 these phenomena should disconcert you, i will venture to read you a
 couple of similar narratives, much shorter, merely to show that we
 are dealing with a well-marked natural kind of fact. in the first
 case, which i take from the journal of the society for psychical
 research, the sense of presence developed in a few moments into a
 distinctly visualized hallucination,—but i leave that part of the
 story out.
“i had read,” the
 narrator says, “some twenty
 minutes or so, was thoroughly absorbed in the book, my mind was
 perfectly quiet, and for the time being my friends were quite
 forgotten, when suddenly without a moment's warning my whole being
 seemed roused to the highest state of tension or aliveness, and i was
 aware, with an intenseness not easily imagined by those who had never
 experienced it, that another being or presence was not only in the
 room, but quite close to me. i put my book down, and although my
 excitement was great, i felt quite collected, and not conscious of
 any sense of fear. without changing my position, and looking straight
 at the fire, i knew somehow that my friend a. h. was standing at my
 left elbow, but so far behind me as to be hidden by the armchair in
 which i was leaning back. moving my eyes round slightly without
 otherwise changing my position, the lower portion of one leg became
 visible, and i instantly recognized the gray-blue material of
 trousers he often wore, but the stuff appeared semi-transparent,
 reminding me of tobacco smoke in consistency,”—and
 hereupon the visual hallucination came.
[pg ]
another informant
 writes:—
“quite early in the night i was awakened.... i felt
 as if i had been aroused intentionally, and at first thought some one
 was breaking into the house.... i then turned on my side to go to
 sleep again, and immediately felt a consciousness of a presence in
 the room, and singular to state, it was not the consciousness of a
 live person, but of a spiritual presence. this may provoke a smile,
 but i can only tell you the facts as they occurred to me. i do not
 know how to better describe my sensations than by simply stating that
 i felt a consciousness of a spiritual presence.... i felt also at the
 same time a strong feeling of superstitious dread, as if something
 strange and fearful were about to happen.”
professor flournoy
 of geneva gives me the following testimony of a friend of his, a
 lady, who has the gift of automatic or involuntary writing:—
“whenever i practice automatic writing, what makes me
 feel that it is not due to a subconscious self is the feeling i
 always have of a foreign presence, external to my body. it is
 sometimes so definitely characterized that i could point to its exact
 position. this impression of presence is impossible to describe. it
 varies in intensity and clearness according to the personality from
 whom the writing professes to come. if it is some one whom i love, i
 feel it immediately, before any writing has come. my heart seems to
 recognize it.”
in an earlier book
 of mine i have cited at full length a curious case of presence felt
 by a blind man. the presence was that of the figure of a gray-bearded
 man dressed in a pepper and salt suit, squeezing himself under the
 crack of the door and moving across the floor of the room towards a
 sofa. the blind subject of this quasi-hallucination is an
 exceptionally intelligent reporter. he is entirely without internal
 visual imagery and cannot represent light or colors to himself, and
 is positive that [pg
 ] his
 other senses, hearing, etc., were not involved in this false
 perception. it seems to have been an abstract conception rather, with
 the feelings of reality and spatial outwardness directly attached to
 it—in other words, a fully objectified and exteriorized idea.
such cases, taken
 along with others which would be too tedious for quotation, seem
 sufficiently to prove the existence in our mental machinery of a
 sense of present reality more diffused and general than that which
 our special senses yield. for the psychologists the tracing of the
 organic seat of such a feeling would form a pretty problem—nothing
 could be more natural than to connect it with the muscular sense,
 with the feeling that our muscles were innervating themselves for
 action. whatsoever thus innervated our activity, or “made our flesh creep,”—our senses are what do so
 oftenest,—might then appear real and present, even though it were but
 an abstract idea. but with such vague conjectures we have no concern
 at present, for our interest lies with the faculty rather than with
 its organic seat.
like all positive
 affections of consciousness, the sense of reality has its negative
 counterpart in the shape of a feeling of unreality by which persons
 may be haunted, and of which one sometimes hears complaint:—
“when i reflect on the fact that i have made my
 appearance by accident upon a globe itself whirled through space as
 the sport of the catastrophes of the heavens,” says
 madame ackermann; “when i see
 myself surrounded by beings as ephemeral and incomprehensible as i am
 myself, and all excitedly pursuing pure chimeras, i experience a
 strange feeling of being in a dream. it seems to me as if i have
 loved and suffered and that erelong i shall die, in a dream. my last
 word will be, ‘i have been
 dreaming.’ ”
[pg ]
in another lecture
 we shall see how in morbid melancholy this sense of the unreality of
 things may become a carking pain, and even lead to suicide.
we may now lay it
 down as certain that in the distinctively religious sphere of
 experience, many persons (how many we cannot tell) possess the
 objects of their belief, not in the form of mere conceptions which
 their intellect accepts as true, but rather in the form of
 quasi-sensible realities directly apprehended. as his sense of the
 real presence of these objects fluctuates, so the believer alternates
 between warmth and coldness in his faith. other examples will bring
 this home to one better than abstract description, so i proceed
 immediately to cite some. the first example is a negative one,
 deploring the loss of the sense in question. i have extracted it from
 an account given me by a scientific man of my acquaintance, of his
 religious life. it seems to me to show clearly that the feeling of
 reality may be something more like a sensation than an intellectual
 operation properly so-called.
“between twenty and thirty i gradually became more
 and more agnostic and irreligious, yet i cannot say that i ever lost
 that ‘indefinite
 consciousness’
which herbert spencer describes so well,
 of an absolute reality behind phenomena. for me this reality was not
 the pure unknowable of spencer's philosophy, for although i had
 ceased my childish prayers to god, and never prayed to
it in a formal manner, yet my more recent experience
 shows me to have been in a relation to it which practically was the same thing as prayer.
 whenever i had any trouble, especially when i had conflict with other
 people, either domestically or in the way of business, or when i was
 depressed in spirits or anxious about affairs, i now recognize that i
 used to fall back for support upon this curious relation i felt
 myself to be in to this fundamental cosmical it. it was on my side, or i was on its side, however
 you please to term it, in the particular [pg ]trouble, and
 it always strengthened me and seemed to give me endless vitality to
 feel its underlying and supporting presence. in fact, it was an
 unfailing fountain of living justice, truth, and strength, to which i
 instinctively turned at times of weakness, and it always brought me
 out. i know now that it was a personal relation i was in to it,
 because of late years the power of communicating with it has left me,
 and i am conscious of a perfectly definite loss. i used never to fail
 to find it when i turned to it. then came a set of years when
 sometimes i found it, and then again i would be wholly unable to make
 connection with it. i remember many occasions on which at night in
 bed, i would be unable to get to sleep on account of worry. i turned
 this way and that in the darkness, and groped mentally for the
 familiar sense of that higher mind of my mind which had always seemed
 to be close at hand as it were, closing the passage, and yielding
 support, but there was no electric current. a blank was there instead
 of it: i couldn't find anything. now, at the age of
 nearly fifty, my power of getting into connection with it has
 entirely left me; and i have to confess that a great help has gone
 out of my life. life has become curiously dead and indifferent; and i
 can now see that my old experience was probably exactly the same
 thing as the prayers of the orthodox, only i did not call them by
 that name. what i have spoken of as ‘it’ was
 practically not spencer's unknowable, but just my own instinctive and
 individual god, whom i relied upon for higher sympathy, but whom
 somehow i have lost.”
nothing is more
 common in the pages of religious biography than the way in which
 seasons of lively and of difficult faith are described as
 alternating. probably every religious person has the recollection of
 particular crises in which a directer vision of the truth, a direct
 perception, perhaps, of a living god's existence, swept in and
 overwhelmed the languor of the more ordinary belief. in james russell
 lowell's correspondence there is a brief memorandum of an experience
 of this kind:—[pg
“i had a revelation last friday evening. i was at
 mary's, and happening to say something of the presence of spirits (of
 whom, i said, i was often dimly aware), mr. putnam entered into an
 argument with me on spiritual matters. as i was speaking, the whole
 system rose up before me like a vague destiny looming from the abyss.
 i never before so clearly felt the spirit of god in me and around me.
 the whole room seemed to me full of god. the air seemed to waver to
 and fro with the presence of something i knew not what. i spoke with
 the calmness and clearness of a prophet. i cannot tell you what this
 revelation was. i have not yet studied it enough. but i shall perfect
 it one day, and then you shall hear it and acknowledge its
 grandeur.”
here is a longer
 and more developed experience from a manuscript communication by a
 clergyman,—i take it from starbuck's manuscript collection:—
“i remember the night, and almost the very spot on
 the hilltop, where my soul opened out, as it were, into the infinite,
 and there was a rushing together of the two worlds, the inner and the
 outer. it was deep calling unto deep,—the deep that my own struggle
 had opened up within being answered by the unfathomable deep without,
 reaching beyond the stars. i stood alone with him who had made me,
 and all the beauty of the world, and love, and sorrow, and even
 temptation. i did not seek him, but felt the perfect unison of my
 spirit with his. the ordinary sense of things around me faded. for
 the moment nothing but an ineffable joy and exaltation remained. it
 is impossible fully to describe the experience. it was like the
 effect of some great orchestra when all the separate notes have
 melted into one swelling harmony that leaves the listener conscious
 of nothing save that his soul is being wafted upwards, and almost
 bursting with its own emotion. the perfect stillness of the night was
 thrilled by a more solemn silence. the darkness held a presence that
 was all the more felt because it was not seen. i could not any more
 have doubted that he was [pg
 ]there than that i
 was. indeed, i felt myself to be, if possible, the less real of the
 two.
“my highest faith in god and truest idea of him
 were then born in me. i have stood upon the mount of vision since,
 and felt the eternal round about me. but never since has there come
 quite the same stirring of the heart. then, if ever, i believe, i
 stood face to face with god, and was born anew of his spirit. there
 was, as i recall it, no sudden change of thought or of belief,
 except that my early crude conception had, as it were, burst into
 flower. there was no destruction of the old, but a rapid, wonderful
 unfolding. since that time no discussion that i have heard of the
 proofs of god's existence has been able to shake my faith. having
 once felt the presence of god's spirit, i have never lost it again
 for long. my most assuring evidence of his existence is deeply
 rooted in that hour of vision, in the memory of that supreme
 experience, and in the conviction, gained from reading and
 reflection, that something the same has come to all who have found
 god. i am aware that it may justly be called mystical. i am not
 enough acquainted with philosophy to defend it from that or any
 other charge. i feel that in writing of it i have overlaid it with
 words rather than put it clearly to your thought. but, such as it
 is, i have described it as carefully as i now am able to
 do.”
here is another
 document, even more definite in character, which, the writer being a
 swiss, i translate from the french original.
“i was in perfect health: we were on our sixth day of
 tramping, and in good training. we had come the day before from sixt
 to trient by buet. i felt neither fatigue, hunger, nor thirst, and my
 state of mind was equally healthy. i had had at forlaz good news from
 home; i was subject to no anxiety, either near or remote, for we had
 a good guide, and there was not a shadow of uncertainty about the
 road we should follow. i can best describe the condition in which i
 was by calling it a [pg
 ]state of
 equilibrium. when all at once i experienced a feeling of being raised
 above myself, i felt the presence of god—i tell of the thing just as
 i was conscious of it—as if his goodness and his power were
 penetrating me altogether. the throb of emotion was so violent that i
 could barely tell the boys to pass on and not wait for me. i then sat
 down on a stone, unable to stand any longer, and my eyes overflowed
 with tears. i thanked god that in the course of my life he had taught
 me to know him, that he sustained my life and took pity both on the
 insignificant creature and on the sinner that i was. i begged him
 ardently that my life might be consecrated to the doing of his will.
 i felt his reply, which was that i should do his will from day to
 day, in humility and poverty, leaving him, the almighty god, to be
 judge of whether i should some time be called to bear witness more
 conspicuously. then, slowly, the ecstasy left my heart; that is, i
 felt that god had withdrawn the communion which he had granted, and i
 was able to walk on, but very slowly, so strongly was i still
 possessed by the interior emotion. besides, i had wept
 uninterruptedly for several minutes, my eyes were swollen, and i did
 not wish my companions to see me. the state of ecstasy may have
 lasted four or five minutes, although it seemed at the time to last
 much longer. my comrades waited for me ten minutes at the cross of
 barine, but i took about twenty-five or thirty minutes to join them,
 for as well as i can remember, they said that i had kept them back
 for about half an hour. the impression had been so profound that in
 climbing slowly the slope i asked myself if it were possible that
 moses on sinai could have had a more intimate communication with god.
 i think it well to add that in this ecstasy of mine god had neither
 form, color, odor, nor taste; moreover, that the feeling of his
 presence was accompanied with no determinate localization. it was
 rather as if my personality had been transformed by the presence of
 a spiritual
 spirit. but the more i seek
 words to express this intimate intercourse, the more i feel the
 impossibility of describing the thing by any of our usual images. at
 bottom the expression most apt to render what i felt is this: god was
 present, though invisible; he fell under no one of my senses, yet my
 consciousness perceived him.”
[pg ]
the adjective
 “mystical” is technically applied,
 most often, to states that are of brief duration. of course such
 hours of rapture as the last two persons describe are mystical
 experiences, of which in a later lecture i shall have much to say.
 meanwhile here is the abridged record of another mystical or
 semi-mystical experience, in a mind evidently framed by nature for
 ardent piety. i owe it to starbuck's collection. the lady who gives
 the account is the daughter of a man well known in his time as a
 writer against christianity. the suddenness of her conversion shows
 well how native the sense of god's presence must be to certain minds.
 she relates that she was brought up in entire ignorance of christian
 doctrine, but, when in germany, after being talked to by christian
 friends, she read the bible and prayed, and finally the plan of
 salvation flashed upon her like a stream of light.
“to this day,” she
 writes, 
 “i cannot understand dallying
 with religion and the commands of god. the very instant i heard my
 father's cry calling unto me, my heart bounded in recognition. i
 ran, i stretched forth my arms, i cried aloud, ‘here, here i am, my father.’ oh,
 happy child, what should i do? ‘love me,’ answered my god. ‘i do, i do,’ i
 cried passionately. ‘come unto
 me,’ called my father. ‘i will,’my
 heart panted. did i stop to ask a single question? not one. it
 never occurred to me to ask whether i was good enough, or to
 hesitate over my unfitness, or to find out what i thought of his
 church, or ... to wait until i should be satisfied. satisfied! i
 was satisfied. had i not found my god and my father? did he not
 love me? had he not called me? was there not a church into which i
 might enter?... since then i have had direct answers to prayer—so
 significant as to be almost like talking with god and hearing his
 answer. the idea of god's reality has never left me for one
 moment.”
here is still
 another case, the writer being a man aged [pg ] twenty-seven, in which the experience, probably
 almost as characteristic, is less vividly described:—
“i have on a number of occasions felt that i had
 enjoyed a period of intimate communion with the divine. these
 meetings came unasked and unexpected, and seemed to consist merely in
 the temporary obliteration of the conventionalities which usually
 surround and cover my life.... once it was when from the summit of a
 high mountain i looked over a gashed and corrugated landscape
 extending to a long convex of ocean that ascended to the horizon, and
 again from the same point when i could see nothing beneath me but a
 boundless expanse of white cloud, on the blown surface of which a few
 high peaks, including the one i was on, seemed plunging about as if
 they were dragging their anchors. what i felt on these occasions was
 a temporary loss of my own identity, accompanied by an illumination
 which revealed to me a deeper significance than i had been wont to
 attach to life. it is in this that i find my justification for saying
 that i have enjoyed communication with god. of course the absence of
 such a being as this would be chaos. i cannot conceive of life
 without its presence.”
of the more
 habitual and so to speak chronic sense of god's presence the
 following sample from professor starbuck's manuscript collection may
 serve to give an idea. it is from a man aged forty-nine,—probably
 thousands of unpretending christians would write an almost identical
 account.
“god is more real to me than any thought or thing or
 person. i feel his presence positively, and the more as i live in
 closer harmony with his laws as written in my body and mind. i feel
 him in the sunshine or rain; and awe mingled with a delicious
 restfulness most nearly describes my feelings. i talk to him as to a
 companion in prayer and praise, and our communion is delightful. he
 answers me again and again, often in words so clearly spoken that it
 seems my outer ear must have carried the tone, but generally in
 strong mental impressions. usually a text of scripture, unfolding
 some new view [pg
 ]of him and his love
 for me, and care for my safety. i could give hundreds of instances,
 in school matters, social problems, financial difficulties, etc. that
 he is mine and i am his never leaves me, it is an abiding joy.
 without it life would be a blank, a desert, a shoreless, trackless
 waste.”
i subjoin some
 more examples from writers of different ages and sexes. they are also
 from professor starbuck's collection, and their number might be
 greatly multiplied. the first is from a man twenty-seven years
 old:—
“god is quite real to me. i talk to him and often get
 answers. thoughts sudden and distinct from any i have been
 entertaining come to my mind after asking god for his direction.
 something over a year ago i was for some weeks in the direst
 perplexity. when the trouble first appeared before me i was dazed,
 but before long (two or three hours) i could hear distinctly a
 passage of scripture: ‘my grace is
 sufficient for thee.’ every
 time my thoughts turned to the trouble i could hear this quotation. i
 don't think i ever doubted the existence of god, or had him drop out
 of my consciousness. god has frequently stepped into my affairs very
 perceptibly, and i feel that he directs many little details all the
 time. but on two or three occasions he has ordered ways for me very
 contrary to my ambitions and plans.”
another statement
 (none the less valuable psychologically for being so decidedly
 childish) is that of a boy of seventeen:—
“sometimes as i go to church, i sit down, join in the
 service, and before i go out i feel as if god was with me, right side
 of me, singing and reading the psalms with me.... and then again i
 feel as if i could sit beside him, and put my arms around him, kiss
 him, etc. when i am taking holy communion at the altar, i try to get
 with him and generally feel his presence.”
i let a few other
 cases follow at random:—
“god surrounds me like the physical atmosphere. he
 is [pg
 ]closer to me than
 my own breath. in him literally i live and move and have my
 being.”—
“there are times when i seem to stand, in his very
 presence, to talk with him. answers to prayer have come, sometimes
 direct and overwhelming in their revelation of his presence and
 powers. there are times when god seems far off, but this is always
 my own fault.”—
“i have the sense of a presence, strong, and at the
 same time soothing, which hovers over me. sometimes it seems to
 enwrap me with sustaining arms.”
such is the human
 ontological imagination, and such is the convincingness of what it
 brings to birth. unpicturable beings are realized, and realized with
 an intensity almost like that of an hallucination. they determine our
 vital attitude as decisively as the vital attitude of lovers is
 determined by the habitual sense, by which each is haunted, of the
 other being in the world. a lover has notoriously this sense of the
 continuous being of his idol, even when his attention is addressed to
 other matters and he no longer represents her features. he cannot
 forget her; she uninterruptedly affects him through and through.
i spoke of the
 convincingness of these feelings of reality, and i must dwell a
 moment longer on that point. they are as convincing to those who have
 them as any direct sensible experiences can be, and they are, as a
 rule, much more convincing than results established by mere logic
 ever are. one may indeed be entirely without them; probably more than
 one of you here present is without them in any marked degree; but if
 you do have them, and have them at all strongly, the probability is
 that you cannot help regarding them as genuine perceptions of truth,
 as revelations of a kind of reality which no adverse argument,
 however unanswerable by you in [pg ] words, can expel from your belief. the opinion
 opposed to mysticism in philosophy is sometimes spoken of as
 rationalism. rationalism insists
 that all our beliefs ought ultimately to find for themselves
 articulate grounds. such grounds, for rationalism, must consist of
 four things: () definitely statable abstract principles; ()
 definite facts of sensation; () definite hypotheses based on such
 facts; and () definite inferences logically drawn. vague impressions
 of something indefinable have no place in the rationalistic system,
 which on its positive side is surely a splendid intellectual
 tendency, for not only are all our philosophies fruits of it, but
 physical science (amongst other good things) is its result.
nevertheless, if
 we look on man's whole mental life as it exists, on the life of men
 that lies in them apart from their learning and science, and that
 they inwardly and privately follow, we have to confess that the part
 of it of which rationalism can give an account is relatively
 superficial. it is the part that has the prestige
 undoubtedly, for it has the loquacity, it can challenge you for
 proofs, and chop logic, and put you down with words. but it will fail
 to convince or convert you all the same, if your dumb intuitions are
 opposed to its conclusions. if you have intuitions at all, they come
 from a deeper level of your nature than the loquacious level which
 rationalism inhabits. your whole subconscious life, your impulses,
 your faiths, your needs, your divinations, have prepared the
 premises, of which your consciousness now feels the weight of the
 result; and something in you absolutely knows
 that that result must be truer than any logic-chopping rationalistic
 talk, however clever, that may contradict it. this inferiority of the
 rationalistic level in founding belief is just as manifest when
 rationalism argues for religion as when it argues against it. that
 [pg ] vast literature of proofs of
 god's existence drawn from the order of nature, which a century ago
 seemed so overwhelmingly convincing, to-day does little more than
 gather dust in libraries, for the simple reason that our generation
 has ceased to believe in the kind of god it argued for. whatever sort
 of a being god may be, we know to-day that he is nevermore
 that mere external inventor of “contrivances” intended to make manifest his
 “glory” in which our
 great-grandfathers took such satisfaction, though just how we know
 this we cannot possibly make clear by words either to others or to
 ourselves. i defy any of you here fully to account for your
 persuasion that if a god exist he must be a more cosmic and tragic
 personage than that being.
the truth is that
 in the metaphysical and religious sphere, articulate reasons are
 cogent for us only when our inarticulate feelings of reality have
 already been impressed in favor of the same conclusion. then, indeed,
 our intuitions and our reason work together, and great world-ruling
 systems, like that of the buddhist or of the catholic philosophy, may
 grow up. our impulsive belief is here always what sets up the
 original body of truth, and our articulately verbalized philosophy is
 but its showy translation into formulas. the unreasoned and immediate
 assurance is the deep thing in us, the reasoned argument is but a
 surface exhibition. instinct leads, intelligence does but follow. if
 a person feels the presence of a living god after the fashion shown
 by my quotations, your critical arguments, be they never so superior,
 will vainly set themselves to change his faith.
please observe,
 however, that i do not yet say that it is better
 that the subconscious and non-rational should thus hold primacy in
 the religious realm. i confine myself to simply pointing out that
 they do so hold it as a matter of fact.[pg ]
so much for our
 sense of the reality of the religious objects. let me now say a brief
 word more about the attitudes they characteristically awaken.
we have already
 agreed that they are solemn; and we have seen reason to
 think that the most distinctive of them is the sort of joy which may
 result in extreme cases from absolute self-surrender. the sense of
 the kind of object to which the surrender is made has much to do with
 determining the precise complexion of the joy; and the whole
 phenomenon is more complex than any simple formula allows. in the
 literature of the subject, sadness and gladness have each been
 emphasized in turn. the ancient saying that the first maker of the
 gods was fear receives voluminous corroboration from every age of
 religious history; but none the less does religious history show the
 part which joy has evermore tended to play. sometimes the joy has
 been primary; sometimes secondary, being the gladness of deliverance
 from the fear. this latter state of things, being the more complex,
 is also the more complete; and as we proceed, i think we shall have
 abundant reason for refusing to leave out either the sadness or the
 gladness, if we look at religion with the breadth of view which it
 demands. stated in the completest possible terms, a man's religion
 involves both moods of contraction and moods of expansion of his
 being. but the quantitative mixture and order of these moods vary so
 much from one age of the world, from one system of thought, and from
 one individual to another, that you may insist either on the dread
 and the submission, or on the peace and the freedom as the essence of
 the matter, and still remain materially within the limits of the
 truth. the constitutionally sombre and the constitutionally sanguine
 onlooker are bound to emphasize opposite aspects of what lies before
 their eyes.[pg
the
 constitutionally sombre religious person makes even of his religious
 peace a very sober thing. danger still hovers in the air about it.
 flexion and contraction are not wholly checked. it were sparrowlike
 and childish after our deliverance to explode into twittering
 laughter and caper-cutting, and utterly to forget the imminent hawk
 on bough. lie low, rather, lie low; for you are in the hands of a
 living god. in the book of job, for example, the impotence of man and
 the omnipotence of god is the exclusive burden of its author's mind.
 “it is as high as heaven; what canst thou
 do?—deeper than hell; what canst thou know?” there is an
 astringent relish about the truth of this conviction which some men
 can feel, and which for them is as near an approach as can be made to
 the feeling of religious joy.
“in job,” says
 that coldly truthful writer, the author of mark rutherford,
“god reminds us
 that man is not the measure of his creation. the world is immense,
 constructed on no plan or theory which the intellect of man can
 grasp. it is transcendent
everywhere. this is the burden of every
 verse, and is the secret, if there be one, of the poem. sufficient or
 insufficient, there is nothing more.... god is great, we know not his
 ways. he takes from us all we have, but yet if we possess our souls
 in patience, we may pass the valley of the shadow, and come out in
 sunlight again. we may or we may not!... what more have we to say now
 than god said from the whirlwind over two thousand five hundred years
 ago?”
if we turn to the
 sanguine onlooker, on the other hand, we find that deliverance is
 felt as incomplete unless the burden be altogether overcome and the
 danger forgotten. such onlookers give us definitions that seem to the
 sombre minds of whom we have just been speaking to leave out all the
 solemnity that makes religious peace so different from merely animal
 joys. in the opinion of some [pg ] writers an attitude might be called religious,
 though no touch were left in it of sacrifice or submission, no
 tendency to flexion, no bowing of the head. any “habitual and regulated admiration,” says
 professor j. r. seeley,
“is worthy to be called a religion”;
 and accordingly he thinks that our music, our science, and our
 so-called “civilization,” as these
 things are now organized and admiringly believed in, form the more
 genuine religions of our time. certainly the unhesitating and
 unreasoning way in which we feel that we must inflict our
 civilization upon “lower” races, by
 means of hotchkiss guns, etc., reminds one of nothing so much as of
 the early spirit of islam spreading its religion by the sword.
in my last lecture
 i quoted to you the ultra-radical opinion of mr. havelock ellis, that
 laughter of any sort may be considered a religious exercise, for it
 bears witness to the soul's emancipation. i quoted this opinion in
 order to deny its adequacy. but we must now settle our scores more
 carefully with this whole optimistic way of thinking. it is far too
 complex to be decided off-hand. i propose accordingly that we make of
 religious optimism the theme of the next two lectures.
[pg ]
lectures iv and v. the religion of
 healthy-mindedness.
if we were to ask
 the question: “what is human life's chief
 concern?” one of the answers we should receive would be:
 “it is happiness.” how to gain, how to
 keep, how to recover happiness, is in fact for most men at all times
 the secret motive of all they do, and of all they are willing to
 endure. the hedonistic school in ethics deduces the moral life wholly
 from the experiences of happiness and unhappiness which different
 kinds of conduct bring; and, even more in the religious life than in
 the moral life, happiness and unhappiness seem to be the poles round
 which the interest revolves. we need not go so far as to say with the
 author whom i lately quoted that any persistent enthusiasm is, as
 such, religion, nor need we call mere laughter a religious exercise;
 but we must admit that any persistent enjoyment may produce
 the sort of religion which consists in a grateful admiration of the
 gift of so happy an existence; and we must also acknowledge that the
 more complex ways of experiencing religion are new manners of
 producing happiness, wonderful inner paths to a supernatural kind of
 happiness, when the first gift of natural existence is unhappy, as it
 so often proves itself to be.
with such
 relations between religion and happiness, it is perhaps not
 surprising that men come to regard the happiness which a religious
 belief affords as a proof of its truth. if a creed makes a man feel
 happy, he almost inevitably adopts it. such a belief ought to be
 true; [pg ] therefore it is
 true—such, rightly or wrongly, is one of the “immediate inferences” of the religious logic used
 by ordinary men.
“the near presence of god's
 spirit,”
says a german writer,
“may be
 experienced in its reality—indeed only experienced. and the mark by which the spirit's
 existence and nearness are made irrefutably clear to those who have
 ever had the experience is the utterly incomparable
feeling of
 happiness which is
 connected with the nearness, and which is therefore not only a
 possible and altogether proper feeling for us to have here below,
 but is the best and most indispensable proof of god's reality. no
 other proof is equally convincing, and therefore happiness is the
 point from which every efficacious new theology should
 start.”
in the hour
 immediately before us, i shall invite you to consider the simpler
 kinds of religious happiness, leaving the more complex sorts to be
 treated on a later day.
in many persons,
 happiness is congenital and irreclaimable. “cosmic emotion” inevitably takes in them the form
 of enthusiasm and freedom. i speak not only of those who are animally
 happy. i mean those who, when unhappiness is offered or proposed to
 them, positively refuse to feel it, as if it were something mean and
 wrong. we find such persons in every age, passionately flinging
 themselves upon their sense of the goodness of life, in spite of the
 hardships of their own condition, and in spite of the sinister
 theologies into which they may be born. from the outset their
 religion is one of union with the divine. the heretics who went
 before the reformation are lavishly accused by the church writers of
 antinomian practices, just as the first christians were accused of
 indulgence in orgies by the romans. it is probable that there never
 has been a century in which the deliberate refusal to think ill of
 life has not been idealized [pg
 ] by
 a sufficient number of persons to form sects, open or secret, who
 claimed all natural things to be permitted. saint augustine's maxim,
 dilige et quod vis fac,—if you but
 love [god], you may do as you incline,—is morally one of the
 profoundest of observations, yet it is pregnant, for such persons,
 with passports beyond the bounds of conventional morality. according
 to their characters they have been refined or gross; but their belief
 has been at all times systematic enough to constitute a definite
 religious attitude. god was for them a giver of freedom, and the
 sting of evil was overcome. saint francis and his immediate disciples
 were, on the whole, of this company of spirits, of which there are of
 course infinite varieties. rousseau in the earlier years of his
 writing, diderot, b. de saint pierre, and many of the leaders of the
 eighteenth century anti-christian movement were of this optimistic
 type. they owed their influence to a certain authoritativeness in
 their feeling that nature, if you will only trust her sufficiently,
 is absolutely good.
it is to be hoped
 that we all have some friend, perhaps more often feminine than
 masculine, and young than old, whose soul is of this sky-blue tint,
 whose affinities are rather with flowers and birds and all enchanting
 innocencies than with dark human passions, who can think no ill of
 man or god, and in whom religious gladness, being in possession from
 the outset, needs no deliverance from any antecedent burden.
“god has two families of children on this
 earth,”
says francis w. newman,
“the once-born
and the
 twice-born,” and
 the once-born he describes as follows: “they see god, not as a strict judge, not as a
 glorious potentate; but as the animating spirit of a beautiful
 harmonious world, beneficent and kind, merciful as well as pure.
 the same characters generally have [pg ]no metaphysical
 tendencies: they do not look back into themselves. hence they are
 not distressed by their own imperfections: yet it would be absurd
 to call them self-righteous; for they hardly think of
 themselves at all. this childlike quality of their nature makes the
 opening of religion very happy to them: for they no more shrink
 from god, than a child from an emperor, before whom the parent
 trembles: in fact, they have no vivid conception of
any of the qualities in which the severer majesty of
 god consists.
he is to them the impersonation of
 kindness and beauty. they read his character, not in the disordered
 world of man, but in romantic and harmonious nature. of human sin
 they know perhaps little in their own hearts and not very much in
 the world; and human suffering does but melt them to tenderness.
 thus, when they approach god, no inward disturbance ensues; and
 without being as yet spiritual, they have a certain complacency and
 perhaps romantic sense of excitement in their simple
 worship.”
in the romish
 church such characters find a more congenial soil to grow in than in
 protestantism, whose fashions of feeling have been set by minds of a
 decidedly pessimistic order. but even in protestantism they have been
 abundant enough; and in its recent “liberal” developments of unitarianism and
 latitudinarianism generally, minds of this order have played and
 still are playing leading and constructive parts. emerson himself is
 an admirable example. theodore parker is another,—here are a couple
 of characteristic passages from parker's correspondence.
“orthodox scholars say: ‘in the heathen classics you find no consciousness of
 sin.’
it is very true—god be thanked for it.
 they were conscious of wrath, of cruelty, avarice, drunkenness,
 lust, sloth, cowardice, and other actual vices, and struggled and
 got rid of the deformities, but they were not conscious of
[pg ] ‘enmity against god,’ and
 didn't sit down and whine and groan against non-existent evil. i
 have done wrong things enough in my life, and do them now; i miss
 the mark, draw bow, and try again. but i am not conscious of hating
 god, or man, or right, or love, and i know there is much
‘health in
 me’; and in my body, even now, there dwelleth many a
 good thing, spite of consumption and saint paul.” in
 another letter parker writes: “i have swum in clear sweet waters all my days; and
 if sometimes they were a little cold, and the stream ran adverse
 and something rough, it was never too strong to be breasted and
 swum through. from the days of earliest boyhood, when i went
 stumbling through the grass,... up to the gray-bearded manhood of
 this time, there is none but has left me honey in the hive of
 memory that i now feed on for present delight. when i recall the
 years ... i am filled with a sense of sweetness and wonder that
 such little things can make a mortal so exceedingly rich. but i
 must confess that the chiefest of all my delights is still the
 religious.”
another good
 expression of the “once-born” type of
 consciousness, developing straight and natural, with no element of
 morbid compunction or crisis, is contained in the answer of dr.
 edward everett hale, the eminent unitarian preacher and writer, to
 one of dr. starbuck's circulars. i quote a part of it:—
“i observe, with profound regret, the religious
 struggles which come into many biographies, as if almost essential to
 the formation of the hero. i ought to speak of these, to say that any
 man has an advantage, not to be estimated, who is born, as i was,
 into a family where the religion is simple and rational; who is
 trained in the theory of such a religion, so that he never knows, for
 an hour, what these religious or irreligious struggles are. i always
 knew god loved me, and i was always grateful to him for the world he
 placed me in. i always liked to tell him so, and was always glad to
 receive his suggestions to me.... i can remember perfectly that when
 i was coming to manhood, the half-philosophical novels of the time
 had a deal [pg
 ]to say about the
 young men and maidens who were facing the ‘problem of life.’ i had
 no idea whatever what the problem of life was. to live with all my
 might seemed to me easy; to learn where there was so much to learn
 seemed pleasant and almost of course; to lend a hand, if one had a
 chance, natural; and if one did this, why, he enjoyed life because he
 could not help it, and without proving to himself that he ought to
 enjoy it.... a child who is early taught that he is god's child, that
 he may live and move and have his being in god, and that he has,
 therefore, infinite strength at hand for the conquering of any
 difficulty, will take life more easily, and probably will make more
 of it, than one who is told that he is born the child of wrath and
 wholly incapable of good.”
one can but
 recognize in such writers as these the presence of a temperament
 organically weighted on the side of cheer and fatally forbidden to
 linger, as those of opposite temperament linger, over the darker
 aspects of the universe. in some individuals optimism may become
 quasi-pathological. the capacity for even a transient sadness or a
 momentary humility seems cut off from them as by a kind of congenital
 anæsthesia.[pg ]
the supreme
 contemporary example of such an inability to feel evil is of course
 walt whitman.
“his favorite occupation,” writes
 his disciple, dr. bucke, “seemed to be strolling or sauntering about
 outdoors by himself, looking at the grass, the trees, the flowers,
 the vistas of light, the varying aspects of the sky, and listening
 to the birds, the crickets, the tree frogs, and all the hundreds of
 natural sounds. it was evident that these things gave him a
 pleasure far beyond what they give to ordinary people. until i knew
 the man,”
continues dr. bucke,
“it had not
 occurred to me that any one could derive so much absolute happiness
 from these things as he did. he was very fond of flowers, either
 wild or cultivated; liked all sorts. i think he admired lilacs and
 sunflowers just as much as roses. perhaps, indeed, no man who ever
 lived liked so many things and disliked so few as walt whitman. all
 natural objects seemed to have a charm for him. all sights and
 sounds seemed to please him. he appeared to like (and i believe he
 did like) all the men, women, and children he saw (though i never
 knew him to say that he liked any one), but each who knew him felt
 that he liked him or her, and that he liked others also. i never
 knew him to argue or dispute, and he never spoke about money. he
 always justified, sometimes playfully, sometimes quite seriously,
 those who spoke harshly of himself or his writings, and i often
 thought he even took pleasure in the opposition of enemies. when i
 first knew [him], i used to think that he watched himself, and
 would not allow his tongue to give expression to fretfulness,
 antipathy, complaint, and remonstrance. it did not occur to me as
 possible that these mental states could be absent in him. after
 long observation, however, i satisfied myself that such absence or
 unconsciousness was entirely real. he never spoke deprecatingly of
 any nationality or class of men, or time in the world's history, or
 against any trades or occupations—not even against any animals,
 insects, or inanimate things, nor any of the [pg ]laws of
 nature, nor any of the results of those laws, such as illness,
 deformity, and death. he never complained or grumbled either at the
 weather, pain, illness, or anything else. he never swore. he could
 not very well, since he never spoke in anger and apparently never
 was angry. he never exhibited fear, and i do not believe he ever
 felt it.”
walt whitman owes
 his importance in literature to the systematic expulsion from his
 writings of all contractile elements. the only sentiments he allowed
 himself to express were of the expansive order; and he expressed
 these in the first person, not as your mere monstrously conceited
 individual might so express them, but vicariously for all men, so
 that a passionate and mystic ontological emotion suffuses his words,
 and ends by persuading the reader that men and women, life and death,
 and all things are divinely good.
thus it has come
 about that many persons to-day regard walt whitman as the restorer of
 the eternal natural religion. he has infected them with his own love
 of comrades, with his own gladness that he and they exist. societies
 are actually formed for his cult; a periodical organ exists for its
 propagation, in which the lines of orthodoxy and heterodoxy are
 already beginning to be drawn; hymns
 are written by others in his peculiar prosody; and he is even
 explicitly compared with the founder of the christian religion, not
 altogether to the advantage of the latter.
whitman is often
 spoken of as a “pagan.” the word
 nowadays means sometimes the mere natural animal man without a sense
 of sin; sometimes it means a greek or roman with his own peculiar
 religious consciousness. in [pg
 neither of these senses does it fitly define this poet. he is more
 than your mere animal man who has not tasted of the tree of good and
 evil. he is aware enough of sin for a swagger to be present in his
 indifference towards it, a conscious pride in his freedom from
 flexions and contractions, which your genuine pagan in the first
 sense of the word would never show.
“i could
 turn and live with animals, they are so placid and
 self-contained,
i stand and look at them long and
 long;
they do not sweat and whine about
 their condition.
they do not lie awake in the dark
 and weep for their sins.
not one is dissatisfied, not one
 is demented with the mania of owning things,
not one kneels to another, nor to
 his kind that lived thousands of years ago,
not one is respectable or unhappy over the
 whole earth.”
no natural pagan
 could have written these well-known lines. but on the other hand
 whitman is less than a greek or roman; for their consciousness, even
 in homeric times, was full to the brim of the sad mortality of this
 sunlit world, and such a consciousness walt whitman resolutely
 refuses to adopt. when, for example, achilles, about to slay lycaon,
 priam's young son, hears him sue for mercy, he stops to say:—
“ah, friend, thou too must die: why thus lamentest
 thou? patroclos too is dead, who was better far than thou.... over me
 too hang death and forceful fate. there cometh morn or eve or some
 noonday when my life too some man shall take in battle, whether with
 spear he smite, or arrow from the string.”
then achilles
 savagely severs the poor boy's neck with his sword, heaves him by the
 foot into the scamander, and calls to the fishes of the river to eat
 the white fat of lycaon. just as here the cruelty and the sympathy
 each [pg ] ring true, and do not
 mix or interfere with one another, so did the greeks and romans keep
 all their sadnesses and gladnesses unmingled and entire. instinctive
 good they did not reckon sin; nor had they any such desire to save
 the credit of the universe as to make them insist, as so many of
 us insist, that what immediately
 appears as evil must be “good in the
 making,” or something equally ingenious. good was good, and
 bad just bad, for the earlier greeks. they neither denied the ills of
 nature,—walt whitman's verse, “what is called
 good is perfect and what is called bad is just as perfect,”
 would have been mere silliness to them,—nor did they, in order to
 escape from those ills, invent “another and a
 better world” of the imagination, in which, along with the
 ills, the innocent goods of sense would also find no place. this
 integrity of the instinctive reactions, this freedom from all moral
 sophistry and strain, gives a pathetic dignity to ancient pagan
 feeling. and this quality whitman's outpourings have not got. his
 optimism is too voluntary and defiant; his gospel has a touch of
 bravado and an affected twist, and this
 diminishes its effect on many readers who yet are well disposed
 towards optimism, and on the whole quite willing to admit that in
 important respects whitman is of the genuine lineage of the
 prophets.
if, then, we give
 the name of healthy-mindedness to the tendency which looks on all
 things and sees that they are good, we find that we must distinguish
 between a more involuntary and a more voluntary or systematic way of
 being healthy-minded. in its involuntary variety, healthy-mindedness
 [pg ] is a way of feeling happy
 about things immediately. in its systematical variety, it is an
 abstract way of conceiving things as good. every abstract way of
 conceiving things selects some one aspect of them as their essence
 for the time being, and disregards the other aspects. systematic
 healthy-mindedness, conceiving good as the essential and universal
 aspect of being, deliberately excludes evil from its field of vision;
 and although, when thus nakedly stated, this might seem a difficult
 feat to perform for one who is intellectually sincere with himself
 and honest about facts, a little reflection shows that the situation
 is too complex to lie open to so simple a criticism.
in the first
 place, happiness, like every other emotional state, has blindness and
 insensibility to opposing facts given it as its instinctive weapon
 for self-protection against disturbance. when happiness is actually
 in possession, the thought of evil can no more acquire the feeling of
 reality than the thought of good can gain reality when melancholy
 rules. to the man actively happy, from whatever cause, evil simply
 cannot then and there be believed in. he must ignore it; and to the
 bystander he may then seem perversely to shut his eyes to it and hush
 it up.
but more than
 this: the hushing of it up may, in a perfectly candid and honest
 mind, grow into a deliberate religious policy, or parti
 pris. much of what we call evil is due entirely to the
 way men take the phenomenon. it can so often be converted into a
 bracing and tonic good by a simple change of the sufferer's inner
 attitude from one of fear to one of fight; its sting so often departs
 and turns into a relish when, after vainly seeking to shun it, we
 agree to face about and bear it cheerfully, that a man is simply
 bound in honor, with reference to [pg ] many of the facts that seem at first to
 disconcert his peace, to adopt this way of escape. refuse to admit
 their badness; despise their power; ignore their presence; turn your
 attention the other way; and so far as you yourself are concerned at
 any rate, though the facts may still exist, their evil character
 exists no longer. since you make them evil or good by your own
 thoughts about them, it is the ruling of your thoughts which proves
 to be your principal concern.
the deliberate
 adoption of an optimistic turn of mind thus makes its entrance into
 philosophy. and once in, it is hard to trace its lawful bounds. not
 only does the human instinct for happiness, bent on self-protection
 by ignoring, keep working in its favor, but higher inner ideals have
 weighty words to say. the attitude of unhappiness is not only
 painful, it is mean and ugly. what can be more base and unworthy than
 the pining, puling, mumping mood, no matter by what outward ills it
 may have been engendered? what is more injurious to others? what less
 helpful as a way out of the difficulty? it but fastens and
 perpetuates the trouble which occasioned it, and increases the total
 evil of the situation. at all costs, then, we ought to reduce the
 sway of that mood; we ought to scout it in ourselves and others, and
 never show it tolerance. but it is impossible to carry on this
 discipline in the subjective sphere without zealously emphasizing the
 brighter and minimizing the darker aspects of the objective sphere of
 things at the same time. and thus our resolution not to indulge in
 misery, beginning at a comparatively small point within ourselves,
 may not stop until it has brought the entire frame of reality under a
 systematic conception optimistic enough to be congenial with its
 needs.
in all this i say
 nothing of any mystical insight or [pg ] persuasion that the total frame of things
 absolutely must be good. such mystical persuasion plays an enormous
 part in the history of the religious consciousness, and we must look
 at it later with some care. but we need not go so far at present.
 more ordinary non-mystical conditions of rapture suffice for my
 immediate contention. all invasive moral states and passionate
 enthusiasms make one feelingless to evil in some direction. the
 common penalties cease to deter the patriot, the usual prudences are
 flung by the lover to the winds. when the passion is extreme,
 suffering may actually be gloried in, provided it be for the ideal
 cause, death may lose its sting, the grave its victory. in these
 states, the ordinary contrast of good and ill seems to be swallowed
 up in a higher denomination, an omnipotent excitement which engulfs
 the evil, and which the human being welcomes as the crowning
 experience of his life. this, he says, is truly to live, and i exult
 in the heroic opportunity and adventure.
the systematic
 cultivation of healthy-mindedness as a religious attitude is
 therefore consonant with important currents in human nature, and is
 anything but absurd. in fact, we all do cultivate it more or less,
 even when our professed theology should in consistency forbid it. we
 divert our attention from disease and death as much as we can; and
 the slaughter-houses and indecencies without end on which our life is
 founded are huddled out of sight and never mentioned, so that the
 world we recognize officially in literature and in society is a
 poetic fiction far handsomer and cleaner and better than the world
 that really is.[pg ]
the advance of
 liberalism, so-called, in christianity, during the past fifty years,
 may fairly be called a victory of healthy-mindedness within the
 church over the morbidness with which the old hell-fire theology was
 more harmoniously related. we have now whole congregations whose
 preachers, far from magnifying our consciousness of sin, seem devoted
 rather to making little of it. they ignore, or even deny, eternal
 punishment, and insist on the dignity rather than on the depravity of
 man. they look at the continual preoccupation of the old-fashioned
 christian with the salvation of his soul as something sickly and
 reprehensible rather than admirable; and a sanguine and “muscular” attitude, which to our forefathers
 would have seemed purely heathen, has become in their eyes an ideal
 element of christian character. i am not asking whether or not they
 are right, i am only pointing out the change.
the persons to
 whom i refer have still retained for the most part their nominal
 connection with christianity, in spite of their discarding of its
 more pessimistic theological elements. but in that “theory of evolution” which, gathering momentum
 for a century, has within the past twenty-five years swept so rapidly
 over europe and america, we see the ground laid for a new sort of
 religion of nature, which has entirely displaced christianity from
 the thought of a large part of our generation. the idea of a
 universal evolution lends itself to a doctrine of general meliorism
 and progress which fits the religious needs of the healthy-minded so
 well that it seems almost as if it might have been created for their
 use. accordingly we find “evolutionism” interpreted thus optimistically and
 [pg ] embraced as a substitute for
 the religion they were born in, by a multitude of our contemporaries
 who have either been trained scientifically, or been fond of reading
 popular science, and who had already begun to be inwardly
 dissatisfied with what seemed to them the harshness and irrationality
 of the orthodox christian scheme. as examples are better than
 descriptions, i will quote a document received in answer to professor
 starbuck's circular of questions. the writer's state of mind may by
 courtesy be called a religion, for it is his reaction on the whole
 nature of things, it is systematic and reflective, and it loyally
 binds him to certain inner ideals. i think you will recognize in him,
 coarse-meated and incapable of wounded spirit as he is, a
 sufficiently familiar contemporary type.
q. what does religion mean to
 you?
a. it means nothing; and it seems, so far as i can
 observe, useless to others. i am sixty-seven years of age and have
 resided in x. fifty years, and have been in business forty-five,
 consequently i have some little experience of life and men, and
 some women too, and i find that the most religious and pious people
 are as a rule those most lacking in uprightness and morality. the
 men who do not go to church or have any religious convictions are
 the best. praying, singing of hymns, and sermonizing are
 pernicious—they teach us to rely on some supernatural power, when
 we ought to rely on ourselves. i teetotally disbelieve in a god. the god-idea was
 begotten in ignorance, fear, and a general lack of any knowledge of
 nature. if i were to die now, being in a healthy condition for my
 age, both mentally and physically, i would just as lief, yes,
 rather, die with a hearty enjoyment of music, sport, or any other
 rational pastime. as a timepiece stops, we die—there being no
 immortality in either case.
q. what comes before your mind
 corresponding to the words god, heaven, angels,
 etc.?
a. nothing whatever. i am a man without a
 religion. these words mean so much mythic
 bosh.[pg
q. have you had any experiences
 which appeared providential?
a. none whatever. there is no agency of the
 superintending kind. a little judicious observation as well as
 knowledge of scientific law will convince any one of this
 fact.
q. what things work most strongly
 on your emotions?
a. lively songs and music; pinafore instead of an
 oratorio. i like scott, burns, byron, longfellow, especially
 shakespeare, etc., etc. of songs, the star-spangled banner,
 america, marseillaise, and all moral and soul-stirring songs, but
 wishy-washy hymns are my detestation. i greatly enjoy nature,
 especially fine weather, and until within a few years used to walk
 sundays into the country, twelve miles often, with no fatigue, and
 bicycle forty or fifty. i have dropped the bicycle. i never go to
 church, but attend lectures when there are any good ones. all of my
 thoughts and cogitations have been of a healthy and cheerful kind,
 for instead of doubts and fears i see things as they are, for i
 endeavor to adjust myself to my environment. this i regard as the
 deepest law. mankind is a progressive animal. i am satisfied he
 will have made a great advance over his present status a thousand
 years hence.
q. what is your notion of
 sin?
a. it seems to me that sin is a condition, a
 disease, incidental to man's development not being yet advanced
 enough. morbidness over it increases the disease. we should think
 that a million of years hence equity, justice, and mental and
 physical good order will be so fixed and organized that no one will
 have any idea of evil or sin.
q. what is your
 temperament?
a. nervous, active, wide-awake, mentally and
 physically. sorry that nature compels us to sleep at
 all.
if we are in
 search of a broken and a contrite heart, clearly we need not look to
 this brother. his contentment with the finite incases him like a
 lobster-shell and shields him from all morbid repining at his
 distance from the infinite. we have in him an excellent example of
 the optimism which may be encouraged by popular
 science.[pg
to my mind a
 current far more important and interesting religiously than that
 which sets in from natural science towards healthy-mindedness is that
 which has recently poured over america and seems to be gathering
 force every day,—i am ignorant what foothold it may yet have acquired
 in great britain,—and to which, for the sake of having a brief
 designation, i will give the title of the “mind-cure movement.” there are various sects of
 this “new thought,” to use another of
 the names by which it calls itself; but their agreements are so
 profound that their differences may be neglected for my present
 purpose, and i will treat the movement, without apology, as if it
 were a simple thing.
it is a
 deliberately optimistic scheme of life, with both a speculative and a
 practical side. in its gradual development during the last quarter of
 a century, it has taken up into itself a number of contributory
 elements, and it must now be reckoned with as a genuine religious
 power. it has reached the stage, for example, when the demand for its
 literature is great enough for insincere stuff, mechanically produced
 for the market, to be to a certain extent supplied by publishers,—a
 phenomenon never observed, i imagine, until a religion has got well
 past its earliest insecure beginnings.
one of the
 doctrinal sources of mind-cure is the four gospels; another is
 emersonianism or new england transcendentalism; another is berkeleyan
 idealism; another is spiritism, with its messages of “law” and “progress” and “development”; another the optimistic popular
 science evolutionism of which i have recently spoken; and, finally,
 hinduism has contributed a strain. but the most characteristic
 feature of the mind-cure movement is an inspiration much more direct.
 the leaders in this faith have had an intuitive belief in the
 all-saving power [pg
 ] of
 healthy-minded attitudes as such, in the conquering efficacy of
 courage, hope, and trust, and a correlative contempt for doubt, fear,
 worry, and all nervously precautionary states of mind. their
 belief has in a general way been corroborated by the practical
 experience of their disciples; and this experience forms to-day a
 mass imposing in amount.
the blind have
 been made to see, the halt to walk; lifelong invalids have had their
 health restored. the moral fruits have been no less remarkable. the
 deliberate adoption of a healthy-minded attitude has proved possible
 to many who never supposed they had it in them; regeneration of
 character has gone on on an extensive scale; and cheerfulness has
 been restored to countless homes. the indirect influence of this has
 been great. the mind-cure principles are beginning so to pervade the
 air that one catches their spirit at second-hand. one hears of the
 “gospel of relaxation,” of the
 “don't worry movement,” of people who
 repeat to themselves, “youth, health,
 vigor!” when dressing in the morning, as their motto for the
 day. complaints of the weather are getting to be forbidden in many
 households; and more and more people are recognizing it to be bad
 form to speak of disagreeable sensations, or to make much of the
 ordinary inconveniences and ailments of life. these general tonic
 effects on public opinion would be good even if the more striking
 results were non-existent. but the latter abound so that we can
 afford to overlook the [pg
 innumerable failures and self-deceptions that are mixed in with them
 (for in everything human failure is a matter of course), and we can
 also overlook the verbiage of a good deal of the mind-cure
 literature, some of which is so moonstruck with optimism and so
 vaguely expressed that an academically trained intellect finds it
 almost impossible to read it at all.
the plain fact
 remains that the spread of the movement has been due to practical
 fruits, and the extremely practical turn of character of the american
 people has never been better shown than by the fact that this, their
 only decidedly original contribution to the systematic philosophy of
 life, should be so intimately knit up with concrete therapeutics. to
 the importance of mind-cure the medical and clerical professions in
 the united states are beginning, though with much recalcitrancy and
 protesting, to open their eyes. it is evidently bound to develop
 still farther, both speculatively and practically, and its latest
 writers are far and away the ablest of the group. it
 matters nothing that, just as there are hosts of persons who cannot
 pray, so there are greater hosts who cannot by any possibility be
 influenced by the mind-curers' ideas. for our immediate purpose, the
 important point is that so large a number should exist who can be so
 influenced. they form a psychic type to be studied with
 respect.[pg ]
to come now to a
 little closer quarters with their creed. the fundamental pillar on
 which it rests is nothing more than the general basis of all
 religious experience, the fact that man has a dual nature, and is
 connected with two spheres of thought, a shallower and a profounder
 sphere, in either of which he may learn to live more habitually. the
 shallower and lower sphere is that of the fleshly sensations,
 instincts, and desires, of egotism, doubt, and the lower personal
 interests. but whereas christian theology has always considered
 frowardness [pg ] to be the essential vice of this part of human
 nature, the mind-curers say that the mark of the beast in it is
 fear; and this is what gives such an
 entirely new religious turn to their persuasion.
“fear,” to
 quote a writer of the school, “has had its uses in the evolutionary process, and
 seems to constitute the whole of forethought in most animals; but
 that it should remain any part of the mental equipment of human
 civilized life is an absurdity. i find that the fear element of
 forethought is not stimulating to those more civilized persons to
 whom duty and attraction are the natural motives, but is weakening
 and deterrent. as soon as it becomes unnecessary, fear becomes a
 positive deterrent, and should be entirely removed, as dead flesh is
 removed from living tissue. to assist in the analysis of fear, and in
 the denunciation of its expressions, i have coined the word
fearthought
to stand for the unprofitable element of
 forethought, and have defined the word ‘worry’ as fearthought in contradistinction
 to forethought. i have also
 defined fearthought as the self-imposed or
 self-permitted suggestion of inferiority, in order to place it where it really belongs, in
 the category of harmful, unnecessary, and therefore not respectable
 things.”
the “misery-habit,” the “martyr-habit,” engendered by the prevalent
 “fearthought,” get pungent criticism
 from the mind-cure writers:—
“consider for a moment the habits of life into which
 we are born. there are certain social conventions or customs and
 alleged requirements, there is a theological bias, a general view of
 the world. there are conservative ideas in regard to our early
 training, our education, marriage, and occupation in life. following
 close upon this, there is a long series of anticipations, namely,
 that we shall suffer certain children's diseases, diseases of middle
 life, and of old age; the thought that we shall grow
[pg ]old, lose our faculties, and again become
 childlike; while crowning all is the fear of death. then there is a
 long line of particular fears and trouble-bearing expectations,
 such, for example, as ideas associated with certain articles of
 food, the dread of the east wind, the terrors of hot weather, the
 aches and pains associated with cold weather, the fear of catching
 cold if one sits in a draught, the coming of hay-fever upon the
 th of august in the middle of the day, and so on through a long
 list of fears, dreads, worriments, anxieties, anticipations,
 expectations, pessimisms, morbidities, and the whole ghostly train
 of fateful shapes which our fellow-men, and especially physicians,
 are ready to help us conjure up, an array worthy to rank with
 bradley's ‘unearthly
 ballet of bloodless categories.’
“yet this is not all. this vast array is swelled by
 innumerable volunteers from daily life,—the fear of accident, the
 possibility of calamity, the loss of property, the chance of
 robbery, of fire, or the outbreak of war. and it is not deemed
 sufficient to fear for ourselves. when a friend is taken ill, we
 must forthwith fear the worst and apprehend death. if one meets
 with sorrow ... sympathy means to enter into and increase the
 suffering.”
“man,” to
 quote another writer, “often has
 fear stamped upon him before his entrance into the outer world; he
 is reared in fear; all his life is passed in bondage to fear of
 disease and death, and thus his whole mentality becomes cramped,
 limited, and depressed, and his body follows its shrunken pattern
 and specification.... think of the millions of sensitive and
 responsive souls among our ancestors who have been under the
 dominion of such a perpetual nightmare! is it not surprising that
 health exists at all? nothing but the boundless divine love,
 exuberance, and vitality, constantly poured in, even though
 unconsciously to us, could in some degree neutralize such an ocean
 of morbidity.”
although the
 disciples of the mind-cure often use christian terminology, one sees
 from such quotations [pg
 ] how
 widely their notion of the fall of man diverges from that of ordinary
 christians.
their notion of
 man's higher nature is hardly less divergent, being decidedly
 pantheistic. the spiritual in man appears in the mind-cure philosophy
 as partly conscious, but chiefly subconscious; and through the
 subconscious part of it we are already one with the divine without
 any miracle of grace, or abrupt creation of a new inner man. as this
 view is variously expressed by different writers, we find in it
 traces of christian mysticism, of transcendental idealism, of
 vedantism, and of the modern psychology of the subliminal self. a
 quotation or two will put us at the central point of view:—
“the great central fact of the universe is that
 spirit of infinite life and power that is back of all, that manifests
 itself in and through all. this spirit of infinite life and power
 that is back of all is what i call god. i care not what term you may
 use, be it kindly light, providence, the over-soul,
 omnipotence, [pg
 ]or whatever term
 may be most convenient, so long as we are agreed in regard to the
 great central fact itself. god then fills the universe alone, so that
 all is from him and in him, and there is nothing that is outside. he
 is the life of our life, our very life itself. we are partakers of
 the life of god; and though we differ from him in that we are
 individualized spirits, while he is the infinite spirit, including
 us, as well as all else beside, yet in essence the life of god and
 the life of man are identically the same, and so are one. they differ
 not in essence or quality; they differ in degree.
“the great central fact in human life is the coming
 into a conscious vital realization of our oneness with this
 infinite life, and the opening of ourselves fully to this divine
 inflow. in just the degree that we come into a conscious
 realization of our oneness with the infinite life, and open
 ourselves to this divine inflow, do we actualize in ourselves the
 qualities and powers of the infinite life, do we make ourselves
 channels through which the infinite intelligence and power can
 work. in just the degree in which you realize your oneness with the
 infinite spirit, you will exchange dis-ease for ease, inharmony for
 harmony, suffering and pain for abounding health and strength. to
 recognize our own divinity, and our intimate relation to the
 universal, is to attach the belts of our machinery to the
 powerhouse of the universe. one need remain in hell no longer than
 one chooses to; we can rise to any heaven we ourselves choose; and
 when we choose so to rise, all the higher powers of the universe
 combine to help us heavenward.”
let me now pass
 from these abstracter statements to some more concrete accounts of
 experience with the mind-cure religion. i have many answers from
 correspondents—the only difficulty is to choose. the first two whom i
 shall quote are my personal friends. one of them, a woman, writing as
 follows, expresses well the feeling of continuity with the infinite
 power, by which all mind-cure disciples are inspired.[pg ]
“the first underlying cause of all sickness,
 weakness, or depression is the human
 sense of separateness from
 that divine energy which we call god. the soul which can feel and
 affirm in serene but jubilant confidence, as did the nazarene:
‘i and my father
 are one,’
has no further need of healer, or of
 healing. this is the whole truth in a nutshell, and other foundation
 for wholeness can no man lay than this fact of impregnable divine
 union. disease can no longer attack one whose feet are planted on
 this rock, who feels hourly, momently, the influx of the deific
 breath. if one with omnipotence, how can weariness enter the
 consciousness, how illness assail that indomitable
 spark?
“this possibility of annulling forever the law of
 fatigue has been abundantly proven in my own case; for my earlier
 life bears a record of many, many years of bedridden invalidism,
 with spine and lower limbs paralyzed. my thoughts were no more
 impure than they are to-day, although my belief in the necessity of
 illness was dense and unenlightened; but since my resurrection in
 the flesh, i have worked as a healer unceasingly for fourteen years
 without a vacation, and can truthfully assert that i have never
 known a moment of fatigue or pain, although coming in touch
 constantly with excessive weakness, illness, and disease of all
 kinds. for how can a conscious part of deity be sick?—since
‘greater is he
 that is with us than all that can strive against
 us.’ ”
my second
 correspondent, also a woman, sends me the following statement:—
“life seemed difficult to me at one time. i was
 always breaking down, and had several attacks of what is called
 nervous prostration, with terrible insomnia, being on the verge of
 insanity; besides having many other troubles, especially of the
 digestive organs. i had been sent away from home in charge of
 doctors, had taken all the narcotics, stopped all work, been fed up,
 and in fact knew all the doctors within reach. but i never recovered
 permanently till this new thought took possession of
 me.
“i think that the one thing which impressed me most
 was [pg
 ]learning the fact
 that we must be in absolutely constant relation or mental touch
 (this word is to me very expressive) with that essence of life
 which permeates all and which we call god. this is almost
 unrecognizable unless we live it into ourselves actually,
 that is, by a constant turning to the very innermost, deepest
 consciousness of our real selves or of god in us, for illumination
 from within, just as we turn to the sun for light, warmth, and
 invigoration without. when you do this consciously, realizing that
 to turn inward to the light within you is to live in the presence
 of god or your divine self, you soon discover the unreality of the
 objects to which you have hitherto been turning and which have
 engrossed you without.
“i have come to disregard the meaning of this
 attitude for bodily health as
 such, because that comes
 of itself, as an incidental result, and cannot be found by any
 special mental act or desire to have it, beyond that general
 attitude of mind i have referred to above. that which we usually
 make the object of life, those outer things we are all so wildly
 seeking, which we so often live and die for, but which then do not
 give us peace and happiness, they should all come of themselves as
 accessory, and as the mere outcome or natural result of a far
 higher life sunk deep in the bosom of the spirit. this life is the
 real seeking of the kingdom of god, the desire for his supremacy in
 our hearts, so that all else comes as that which shall be
‘added unto
 you’—as quite incidental and as a surprise to us,
 perhaps; and yet it is the proof of the reality of the perfect
 poise in the very centre of our being.
“when i say that we commonly make the object of our
 life that which we should not work for primarily, i mean many
 things which the world considers praiseworthy and excellent, such
 as success in business, fame as author or artist, physician or
 lawyer, or renown in philanthropic undertakings. such things should
 be results, not objects. i would also include pleasures of many
 kinds which seem harmless and good at the time, and are pursued
 because many accept them—i mean conventionalities, sociabilities,
 and fashions in their various development, these being mostly
 approved by the masses, although they may be unreal, and even
 unhealthy superfluities.”
[pg ]
here is another
 case, more concrete, also that of a woman. i read you these cases
 without comment,—they express so many varieties of the state of mind
 we are studying.
“i had been a sufferer from my childhood till my
 fortieth year. [details of ill-health are given which i omit.] i had
 been in vermont several months hoping for good from the change of
 air, but steadily growing weaker, when one day during the latter part
 of october, while resting in the afternoon, i suddenly heard as it
 were these words: ‘you will be
 healed and do a work you never dreamed of.’ these
 words were impressed upon my mind with such power i said at once that
 only god could have put them there. i believed them in spite of
 myself and of my suffering and weakness, which continued until
 christmas, when i returned to boston. within two days a young friend
 offered to take me to a mental healer (this was january , ). the
 healer said: ‘there is
 nothing but mind; we are expressions of the one mind; body is only a
 mortal belief; as a man thinketh so is he.’ i could
 not accept all she said, but i translated all that was there
 for me in this way: ‘there is nothing but god; i am created by him, and
 am absolutely dependent upon him; mind is given me to use; and by
 just so much of it as i will put upon the thought of right action in
 body i shall be lifted out of bondage to my ignorance and fear and
 past experience.’
that day i commenced accordingly to take
 a little of every food provided for the family, constantly saying to
 myself: 
 ‘the power that created the
 stomach must take care of what i have eaten.’ by
 holding these suggestions through the evening i went to bed and
 fell asleep, saying: ‘i am soul,
 spirit, just one with god's thought of me,’ and
 slept all night without waking, for the first time in several years
 [the distress-turns had usually recurred about two o'clock in the
 night]. i felt the next day like an escaped prisoner, and believed
 i had found the secret that would in time give me perfect health.
 within ten days i was able to eat anything provided for others, and
 after two weeks i began to have my own positive mental suggestions
 of truth, [pg
 ]which were to me
 like stepping-stones. i will note a few of them; they came about
 two weeks apart.
“st. i am soul, therefore it is well with
 me.
“d. i am soul, therefore i am well.
“d. a sort of inner vision of myself as a
 four-footed beast with a protuberance on every part of my body
 where i had suffering, with my own face, begging me to acknowledge
 it as myself. i resolutely fixed my attention on being well, and
 refused to even look at my old self in this form.
“th. again the vision of the beast far in the
 background, with faint voice. again refusal to
 acknowledge.
“th. once more the vision, but only of my eyes
 with the longing look; and again the refusal. then came the
 conviction, the inner consciousness, that i was perfectly well and
 always had been, for i was soul, an expression of god's perfect
 thought. that was to me the perfect and completed separation
 between what i was and what i appeared to be. i succeeded in never
 losing sight after this of my real being, by constantly affirming
 this truth, and by degrees (though it took me two years of hard
 work to get there) i expressed health
 continuously throughout my whole body.
“in my subsequent nineteen years' experience i have
 never known this truth to fail when i applied it, though in my
 ignorance i have often failed to apply it, but through my failures
 i have learned the simplicity and trustfulness of the little
 child.”
but i fear that i
 risk tiring you by so many examples, and i must lead you back to
 philosophic generalities again. you see already by such records of
 experience how impossible it is not to class mind-cure as primarily a
 religious movement. its doctrine of the oneness of our life with
 god's life is in fact quite indistinguishable from an interpretation
 of christ's message which in these very gifford lectures has been
 defended by some of your very ablest scottish religious
 philosophers.[pg ]
but philosophers
 usually profess to give a quasi-logical explanation of the existence
 of evil, whereas of the general fact of evil in the world, the
 existence of the selfish, suffering, timorous finite consciousness,
 the mind-curers, so far as i am acquainted with them, profess to give
 no speculative explanation. evil is empirically there for them as it
 is for everybody, but the practical point of view predominates, and
 it would ill agree with the spirit of their system to spend time in
 worrying over it as a “mystery” or
 “problem,” or in “laying to heart” the lesson of its experience,
 after the manner of the evangelicals. don't reason about it, as dante
 says, but give a glance and pass beyond! it is avidhya, ignorance!
 something merely to be outgrown and left behind, transcended and
 forgotten. christian science so-called, the sect of mrs. eddy, is the
 most radical branch of mind-cure in its dealings with evil. for it
 evil is simply a lie, [pg ] and any one who mentions it is a liar. the
 optimistic ideal of duty forbids us to pay it the compliment even of
 explicit attention. of course, as our next lectures will show us,
 this is a bad speculative omission, but it is intimately linked with
 the practical merits of the system we are examining. why regret a
 philosophy of evil, a mind-curer would ask us, if i can put you in
 possession of a life of good?
after all, it is
 the life that tells; and mind-cure has developed a living system of
 mental hygiene which may well claim to have thrown all previous
 literature of the diätetik der seele into the shade.
 this system is wholly and exclusively compacted of optimism:
 “pessimism leads to weakness. optimism leads
 to power.” “thoughts are
 things,” as one of the most vigorous mind-cure writers prints
 in bold type at the bottom of each of his pages; and if your thoughts
 are of health, youth, vigor, and success, before you know it these
 things will also be your outward portion. no one can fail of the
 regenerative influence of optimistic thinking, pertinaciously
 pursued. every man owns indefeasibly this inlet to the divine. fear,
 on the contrary, and all the contracted and egoistic modes of
 thought, are inlets to destruction. most mind-curers here bring in a
 doctrine that thoughts are “forces,”
 and that, by virtue of a law that like attracts like, one man's
 thoughts draw to themselves as allies all the thoughts of the same
 character that exist the world over. thus one gets, by one's
 thinking, reinforcements from elsewhere for the realization of one's
 desires; and the great point in the conduct of life is to get the
 heavenly forces on one's side by opening one's own mind to their
 influx.
on the whole, one
 is struck by a psychological similarity between the mind-cure
 movement and the lutheran [pg
 ] and
 wesleyan movements. to the believer in moralism and works, with his
 anxious query, “what shall i do to be
 saved?” luther and wesley replied: “you are saved now, if you would but believe it.”
 and the mind-curers come with precisely similar words of
 emancipation. they speak, it is true, to persons for whom the
 conception of salvation has lost its ancient theological meaning, but
 who labor nevertheless with the same eternal human difficulty.
 things are
 wrong with them; and “what shall
 i do to be clear, right, sound, whole, well?” is the form of
 their question. and the answer is: “you
 are well, sound, and clear already,
 if you did but know it.” “the whole
 matter may be summed up in one sentence,” says one of the
 authors whom i have already quoted, “god is well, and so are you. you
 must awaken to the knowledge of your real being.”
the adequacy of
 their message to the mental needs of a large fraction of mankind is
 what gave force to those earlier gospels. exactly the same adequacy
 holds in the case of the mind-cure message, foolish as it may sound
 upon its surface; and seeing its rapid growth in influence, and its
 therapeutic triumphs, one is tempted to ask whether it may not be
 destined (probably by very reason of the crudity and extravagance of
 many of its manifestations) to play
 a part almost as great in the evolution of the popular religion of
 the future as did those earlier movements in their day.
but i here fear
 that i may begin to “jar upon the
 nerves” of some of the members of this academic audience. such
 contemporary vagaries, you may think, [pg ] should hardly take so large a place in
 dignified gifford lectures. i can only beseech you to have patience.
 the whole outcome of these lectures will, i imagine, be the
 emphasizing to your mind of the enormous diversities which the
 spiritual lives of different men exhibit. their wants, their
 susceptibilities, and their capacities all vary and must be classed
 under different heads. the result is that we have really different
 types of religious experience; and, seeking in these lectures closer
 acquaintance with the healthy-minded type, we must take it where we
 find it in most radical form. the psychology of individual types of
 character has hardly begun even to be sketched as yet—our lectures
 may possibly serve as a crumb-like contribution to the structure. the
 first thing to bear in mind (especially if we ourselves belong to the
 clerico-academic-scientific type, the officially and conventionally
 “correct” type, “the deadly respectable” type, for which to ignore
 others is a besetting temptation) is that nothing can be more stupid
 than to bar out phenomena from our notice, merely because we are
 incapable of taking part in anything like them ourselves.
now the history of
 lutheran salvation by faith, of methodistic conversions, and of what
 i call the mind-cure movement seems to prove the existence of
 numerous persons in whom—at any rate at a certain stage in their
 development—a change of character for the better, so far from being
 facilitated by the rules laid down by official moralists, will take
 place all the more successfully if those rules be exactly reversed.
 official moralists advise us never to relax our strenuousness.
 “be vigilant, day and night,” they
 adjure us; “hold your passive tendencies in
 check; shrink from no effort; keep your will like a bow always
 bent.” but the persons i speak of find that all this conscious
 effort leads to nothing but failure [pg ] and vexation in their hands, and only makes
 them two-fold more the children of hell they were before. the tense
 and voluntary attitude becomes in them an impossible fever and
 torment. their machinery refuses to run at all when the bearings are
 made so hot and the belts so tight.
under these
 circumstances the way to success, as vouched for by innumerable
 authentic personal narrations, is by an anti-moralistic method, by
 the “surrender” of which i spoke in my
 second lecture. passivity, not activity; relaxation, not intentness,
 should be now the rule. give up the feeling of responsibility, let go
 your hold, resign the care of your destiny to higher powers, be
 genuinely indifferent as to what becomes of it all, and you will find
 not only that you gain a perfect inward relief, but often also, in
 addition, the particular goods you sincerely thought you were
 renouncing. this is the salvation through self-despair, the dying to
 be truly born, of lutheran theology, the passage into nothing
 of which jacob behmen writes. to get to it, a critical point must
 usually be passed, a corner turned within one. something must give
 way, a native hardness must break down and liquefy; and this event
 (as we shall abundantly see hereafter) is frequently sudden and
 automatic, and leaves on the subject an impression that he has been
 wrought on by an external power.
whatever its
 ultimate significance may prove to be, this is certainly one
 fundamental form of human experience. some say that the capacity or
 incapacity for it is what divides the religious from the merely
 moralistic character. with those who undergo it in its fullness, no
 criticism avails to cast doubt on its reality. they know; for
 they have actually felt the higher powers, in giving up
 the tension of their personal will.[pg ]
a story which
 revivalist preachers often tell is that of a man who found himself at
 night slipping down the side of a precipice. at last he caught a
 branch which stopped his fall, and remained clinging to it in misery
 for hours. but finally his fingers had to loose their hold, and with
 a despairing farewell to life, he let himself drop. he fell just six
 inches. if he had given up the struggle earlier, his agony would have
 been spared. as the mother earth received him, so, the preachers tell
 us, will the everlasting arms receive us if we
 confide absolutely in them, and give up the hereditary habit of
 relying on our personal strength, with its precautions that cannot
 shelter and safeguards that never save.
the mind-curers
 have given the widest scope to this sort of experience. they have
 demonstrated that a form of regeneration by relaxing, by letting go,
 psychologically indistinguishable from the lutheran justification by
 faith and the wesleyan acceptance of free grace, is within the reach
 of persons who have no conviction of sin and care nothing for the
 lutheran theology. it is but giving your little private convulsive
 self a rest, and finding that a greater self is there. the results,
 slow or sudden, or great or small, of the combined optimism and
 expectancy, the regenerative phenomena which ensue on the abandonment
 of effort, remain firm facts of human nature, no matter whether we
 adopt a theistic, a pantheistic-idealistic, or a
 medical-materialistic view of their ultimate causal
 explanation.[pg ]
when we take up
 the phenomena of revivalistic conversion, we shall learn something
 more about all this. meanwhile i will say a brief word about the
 mind-curer's methods.
they are of course
 largely suggestive. the suggestive influence of environment plays an
 enormous part in all spiritual education. but the word “suggestion,” having acquired official status, is
 unfortunately already beginning to play in many quarters the part of
 a wet blanket upon investigation, being used to fend off all inquiry
 into the varying susceptibilities of individual cases. “suggestion” is only another name for the power of
 ideas, so
 far as they prove efficacious over belief and conduct.
 ideas efficacious over some people prove inefficacious over others.
 ideas efficacious at some times and in some human surroundings are
 not so at other times and elsewhere. the ideas of christian churches
 are not efficacious in the therapeutic direction to-day, whatever
 they may have been in earlier centuries; and when the whole question
 is as to why the salt has lost its savor here or gained it there, the
 mere blank waving of the word “suggestion” as if it were a banner gives no
 light. dr. goddard, whose candid psychological essay on faith cures
 ascribes them to nothing but ordinary suggestion, concludes by saying
 that “religion [and by this he seems to mean
 our popular christianity] has in it all there is in mental
 therapeutics, and has it in its best form. living up to [our
 religious] ideas will do anything for us that can be done.”
 and this in spite of the actual fact that the popular christianity
 does absolutely [pg
nothing, or did nothing until
 mind-cure came to the rescue.
an idea, to be
 suggestive, must come to the individual with the force of a
 revelation. the mind-cure with its gospel of healthy-mindedness has
 come as a revelation to many whose hearts the church christianity had
 left hardened. it has let loose their springs of higher life.
 [pg ] in what can the originality of
 any religious movement consist, save in finding a channel, until then
 sealed up, through which those springs may be set free in some group
 of human beings?
the force of
 personal faith, enthusiasm, and example, and above all the force of
 novelty, are always the prime suggestive agency in this kind of
 success. if mind-cure should ever become official, respectable, and
 intrenched, these elements of suggestive efficacy will be lost. in
 its acuter stages every religion must be a homeless arab of the
 desert. the church knows this well enough, with its everlasting inner
 struggle of the acute religion of the few against the chronic
 religion of the many, indurated into an obstructiveness worse than
 that which irreligion opposes to the movings of the spirit.
 “we may pray,” says jonathan edwards,
 “concerning all those saints that are not
 lively christians, that they may either be enlivened, or taken away;
 if that be true that is often said by some at this day, that these
 cold dead saints do more hurt than natural men, and lead more souls
 to hell, and that it would be well for mankind if they were all
 dead.”
the next condition
 of success is the apparent existence, in large numbers, of minds who
 unite healthy-mindedness with readiness for regeneration by letting
 go. protestantism has been too pessimistic as regards the natural
 man, catholicism has been too legalistic and moralistic, for either
 the one or the other to appeal in any generous way to the type of
 character formed of this peculiar mingling of elements. however few
 of us here present may belong to such a type, it is now evident that
 [pg ] it forms a specific moral
 combination, well represented in the world.
finally, mind-cure
 has made what in our protestant countries is an unprecedentedly great
 use of the subconscious life. to their reasoned advice and dogmatic
 assertion, its founders have added systematic exercise in passive
 relaxation, concentration, and meditation, and have even invoked
 something like hypnotic practice. i quote some passages at
 random:—
“the value, the potency of ideals is the great
 practical truth on which the new thought most strongly insists,—the
 development namely from within outward, from small to
 great.consequently
 one's thought should be centred on the ideal outcome, even though
 this trust be literally like a step in the dark.
to attain the ability thus effectively
 to direct the mind, the new thought advises the practice of
 concentration, or in other words, the attainment of self-control.
 one is to learn to marshal the tendencies of the mind, so that they
 may be held together as a unit by the chosen ideal. to this end,
 one should set apart times for silent meditation, by one's self,
 preferably in a room where the surroundings are favorable to
 spiritual thought. in new thought terms, this is called
‘entering the
 silence.’ ”
“the time will come when in the busy office or on
 the noisy street you can enter into the silence by simply drawing
 the mantle of your own thoughts about you and realizing that there
 and everywhere the spirit of infinite life, love, wisdom, peace,
 power, and plenty is guiding, keeping, protecting, leading you.
 this is the spirit of continual prayer.
one of the most intuitive men we ever
 met had a desk at a city office where several other gentlemen were
 doing business constantly, and often talking loudly. entirely
 undisturbed by the many various sounds about him, this self-centred
 faithful man would, [pg ]in any moment of
 perplexity, draw the curtains of privacy so completely about him
 that he would be as fully inclosed in his own psychic aura, and
 thereby as effectually removed from all distractions, as though he
 were alone in some primeval wood. taking his difficulty with him
 into the mystic silence in the form of a direct question, to which
 he expected a certain answer, he would remain utterly passive until
 the reply came, and never once through many years' experience did
 he find himself disappointed or misled.”
wherein, i should
 like to know, does this intrinsically differ from the
 practice of “recollection” which plays
 so great a part in catholic discipline? otherwise called the practice
 of the presence of god (and so known among ourselves, as for instance
 in jeremy taylor), it is thus defined by the eminent teacher alvarez
 de paz in his work on contemplation.
“it is the recollection of god, the thought of god,
 which in all places and circumstances makes us see him present, lets
 us commune respectfully and lovingly with him, and fills us with
 desire and affection for him.... would you escape from every ill?
 never lose this recollection of god, neither in prosperity nor in
 adversity, nor on any occasion whichsoever it be. invoke not, to
 excuse yourself from this duty, either the difficulty or the
 importance of your business, for you can always remember that god
 sees you, that you are under his eye. if a thousand times an hour you
 forget him, reanimate a thousand times the recollection. if you
 cannot practice this exercise continuously, at least make yourself as
 familiar with it as possible; and, like unto those who in a rigorous
 winter draw near the fire as often as they can, go as often as you
 can to that ardent fire which will warm your
 soul.”
all the external
 associations of the catholic discipline are of course unlike anything
 in mind-cure thought, but the purely spiritual part of the exercise
 is identical in [pg
 both communions, and in both communions those who urge it write with
 authority, for they have evidently experienced in their own persons
 that whereof they tell. compare again some mind-cure utterances:—
“high, healthful, pure thinking can be encouraged,
 promoted, and strengthened. its current can be turned upon grand
 ideals until it forms a habit and wears a channel. by means of such
 discipline the mental horizon can be flooded with the sunshine of
 beauty, wholeness, and harmony. to inaugurate pure and lofty thinking
 may at first seem difficult, even almost mechanical, but perseverance
 will at length render it easy, then pleasant, and finally
 delightful.
“the soul's real world is that which it has built
 of its thoughts, mental states, and imaginations. if we
will, we can turn our backs upon the lower and
 sensuous plane, and lift ourselves into the realm of the spiritual
 and real, and there gain a residence. the assumption of states of
 expectancy and receptivity will attract spiritual sunshine, and it
 will flow in as naturally as air inclines to a vacuum.... whenever
 the thought is not occupied with one's daily duty or profession, it
 should be sent aloft into the spiritual atmosphere. there are quiet
 leisure moments by day, and wakeful hours at night, when this
 wholesome and delightful exercise may be engaged in to great
 advantage. if one who has never made any systematic effort to lift
 and control the thought-forces will, for a single month, earnestly
 pursue the course here suggested, he will be surprised and
 delighted at the result, and nothing will induce him to go back to
 careless, aimless, and superficial thinking. at such favorable
 seasons the outside world, with all its current of daily events, is
 barred out, and one goes into the silent sanctuary of the inner
 temple of soul to commune and aspire. the spiritual hearing becomes
 delicately sensitive, so that the ‘still, small voice’ is
 audible, the tumultuous waves of external sense are hushed, and
 there is a great calm. the ego gradually becomes conscious that it
 is face to face with the divine presence; that mighty, healing,
 loving, fatherly life which is nearer to us than we are to
 ourselves. there is soul-contact [pg ]with the
 parent-soul, and an influx of life, love, virtue, health, and
 happiness from the inexhaustible fountain.”
when we reach the
 subject of mysticism, you will undergo so deep an immersion into
 these exalted states of consciousness as to be wet all over, if i may
 so express myself; and the cold shiver of doubt with which this
 little sprinkling may affect you will have long since passed
 away—doubt, i mean, as to whether all such writing be not mere
 abstract talk and rhetoric set down pour
 encourager les autres. you will then be convinced, i
 trust, that these states of consciousness of “union” form a perfectly definite class of
 experiences, of which the soul may occasionally partake, and which
 certain persons may live by in a deeper sense than they live by
 anything else with which they have acquaintance. this brings me to a
 general philosophical reflection with which i should like to pass
 from the subject of healthy-mindedness, and close a topic which i
 fear is already only too long drawn out. it concerns the relation of
 all this systematized healthy-mindedness and mind-cure religion to
 scientific method and the scientific life.
in a later lecture
 i shall have to treat explicitly of the relation of religion to
 science on the one hand, and to primeval savage thought on the other.
 there are plenty of persons to-day—“scientists” or “positivists,” they are fond of calling
 themselves—who will tell you that religious thought is a mere
 survival, an atavistic reversion to a type of consciousness which
 humanity in its more enlightened examples has long since left behind
 and outgrown. if you ask them to explain themselves more fully, they
 will probably say that for primitive thought [pg ] everything is conceived of under the form of
 personality. the savage thinks that things operate by personal
 forces, and for the sake of individual ends. for him, even external
 nature obeys individual needs and claims, just as if these were so
 many elementary powers. now science, on the other hand, these
 positivists say, has proved that personality, so far from being an
 elementary force in nature, is but a passive resultant of the really
 elementary forces, physical, chemical, physiological, and
 psycho-physical, which are all impersonal and general in character.
 nothing individual accomplishes anything in the universe save in so
 far as it obeys and exemplifies some universal law. should you then
 inquire of them by what means science has thus supplanted primitive
 thought, and discredited its personal way of looking at things, they
 would undoubtedly say it has been by the strict use of the method of
 experimental verification. follow out science's conceptions
 practically, they will say, the conceptions that ignore personality
 altogether, and you will always be corroborated. the world is so made
 that all your expectations will be experientially verified so long,
 and only so long, as you keep the terms from which you infer them
 impersonal and universal.
but here we have
 mind-cure, with her diametrically opposite philosophy, setting up an
 exactly identical claim. live as if i were true, she says, and every
 day will practically prove you right. that the controlling energies
 of nature are personal, that your own personal thoughts are forces,
 that the powers of the universe will directly respond to your
 individual appeals and needs, are propositions which your whole
 bodily and mental experience will verify. and that experience does
 largely verify these primeval religious ideas is proved by the fact
 that the mind-cure movement spreads as it does, not by proclamation
 [pg ] and assertion simply, but by
 palpable experiential results. here, in the very heyday of science's
 authority, it carries on an aggressive warfare against the scientific
 philosophy, and succeeds by using science's own peculiar methods and
 weapons. believing that a higher power will take care of us in
 certain ways better than we can take care of ourselves, if we only
 genuinely throw ourselves upon it and consent to use it, it finds the
 belief, not only not impugned, but corroborated by its
 observation.
how conversions
 are thus made, and converts confirmed, is evident enough from the
 narratives which i have quoted. i will quote yet another couple of
 shorter ones to give the matter a perfectly concrete turn. here is
 one:—
“one of my first experiences in applying my teaching
 was two months after i first saw the healer. i fell, spraining my
 right ankle, which i had done once four years before, having then had
 to use a crutch and elastic anklet for some months, and carefully
 guarding it ever since. as soon as i was on my feet i made the
 positive suggestion (and felt it through all my being):
‘there is
 nothing but god, all life comes from him perfectly. i cannot be
 sprained or hurt, i will let him take care of
 it.’ well, i never had a sensation in it, and i walked
 two miles that day.”
the next case not
 only illustrates experiment and verification, but also the element of
 passivity and surrender of which awhile ago i made such account.
“i went into town to do some shopping one morning,
 and i had not been gone long before i began to feel ill. the ill
 feeling increased rapidly, until i had pains in all my bones, nausea
 and faintness, headache, all the symptoms in short that precede an
 attack of influenza. i thought that i was going to have the grippe,
 epidemic then in boston, or something worse. the mind-cure teachings
 that i had been listening to all the winter [pg ]thereupon
 came into my mind, and i thought that here was an opportunity to test
 myself. on my way home i met a friend, and i refrained with some
 effort from telling her how i felt. that was the first step gained. i
 went to bed immediately, and my husband wished to send for the
 doctor. but i told him that i would rather wait until morning and see
 how i felt. then followed one of the most beautiful experiences of my
 life.
“i cannot express it in any other way than to say
 that i did ‘lie down in
 the stream of life and let it flow over me.’ i
 gave up all fear of any impending disease; i was perfectly willing
 and obedient. there was no intellectual effort, or train of
 thought. my dominant idea was: ‘behold the handmaid of the lord: be it unto me
 even as thou wilt,’ and a
 perfect confidence that all would be well, that all
was well. the creative life was flowing into me every
 instant, and i felt myself allied with the infinite, in harmony,
 and full of the peace that passeth understanding. there was no
 place in my mind for a jarring body. i had no consciousness of time
 or space or persons; but only of love and happiness and
 faith.
“i do not know how long this state lasted, nor when
 i fell asleep; but when i woke up in the morning, i
 was well.”
these are
 exceedingly trivial instances, but in
 them, if we have anything at all, we have the method of experiment
 and verification. for the point i am driving at now, it makes no
 difference whether you consider the patients to be deluded victims of
 their imagination or not. that they seemed to themselves to have been cured by the
 experiments tried was enough to make them converts to the system. and
 although it is evident that one must be of a certain mental mould to
 get such results (for not every one can get thus cured to his own
 satisfaction any more than every one can be cured by the first
 regular practitioner whom he calls in), yet it would surely be
 pedantic and over-scrupulous for those who can get
 their savage and primitive philosophy of mental healing verified
 [pg ] in such experimental ways as
 this, to give them up at word of command for more scientific
 therapeutics. what are we to think of all this? has science made too
 wide a claim?
i believe that the
 claims of the sectarian scientist are, to say the least, premature.
 the experiences which we have been studying during this hour (and a
 great many other kinds of religious experiences are like them)
 plainly show the universe to be a more many-sided affair than any
 sect, even the scientific sect, allows for. what, in the end, are all
 our verifications but experiences that agree with more or less
 isolated systems of ideas (conceptual systems) that our minds have
 framed? but why in the name of common sense need we assume that only
 one such system of ideas can be true? the obvious outcome of our
 total experience is that the world can be handled according to many
 systems of ideas, and is so handled by different men, and will each
 time give some characteristic kind of profit, for which he cares, to
 the handler, while at the same time some other kind of profit has to
 be omitted or postponed. science gives to all of us telegraphy,
 electric lighting, and diagnosis, and succeeds in preventing and
 curing a certain amount of disease. religion in the shape of
 mind-cure gives to some of us serenity, moral poise, and happiness,
 and prevents certain forms of disease as well as science does, or
 even better in a certain class of persons. evidently, then, the
 science and the religion are both of them genuine keys for unlocking
 the world's treasure-house to him who can use either of them
 practically. just as evidently neither is exhaustive or exclusive of
 the other's simultaneous use. and why, after all, may not the world
 be so complex as to consist of many interpenetrating spheres of
 reality, which we can thus approach in alternation by using different
 [pg ] conceptions and assuming
 different attitudes, just as mathematicians handle the same numerical
 and spatial facts by geometry, by analytical geometry, by algebra, by
 the calculus, or by quaternions, and each time come out right? on
 this view religion and science, each verified in its own way from
 hour to hour and from life to life, would be co-eternal. primitive
 thought, with its belief in individualized personal forces, seems at
 any rate as far as ever from being driven by science from the field
 to-day. numbers of educated people still find it the directest
 experimental channel by which to carry on their intercourse with
 reality.
the case of
 mind-cure lay so ready to my hand that i could not resist the
 temptation of using it to bring these last truths home to your
 attention, but i must content myself to-day with this very brief
 indication. in a later lecture the relations of religion both to
 science and to primitive thought will have to receive much more
 explicit attention.
appendix
(see note to p.
case
i. “my own experience is this: i had long been ill,
 and one of the first results of my illness, a dozen years before,
 had been a diplopia which deprived me of the use of my eyes for
 reading and writing almost entirely, while a later one had been to
 shut me out from exercise of any kind under penalty of
[pg ]immediate and great exhaustion. i had been under
 the care of doctors of the highest standing both in europe and
 america, men in whose power to help me i had had great faith, with
 no or ill result. then, at a time when i seemed to be rather
 rapidly losing ground, i heard some things that gave me interest
 enough in mental healing to make me try it; i had no great hope of
 getting any good from it—it was a 
chance
i tried, partly because my thought
 was interested by the new possibility it seemed to open, partly
 because it was the only chance i then could see. i went to x. in
 boston, from whom some friends of mine had got, or thought that
 they had got, great help; the treatment was a silent one; little
 was said, and that little carried no conviction to my mind;
 whatever influence was exerted was that of another person's
 thought or feeling silently projected on to my unconscious mind,
 into my nervous system as it were, as we sat still together. i
 believed from the start in the possibility
of such action, for i knew the power
 of the mind to shape, helping or hindering, the body's
 nerve-activities, and i thought telepathy probable, although
 unproved, but i had no belief in it as more than a possibility,
 and no strong conviction nor any mystic or religious faith
 connected with my thought of it that might have brought
 imagination strongly into play.
“i sat quietly with the healer for half an hour
 each day, at first with no result; then, after ten days or so, i
 became quite suddenly and swiftly conscious of a tide of new
 energy rising within me, a sense of power to pass beyond old
 halting-places, of power to break the bounds that, though often
 tried before, had long been veritable walls about my life, too
 high to climb. i began to read and walk as i had not done for
 years, and the change was sudden, marked, and unmistakable. this
 tide seemed to mount for some weeks, three or four perhaps, when,
 summer having come, i came away, taking the treatment up again a
 few months later. the lift i got proved permanent, and left me
 slowly gaining ground instead of losing it, but with this lift
 the influence seemed in a way to have spent itself, and, though
 my confidence in the reality of the power had gained immensely
 from this first experience, and should have helped me to make
 further gain in health and strength if my belief in
[pg ]it had been the potent factor there, i never
 after this got any result at all as striking or as clearly marked
 as this which came when i made trial of it first, with little
 faith and doubtful expectation. it is difficult to put all the
 evidence in such a matter into words, to gather up into a
 distinct statement all that one bases one's conclusions on, but i
 have always felt that i had abundant evidence to justify (to
 myself, at least) the conclusion that i came to then, and since
 have held to, that the physical change which came at that time
 was, first, the result of a change wrought within me by a change
 of mental state; and, secondly, that that change of mental state
 was not, save in a very secondary way, brought about through the
 influence of an excited imagination, or a consciously
received suggestion of an hypnotic
 sort. lastly, i believe that this change was the result of my
 receiving telepathically, and upon a mental stratum quite below
 the level of immediate consciousness, a healthier and more
 energetic attitude, receiving it from another person whose
 thought was directed upon me with the intention of impressing the
 idea of this attitude upon me. in my case the disease was
 distinctly what would be classed as nervous, not organic; but
 from such opportunities as i have had of observing, i have come
 to the conclusion that the dividing line that has been drawn is
 an arbitrary one, the nerves controlling the internal activities
 and the nutrition of the body throughout; and i believe that the
 central nervous system, by starting and inhibiting local centres,
 can exercise a vast influence upon disease of any kind, if it can
 be brought to bear. in my judgment the question is simply how to
 bring it to bear, and i think that the uncertainty and remarkable
 differences in the results obtained through mental healing do but
 show how ignorant we are as yet of the forces at work and of the
 means we should take to make them effective. that these results
 are not due to chance coincidences my observation of myself and
 others makes me sure; that the conscious mind, the imagination,
 enters into them as a factor in many cases is doubtless true, but
 in many others, and sometimes very extraordinary ones, it hardly
 seems to enter in at all. on the whole i am inclined to think
 that as the healing action, like the morbid one, springs from the
 plane [pg
 ]of the
 normally unconscious mind, so the strongest and most
 effective impressions are those which it receives, in some as yet unknown, subtle
 way, directly
from a healthier mind whose state,
 through a hidden law of sympathy, it
 reproduces.”
case
ii. “at the urgent request of friends, and with no
 faith and hardly any hope (possibly owing to a previous
 unsuccessful experience with a christian scientist), our little
 daughter was placed under the care of a healer, and cured of a
 trouble about which the physician had been very discouraging in
 his diagnosis. this interested me, and i began studying earnestly
 the method and philosophy of this method of healing. gradually an
 inner peace and tranquillity came to me in so positive a way that
 my manner changed greatly. my children and friends noticed the
 change and commented upon it. all feelings of irritability
 disappeared. even the expression of my face changed
 noticeably.
“i had been bigoted, aggressive, and intolerant
 in discussion, both in public and private. i grew broadly
 tolerant and receptive toward the views of others. i had been
 nervous and irritable, coming home two or three times a week with
 a sick headache induced, as i then supposed, by dyspepsia and
 catarrh. i grew serene and gentle, and the physical troubles
 entirely disappeared. i had been in the habit of approaching
 every business interview with an almost morbid dread. i now meet
 every one with confidence and inner calm.
“i may say that the growth has all been toward
 the elimination of selfishness. i do not mean simply the grosser,
 more sensual forms, but those subtler and generally unrecognized
 kinds, such as express themselves in sorrow, grief, regret, envy,
 etc. it has been in the direction of a practical, working
 realization of the immanence of god and the divinity of man's
 true, inner self.”
[pg ]
lectures vi and vii. the sick
 soul.
at our last
 meeting, we considered the healthy-minded temperament, the
 temperament which has a constitutional incapacity for prolonged
 suffering, and in which the tendency to see things optimistically is
 like a water of crystallization in which the individual's character
 is set. we saw how this temperament may become the basis for a
 peculiar type of religion, a religion in which good, even the good of
 this world's life, is regarded as the essential thing for a rational
 being to attend to. this religion directs him to settle his scores
 with the more evil aspects of the universe by systematically
 declining to lay them to heart or make much of them, by ignoring them
 in his reflective calculations, or even, on occasion, by denying
 outright that they exist. evil is a disease; and worry over disease
 is itself an additional form of disease, which only adds to the
 original complaint. even repentance and remorse, affections which
 come in the character of ministers of good, may be but sickly and
 relaxing impulses. the best repentance is to up and act for
 righteousness, and forget that you ever had relations with sin.
spinoza's
 philosophy has this sort of healthy-mindedness woven into the heart
 of it, and this has been one secret of its fascination. he whom
 reason leads, according to spinoza, is led altogether by the
 influence over his mind of good. knowledge of evil is an “inadequate” knowledge, fit only for slavish
 minds. so spinoza [pg
 categorically condemns repentance. when men make mistakes, he
 says,—
“one might perhaps expect gnawings of conscience and
 repentance to help to bring them on the right path, and might
 thereupon conclude (as every one does conclude) that these affections
 are good things. yet when we look at the matter closely, we shall
 find that not only are they not good, but on the contrary deleterious
 and evil passions. for it is manifest that we can always get along
 better by reason and love of truth than by worry of conscience and
 remorse. harmful are these and evil, inasmuch as they form a
 particular kind of sadness; and the disadvantages of
 sadness,”
he continues, “i have already proved, and shown that we should
 strive to keep it from our life. just so we should endeavor, since
 uneasiness of conscience and remorse are of this kind of complexion,
 to flee and shun these states of mind.”
within the
 christian body, for which repentance of sins has from the beginning
 been the critical religious act, healthy-mindedness has always come
 forward with its milder interpretation. repentance according to such
 healthy-minded christians means getting away from the sin, not
 groaning and writhing over its commission. the catholic practice of
 confession and absolution is in one of its aspects little more than a
 systematic method of keeping healthy-mindedness on top. by it a man's
 accounts with evil are periodically squared and audited, so that he
 may start the clean page with no old debts inscribed. any catholic
 will tell us how clean and fresh and free he feels after the purging
 operation. martin luther by no means belonged to the healthy-minded
 type in the radical sense in which we have discussed it, and he
 repudiated priestly absolution for sin. yet in this matter of
 repentance he had some very healthy-minded [pg ] ideas, due in the main to the largeness of his
 conception of god.
“when i was a monk,” he
 says, “i thought that
 i was utterly cast away, if at any time i felt the lust of the flesh:
 that is to say, if i felt any evil motion, fleshly lust, wrath,
 hatred, or envy against any brother. i assayed many ways to help to
 quiet my conscience, but it would not be; for the concupiscence and
 lust of my flesh did always return, so that i could not rest, but was
 continually vexed with these thoughts: this or that sin thou hast
 committed: thou art infected with envy, with impatiency, and such
 other sins: therefore thou art entered into this holy order in vain,
 and all thy good works are unprofitable. but if then i had rightly
 understood these sentences of paul: ‘the flesh lusteth contrary to the spirit, and the
 spirit contrary to the flesh; and these two are one against another,
 so that ye cannot do the things that ye would
 do,’i should not have so miserably tormented myself,
 but should have thought and said to myself, as now commonly i
 do, ‘martin, thou
 shalt not utterly be without sin, for thou hast flesh; thou shalt
 therefore feel the battle thereof.’ i
 remember that staupitz was wont to say, ‘i have vowed unto god above a thousand times that
 i would become a better man: but i never performed that which i
 vowed. hereafter i will make no such vow: for i have now learned by
 experience that i am not able to perform it. unless, therefore, god
 be favorable and merciful unto me for christ's sake, i shall not be
 able, with all my vows and all my good deeds, to stand before
 him.’
this (of staupitz's) was not only a
 true, but also a godly and a holy desperation; and this must they
 all confess, both with mouth and heart, who will be saved. for the
 godly trust not to their own righteousness. they look unto christ
 their reconciler, who gave his life for their sins. moreover, they
 know that the remnant of sin which is in their flesh is not laid to
 their charge, but freely pardoned. notwithstanding, in the mean
 while they fight in spirit against the flesh, lest they
 should fulfill
the lusts thereof; and although they
 feel the flesh to rage and rebel, and themselves also do fall
 sometimes into sin through infirmity, yet are they not discouraged,
 nor think therefore [pg ]that their state
 and kind of life, and the works which are done according to their
 calling, displease god; but they raise up themselves by
 faith.”
one of the
 heresies for which the jesuits got that spiritual genius, molinos,
 the founder of quietism, so abominably condemned was his
 healthy-minded opinion of repentance:—
“when thou fallest into a fault, in what matter
 soever it be, do not trouble nor afflict thyself for it. for they are
 effects of our frail nature, stained by original sin. the common
 enemy will make thee believe, as soon as thou fallest into any fault,
 that thou walkest in error, and therefore art out of god and his
 favor, and herewith would he make thee distrust of the divine grace,
 telling thee of thy misery, and making a giant of it; and putting it
 into thy head that every day thy soul grows worse instead of better,
 whilst it so often repeats these failings. o blessed soul, open thine
 eyes; and shut the gate against these diabolical suggestions, knowing
 thy misery, and trusting in the mercy divine. would not he be a mere
 fool who, running at tournament with others, and falling in the best
 of the career, should lie weeping on the ground and afflicting
 himself with discourses upon his fall? man (they would tell him),
 lose no time, get up and take the course again, for he that rises
 again quickly and continues his race is as if he had never fallen. if
 thou seest thyself fallen once and a thousand times, thou oughtest to
 make use of the remedy which i have given thee, that is, a loving
 confidence in the divine mercy. these are the weapons with which thou
 must fight and conquer cowardice and vain thoughts. this is the means
 thou oughtest to use—not to lose time, not to disturb thyself, and
 reap no good.”
now in contrast
 with such healthy-minded views as these, if we treat them as a way of
 deliberately minimizing evil, stands a radically opposite view, a way
 of maximizing [pg
 evil, if you please so to call it, based on the persuasion that the
 evil aspects of our life are of its very essence, and that the
 world's meaning most comes home to us when we lay them most to heart.
 we have now to address ourselves to this more morbid way of looking
 at the situation. but as i closed our last hour with a general
 philosophical reflection on the healthy-minded way of taking life, i
 should like at this point to make another philosophical reflection
 upon it before turning to that heavier task. you will excuse the
 brief delay.
if we admit that
 evil is an essential part of our being and the key to the
 interpretation of our life, we load ourselves down with a difficulty
 that has always proved burdensome in philosophies of religion.
 theism, whenever it has erected itself into a systematic philosophy
 of the universe, has shown a reluctance to let god be anything less
 than all-in-all. in other words, philosophic theism has always shown
 a tendency to become pantheistic and monistic, and to consider the
 world as one unit of absolute fact; and this has been at variance
 with popular or practical theism, which latter has ever been more or
 less frankly pluralistic, not to say polytheistic, and shown itself
 perfectly well satisfied with a universe composed of many original
 principles, provided we be only allowed to believe that the divine
 principle remains supreme, and that the others are subordinate. in
 this latter case god is not necessarily responsible for the existence
 of evil; he would only be responsible if it were not finally
 overcome. but on the monistic or pantheistic view, evil, like
 everything else, must have its foundation in god; and the difficulty
 is to see how this can possibly be the case if god be absolutely
 good. this difficulty faces us in every form of philosophy in which
 the world appears as one flawless unit of fact. such a unit is an
 individual, [pg ] and in it the worst parts must be as essential
 as the best, must be as necessary to make the individual what he is;
 since if any part whatever in an individual were to vanish or alter,
 it would no longer be that individual at all. the
 philosophy of absolute idealism, so vigorously represented both in
 scotland and america to-day, has to struggle with this difficulty
 quite as much as scholastic theism struggled in its time; and
 although it would be premature to say that there is no speculative
 issue whatever from the puzzle, it is perfectly fair to say that
 there is no clear or easy issue, and that the only obvious
 escape from paradox here is to cut loose from the monistic assumption
 altogether, and to allow the world to have existed from its origin in
 pluralistic form, as an aggregate or collection of higher and lower
 things and principles, rather than an absolutely unitary fact. for
 then evil would not need to be essential; it might be, and may always
 have been, an independent portion that had no rational or absolute
 right to live with the rest, and which we might conceivably hope to
 see got rid of at last.
now the gospel of
 healthy-mindedness, as we have described it, casts its vote
 distinctly for this pluralistic view. whereas the monistic
 philosopher finds himself more or less bound to say, as hegel said,
 that everything actual is rational, and that evil, as an element
 dialectically required, must be pinned in and kept and consecrated
 and have a function awarded to it in the final system of truth,
 healthy-mindedness refuses to say anything of the sort. evil, it
 says, is emphatically irrational, [pg ] and not to be pinned in, or preserved,
 or consecrated in any final system of truth. it is a pure abomination
 to the lord, an alien unreality, a waste element, to be sloughed off
 and negated, and the very memory of it, if possible, wiped out and
 forgotten. the ideal, so far from being co-extensive with the whole
 actual, is a mere extract from the actual, marked by
 its deliverance from all contact with this diseased, inferior, and
 excrementitious stuff.
here we have the
 interesting notion fairly and squarely presented to us, of there
 being elements of the universe which may make no rational whole in
 conjunction with the other elements, and which, from the point of
 view of any system which those other elements make up, can only be
 considered so much irrelevance and accident—so much “dirt,” as it were, and matter out of place. i ask
 you now not to forget this notion; for although most philosophers
 seem either to forget it or to disdain it too much ever to mention
 it, i believe that we shall have to admit it ourselves in the end as
 containing an element of truth. the mind-cure gospel thus once more
 appears to us as having dignity and importance. we have seen it to be
 a genuine religion, and no mere silly appeal to imagination to cure
 disease; we have seen its method of experimental verification to be
 not unlike the method of all science; and now here we find mind-cure
 as the champion of a perfectly definite conception of the
 metaphysical structure of the world. i hope that, in view of all
 this, you will not regret my having pressed it upon your attention at
 such length.
let us now say
 good-by for a while to all this way of thinking, and turn towards
 those persons who cannot so swiftly throw off the burden of the
 consciousness of evil, [pg
 ] but
 are congenitally fated to suffer from its presence. just as we saw
 that in healthy-mindedness there are shallower and profounder levels,
 happiness like that of the mere animal, and more regenerate sorts of
 happiness, so also are there different levels of the morbid mind, and
 the one is much more formidable than the other. there are people for
 whom evil means only a mal-adjustment with things, a
 wrong correspondence of one's life with the environment. such evil as
 this is curable, in principle at least, upon the natural plane, for
 merely by modifying either the self or the things, or both at once,
 the two terms may be made to fit, and all go merry as a marriage bell
 again. but there are others for whom evil is no mere relation of the
 subject to particular outer things, but something more radical and
 general, a wrongness or vice in his essential nature, which no
 alteration of the environment, or any superficial rearrangement of
 the inner self, can cure, and which requires a supernatural remedy.
 on the whole, the latin races have leaned more towards the former way
 of looking upon evil, as made up of ills and sins in the plural,
 removable in detail; while the germanic races have tended rather to
 think of sin in the singular, and with a capital s, as of something
 ineradicably ingrained in our natural subjectivity, and never to be
 removed by any superficial piecemeal operations. these
 comparisons of races are always open to exception, but undoubtedly
 the northern tone in religion has inclined to the more intimately
 pessimistic persuasion, and this way of feeling, being the more
 extreme, we shall find by far the more instructive for our study.
recent psychology
 has found great use for the word “threshold” as a symbolic designation for the
 point at which one state of mind passes into another. thus we
 [pg ] speak of the threshold of a
 man's consciousness in general, to indicate the amount of noise,
 pressure, or other outer stimulus which it takes to arouse his
 attention at all. one with a high threshold will doze through an
 amount of racket by which one with a low threshold would be
 immediately waked. similarly, when one is sensitive to small
 differences in any order of sensation, we say he has a low
 “difference-threshold”—his mind easily
 steps over it into the consciousness of the differences in question.
 and just so we might speak of a “pain-threshold,” a “fear-threshold,” a “misery-threshold,” and find it quickly overpassed
 by the consciousness of some individuals, but lying too high in
 others to be often reached by their consciousness. the sanguine and
 healthy-minded live habitually on the sunny side of their
 misery-line, the depressed and melancholy live beyond it, in darkness
 and apprehension. there are men who seem to have started in life with
 a bottle or two of champagne inscribed to their credit; whilst others
 seem to have been born close to the pain-threshold, which the
 slightest irritants fatally send them over.
does it not appear
 as if one who lived more habitually on one side of the pain-threshold
 might need a different sort of religion from one who habitually lived
 on the other? this question, of the relativity of different types of
 religion to different types of need, arises naturally at this point,
 and will become a serious problem ere we have done. but before we
 confront it in general terms, we must address ourselves to the
 unpleasant task of hearing what the sick souls, as we may call them
 in contrast to the healthy-minded, have to say of the secrets of
 their prison-house, their own peculiar form of consciousness. let us
 then resolutely turn our backs on the once-born and their sky-blue
 optimistic gospel; let us not simply cry [pg ] out, in spite of all appearances, “hurrah for the universe!—god's in his heaven, all's
 right with the world.” let us see rather whether pity, pain,
 and fear, and the sentiment of human helplessness may not open a
 profounder view and put into our hands a more complicated key to the
 meaning of the situation.
to begin with, how
 can things so insecure as the
 successful experiences of this world afford a stable anchorage? a
 chain is no stronger than its weakest link, and life is after all a
 chain. in the healthiest and most prosperous existence, how many
 links of illness, danger, and disaster are always interposed?
 unsuspectedly from the bottom of every fountain of pleasure, as the
 old poet said, something bitter rises up: a touch of nausea, a
 falling dead of the delight, a whiff of melancholy, things that sound
 a knell, for fugitive as they may be, they bring a feeling of coming
 from a deeper region and often have an appalling convincingness. the
 buzz of life ceases at their touch as a piano-string stops sounding
 when the damper falls upon it.
of course the
 music can commence again;—and again and again,—at intervals. but with
 this the healthy-minded consciousness is left with an irremediable
 sense of precariousness. it is a bell with a crack; it draws its
 breath on sufferance and by an accident.
even if we suppose
 a man so packed with healthy-mindedness as never to have experienced
 in his own person any of these sobering intervals, still, if he is a
 reflecting being, he must generalize and class his own lot with that
 of others; and, doing so, he must see that his escape is just a lucky
 chance and no essential difference. he might just as well have been
 born to an entirely different fortune. and then indeed the hollow
 security! what [pg
 kind of a frame of things is it of which the best you can say is,
 “thank god, it has let me off clear this
 time!” is not its blessedness a fragile fiction? is not your
 joy in it a very vulgar glee, not much unlike the snicker of any
 rogue at his success? if indeed it were all success, even on such
 terms as that! but take the happiest man, the one most envied by the
 world, and in nine cases out of ten his inmost consciousness is one
 of failure. either his ideals in the line of his achievements are
 pitched far higher than the achievements themselves, or else he has
 secret ideals of which the world knows nothing, and in regard to
 which he inwardly knows himself to be found wanting.
when such a
 conquering optimist as goethe can express himself in this wise, how
 must it be with less successful men?
“i will say nothing,” writes
 goethe in , “against the
 course of my existence. but at bottom it has been nothing but pain
 and burden, and i can affirm that during the whole of my  years, i
 have not had four weeks of genuine well-being. it is but the
 perpetual rolling of a rock that must be raised up again
 forever.”
what single-handed
 man was ever on the whole as successful as luther? yet when he had
 grown old, he looked back on his life as if it were an absolute
 failure.
“i am utterly weary of life. i pray the lord will
 come forthwith and carry me hence. let him come, above all, with his
 last judgment: i will stretch out my neck, the thunder will burst
 forth, and i shall be at rest.”—and
 having a necklace of white agates in his hand at the time he
 added: “o god, grant
 that it may come without delay. i would readily eat up this necklace
 to-day, for the judgment to come to-morrow.”—the
 electress dowager, one day when luther was dining with her, said to
 him: “doctor, i wish
 you may live forty years to [pg ]come.” “madam,” replied he, “rather than live forty years more, i would give up
 my chance of paradise.”
failure, then,
 failure! so the world stamps us at every turn. we strew it with our
 blunders, our misdeeds, our lost opportunities, with all the
 memorials of our inadequacy to our vocation. and with what a damning
 emphasis does it then blot us out! no easy fine, no mere apology or
 formal expiation, will satisfy the world's demands, but every pound
 of flesh exacted is soaked with all its blood. the subtlest forms of
 suffering known to man are connected with the poisonous humiliations
 incidental to these results.
and they are
 pivotal human experiences. a process so ubiquitous and everlasting is
 evidently an integral part of life. “there is
 indeed one element in human destiny,” robert louis stevenson
 writes, “that not blindness itself can
 controvert. whatever else we are intended to do, we are not intended
 to succeed; failure is the fate allotted.” and our
 nature being thus rooted in failure, is it any wonder that
 theologians should have held it to be essential, and thought that
 only through the personal experience of humiliation which it
 engenders the deeper sense of life's significance is reached?[pg ]
but this is only
 the first stage of the world-sickness. make the human being's
 sensitiveness a little greater, carry him a little farther over the
 misery-threshold, and the good quality of the successful moments
 themselves when they occur is spoiled and vitiated. all natural goods
 perish. riches take wings; fame is a breath; love is a cheat; youth
 and health and pleasure vanish. can things whose end is always dust
 and disappointment be the real goods which our souls require? back of
 everything is the great spectre of universal death, the
 all-encompassing blackness:—
“what profit hath a man of all his labour which he
 taketh under the sun? i looked on all the works that my hands had
 wrought, and behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit. for that
 which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; as the one dieth,
 so dieth the other; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust
 again.... the dead know not anything, neither have they any more a
 reward; for the memory of them is forgotten. also their love and
 their hatred and their envy is now perished; neither have they any
 more a portion for ever in anything that is done under the sun....
 truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to
 behold the sun: but if a man live many years and rejoice in them all,
 yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be
 many.”
in short, life and
 its negation are beaten up inextricably together. but if the life be
 good, the negation of it must be bad. yet the two are equally
 essential facts of existence; and all natural happiness thus seems
 infected with a contradiction. the breath of the sepulchre surrounds
 it.
to a mind
 attentive to this state of things and rightly subject to the
 joy-destroying chill which such a contemplation engenders, the only
 relief that healthy-mindedness can give is by saying: “stuff and nonsense, get out into the open air!”
 or “cheer up, old fellow, you'll [pg ] be all right erelong, if you will only
 drop your morbidness!” but in all seriousness, can such bald
 animal talk as that be treated as a rational answer? to ascribe
 religious value to mere happy-go-lucky contentment with one's brief
 chance at natural good is but the very consecration of forgetfulness
 and superficiality. our troubles lie indeed too deep for that
 cure. the fact that we can die, that we can be
 ill at all, is what perplexes us; the fact that we now for a moment
 live and are well is irrelevant to that perplexity. we need a life
 not correlated with death, a health not liable to illness, a kind of
 good that will not perish, a good in fact that flies beyond the goods
 of nature.
it all depends on
 how sensitive the soul may become to discords. “the trouble with me is that i believe too much in common
 happiness and goodness,” said a friend of mine whose
 consciousness was of this sort, “and nothing
 can console me for their transiency. i am appalled and disconcerted
 at its being possible.” and so with most of us: a little
 cooling down of animal excitability and instinct, a little loss of
 animal toughness, a little irritable weakness and descent of the
 pain-threshold, will bring the worm at the core of all our usual
 springs of delight into full view, and turn us into melancholy
 metaphysicians. the pride of life and glory of the world will
 shrivel. it is after all but the standing quarrel of hot youth and
 hoary eld. old age has the last word: the purely naturalistic look at
 life, however enthusiastically it may begin, is sure to end in
 sadness.
this sadness lies
 at the heart of every merely positivistic, agnostic, or naturalistic
 scheme of philosophy. let sanguine healthy-mindedness do its best
 with its strange power of living in the moment and ignoring and
 forgetting, still the evil background is really there to be
 [pg ] thought of, and the skull will
 grin in at the banquet. in the practical life of the individual, we
 know how his whole gloom or glee about any present fact depends on
 the remoter schemes and hopes with which it stands related. its
 significance and framing give it the chief part of its value. let it
 be known to lead nowhere, and however agreeable it may be in its
 immediacy, its glow and gilding vanish. the old man, sick with an
 insidious internal disease, may laugh and quaff his wine at first as
 well as ever, but he knows his fate now, for the doctors have
 revealed it; and the knowledge knocks the satisfaction out of all
 these functions. they are partners of death and the worm is their
 brother, and they turn to a mere flatness.
the lustre of the
 present hour is always borrowed from the background of possibilities
 it goes with. let our common experiences be enveloped in an eternal
 moral order; let our suffering have an immortal significance; let
 heaven smile upon the earth, and deities pay their visits; let faith
 and hope be the atmosphere which man breathes in;—and his days pass
 by with zest; they stir with prospects, they thrill with remoter
 values. place round them on the contrary the curdling cold and gloom
 and absence of all permanent meaning which for pure naturalism and
 the popular science evolutionism of our time are all that is visible
 ultimately, and the thrill stops short, or turns rather to an anxious
 trembling.
for naturalism,
 fed on recent cosmological speculations, mankind is in a position
 similar to that of a set of people living on a frozen lake,
 surrounded by cliffs over which there is no escape, yet knowing that
 little by little the ice is melting, and the inevitable day drawing
 near when the last film of it will disappear, and to be drowned
 ignominiously will be the human creature's portion. the [pg ] merrier the skating, the warmer and more
 sparkling the sun by day, and the ruddier the bonfires at night, the
 more poignant the sadness with which one must take in the meaning of
 the total situation.
the early greeks
 are continually held up to us in literary works as models of the
 healthy-minded joyousness which the religion of nature may engender.
 there was indeed much joyousness among the greeks—homer's flow of
 enthusiasm for most things that the sun shines upon is steady. but
 even in homer the reflective passages are cheerless, and the
 moment the greeks grew systematically pensive and thought of
 ultimates, they became unmitigated pessimists. the
 jealousy of the gods, the nemesis that follows too much happiness,
 the all-encompassing death, fate's dark opacity, the ultimate and
 unintelligible cruelty, were the fixed background of [pg ] their imagination. the beautiful
 joyousness of their polytheism is only a poetic modern fiction. they
 knew no joys comparable in quality of preciousness to those which we
 shall erelong see that brahmans, buddhists, christians, mohammedans,
 twice-born people whose religion is non-naturalistic, get from their
 several creeds of mysticism and renunciation.
stoic
 insensibility and epicurean resignation were the farthest advance
 which the greek mind made in that direction. the epicurean said:
 “seek not to be happy, but rather to escape
 unhappiness; strong happiness is always linked with pain; therefore
 hug the safe shore, and do not tempt the deeper raptures. avoid
 disappointment by expecting little, and by aiming low; and above all
 do not fret.” the stoic said: “the
 only genuine good that life can yield a man is the free possession of
 his own soul; all other goods are lies.” each of these
 philosophies is in its degree a philosophy of despair in nature's
 boons. trustful self-abandonment to the joys that freely offer has
 entirely departed from both epicurean and stoic; and what each
 proposes is a way of rescue from the resultant dust-and-ashes state
 of mind. the epicurean still awaits results from economy of
 indulgence and damping of desire. the stoic hopes for no results, and
 gives up natural good altogether. there is dignity in both these
 forms of resignation. they represent distinct stages in the sobering
 process which man's primitive intoxication with sense-happiness is
 sure to undergo. in the one the hot blood has grown cool, in the
 other it has become quite cold; and although i have spoken of them in
 the past tense, as if they were merely historic, yet stoicism and
 epicureanism will probably be to all time typical attitudes, marking
 a certain definite stage accomplished in the evolution of the
 world-sick [pg
 soul. they
 mark the conclusion of what we call the once-born period, and
 represent the highest flights of what twice-born religion would call
 the purely natural man—epicureanism, which can only by great courtesy
 be called a religion, showing his refinement, and stoicism exhibiting
 his moral will. they leave the world in the shape of an unreconciled
 contradiction, and seek no higher unity. compared with the complex
 ecstasies which the supernaturally regenerated christian may enjoy,
 or the oriental pantheist indulge in, their receipts for equanimity
 are expedients which seem almost crude in their simplicity.
please observe,
 however, that i am not yet pretending finally to judge any
 of these attitudes. i am only describing their variety.
the securest way
 to the rapturous sorts of happiness of which the twice-born make
 report has as an historic matter of fact been through a more radical
 pessimism than anything that we have yet considered. we have seen how
 the lustre and enchantment may be rubbed off from the goods of
 nature. but there is a pitch of unhappiness so great that the goods
 of nature may be entirely forgotten, and all sentiment of their
 existence vanish from the mental field. for this extremity of
 pessimism to be reached, something more is needed than observation of
 [pg ] life and reflection upon
 death. the individual must in his own person become the prey of a
 pathological melancholy. as the healthy-minded enthusiast succeeds in
 ignoring evil's very existence, so the subject of melancholy is
 forced in spite of himself to ignore that of all good whatever: for
 him it may no longer have the least reality. such sensitiveness and
 susceptibility to mental pain is a rare occurrence where the nervous
 constitution is entirely normal; one seldom finds it in a healthy
 subject even where he is the victim of the most atrocious cruelties
 of outward fortune. so we note here the neurotic constitution, of
 which i said so much in my first lecture, making its active entrance
 on our scene, and destined to play a part in much that follows. since
 these experiences of melancholy are in the first instance absolutely
 private and individual, i can now help myself out with personal
 documents. painful indeed they will be to listen to, and there is
 almost an indecency in handling them in public. yet they lie right in
 the middle of our path; and if we are to touch the psychology of
 religion at all seriously, we must be willing to forget
 conventionalities, and dive below the smooth and lying official
 conversational surface.
one can
 distinguish many kinds of pathological depression. sometimes it is
 mere passive joylessness and dreariness, discouragement, dejection,
 lack of taste and zest and spring. professor ribot has proposed the
 name anhedonia to designate this
 condition.
“the state of anhedonia,
 if i may coin a new word to pair off with analgesia,”
he writes, “has been very little studied, but it exists. a
 young girl was smitten with a liver disease which for some time
 altered her constitution. she felt no longer any affection for her
 father and mother. she would have played with her doll, but it was
 impossible to find the least pleasure in [pg ]the act.
 the same things which formerly convulsed her with laughter entirely
 failed to interest her now. esquirol observed the case of a very
 intelligent magistrate who was also a prey to hepatic disease.
 every emotion appeared dead within him. he manifested neither
 perversion nor violence, but complete absence of emotional
 reaction. if he went to the theatre, which he did out of habit, he
 could find no pleasure there. the thought of his house, of his
 home, of his wife, and of his absent children moved him as little,
 he said, as a theorem of euclid.”
prolonged
 seasickness will in most persons produce a temporary condition of
 anhedonia. every good, terrestrial or celestial, is imagined only to
 be turned from with disgust. a temporary condition of this sort,
 connected with the religious evolution of a singularly lofty
 character, both intellectual and moral, is well described by the
 catholic philosopher, father gratry, in his autobiographical
 recollections. in consequence of mental isolation and excessive study
 at the polytechnic school, young gratry fell into a state of nervous
 exhaustion with symptoms which he thus describes:—
“i had such a universal terror that i woke at night
 with a start, thinking that the pantheon was tumbling on the
 polytechnic school, or that the school was in flames, or that the
 seine was pouring into the catacombs, and that paris was being
 swallowed up. and when these impressions were past, all day long
 without respite i suffered an incurable and intolerable desolation,
 verging on despair. i thought myself, in fact, rejected by god, lost,
 damned! i felt something like the suffering of hell. before that i
 had never even thought of hell. my mind had never turned in that
 direction. neither discourses nor reflections had impressed me in
 that way. i took no account of hell. now, and all at once, i suffered
 in a measure what is suffered there.
“but what was perhaps still more dreadful is that
 every idea of heaven was taken away from me: i could no longer
 conceive [pg
 ]of anything of
 the sort. heaven did not seem to me worth going to. it was like a
 vacuum; a mythological elysium, an abode of shadows less real than
 the earth. i could conceive no joy, no pleasure in inhabiting it.
 happiness, joy, light, affection, love—all these words were now
 devoid of sense. without doubt i could still have talked of all
 these things, but i had become incapable of feeling anything in
 them, of understanding anything about them, of hoping anything from
 them, or of believing them to exist. there was my great and
 inconsolable grief! i neither perceived nor conceived any longer
 the existence of happiness or perfection. an abstract heaven over a
 naked rock. such was my present abode for
 eternity.”
so much for
 melancholy in the sense of incapacity for joyous feeling. a much
 worse form of it is positive and active anguish, a sort of psychical
 neuralgia wholly unknown to healthy life. such anguish may partake of
 various characters, having sometimes more the quality of loathing;
 sometimes that of irritation and exasperation; or again of
 self-mistrust and self-despair; or of suspicion, anxiety,
 trepidation, fear. the patient may rebel or submit; [pg ] may accuse himself, or accuse outside
 powers; and he may or he may not be tormented by the theoretical
 mystery of why he should so have to suffer. most cases are mixed
 cases, and we should not treat our classifications with too much
 respect. moreover, it is only a relatively small proportion of cases
 that connect themselves with the religious sphere of experience at
 all. exasperated cases, for instance, as a rule do not. i quote now
 literally from the first case of melancholy on which i lay my hand.
 it is a letter from a patient in a french asylum.
“i suffer too much in this hospital, both physically
 and morally. besides the burnings and the sleeplessness (for i no
 longer sleep since i am shut up here, and the little rest i get is
 broken by bad dreams, and i am waked with a jump by nightmares,
 dreadful visions, lightning, thunder, and the rest), fear, atrocious
 fear, presses me down, holds me without respite, never lets me go.
 where is the justice in it all! what have i done to deserve this
 excess of severity? under what form will this fear crush me? what
 would i not owe to any one who would rid me of my life! eat, drink,
 lie awake all night, suffer without interruption—such is the fine
 legacy i have received from my mother! what i fail to understand is
 this abuse of power. there are limits to everything, there is a
 middle way. but god knows neither middle way nor limits. i say god,
 but why? all i have known so far has been the devil. after all, i am
 afraid of god as much as of the devil, so i drift along, thinking of
 nothing but suicide, but with neither courage nor means here to
 execute the act. as you read this, it will easily prove to you my
 insanity. the style and the ideas are incoherent enough—i can see
 that myself. but i cannot keep myself from being either crazy or an
 idiot; and, as things are, from whom should i ask pity? i am
 defenseless against the invisible enemy who is tightening his coils
 around me. i should be no better armed against him even if i saw him,
 or had seen him. oh, if he would but kill me, devil take him!
 death, [pg
 ]death, once for
 all! but i stop. i have raved to you long enough. i say raved, for i
 can write no otherwise, having neither brain nor thoughts left. o
 god! what a misfortune to be born! born like a mushroom, doubtless
 between an evening and a morning; and how true and right i was when
 in our philosophy-year in college i chewed the cud of bitterness with
 the pessimists. yes, indeed, there is more pain in life than
 gladness—it is one long agony until the grave. think how gay it makes
 me to remember that this horrible misery of mine, coupled with this
 unspeakable fear, may last fifty, one hundred, who knows how many
 more years!”
this letter shows
 two things. first, you see how the entire consciousness of the poor
 man is so choked with the feeling of evil that the sense of there
 being any good in the world is lost for him altogether. his attention
 excludes it, cannot admit it: the sun has left his heaven. and
 secondly you see how the querulous temper of his misery keeps his
 mind from taking a religious direction. querulousness of mind tends
 in fact rather towards irreligion; and it has played, so far as i
 know, no part whatever in the construction of religious systems.
religious
 melancholy must be cast in a more melting mood. tolstoy has left us,
 in his book called my confession, a wonderful account of the attack
 of melancholy which led him to his own religious conclusions. the
 latter in some respects are peculiar; but the melancholy presents two
 characters which make it a typical document for our present purpose.
 first it is a well-marked case of anhedonia, of passive loss of
 appetite for all life's values; and second, it shows how the altered
 and estranged aspect which the world assumed in consequence of this
 stimulated tolstoy's intellect to a gnawing, carking questioning and
 effort for philosophic relief. i mean [pg ] to quote tolstoy at some length; but before
 doing so, i will make a general remark on each of these two
 points.
first on our
 spiritual judgments and the sense of value in general.
it is notorious
 that facts are compatible with opposite emotional comments, since the
 same fact will inspire entirely different feelings in different
 persons, and at different times in the same person; and there is no
 rationally deducible connection between any outer fact and the
 sentiments it may happen to provoke. these have their source in
 another sphere of existence altogether, in the animal and spiritual
 region of the subject's being. conceive yourself, if possible,
 suddenly stripped of all the emotion with which your world now
 inspires you, and try to imagine it as it
 exists, purely by itself, without your favorable or
 unfavorable, hopeful or apprehensive comment. it will be almost
 impossible for you to realize such a condition of negativity and
 deadness. no one portion of the universe would then have importance
 beyond another; and the whole collection of its things and series of
 its events would be without significance, character, expression, or
 perspective. whatever of value, interest, or meaning our respective
 worlds may appear endued with are thus pure gifts of the spectator's
 mind. the passion of love is the most familiar and extreme example of
 this fact. if it comes, it comes; if it does not come, no process of
 reasoning can force it. yet it transforms the value of the creature
 loved as utterly as the sunrise transforms mont blanc from a
 corpse-like gray to a rosy enchantment; and it sets the whole world
 to a new tune for the lover and gives a new issue to his life. so
 with fear, with indignation, jealousy, ambition, worship. if they are
 there, life changes. and whether they shall be there or not depends
 almost always upon [pg
 non-logical, often on organic conditions. and as the excited interest
 which these passions put into the world is our gift to the world,
 just so are the passions themselves gifts,—gifts to us, from sources
 sometimes low and sometimes high; but almost always non-logical and
 beyond our control. how can the moribund old man reason back to
 himself the romance, the mystery, the imminence of great things with
 which our old earth tingled for him in the days when he was young and
 well? gifts, either of the flesh or of the spirit; and the spirit
 bloweth where it listeth; and the world's materials lend their
 surface passively to all the gifts alike, as the stage-setting
 receives indifferently whatever alternating colored lights may be
 shed upon it from the optical apparatus in the gallery.
meanwhile the
 practically real world for each one of us, the effective world of the
 individual, is the compound world, the physical facts and emotional
 values in indistinguishable combination. withdraw or pervert either
 factor of this complex resultant, and the kind of experience we call
 pathological ensues.
in tolstoy's case
 the sense that life had any meaning whatever was for a time wholly
 withdrawn. the result was a transformation in the whole expression of
 reality. when we come to study the phenomenon of conversion or
 religious regeneration, we shall see that a not infrequent
 consequence of the change operated in the subject is a
 transfiguration of the face of nature in his eyes. a new heaven seems
 to shine upon a new earth. in melancholiacs there is usually a
 similar change, only it is in the reverse direction. the world now
 looks remote, strange, sinister, uncanny. its color is gone, its
 breath is cold, there is no speculation in the eyes it glares with.
 “it is as if i lived in another
 century,” says one asylum patient.—“i
 [pg ] see everything through a
 cloud,” says another, “things are not
 as they were, and i am changed.”—“i
 see,” says a third, “i touch, but the
 things do not come near me, a thick veil alters the hue and look of
 everything.”—“persons move like
 shadows, and sounds seem to come from a distant
 world.”—“there is no longer any past
 for me; people appear so strange; it is as if i could not see any
 reality, as if i were in a theatre; as if people were actors, and
 everything were scenery; i can no longer find myself; i walk, but
 why? everything floats before my eyes, but leaves no
 impression.”—“i weep false tears, i
 have unreal hands: the things i see are not real things.”—such
 are expressions that naturally rise to the lips of melancholy
 subjects describing their changed state.
now there are some
 subjects whom all this leaves a prey to the profoundest astonishment.
 the strangeness is wrong. the unreality cannot be. a mystery is
 concealed, and a metaphysical solution must exist. if the natural
 world is so double-faced and unhomelike, what world, what thing is
 real? an urgent wondering and questioning is set up, a poring
 theoretic activity, and in the desperate effort to get into right
 relations with the matter, the sufferer is often led to what becomes
 for him a satisfying religious solution.
at about the age
 of fifty, tolstoy relates that he began to have moments of
 perplexity, of what he calls arrest, as if he knew not “how to live,” or what to do. it is obvious that
 these were moments in which the excitement and interest which our
 functions naturally bring had ceased. life had been enchanting, it
 was now flat sober, more than sober, dead. things were meaningless
 whose [pg ] meaning had always
 been self-evident. the questions “why?” and “what
 next?” began to beset him more and more frequently. at first
 it seemed as if such questions must be answerable, and as if he could
 easily find the answers if he would take the time; but as they ever
 became more urgent, he perceived that it was like those first
 discomforts of a sick man, to which he pays but little attention till
 they run into one continuous suffering, and then he realizes that
 what he took for a passing disorder means the most momentous thing in
 the world for him, means his death.
these questions
 “why?” “wherefore?” “what
 for?” found no response.
“i felt,” says
 tolstoy, 
 “that something had broken
 within me on which my life had always rested, that i had nothing
 left to hold on to, and that morally my life had stopped. an
 invincible force impelled me to get rid of my existence, in one way
 or another. it cannot be said exactly that i wished
to kill myself, for the force which
 drew me away from life was fuller, more powerful, more general than
 any mere desire. it was a force like my old aspiration to live,
 only it impelled me in the opposite direction. it was an aspiration
 of my whole being to get out of life.
“behold me then, a man happy and in good health,
 hiding the rope in order not to hang myself to the rafters of the
 room where every night i went to sleep alone; behold me no longer
 going shooting, lest i should yield to the too easy temptation of
 putting an end to myself with my gun.
“i did not know what i wanted. i was afraid of
 life; i was driven to leave it; and in spite of that i still hoped
 something from it.
“all this took place at a time when so far as all
 my outer circumstances went, i ought to have been completely happy.
 i had a good wife who loved me and whom i loved; good children and
 a large property which was increasing with no pains taken on my
 part. i was more respected by my kinsfolk and [pg ]acquaintance than i had ever been; i was loaded
 with praise by strangers; and without exaggeration i could believe
 my name already famous. moreover i was neither insane nor ill. on
 the contrary, i possessed a physical and mental strength which i
 have rarely met in persons of my age. i could mow as well as the
 peasants, i could work with my brain eight hours uninterruptedly
 and feel no bad effects.
“and yet i could give no reasonable meaning to any
 actions of my life. and i was surprised that i had not understood
 this from the very beginning. my state of mind was as if some
 wicked and stupid jest was being played upon me by some one. one
 can live only so long as one is intoxicated, drunk with life; but
 when one grows sober one cannot fail to see that it is all a stupid
 cheat. what is truest about it is that there is nothing even funny
 or silly in it; it is cruel and stupid, purely and
 simply.
“the oriental fable of the traveler surprised in
 the desert by a wild beast is very old.
“seeking to save himself from the fierce animal,
 the traveler jumps into a well with no water in it; but at the
 bottom of this well he sees a dragon waiting with open mouth to
 devour him. and the unhappy man, not daring to go out lest he
 should be the prey of the beast, not daring to jump to the bottom
 lest he should be devoured by the dragon, clings to the branches of
 a wild bush which grows out of one of the cracks of the well. his
 hands weaken, and he feels that he must soon give way to certain
 fate; but still he clings, and sees two mice, one white, the other
 black, evenly moving round the bush to which he hangs, and gnawing
 off its roots.
“the traveler sees this and knows that he must
 inevitably perish; but while thus hanging he looks about him and
 finds on the leaves of the bush some drops of honey. these he
 reaches with his tongue and licks them off with
 rapture.
“thus i hang upon the boughs of life, knowing that
 the inevitable dragon of death is waiting ready to tear me, and i
 cannot comprehend why i am thus made a martyr. i try to suck the
 honey which formerly consoled me; but the honey pleases me no
 longer, and day and night the white mouse and [pg ]the black
 mouse gnaw the branch to which i cling. i can see but one thing:
 the inevitable dragon and the mice—i cannot turn my gaze away from
 them.
“this is no fable, but the literal incontestable
 truth which every one may understand. what will be the outcome of
 what i do to-day? of what i shall do to-morrow? what will be the
 outcome of all my life? why should i live? why should i do
 anything? is there in life any purpose which the inevitable death
 which awaits me does not undo and destroy?
“these questions are the simplest in the world.
 from the stupid child to the wisest old man, they are in the soul
 of every human being. without an answer to them, it is impossible,
 as i experienced, for life to go on.
“ ‘but perhaps,’ i
 often said to myself, ‘there may be
 something i have failed to notice or to comprehend. it is not
 possible that this condition of despair should be natural to
 mankind.’
and i sought for an explanation in all
 the branches of knowledge acquired by men. i questioned painfully
 and protractedly and with no idle curiosity. i sought, not with
 indolence, but laboriously and obstinately for days and nights
 together. i sought like a man who is lost and seeks to save
 himself,—and i found nothing. i became convinced, moreover, that
 all those who before me had sought for an answer in the sciences
 have also found nothing. and not only this, but that they have
 recognized that the very thing which was leading me to despair—the
 meaningless absurdity of life—is the only incontestable knowledge
 accessible to man.”
to prove this
 point, tolstoy quotes the buddha, solomon, and schopenhauer. and he
 finds only four ways in which men of his own class and society are
 accustomed to meet the situation. either mere animal blindness,
 sucking the honey without seeing the dragon or the mice,—“and from such a way,” he says, “i can learn nothing, after what i now know;” or
 reflective epicureanism, snatching what it can while the day
 lasts,—which is only a more deliberate sort of stupefaction than the
 first; [pg ] or manly suicide; or
 seeing the mice and dragon and yet weakly and plaintively clinging to
 the bush of life.
suicide was
 naturally the consistent course dictated by the logical
 intellect.
“yet,” says
 tolstoy, 
 “whilst my intellect was
 working, something else in me was working too, and kept me from the
 deed—a consciousness of life, as i may call it, which was like a
 force that obliged my mind to fix itself in another direction and
 draw me out of my situation of despair.... during the whole course
 of this year, when i almost unceasingly kept asking myself how to
 end the business, whether by the rope or by the bullet, during all
 that time, alongside of all those movements of my ideas and
 observations, my heart kept languishing with another pining
 emotion. i can call this by no other name than that of a thirst for
 god. this craving for god had nothing to do with the movement of my
 ideas,—in fact, it was the direct contrary of that movement,—but it
 came from my heart. it was like a feeling of dread that made me
 seem like an orphan and isolated in the midst of all these things
 that were so foreign. and this feeling of dread was mitigated by
 the hope of finding the assistance of some one.”
of the process,
 intellectual as well as emotional, which, starting from this idea of
 god, led to tolstoy's recovery, i will say nothing in this lecture,
 reserving it for a later hour. the only thing that need interest us
 now is the phenomenon of his absolute disenchantment with ordinary
 life, and the fact that the whole range of habitual values may, to a
 man as powerful and full of faculty as he was, come to appear so
 ghastly a mockery.
when
 disillusionment has gone as far as this, there is seldom a
 restitutio ad integrum. one has
 tasted of the fruit of the tree, and the happiness of eden never
 comes again. the happiness that comes, when any does come,—and
 [pg ] often enough it fails to
 return in an acute form, though its form is sometimes very acute,—is
 not the simple ignorance of ill, but something vastly more complex,
 including natural evil as one of its elements, but finding natural
 evil no such stumbling-block and terror because it now sees it
 swallowed up in supernatural good. the process is one of redemption,
 not of mere reversion to natural health, and the sufferer, when
 saved, is saved by what seems to him a second birth, a deeper kind of
 conscious being than he could enjoy before.
we find a somewhat
 different type of religious melancholy enshrined in literature in
 john bunyan's autobiography. tolstoy's preoccupations were largely
 objective, for the purpose and meaning of life in general was what so
 troubled him; but poor bunyan's troubles were over the condition of
 his own personal self. he was a typical case of the psychopathic
 temperament, sensitive of conscience to a diseased degree, beset by
 doubts, fears, and insistent ideas, and a victim of verbal
 automatisms, both motor and sensory. these were usually texts of
 scripture which, sometimes damnatory and sometimes favorable, would
 come in a half-hallucinatory form as if they were voices, and fasten
 on his mind and buffet it between them like a shuttlecock. added to
 this were a fearful melancholy self-contempt and despair.
“nay, thought i, now i grow worse and worse; now i am
 farther from conversion than ever i was before. if now i should have
 burned at the stake, i could not believe that christ had love for me;
 alas, i could neither hear him, nor see him, nor feel him, nor savor
 any of his things. sometimes i would tell my condition to the people
 of god, which, when they heard, they would pity me, and would tell of
 the promises. but they had as good have told me that i must reach the
 sun with my finger as have bidden me receive or rely upon the
 promise. [pg
 ][yet] all this
 while as to the act of sinning, i never was more tender than now; i
 durst not take a pin or stick, though but so big as a straw, for my
 conscience now was sore, and would smart at every touch; i could not
 tell how to speak my words, for fear i should misplace them. oh, how
 gingerly did i then go, in all i did or said! i found myself as on a
 miry bog that shook if i did but stir; and was as there left both by
 god and christ, and the spirit, and all good
 things.
“but my original and inward pollution, that was my
 plague and my affliction. by reason of that, i was more loathsome
 in my own eyes than was a toad; and i thought i was so in god's
 eyes too. sin and corruption, i said, would as naturally bubble out
 of my heart as water would bubble out of a fountain. i could have
 changed heart with anybody. i thought none but the devil himself
 could equal me for inward wickedness and pollution of mind. sure,
 thought i, i am forsaken of god; and thus i continued a long while,
 even for some years together.
“and now i was sorry that god had made me a man.
 the beasts, birds, fishes, etc., i blessed their condition, for
 they had not a sinful nature; they were not obnoxious to the wrath
 of god; they were not to go to hell-fire after death. i could
 therefore have rejoiced, had my condition been as any of theirs.
 now i blessed the condition of the dog and toad, yea, gladly would
 i have been in the condition of the dog or horse, for i knew they
 had no soul to perish under the everlasting weight of hell or sin,
 as mine was like to do. nay, and though i saw this, felt this, and
 was broken to pieces with it, yet that which added to my sorrow
 was, that i could not find with all my soul that i did desire
 deliverance. my heart was at times exceedingly hard. if i would
 have given a thousand pounds for a tear, i could not shed one; no,
 nor sometimes scarce desire to shed one.
“i was both a burthen and a terror to myself; nor
 did i ever so know, as now, what it was to be weary of my life, and
 yet afraid to die. how gladly would i have been anything but
 myself! anything but a man! and in any condition but my
 own.”
[pg ]
poor patient
 bunyan, like tolstoy, saw the light again, but we must also postpone
 that part of his story to another hour. in a later lecture i will
 also give the end of the experience of henry alline, a devoted
 evangelist who worked in nova scotia a hundred years ago, and who
 thus vividly describes the high-water mark of the religious
 melancholy which formed its beginning. the type was not unlike
 bunyan's.
“everything i saw seemed to be a burden to me; the
 earth seemed accursed for my sake: all trees, plants, rocks, hills,
 and vales seemed to be dressed in mourning and groaning, under the
 weight of the curse, and everything around me seemed to be conspiring
 my ruin. my sins seemed to be laid open; so that i thought that every
 one i saw knew them, and sometimes i was almost ready to acknowledge
 many things, which i thought they knew: yea sometimes it seemed to me
 as if every one was pointing me out as the most guilty wretch upon
 earth. i had now so great a sense of the vanity and emptiness of all
 things here below, that i knew the whole world could not possibly
 make me happy, no, nor the whole system of creation. when i waked in
 the morning, the first thought would be, oh, my wretched soul, what
 shall i do, where shall i go? and when i laid down, would say, i
 shall be perhaps in hell before morning. i would many times look on
 the beasts with envy, wishing with all my heart i was in their place,
 that i might have no soul to lose; and when i have seen birds flying
 over my head, have often thought within myself, oh, that i could fly
 away from my danger and distress! oh, how happy should i be, if i
 were in their place!”
envy of the placid
 beasts seems to be a very widespread affection in this type of
 sadness.
the worst kind of
 melancholy is that which takes the [pg ] form of panic fear. here is an excellent
 example, for permission to print which i have to thank the sufferer.
 the original is in french, and though the subject was evidently in a
 bad nervous condition at the time of which he writes, his case has
 otherwise the merit of extreme simplicity. i translate freely.
“whilst in this state of philosophic pessimism and
 general depression of spirits about my prospects, i went one evening
 into a dressing-room in the twilight to procure some article that was
 there; when suddenly there fell upon me without any warning, just as
 if it came out of the darkness, a horrible fear of my own existence.
 simultaneously there arose in my mind the image of an epileptic
 patient whom i had seen in the asylum, a black-haired youth with
 greenish skin, entirely idiotic, who used to sit all day on one of
 the benches, or rather shelves against the wall, with his knees drawn
 up against his chin, and the coarse gray undershirt, which was his
 only garment, drawn over them inclosing his entire figure. he sat
 there like a sort of sculptured egyptian cat or peruvian mummy,
 moving nothing but his black eyes and looking absolutely non-human.
 this image and my fear entered into a species of combination with
 each other. that shape am
 i, i felt, potentially.
 nothing that i possess can defend me against that fate, if the hour
 for it should strike for me as it struck for him. there was such a
 horror of him, and such a perception of my own merely momentary
 discrepancy from him, that it was as if something hitherto solid
 within my breast gave way entirely, and i became a mass of quivering
 fear. after this the universe was changed for me altogether. i awoke
 morning after morning with a horrible dread at the pit of my stomach,
 and with a sense of the insecurity of life that i never knew before,
 and that i have never felt since.
it was like a revelation; and although
 the immediate [pg
 ]feelings passed
 away, the experience has made me sympathetic with the morbid feelings
 of others ever since. it gradually faded, but for months i was unable
 to go out into the dark alone.
“in general i dreaded to be left alone. i remember
 wondering how other people could live, how i myself had ever lived,
 so unconscious of that pit of insecurity beneath the surface of
 life. my mother in particular, a very cheerful person, seemed to me
 a perfect paradox in her unconsciousness of danger, which you may
 well believe i was very careful not to disturb by revelations of my
 own state of mind. i have always thought that this experience of
 melancholia of mine had a religious bearing.”
on asking this
 correspondent to explain more fully what he meant by these last
 words, the answer he wrote was this:—
“i mean that the fear was so invasive and powerful
 that if i had not clung to scripture-texts like ‘the eternal god is my refuge,’ etc., ‘come unto me,
 all ye that labor and are heavy-laden,’etc., ‘i am the
 resurrection and the life,’ etc., i
 think i should have grown really insane.”
there is no need
 of more examples. the cases we have looked at are enough. one of them
 gives us the vanity of mortal things; another the sense of sin; and
 the remaining one describes the fear of the universe;—and in one or
 other of these three ways it always is that man's original optimism
 and self-satisfaction get leveled with the dust.
in none of these
 cases was there any intellectual insanity [pg ] or delusion about matters of fact; but were we
 disposed to open the chapter of really insane melancholia, with its
 hallucinations and delusions, it would be a worse story
 still—desperation absolute and complete, the whole universe
 coagulating about the sufferer into a material of overwhelming
 horror, surrounding him without opening or end. not the conception or
 intellectual perception of evil, but the grisly blood-freezing
 heart-palsying sensation of it close upon one, and no other
 conception or sensation able to live for a moment in its presence.
 how irrelevantly remote seem all our usual refined optimisms and
 intellectual and moral consolations in presence of a need of help
 like this! here is the real core of the religious problem: help!
 help! no prophet can claim to bring a final message unless he says
 things that will have a sound of reality in the ears of victims such
 as these. but the deliverance must come in as strong a form as the
 complaint, if it is to take effect; and that seems a reason why the
 coarser religions, revivalistic, orgiastic, with blood and miracles
 and supernatural operations, may possibly never be displaced. some
 constitutions need them too much.
arrived at this
 point, we can see how great an antagonism may naturally arise between
 the healthy-minded way of viewing life and the way that takes all
 this experience of evil as something essential. to this latter way,
 the morbid-minded way, as we might call it, healthy-mindedness pure
 and simple seems unspeakably blind and shallow. to the healthy-minded
 way, on the other hand, the way of the sick soul seems unmanly and
 diseased. with their grubbing in rat-holes instead of living in the
 light; with their manufacture of fears, and preoccupation with every
 unwholesome kind of misery, there is something [pg ] almost obscene about these children of
 wrath and cravers of a second birth. if religious intolerance and
 hanging and burning could again become the order of the day, there is
 little doubt that, however it may have been in the past, the
 healthy-minded would at present show themselves the less indulgent
 party of the two.
in our own
 attitude, not yet abandoned, of impartial onlookers, what are we to
 say of this quarrel? it seems to me that we are bound to say that
 morbid-mindedness ranges over the wider scale of experience, and that
 its survey is the one that overlaps. the method of averting one's
 attention from evil, and living simply in the light of good is
 splendid as long as it will work. it will work with many persons; it
 will work far more generally than most of us are ready to suppose;
 and within the sphere of its successful operation there is nothing to
 be said against it as a religious solution. but it breaks down
 impotently as soon as melancholy comes; and even though one be quite
 free from melancholy one's self, there is no doubt that
 healthy-mindedness is inadequate as a philosophical doctrine, because
 the evil facts which it refuses positively to account for are a
 genuine portion of reality; and they may after all be the best key to
 life's significance, and possibly the only openers of our eyes to the
 deepest levels of truth.
the normal process
 of life contains moments as bad as any of those which insane
 melancholy is filled with, moments in which radical evil gets its
 innings and takes its solid turn. the lunatic's visions of horror are
 all drawn from the material of daily fact. our civilization is
 founded on the shambles, and every individual existence goes out in a
 lonely spasm of helpless agony. if you protest, my friend, wait till
 you arrive there yourself! to believe in the carnivorous reptiles of
 geologic [pg
 times is hard for our imagination—they seem too much like mere museum
 specimens. yet there is no tooth in any one of those museum-skulls
 that did not daily through long years of the foretime hold fast to
 the body struggling in despair of some fated living victim. forms of
 horror just as dreadful to their victims, if on a smaller spatial
 scale, fill the world about us to-day. here on our very hearths and
 in our gardens the infernal cat plays with the panting mouse, or
 holds the hot bird fluttering in her jaws. crocodiles and
 rattlesnakes and pythons are at this moment vessels of life as real
 as we are; their loathsome existence fills every minute of every day
 that drags its length along; and whenever they or other wild beasts
 clutch their living prey, the deadly horror which an agitated
 melancholiac feels is the literally right reaction on the
 situation.
it may indeed be
 that no religious reconciliation with the absolute totality of things
 is possible. some evils, indeed, are ministerial to higher forms of
 good; but it [pg
 ] may
 be that there are forms of evil so extreme as to enter into no good
 system whatsoever, and that, in respect of such evil, dumb submission
 or neglect to notice is the only practical resource. this question
 must confront us on a later day. but provisionally, and as a mere
 matter of program and method, since the evil facts are as genuine
 parts of nature as the good ones, the philosophic presumption should
 be that they have some rational significance, and that systematic
 healthy-mindedness, failing as it does to accord to sorrow, pain, and
 death any positive and active attention whatever, is formally less
 complete than systems that try at least to include these elements in
 their scope.
the completest
 religions would therefore seem to be those in which the pessimistic
 elements are best developed. buddhism, of course, and christianity
 are the best known to us of these. they are essentially religions of
 deliverance: the man must die to an unreal life before he can be born
 into the real life. in my next lecture, i will try to discuss some of
 the psychological conditions of this second birth. fortunately from
 now onward we shall have to deal with more cheerful subjects than
 those which we have recently been dwelling on.
[pg ]
lecture viii. the divided self, and the
 process of its unification.
the last lecture
 was a painful one, dealing as it did with evil as a pervasive element
 of the world we live in. at the close of it we were brought into full
 view of the contrast between the two ways of looking at life which
 are characteristic respectively of what we called the healthy-minded,
 who need to be born only once, and of the sick souls, who must be
 twice-born in order to be happy. the result is two different
 conceptions of the universe of our experience. in the religion of the
 once-born the world is a sort of rectilinear or one-storied affair,
 whose accounts are kept in one denomination, whose parts have just
 the values which naturally they appear to have, and of which a simple
 algebraic sum of pluses and minuses will give the total worth.
 happiness and religious peace consist in living on the plus side of
 the account. in the religion of the twice-born, on the other hand,
 the world is a double-storied mystery. peace cannot be reached by the
 simple addition of pluses and elimination of minuses from life.
 natural good is not simply insufficient in amount and transient,
 there lurks a falsity in its very being. cancelled as it all is by
 death if not by earlier enemies, it gives no final balance, and can
 never be the thing intended for our lasting worship. it keeps us from
 our real good, rather; and renunciation and despair of it are our
 first step in the direction of the truth. there are two lives, the
 natural [pg ] and the spiritual, and
 we must lose the one before we can participate in the other.
in their extreme
 forms, of pure naturalism and pure salvationism, the two types are
 violently contrasted; though here as in most other current
 classifications, the radical extremes are somewhat ideal
 abstractions, and the concrete human beings whom we oftenest meet are
 intermediate varieties and mixtures. practically, however, you all
 recognize the difference: you understand, for example, the disdain of
 the methodist convert for the mere sky-blue healthy-minded moralist;
 and you likewise enter into the aversion of the latter to what seems
 to him the diseased subjectivism of the methodist, dying to live, as
 he calls it, and making of paradox and the inversion of natural
 appearances the essence of god's truth.
the psychological
 basis of the twice-born character seems to be a certain discordancy
 or heterogeneity in the native temperament of the subject, an
 incompletely unified moral and intellectual constitution.
“homo duplex, homo duplex!” writes
 alphonse daudet. “the first time
 that i perceived that i was two was at the death of my brother henri,
 when my father cried out so dramatically, ‘he is dead, he is dead!’ while
 my first self wept, my second self thought, ‘how truly given was that cry, how fine it would be
 at the theatre.’
i was then fourteen years
 old.
“this horrible duality has often given me matter
 for reflection. oh, this terrible second me, always seated whilst
 the other is on foot, acting, living, suffering, bestirring itself.
 this [pg
 ]second me that i
 have never been able to intoxicate, to make shed tears, or put to
 sleep. and how it sees into things, and how it
 mocks!”
recent works on
 the psychology of character have had much to say upon this
 point. some
 persons are born with an inner constitution which is harmonious and
 well balanced from the outset. their impulses are consistent with one
 another, their will follows without trouble the guidance of their
 intellect, their passions are not excessive, and their lives are
 little haunted by regrets. others are oppositely constituted; and are
 so in degrees which may vary from something so slight as to result in
 a merely odd or whimsical inconsistency, to a discordancy of which
 the consequences may be inconvenient in the extreme. of the more
 innocent kinds of heterogeneity i find a good example in mrs. annie
 besant's autobiography.
“i have ever been the queerest mixture of weakness
 and strength, and have paid heavily for the weakness. as a child i
 used to suffer tortures of shyness, and if my shoe-lace was untied
 would feel shamefacedly that every eye was fixed on the unlucky
 string; as a girl i would shrink away from strangers and think myself
 unwanted and unliked, so that i was full of eager gratitude to any
 one who noticed me kindly; as the young mistress of a house i was
 afraid of my servants, and would let careless work pass rather than
 bear the pain of reproving the ill-doer; when i have been lecturing
 and debating with no lack of spirit on the platform, i have preferred
 to go without what i wanted at the hotel rather than to ring and make
 the waiter fetch it. combative on the platform in defense of any
 cause i cared for, i shrink from quarrel or disapproval in the house,
 and am a coward at heart in private while a good
[pg ]fighter in public. how often have i passed unhappy
 quarters of an hour screwing up my courage to find fault with some
 subordinate whom my duty compelled me to reprove, and how often
 have i jeered at myself for a fraud as the doughty platform
 combatant, when shrinking from blaming some lad or lass for doing
 their work badly. an unkind look or word has availed to make me
 shrink into myself as a snail into its shell, while, on the
 platform, opposition makes me speak my best.”
this amount of
 inconsistency will only count as amiable weakness; but a stronger
 degree of heterogeneity may make havoc of the subject's life. there
 are persons whose existence is little more than a series of zigzags,
 as now one tendency and now another gets the upper hand. their spirit
 wars with their flesh, they wish for incompatibles, wayward impulses
 interrupt their most deliberate plans, and their lives are one long
 drama of repentance and of effort to repair misdemeanors and
 mistakes.
heterogeneous
 personality has been explained as the result of inheritance—the
 traits of character of incompatible and antagonistic ancestors are
 supposed to be preserved alongside of each other. this
 explanation may pass for what it is worth—it certainly needs
 corroboration. but whatever the cause of heterogeneous personality
 may be, we find the extreme examples of it in the psychopathic
 temperament, of which i spoke in my first lecture. all writers about
 that temperament make the inner heterogeneity prominent in their
 descriptions. frequently, indeed, it is only this trait that leads us
 to ascribe that temperament to a man at all. a “dégénéré supérieur” is simply a man of
 sensibility in many directions, who finds more difficulty than is
 common in [pg
 keeping his spiritual house in order and running his furrow straight,
 because his feelings and impulses are too keen and too discrepant
 mutually. in the haunting and insistent ideas, in the irrational
 impulses, the morbid scruples, dreads, and inhibitions which beset
 the psychopathic temperament when it is thoroughly pronounced, we
 have exquisite examples of heterogeneous personality. bunyan had an
 obsession of the words, “sell christ for
 this, sell him for that, sell him, sell him!” which would run
 through his mind a hundred times together, until one day out of
 breath with retorting, “i will not, i will
 not,” he impulsively said, “let him go
 if he will,” and this loss of the battle kept him in despair
 for over a year. the lives of the saints are full of such blasphemous
 obsessions, ascribed invariably to the direct agency of satan. the
 phenomenon connects itself with the life of the subconscious self,
 so-called, of which we must ere-long speak more directly.
now in all of us,
 however constituted, but to a degree the greater in proportion as we
 are intense and sensitive and subject to diversified temptations, and
 to the greatest possible degree if we are decidedly psychopathic,
 does the normal evolution of character chiefly consist in the
 straightening out and unifying of the inner self. the higher and the
 lower feelings, the useful and the erring impulses, begin by being a
 comparative chaos within us—they must end by forming a stable system
 of functions in right subordination. unhappiness is apt to
 characterize the period of order-making and struggle. if the
 individual be of tender conscience and religiously quickened, the
 unhappiness will take the form of moral remorse and compunction, of
 feeling inwardly vile and wrong, and of standing in false relations
 to the author of one's being and appointer of one's spiritual fate.
 this is the religious [pg
 melancholy and “conviction of sin”
 that have played so large a part in the history of protestant
 christianity. the man's interior is a battle-ground for what he feels
 to be two deadly hostile selves, one actual, the other ideal. as
 victor hugo makes his mahomet say:—
“je suis
 le champ vil des sublimes combats:
tantôt l'homme d'en haut, et
 tantôt l'homme d'en bas;
et le mal dans ma bouche avec le
 bien alterne,
comme dans le désert le sable et la
 citerne.”
wrong living,
 impotent aspirations; “what i would, that do
 i not; but what i hate, that do i,” as saint paul says;
 self-loathing, self-despair; an unintelligible and intolerable burden
 to which one is mysteriously the heir.
let me quote from
 some typical cases of discordant personality, with melancholy in the
 form of self-condemnation and sense of sin. saint augustine's case is
 a classic example. you all remember his half-pagan, half-christian
 bringing up at carthage, his emigration to rome and milan, his
 adoption of manicheism and subsequent skepticism, and his restless
 search for truth and purity of life; and finally how, distracted by
 the struggle between the two souls in his breast, and ashamed of his
 own weakness of will, when so many others whom he knew and knew of
 had thrown off the shackles of sensuality and dedicated themselves to
 chastity and the higher life, he heard a voice in the garden say,
 “sume,
 lege” (take and read), and opening the bible at
 random, saw the text, “not in chambering and
 wantonness,” etc., which seemed directly sent to his address,
 and laid the inner storm to rest forever.
 augustine's psychological genius has [pg ] given an account of the trouble of having a
 divided self which has never been surpassed.
“the new will which i began to have was not yet
 strong enough to overcome that other will, strengthened by long
 indulgence. so these two wills, one old, one new, one carnal, the
 other spiritual, contended with each other and disturbed my soul. i
 understood by my own experience what i had read,
‘flesh lusteth
 against spirit, and spirit against flesh.’ it
 was myself indeed in both the wills, yet more myself in that which
 i approved in myself than in that which i disapproved in myself.
 yet it was through myself that habit had attained so fierce a
 mastery over me, because i had willingly come whither i willed not.
 still bound to earth, i refused, o god, to fight on thy side, as
 much afraid to be freed from all bonds, as i ought to have feared
 being trammeled by them.
“thus the thoughts by which i meditated upon thee
 were like the efforts of one who would awake, but being overpowered
 with sleepiness is soon asleep again. often does a man when heavy
 sleepiness is on his limbs defer to shake it off, and though not
 approving it, encourage it; even so i was sure it was better to
 surrender to thy love than to yield to my own lusts, yet, though
 the former course convinced me, the latter pleased and held me
 bound. there was naught in me to answer thy call,
‘awake, thou
 sleeper,’
but only drawling, drowsy
 words, ‘presently;
 yes, presently; wait a little while.’ but
 the ‘presently’ had
 no ‘present,’ and
 the ‘little
 while’
grew long.... for i was afraid thou
 wouldst hear me too soon, and heal me at once of my disease of
 lust, which i wished to satiate rather than to see extinguished.
 with what lashes of words did i not scourge my own soul. yet it
 shrank back; it refused, though it had no excuse to offer.... i
 said within myself: ‘come, let it
 be done now,’and as
 i said it, i was on the point of the resolve. i all but did it, yet
 i did not do it. and i made another effort, and almost succeeded,
 yet i did not reach it, and did not grasp it, hesitating to die to
 death, and live to life; and the evil to which [pg ]i was so
 wonted held me more than the better life i had not
 tried.”
there could be no
 more perfect description of the divided will, when the higher wishes
 lack just that last acuteness, that touch of explosive intensity, of
 dynamogenic quality (to use the slang of the psychologists), that
 enables them to burst their shell, and make irruption efficaciously
 into life and quell the lower tendencies forever. in a later lecture
 we shall have much to say about this higher excitability.
i find another
 good description of the divided will in the autobiography of henry
 alline, the nova scotian evangelist, of whose melancholy i read a
 brief account in my last lecture. the poor youth's sins were, as you
 will see, of the most harmless order, yet they interfered with what
 proved to be his truest vocation, so they gave him great
 distress.
“i was now very moral in my life, but found no rest
 of conscience. i now began to be esteemed in young company, who knew
 nothing of my mind all this while, and their esteem began to be a
 snare to my soul, for i soon began to be fond of carnal mirth, though
 i still flattered myself that if i did not get drunk, nor curse, nor
 swear, there would be no sin in frolicking and carnal mirth, and i
 thought god would indulge young people with some (what i called
 simple or civil) recreation. i still kept a round of duties, and
 would not suffer myself to run into any open vices, and so got along
 very well in time of health and prosperity, but when i was distressed
 or threatened by sickness, death, or heavy storms of thunder, my
 religion would not do, and i found there was something wanting, and
 would begin to repent my going so much to frolics, but when the
 distress was over, the devil and my own wicked heart, with the
 solicitations of my associates, and my fondness for young
 company, [pg
 ]were such strong
 allurements, i would again give way, and thus i got to be very wild
 and rude, at the same time kept up my rounds of secret prayer and
 reading; but god, not willing i should destroy myself, still followed
 me with his calls, and moved with such power upon my conscience, that
 i could not satisfy myself with my diversions, and in the midst of my
 mirth sometimes would have such a sense of my lost and undone
 condition, that i would wish myself from the company, and after it
 was over, when i went home, would make many promises that i would
 attend no more on these frolics, and would beg forgiveness for hours
 and hours; but when i came to have the temptation again, i would give
 way: no sooner would i hear the music and drink a glass of wine, but
 i would find my mind elevated and soon proceed to any sort of
 merriment or diversion, that i thought was not debauched or openly
 vicious; but when i returned from my carnal mirth i felt as guilty as
 ever, and could sometimes not close my eyes for some hours after i
 had gone to my bed. i was one of the most unhappy creatures on
 earth.
“sometimes i would leave the company (often
 speaking to the fiddler to cease from playing, as if i was tired),
 and go out and walk about crying and praying, as if my very heart
 would break, and beseeching god that he would not cut me off, nor
 give me up to hardness of heart. oh, what unhappy hours and nights
 i thus wore away! when i met sometimes with merry companions, and
 my heart was ready to sink, i would labor to put on as cheerful a
 countenance as possible, that they might not distrust anything, and
 sometimes would begin some discourse with young men or young women
 on purpose, or propose a merry song, lest the distress of my soul
 would be discovered, or mistrusted, when at the same time i would
 then rather have been in a wilderness in exile, than with them or
 any of their pleasures or enjoyments. thus for many months when i
 was in company, i would act the hypocrite and feign a merry heart,
 but at the same time would endeavor as much as i could to shun
 their company, oh wretched and unhappy mortal that i was!
 everything i did, and wherever i went, i was still in a storm, and
 yet i continued to be the chief contriver and ringleader
[pg ]of the frolics for many months after; though it
 was a toil and torment to attend them; but the devil and my own
 wicked heart drove me about like a slave, telling me that i must do
 this and do that, and bear this and bear that, and turn here and
 turn there, to keep my credit up, and retain the esteem of my
 associates: and all this while i continued as strict as possible in
 my duties, and left no stone unturned to pacify my conscience,
 watching even against my thoughts, and praying continually wherever
 i went: for i did not think there was any sin in my conduct, when i
 was among carnal company, because i did not take any satisfaction
 there, but only followed it, i thought, for sufficient
 reasons.
“but still, all that i did or could do, conscience
 would roar night and day.”
saint augustine
 and alline both emerged into the smooth waters of inner unity and
 peace, and i shall next ask you to consider more closely some of the
 peculiarities of the process of unification, when it occurs. it may
 come gradually, or it may occur abruptly; it may come through altered
 feelings, or through altered powers of action; or it may come through
 new intellectual insights, or through experiences which we shall
 later have to designate as “mystical.”
 however it come, it brings a characteristic sort of relief; and never
 such extreme relief as when it is cast into the religious mould.
 happiness! happiness! religion is only one of the ways in which men
 gain that gift. easily, permanently, and successfully, it often
 transforms the most intolerable misery into the profoundest and most
 enduring happiness.
but to find
 religion is only one out of many ways of reaching unity; and the
 process of remedying inner incompleteness and reducing inner discord
 is a general psychological process, which may take place with any
 sort of mental material, and need not necessarily assume the
 religious form. in judging of the religious types of [pg ] regeneration which we are about to study,
 it is important to recognize that they are only one species of a
 genus that contains other types as well. for example, the new birth
 may be away from religion into incredulity; or it may be from moral
 scrupulosity into freedom and license; or it may be produced by the
 irruption into the individual's life of some new stimulus or passion,
 such as love, ambition, cupidity, revenge, or patriotic devotion. in
 all these instances we have precisely the same psychological form of
 event,—a firmness, stability, and equilibrium succeeding a period of
 storm and stress and inconsistency. in these non-religious cases the
 new man may also be born either gradually or suddenly.
the french
 philosopher jouffroy has left an eloquent memorial of his own
 “counter-conversion,” as the
 transition from orthodoxy to infidelity has been well styled by mr.
 starbuck. jouffroy's doubts had long harassed him; but he dates his
 final crisis from a certain night when his disbelief grew fixed and
 stable, and where the immediate result was sadness at the illusions
 he had lost.
“i shall never forget that night of
 december,”
writes jouffroy, “in which the veil that concealed from me my own
 incredulity was torn. i hear again my steps in that narrow naked
 chamber where long after the hour of sleep had come i had the habit
 of walking up and down. i see again that moon, half-veiled by clouds,
 which now and again illuminated the frigid window-panes. the hours of
 the night flowed on and i did not note their passage. anxiously i
 followed my thoughts, as from layer to layer they descended towards
 the foundation of my consciousness, and, scattering one by one all
 the illusions which until then had screened its windings from my
 view, made them every moment more clearly visible.
“vainly i clung to these last beliefs as a
 shipwrecked sailor clings to the fragments of his vessel; vainly,
 frightened at the unknown void in which i was about to float, i
 turned with them [pg
 ]towards my
 childhood, my family, my country, all that was dear and sacred to
 me: the inflexible current of my thought was too strong,—parents,
 family, memory, beliefs, it forced me to let go of everything. the
 investigation went on more obstinate and more severe as it drew
 near its term, and did not stop until the end was reached. i knew
 then that in the depth of my mind nothing was left that stood
 erect.
“this moment was a frightful one; and when towards
 morning i threw myself exhausted on my bed, i seemed to feel my
 earlier life, so smiling and so full, go out like a fire, and
 before me another life opened, sombre and unpeopled, where in
 future i must live alone, alone with my fatal thought which had
 exiled me thither, and which i was tempted to curse. the days which
 followed this discovery were the saddest of my
 life.”
[pg ]
in john foster's
 essay on decision of character, there is an account of a case of
 sudden conversion to avarice, which is illustrative enough to
 quote:—
a young man, it appears, “wasted, in two or three years, a large patrimony in
 profligate revels with a number of worthless associates who called
 themselves his friends, and who, when his last means were exhausted,
 treated him of course with neglect or contempt. reduced to absolute
 want, he one day went out of the house with an intention to put an
 end to his life; but wandering awhile almost unconsciously, he came
 to the brow of an eminence which overlooked what were lately his
 estates. here he sat down, and remained fixed in thought a number of
 hours, at the end of which he sprang from the ground with a vehement,
 exulting emotion. he had formed his resolution, which was, that all
 these estates should be his again; he had formed his plan, too, which
 he instantly began to execute. he walked hastily forward, determined
 to seize the first opportunity, of however humble a kind, to gain any
 money, though it were ever so despicable a trifle, and resolved
 absolutely not to [pg
 ]spend, if he could
 help it, a farthing of whatever he might obtain. the first thing that
 drew his attention was a heap of coals shot out of carts on the
 pavement before a house. he offered himself to shovel or wheel them
 into the place where they were to be laid, and was employed. he
 received a few pence for the labor; and then, in pursuance of the
 saving part of his plan, requested some small gratuity of meat and
 drink, which was given him. he then looked out for the next thing
 that might chance; and went, with indefatigable industry, through a
 succession of servile employments in different places, of longer and
 shorter duration, still scrupulous in avoiding, as far as possible,
 the expense of a penny. he promptly seized every opportunity which
 could advance his design, without regarding the meanness of
 occupation or appearance. by this method he had gained, after a
 considerable time, money enough to purchase in order to sell again a
 few cattle, of which he had taken pains to understand the value. he
 speedily but cautiously turned his first gains into second
 advantages; retained without a single deviation his extreme
 parsimony; and thus advanced by degrees into larger transactions and
 incipient wealth. i did not hear, or have forgotten, the continued
 course of his life, but the final result was, that he more than
 recovered his lost possessions, and died an inveterate miser, worth
[pg ]
let me turn now to
 the kind of case, the religious case, namely, that immediately
 concerns us. here is one of [pg
 ] the
 simplest possible type, an account of the conversion to the
 systematic religion of healthy-mindedness of a man who must already
 have been naturally of the healthy-minded type. it shows how, when
 the fruit is ripe, a touch will make it fall.
mr. horace
 fletcher, in his little book called menticulture, relates that a
 friend with whom he was talking of the self-control attained by the
 japanese through their practice of the buddhist discipline said:—
“ ‘you must first get rid of anger and
 worry.’
‘but,’ said
 i, ‘is that
 possible?’
‘yes,’ replied he; ‘it is possible to the japanese, and ought to be
 possible to us.’
“on my way back i could think of nothing else but
 the words ‘get rid, get
 rid’; and the idea must have continued to possess me
 during my sleeping hours, for the first consciousness in the
 morning brought back the same thought, with the revelation of a
 discovery, which framed itself into the reasoning,
‘if it is
 possible to get rid of anger and worry, why is it necessary to have
 them at all?’
i felt the strength of the argument,
 and at once accepted the reasoning. the baby had discovered that it
 could walk. it would scorn to creep any longer.
“from the instant i realized that these cancer
 spots of worry and anger were removable, they left me. with the
 discovery of their weakness they were exorcised. from that time
 life has had an entirely different aspect.
“although from that moment the possibility and
 desirability of freedom from the depressing passions has been a
 reality to me, it took me some months to feel absolute security in
 my new position; but, as the usual occasions for worry and anger
 have presented themselves over and over again, and i have been
 unable to feel them in the slightest degree, i no longer dread or
 guard against them, and i am amazed at my increased energy and
 vigor of mind; at my strength to meet situations of all kinds, and
 at my disposition to love and appreciate
 everything.
“i have had occasion to travel more than ten
 thousand miles by rail since that morning. the same pullman porter,
 conductor, hotel-waiter, peddler, book-agent, cabman, and
 others [pg
 ]who were formerly
 a source of annoyance and irritation have been met, but i am not
 conscious of a single incivility. all at once the whole world has
 turned good to me. i have become, as it were, sensitive only to the
 rays of good.
“i could recount many experiences which prove a
 brand-new condition of mind, but one will be sufficient. without
 the slightest feeling of annoyance or impatience, i have seen a
 train that i had planned to take with a good deal of interested and
 pleasurable anticipation move out of the station without me,
 because my baggage did not arrive. the porter from the hotel came
 running and panting into the station just as the train pulled out
 of sight. when he saw me, he looked as if he feared a scolding, and
 began to tell of being blocked in a crowded street and unable to
 get out. when he had finished, i said to him: ‘it doesn't matter at all, you couldn't help it, so
 we will try again to-morrow. here is your fee, i am sorry you had
 all this trouble in earning it.’ the
 look of surprise that came over his face was so filled with
 pleasure that i was repaid on the spot for the delay in my
 departure. next day he would not accept a cent for the service, and
 he and i are friends for life.
“during the first weeks of my experience i was on
 guard only against worry and anger; but, in the mean time, having
 noticed the absence of the other depressing and dwarfing passions,
 i began to trace a relationship, until i was convinced that they
 are all growths from the two roots i have specified. i have felt
 the freedom now for so long a time that i am sure of my relation
 toward it; and i could no more harbor any of the thieving and
 depressing influences that once i nursed as a heritage of humanity
 than a fop would voluntarily wallow in a filthy
 gutter.
“there is no doubt in my mind that pure
 christianity and pure buddhism, and the mental sciences and all
 religions, fundamentally teach what has been a discovery to me; but
 none of them have presented it in the light of a simple and easy
 process of elimination. at one time i wondered if the elimination
 would not yield to indifference and sloth. in my experience, the
 contrary is the result. i feel such an increased
[pg ]desire to do something useful that it seems as if
 i were a boy again and the energy for play had returned. i could
 fight as readily as (and better than) ever, if there were occasion
 for it. it does not make one a coward. it can't, since fear is one
 of the things eliminated. i notice the absence of timidity in the
 presence of any audience. when a boy, i was standing under a tree
 which was struck by lightning, and received a shock from the
 effects of which i never knew exemption until i had dissolved
 partnership with worry. since then, lightning and thunder have been
 encountered under conditions which would formerly have caused great
 depression and discomfort, without [my] experiencing a trace of
 either. surprise is also greatly modified, and one is less liable
 to become startled by unexpected sights or
 noises.
“as far as i am individually concerned, i am not
 bothering myself at present as to what the results of this
 emancipated condition may be. i have no doubt that the perfect
 health aimed at by christian science may be one of the
 possibilities, for i note a marked improvement in the way my
 stomach does its duty in assimilating the food i give it to handle,
 and i am sure it works better to the sound of a song than under the
 friction of a frown. neither am i wasting any of this precious time
 formulating an idea of a future existence or a future heaven. the
 heaven that i have within myself is as attractive as any that has
 been promised or that i can imagine; and i am willing to let the
 growth lead where it will, as long as the anger and their brood
 have no part in misguiding it.”
the older medicine
 used to speak of two ways, lysis and crisis,
 one gradual, the other abrupt, in which one might recover from a
 bodily disease. in the spiritual realm there are also two ways, one
 gradual, the other sudden, in which inner unification may occur.
 tolstoy and bunyan may again serve us as examples, examples, as it
 happens, of the gradual way, though it must be confessed at the
 outset that it is hard to follow these windings [pg ] of the hearts of others, and one feels
 that their words do not reveal their total secret.
howe'er this be,
 tolstoy, pursuing his unending questioning, seemed to come to one
 insight after another. first he perceived that his conviction that
 life was meaningless took only this finite life into account. he was
 looking for the value of one finite term in that of another, and the
 whole result could only be one of those indeterminate equations in
 mathematics which end with =. yet this is as far as the reasoning
 intellect by itself can go, unless irrational sentiment or faith
 brings in the infinite. believe in the infinite as common people do,
 and life grows possible again.
“since mankind has existed, wherever life has been,
 there also has been the faith that gave the possibility of living.
 faith is the sense of life, that sense by virtue of which man does
 not destroy himself, but continues to live on. it is the force
 whereby we live. if man did not believe that he must live for
 something, he would not live at all. the idea of an infinite god, of
 the divinity of the soul, of the union of men's actions with
 god—these are ideas elaborated in the infinite secret depths of human
 thought. they are ideas without which there would be no life, without
 which i myself,”
said tolstoy, “would not exist. i began to see that i had no right
 to rely on my individual reasoning and neglect these answers given by
 faith, for they are the only answers to the
 question.”
yet how believe as
 the common people believe, steeped as they are in grossest
 superstition? it is impossible,—but yet their life! their life! it is
 normal. it is happy! it is an answer to the question!
little by little,
 tolstoy came to the settled conviction—he says it took him two years
 to arrive there—that his trouble had not been with life in general,
 not with the common life of common men, but with the life of the
 upper, intellectual, artistic classes, the life which he had
 [pg ] personally always led, the
 cerebral life, the life of conventionality, artificiality, and
 personal ambition. he had been living wrongly and must change. to
 work for animal needs, to abjure lies and vanities, to relieve common
 wants, to be simple, to believe in god, therein lay happiness
 again.
“i remember,” he
 says, “one day in
 early spring, i was alone in the forest, lending my ear to its
 mysterious noises. i listened, and my thought went back to what for
 these three years it always was busy with—the quest of god. but the
 idea of him, i said, how did i ever come by the
 idea?
“and again there arose in me, with this thought,
 glad aspirations towards life. everything in me awoke and received
 a meaning.... why do i look farther? a voice within me asked. he is
 there: he, without whom one cannot live. to acknowledge god and to
 live are one and the same thing. god is what life is. well, then!
 live, seek god, and there will be no life without
 him....
“after this, things cleared up within me and about
 me better than ever, and the light has never wholly died away. i
 was saved from suicide. just how or when the change took place i
 cannot tell. but as insensibly and gradually as the force of life
 had been annulled within me, and i had reached my moral death-bed,
 just as gradually and imperceptibly did the energy of life come
 back. and what was strange was that this energy that came back was
 nothing new. it was my ancient juvenile force of faith, the belief
 that the sole purpose of my life was to be better. i gave up the life of the conventional world,
 recognizing it to be no life, but a parody on life, which its
 superfluities simply keep us from comprehending,”—and
 tolstoy thereupon embraced the life of the peasants, and has felt
 right and happy, or at least relatively so, ever
 since.
as i interpret his
 melancholy, then, it was not merely an accidental vitiation of his
 humors, though it was doubtless also that. it was logically called
 for by the clash [pg
 between his inner character and his outer activities and aims.
 although a literary artist, tolstoy was one of those primitive oaks
 of men to whom the superfluities and insincerities, the cupidities,
 complications, and cruelties of our polite civilization are
 profoundly unsatisfying, and for whom the eternal veracities lie with
 more natural and animal things. his crisis was the getting of his
 soul in order, the discovery of its genuine habitat and vocation, the
 escape from falsehoods into what for him were ways of truth. it was a
 case of heterogeneous personality tardily and slowly finding its
 unity and level. and though not many of us can imitate tolstoy, not
 having enough, perhaps, of the aboriginal human marrow in our bones,
 most of us may at least feel as if it might be better for us if we
 could.
bunyan's recovery
 seems to have been even slower. for years together he was alternately
 haunted with texts of scripture, now up and now down, but at last
 with an ever growing relief in his salvation through the blood of
 christ.
“my peace would be in and out twenty times a day;
 comfort now and trouble presently; peace now and before i could go a
 furlong as full of guilt and fear as ever heart could
 hold.”when a
 good text comes home to him, “this,” he
 writes, “gave me good
 encouragement for the space of two or three
 hours”;
 or “this was a
 good day to me, i hope i shall not forget it”;
 or “the glory of
 these words was then so weighty on me that i was ready to swoon as
 i sat; yet not with grief and trouble, but with solid joy and
 peace”;
 or “this made a
 strange seizure on my spirit; it brought light with it, and
 commanded a silence in my heart of all those tumultuous thoughts
 that before did use, like masterless hell-hounds, to roar and
 bellow and make a hideous noise within me. it showed me that jesus
 christ had not quite forsaken and cast off my
 soul.”
such periods accumulate until he can write:
“and
 now [pg
 ]remained only the
 hinder part of the tempest, for the thunder was gone beyond me,
 only some drops would still remain, that now and then would fall
 upon me”;—and
 at last: “now did my
 chains fall off my legs indeed; i was loosed from my afflictions
 and irons; my temptations also fled away; so that from that time,
 those dreadful scriptures of god left off to trouble me; now went i
 also home rejoicing, for the grace and love of god.... now could i
 see myself in heaven and earth at once; in heaven by my christ, by
 my head, by my righteousness and life, though on earth by my body
 or person.... christ was a precious christ to my soul that night; i
 could scarce lie in my bed for joy and peace and triumph through
 christ.”
bunyan became a
 minister of the gospel, and in spite of his neurotic constitution,
 and of the twelve years he lay in prison for his non-conformity, his
 life was turned to active use. he was a peacemaker and doer of good,
 and the immortal allegory which he wrote has brought the very spirit
 of religious patience home to english hearts.
but neither bunyan
 nor tolstoy could become what we have called healthy-minded. they had
 drunk too deeply of the cup of bitterness ever to forget its taste,
 and their redemption is into a universe two stories deep. each of
 them realized a good which broke the effective edge of his sadness;
 yet the sadness was preserved as a minor ingredient in the heart of
 the faith by which it was overcome. the fact of interest for us is
 that as a matter of fact they could and did find something
 welling up in the inner reaches of their consciousness, by which such
 extreme sadness could be overcome. tolstoy does well to talk of it as
 that by
 which men live; for that is exactly what it is, a
 stimulus, an excitement, a faith, a force that re-infuses the
 positive willingness to live, even in full presence of the evil
 perceptions that erewhile made life seem unbearable. for tolstoy's
 perceptions of evil [pg
 appear within their sphere to have remained unmodified. his later
 works show him implacable to the whole system of official values: the
 ignobility of fashionable life; the infamies of empire; the
 spuriousness of the church, the vain conceit of the professions; the
 meannesses and cruelties that go with great success; and every other
 pompous crime and lying institution of this world. to all patience
 with such things his experience has been for him a permanent ministry
 of death.
bunyan also leaves
 this world to the enemy.
“i must first pass a sentence of
 death,”
he says, “upon everything that can properly be called a
 thing of this life, even to reckon myself, my wife, my children, my
 health, my enjoyments, and all, as dead to me, and myself as dead
 to them; to trust in god through christ, as touching the world to
 come; and as touching this world, to count the grave my house, to
 make my bed in darkness, and to say to corruption, thou art my
 father, and to the worm, thou art my mother and sister.... the
 parting with my wife and my poor children hath often been to me as
 the pulling of my flesh from my bones, especially my poor blind
 child who lay nearer my heart than all i had besides. poor child,
 thought i, what sorrow art thou like to have for thy portion in
 this world! thou must be beaten, must beg, suffer hunger, cold,
 nakedness, and a thousand calamities, though i cannot now endure
 that the wind should blow upon thee. but yet i must venture you all
 with god, though it goeth to the quick to leave
 you.”
the “hue of resolution” is there, but the full flood
 of ecstatic liberation seems never to have poured over poor john
 bunyan's soul.
these examples may
 suffice to acquaint us in a general way with the phenomenon
 technically called “conversion.” in
 the next lecture i shall invite you to study its peculiarities and
 concomitants in some detail.
[pg ]
lecture ix. conversion.
to be converted,
 to be regenerated, to receive grace, to experience religion, to gain
 an assurance, are so many phrases which denote the process, gradual
 or sudden, by which a self hitherto divided, and consciously wrong
 inferior and unhappy, becomes unified and consciously right superior
 and happy, in consequence of its firmer hold upon religious
 realities. this at least is what conversion signifies in general
 terms, whether or not we believe that a direct divine operation is
 needed to bring such a moral change about.
before entering
 upon a minuter study of the process, let me enliven our understanding
 of the definition by a concrete example. i choose the quaint case of
 an unlettered man, stephen h. bradley, whose experience is related in
 a scarce american pamphlet.
i select this case
 because it shows how in these inner alterations one may find one
 unsuspected depth below another, as if the possibilities of character
 lay disposed in a series of layers or shells, of whose existence we
 have no premonitory knowledge.
bradley thought
 that he had been already fully converted at the age of fourteen.
“i thought i saw the saviour, by faith, in human
 shape, for about one second in the room, with arms extended,
 appearing [pg
 ]to say to me, come.
 the next day i rejoiced with trembling; soon after, my happiness was
 so great that i said that i wanted to die; this world had no place in
 my affections, as i knew of, and every day appeared as solemn to me
 as the sabbath. i had an ardent desire that all mankind might feel as
 i did; i wanted to have them all love god supremely. previous to this
 time i was very selfish and self-righteous; but now i desired the
 welfare of all mankind, and could with a feeling heart forgive my
 worst enemies, and i felt as if i should be willing to bear the
 scoffs and sneers of any person, and suffer anything for his sake, if
 i could be the means in the hands of god, of the conversion of one
 soul.”
nine years later, in , mr. bradley heard of a
 revival of religion that had begun in his neighborhood.
“many of the
 young converts,”
he says, “would come to me when in meeting and ask me if i
 had religion, and my reply generally was, i hope i have. this did
 not appear to satisfy them; they said they knew they
had it. i requested them to pray for
 me, thinking with myself, that if i had not got religion now, after
 so long a time professing to be a christian, that it was time i
 had, and hoped their prayers would be answered in my
 behalf.
“one sabbath, i went to hear the methodist at the
 academy. he spoke of the ushering in of the day of general
 judgment; and he set it forth in such a solemn and terrible manner
 as i never heard before. the scene of that day appeared to be
 taking place, and so awakened were all the powers of my mind that,
 like felix, i trembled involuntarily on the bench where i was
 sitting, though i felt nothing at heart. the next day evening i
 went to hear him again. he took his text from revelation:
‘and i saw the
 dead, small and great, stand before god.’ and
 he represented the terrors of that day in such a manner that it
 appeared as if it would melt the heart of stone. when he finished
 his discourse, an old gentleman turned to me and said,
‘this is what
 i call preaching.’ i
 thought the same; but my feelings were still unmoved by what he
 said, and i did not enjoy religion, but i believe he
 did.
“i will now relate my experience of the power of
 the holy spirit which took place on the same night. had any
 person [pg
 ]told me previous
 to this that i could have experienced the power of the holy spirit
 in the manner which i did, i could not have believed it, and should
 have thought the person deluded that told me so. i went directly
 home after the meeting, and when i got home i wondered what made me
 feel so stupid. i retired to rest soon after i got home, and felt
 indifferent to the things of religion until i began to be exercised
 by the holy spirit, which began in about five minutes after, in the
 following manner:—
“at first, i began to feel my heart beat very quick
 all on a sudden, which made me at first think that perhaps
 something is going to ail me, though i was not alarmed, for i felt
 no pain. my heart increased in its beating, which soon convinced me
 that it was the holy spirit from the effect it had on me. i began
 to feel exceedingly happy and humble, and such a sense of
 unworthiness as i never felt before. i could not very well help
 speaking out, which i did, and said, lord, i do not deserve this
 happiness, or words to that effect, while there was a stream
 (resembling air in feeling) came into my mouth and heart in a more
 sensible manner than that of drinking anything, which continued, as
 near as i could judge, five minutes or more, which appeared to be
 the cause of such a palpitation of my heart. it took complete
 possession of my soul, and i am certain that i desired the lord,
 while in the midst of it, not to give me any more happiness, for it
 seemed as if i could not contain what i had got. my heart seemed as
 if it would burst, but it did not stop until i felt as if i was
 unutterably full of the love and grace of god. in the mean time
 while thus exercised, a thought arose in my mind, what can it mean?
 and all at once, as if to answer it, my memory became exceedingly
 clear, and it appeared to me just as if the new testament was
 placed open before me, eighth chapter of romans, and as light as if
 some candle lighted was held for me to read the th and th
 verses of that chapter, and i read these words: ‘the spirit helpeth our infirmities with groanings
 which cannot be uttered.’ and
 all the time that my heart was a-beating, it made me groan like a
 person in distress, which was not very easy to stop, though i was
 in no pain at all, and my brother being in bed in
[pg ]another room came and opened the door, and asked
 me if i had got the toothache. i told him no, and that he might get
 to sleep. i tried to stop. i felt unwilling to go to sleep myself,
 i was so happy, fearing i should lose it—thinking within
 myself
‘my
 willing soul would stay
in such a frame as this.’
and while i lay
 reflecting, after my heart stopped beating, feeling as if my soul
 was full of the holy spirit, i thought that perhaps there might be
 angels hovering round my bed. i felt just as if i wanted to
 converse with them, and finally i spoke, saying,
‘o ye
 affectionate angels! how is it that ye can take so much interest in
 our welfare, and we take so little interest in our
 own.’
after this, with difficulty i got to
 sleep; and when i awoke in the morning my first thoughts were: what
 has become of my happiness? and, feeling a degree of it in my
 heart, i asked for more, which was given to me as quick as thought.
 i then got up to dress myself, and found to my surprise that i
 could but just stand. it appeared to me as if it was a little
 heaven upon earth. my soul felt as completely raised above the
 fears of death as of going to sleep; and like a bird in a cage, i
 had a desire, if it was the will of god, to get released from my
 body and to dwell with christ, though willing to live to do good to
 others, and to warn sinners to repent. i went downstairs feeling as
 solemn as if i had lost all my friends, and thinking with myself,
 that i would not let my parents know it until i had first looked
 into the testament. i went directly to the shelf and looked into
 it, at the eighth chapter of romans, and every verse seemed to
 almost speak and to confirm it to be truly the word of god, and as
 if my feelings corresponded with the meaning of the word. i then
 told my parents of it, and told them that i thought that they must
 see that when i spoke, that it was not my own voice, for it
 appeared so to me. my speech seemed entirely under the control of
 the spirit within me; i do not mean that the words which i spoke
 were not my own, for they were. i thought that i was influenced
 similar to the apostles on the day of pentecost (with the exception
 of having power to give it to others, and doing [pg ]what they
 did). after breakfast i went round to converse with my neighbors on
 religion, which i could not have been hired to have done before
 this, and at their request i prayed with them, though i had never
 prayed in public before.
“i now feel as if i had discharged my duty by
 telling the truth, and hope by the blessing of god, it may do some
 good to all who shall read it. he has fulfilled his promise in
 sending the holy spirit down into our hearts, or mine at least, and
 i now defy all the deists and atheists in the world to shake my
 faith in christ.”
so much for mr.
 bradley and his conversion, of the effect of which upon his later
 life we gain no information. now for a minuter survey of the
 constituent elements of the conversion process.
if you open the
 chapter on association, of any treatise on psychology, you will read
 that a man's ideas, aims, and objects form diverse internal groups
 and systems, relatively independent of one another. each “aim” which he follows awakens a certain specific
 kind of interested excitement, and gathers a certain group of ideas
 together in subordination to it as its associates; and if the aims
 and excitements are distinct in kind, their groups of ideas may have
 little in common. when one group is present and engrosses the
 interest, all the ideas connected with other groups may be excluded
 from the mental field. the president of the united states when, with
 paddle, gun, and fishing-rod, he goes camping in the wilderness for a
 vacation, changes his system of ideas from top to bottom. the
 presidential anxieties have lapsed into the background entirely; the
 official habits are replaced by the habits of a son of nature, and
 those who knew the man only as the strenuous magistrate would not
 “know him for the same person” if they
 saw him as the camper.
if now he should
 never go back, and never again [pg ] suffer political interests to gain dominion
 over him, he would be for practical intents and purposes a
 permanently transformed being. our ordinary alterations of character,
 as we pass from one of our aims to another, are not commonly called
 transformations, because each of them is so rapidly succeeded by
 another in the reverse direction; but whenever one aim grows so
 stable as to expel definitively its previous rivals from the
 individual's life, we tend to speak of the phenomenon, and perhaps to
 wonder at it, as a “transformation.”
these alternations
 are the completest of the ways in which a self may be divided. a less
 complete way is the simultaneous coexistence of two or more different
 groups of aims, of which one practically holds the right of way and
 instigates activity, whilst the others are only pious wishes, and
 never practically come to anything. saint augustine's aspirations to
 a purer life, in our last lecture, were for a while an example.
 another would be the president in his full pride of office, wondering
 whether it were not all vanity, and whether the life of a
 wood-chopper were not the wholesomer destiny. such fleeting
 aspirations are mere velleitates, whimsies. they exist
 on the remoter outskirts of the mind, and the real self of the man,
 the centre of his energies, is occupied with an entirely different
 system. as life goes on, there is a constant change of our interests,
 and a consequent change of place in our systems of ideas, from more
 central to more peripheral, and from more peripheral to more central
 parts of consciousness. i remember, for instance, that one evening
 when i was a youth, my father read aloud from a boston newspaper that
 part of lord gifford's will which founded these four lectureships. at
 that time i did not think of being a teacher of philosophy: and what
 i listened to was as remote from my own life [pg ] as if it related to the planet mars. yet here i
 am, with the gifford system part and parcel of my very self, and all
 my energies, for the time being, devoted to successfully identifying
 myself with it. my soul stands now planted in what once was for it a
 practically unreal object, and speaks from it as from its proper
 habitat and centre.
when i say
 “soul,” you need not take me in the
 ontological sense unless you prefer to; for although ontological
 language is instinctive in such matters, yet buddhists or humians can
 perfectly well describe the facts in the phenomenal terms which are
 their favorites. for them the soul is only a succession of fields of
 consciousness: yet there is found in each field a part, or sub-field,
 which figures as focal and contains the excitement, and from which,
 as from a centre, the aim seems to be taken. talking of this part, we
 involuntarily apply words of perspective to distinguish it from the
 rest, words like “here,” “this,” “now,”
“mine,” or “me”; and we ascribe to the other parts the
 positions “there,” “then,” “that,”
“his” or “thine,” “it,”
“not me.” but a “here” can change to a “there,” and a “there” become a “here,” and what was “mine” and what was “not
 mine” change their places.
what brings such
 changes about is the way in which emotional excitement alters. things
 hot and vital to us to-day are cold to-morrow. it is as if seen from
 the hot parts of the field that the other parts appear to us, and
 from these hot parts personal desire and volition make their sallies.
 they are in short the centres of our dynamic energy, whereas the cold
 parts leave us indifferent and passive in proportion to their
 coldness.
whether such
 language be rigorously exact is for the present of no importance. it
 is exact enough, if you [pg
 recognize from your own experience the facts which i seek to
 designate by it.
now there may be
 great oscillation in the emotional interest, and the hot places may
 shift before one almost as rapidly as the sparks that run through
 burnt-up paper. then we have the wavering and divided self we heard
 so much of in the previous lecture. or the focus of excitement and
 heat, the point of view from which the aim is taken, may come to lie
 permanently within a certain system; and then, if the change be a
 religious one, we call it a conversion, especially if it be by
 crisis, or sudden.
let us hereafter,
 in speaking of the hot place in a man's consciousness, the group of
 ideas to which he devotes himself, and from which he works, call it
 the
 habitual centre of his personal energy. it makes a great
 difference to a man whether one set of his ideas, or another, be the
 centre of his energy; and it makes a great difference, as regards any
 set of ideas which he may possess, whether they become central or
 remain peripheral in him. to say that a man is “converted” means, in these terms, that religious
 ideas, previously peripheral in his consciousness, now take a central
 place, and that religious aims form the habitual centre of his
 energy.
now if you ask of
 psychology just how the excitement shifts in a man's
 mental system, and why aims that were peripheral become
 at a certain moment central, psychology has to reply that although
 she can give a general description of what happens, she is unable in
 a given case to account accurately for all the single forces at work.
 neither an outside observer nor the subject who undergoes the process
 can explain fully how particular experiences are able to change one's
 centre of energy so decisively, or why they so often have to bide
 their hour to do so. we have a thought, or we perform an act,
 [pg ] repeatedly, but on a certain
 day the real meaning of the thought peals through us for the first
 time, or the act has suddenly turned into a moral impossibility. all
 we know is that there are dead feelings, dead ideas, and cold
 beliefs, and there are hot and live ones; and when one grows hot and
 alive within us, everything has to re-crystallize about it. we may
 say that the heat and liveliness mean only the “motor efficacy,” long deferred but now operative,
 of the idea; but such talk itself is only circumlocution, for whence
 the sudden motor efficacy? and our explanations then get so vague and
 general that one realizes all the more the intense individuality of
 the whole phenomenon.
in the end we fall
 back on the hackneyed symbolism of a mechanical equilibrium. a mind
 is a system of ideas, each with the excitement it arouses, and with
 tendencies impulsive and inhibitive, which mutually check or
 reinforce one another. the collection of ideas alters by subtraction
 or by addition in the course of experience, and the tendencies alter
 as the organism gets more aged. a mental system may be undermined or
 weakened by this interstitial alteration just as a building is, and
 yet for a time keep upright by dead habit. but a new perception, a
 sudden emotional shock, or an occasion which lays bare the organic
 alteration, will make the whole fabric fall together; and then the
 centre of gravity sinks into an attitude more stable, for the new
 ideas that reach the centre in the rearrangement seem now to be
 locked there, and the new structure remains permanent.
formed
 associations of ideas and habits are usually factors of retardation
 in such changes of equilibrium. new information, however acquired,
 plays an accelerating part in the changes; and the slow mutation of
 our instincts and propensities, under the “unimaginable touch [pg ] of time” has an enormous influence.
 moreover, all these influences may work subconsciously or half
 unconsciously. and when
 you get a subject in whom the subconscious life—of which i must speak
 more fully soon—is largely developed, and in whom motives habitually
 ripen in silence, you get a case of which you can never give a full
 account, and in which, both to the subject and the onlookers, there
 may appear an element of marvel. emotional occasions, especially
 violent ones, are extremely potent in precipitating mental
 rearrangements. the sudden and explosive ways in which love,
 jealousy, guilt, fear, remorse, or anger can seize upon one are known
 to everybody. hope,
 happiness, security, resolve, emotions characteristic of conversion,
 can be equally explosive. and emotions that come in this explosive
 way seldom leave things as they found them.
in his recent work
 on the psychology of religion, professor starbuck of california has
 shown by a statistical [pg
 inquiry how closely parallel in its manifestations the ordinary
 “conversion” which occurs in young
 people brought up in evangelical circles is to that growth into a
 larger spiritual life which is a normal phase of adolescence in every
 class of human beings. the age is the same, falling usually between
 fourteen and seventeen. the symptoms are the same,—sense of
 incompleteness and imperfection; brooding, depression, morbid
 introspection, and sense of sin; anxiety about the hereafter;
 distress over doubts, and the like. and the result is the same,—a
 happy relief and objectivity, as the confidence in self gets greater
 through the adjustment of the faculties to the wider outlook. in
 spontaneous religious awakening, apart from revivalistic examples,
 and in the ordinary storm and stress and moulting-time of
 adolescence, we also may meet with mystical experiences, astonishing
 the subjects by their suddenness, just as in revivalistic conversion.
 the analogy, in fact, is complete; and starbuck's conclusion as to
 these ordinary youthful conversions would seem to be the only sound
 one: conversion is in its essence a normal adolescent phenomenon,
 incidental to the passage from the child's small universe to the
 wider intellectual and spiritual life of maturity.
“theology,” says dr. starbuck, “takes the adolescent tendencies and builds upon them; it
 sees that the essential thing in adolescent growth is bringing the
 person out of childhood into the new life of maturity and personal
 insight. it accordingly brings those means to bear which will
 intensify the normal tendencies. it shortens up the period of
 duration of storm and stress.” the conversion phenomena of
 “conviction of sin” last, by this
 investigator's statistics, about one fifth as long as the periods of
 adolescent storm and stress phenomena of which he also got
 statistics, but they are very much more intense. [pg ] bodily accompaniments, loss of sleep and
 appetite, for example, are much more frequent in them. “the essential distinction appears to be that conversion
 intensifies but shortens the period by bringing the person to a
 definite crisis.”
the conversions
 which dr. starbuck here has in mind are of course mainly those of
 very commonplace persons, kept true to a pre-appointed type by
 instruction, appeal, and example. the particular form which they
 affect is the result of suggestion and imitation. if they
 went through their growth-crisis in other faiths and other countries,
 although the essence of the change would be the same (since it is one
 in the main so inevitable), its accidents would be different. in
 catholic lands, for example, and in our own episcopalian sects, no
 such anxiety and conviction of sin is usual as in sects that
 encourage revivals. the sacraments being more relied on in these more
 strictly ecclesiastical bodies, the individual's personal acceptance
 of salvation needs less to be accentuated and led up
 to.[pg ]
but every
 imitative phenomenon must once have had its original, and i propose
 that for the future we keep as close as may be to the more first-hand
 and original forms of experience. these are more likely to be found
 in sporadic adult cases.
professor leuba,
 in a valuable article on the psychology of conversion,
 subordinates the theological aspect of the religious life almost
 entirely to its moral aspect. the religious sense he defines as
 “the feeling of un-wholeness, of moral
 imperfection, of sin, to use the technical word, accompanied by the
 yearning after the peace of unity.” “the word ‘religion,’ ” he says, “is getting more and more to signify the conglomerate of
 desires and emotions springing from the sense of sin and its
 release”; and he gives a large number of examples, in which
 the sin ranges from drunkenness to spiritual pride, to show that the
 sense of it may beset one and crave relief as urgently as does the
 anguish of the sickened flesh or any form of physical misery.
undoubtedly this
 conception covers an immense number of cases. a good one to use as an
 example is that of mr. s. h. hadley, who after his conversion became
 an active and useful rescuer of drunkards in new york. his experience
 runs as follows:—
“one tuesday evening i sat in a saloon in harlem, a
 homeless, friendless, dying drunkard. i had pawned or sold everything
 that would bring a drink. i could not sleep unless i was dead drunk.
 i had not eaten for days, and for four nights preceding i had
 suffered with delirium tremens, or the horrors, from midnight till
 morning. i had often said, ‘i will never be a tramp. i will never be cornered,
 for when that time comes, if ever it comes, i will find a home in
 the bottom of the river.’but
 the lord so ordered it that when that time did come i was
[pg ]not able to walk one quarter of the way to the
 river. as i sat there thinking, i seemed to feel some great and
 mighty presence. i did not know then what it was. i did learn
 afterwards that it was jesus, the sinner's friend. i walked up to
 the bar and pounded it with my fist till i made the glasses rattle.
 those who stood by drinking looked on with scornful curiosity. i
 said i would never take another drink, if i died on the street, and
 really i felt as though that would happen before morning. something
 said, ‘if you want
 to keep this promise, go and have yourself locked
 up.’ i went to the nearest station-house and had myself
 locked up.
“i was placed in a narrow cell, and it seemed as
 though all the demons that could find room came in that place with
 me. this was not all the company i had, either. no, praise the
 lord; that dear spirit that came to me in the saloon was present,
 and said, pray. i did pray, and though i did not feel any great
 help, i kept on praying. as soon as i was able to leave my cell i
 was taken to the police court and remanded back to the cell. i was
 finally released, and found my way to my brother's house, where
 every care was given me. while lying in bed the admonishing spirit
 never left me, and when i arose the following sabbath morning i
 felt that day would decide my fate, and toward evening it came into
 my head to go to jerry m'auley's mission. i went. the house was
 packed, and with great difficulty i made my way to the space near
 the platform. there i saw the apostle to the drunkard and the
 outcast—that man of god, jerry m'auley. he rose, and amid deep
 silence told his experience. there was a sincerity about this man
 that carried conviction with it, and i found myself saying,
‘i wonder if
 god can save me?’ i
 listened to the testimony of twenty-five or thirty persons, every
 one of whom had been saved from rum, and i made up my mind that i
 would be saved or die right there. when the invitation was given, i
 knelt down with a crowd of drunkards. jerry made the first prayer.
 then mrs. m'auley prayed fervently for us. oh, what a conflict was
 going on for my poor soul! a blessed whisper said,
‘come’; the
 devil said, ‘be
 careful.’
i halted but a moment, and then, with
 a breaking heart, i said, ‘dear [pg ]jesus, can you
 help me?’
never with mortal tongue can i
 describe that moment. although up to that moment my soul had been
 filled with indescribable gloom, i felt the glorious brightness of
 the noonday sun shine into my heart. i felt i was a free man. oh,
 the precious feeling of safety, of freedom, of resting on jesus! i
 felt that christ with all his brightness and power had come into my
 life; that, indeed, old things had passed away and all things had
 become new.
“from that moment till now i have never wanted a
 drink of whiskey, and i have never seen money enough to make me
 take one. i promised god that night that if he would take away the
 appetite for strong drink, i would work for him all my life. he has
 done his part, and i have been trying to do
 mine.”
dr. leuba rightly
 remarks that there is little doctrinal theology in such an
 experience, which starts with the absolute need of a higher helper,
 and ends with the sense that he has helped us. he gives other cases
 of drunkards' conversions which are purely ethical, containing, as
 recorded, no theological beliefs whatever. john b. gough's case, for
 instance, is practically, says dr. leuba, the conversion of an
 atheist—neither god nor jesus being mentioned. but in
 spite of the importance of this type of regeneration, with little or
 no intellectual readjustment, this writer surely makes it too
 exclusive. it corresponds to the subjectively centred form of morbid
 melancholy, of which bunyan and alline were examples. but we saw in
 our seventh lecture that there are objective forms of melancholy
 also, in which the lack of rational [pg ] meaning of the universe, and of life anyhow, is
 the burden that weighs upon one—you remember tolstoy's case. so
 there are distinct elements in conversion, and their relations to
 individual lives deserve to be discriminated.
some persons, for
 instance, never are, and possibly never under any circumstances could
 be, converted. religious ideas cannot become the centre of their
 spiritual energy. they may be excellent persons, servants of god in
 practical ways, but they are not children of his kingdom. they are
 either incapable of imagining the invisible; or else, in the language
 of devotion, they are life-long subjects of “barrenness” and “dryness.” such inaptitude for religious faith may
 in some cases be intellectual in its origin. their religious
 faculties may be checked in their natural tendency to expand, by
 beliefs about the world that are inhibitive, the pessimistic and
 materialistic beliefs, for example, within which so many good souls,
 who in former times would have freely indulged their religious
 propensities, find themselves nowadays, as it were, frozen; or the
 agnostic vetoes upon faith as something weak and shameful, under
 which so many of us to-day lie cowering, afraid to use our instincts.
 in many persons such inhibitions are never overcome. to the end of
 their days they refuse to believe, their personal energy never gets
 to its religious centre, and the latter remains inactive in
 perpetuity.
in other persons
 the trouble is profounder. there are men anæsthetic on the religious
 side, deficient in that [pg
 category of sensibility. just as a bloodless organism can never, in
 spite of all its goodwill, attain to the reckless “animal spirits” enjoyed by those of sanguine
 temperament; so the nature which is spiritually barren may admire and
 envy faith in others, but can never compass the enthusiasm and peace
 which those who are temperamentally qualified for faith enjoy. all
 this may, however, turn out eventually to have been a matter of
 temporary inhibition. even late in life some thaw, some release may
 take place, some bolt be shot back in the barrenest breast, and the
 man's hard heart may soften and break into religious feeling. such
 cases more than any others suggest the idea that sudden conversion is
 by miracle. so long as they exist, we must not imagine ourselves to
 deal with irretrievably fixed classes.
now there are two
 forms of mental occurrence in human beings, which lead to a striking
 difference in the conversion process, a difference to which professor
 starbuck has called attention. you know how it is when you try to
 recollect a forgotten name. usually you help the recall by working
 for it, by mentally running over the places, persons, and things with
 which the word was connected. but sometimes this effort fails: you
 feel then as if the harder you tried the less hope there would be, as
 though the name were jammed, and pressure in its
 direction only kept it all the more from rising. and then the
 opposite expedient often succeeds. give up the effort entirely; think
 of something altogether different, and in half an hour the lost name
 comes sauntering into your mind, as emerson says, as carelessly as if
 it had never been invited. some hidden process was started in you by
 the effort, which went on after the effort ceased, and made the
 result come as if it came spontaneously. [pg ] a certain music teacher, says dr. starbuck,
 says to her pupils after the thing to be done has been clearly
 pointed out, and unsuccessfully attempted: “stop trying and it will do itself!”
there is thus a
 conscious and voluntary way and an involuntary and unconscious way in
 which mental results may get accomplished; and we find both ways
 exemplified in the history of conversion, giving us two types, which
 starbuck calls the volitional type and the type by
 self-surrender respectively.
in the volitional
 type the regenerative change is usually gradual, and consists in the
 building up, piece by piece, of a new set of moral and spiritual
 habits. but there are always critical points here at which the
 movement forward seems much more rapid. this psychological fact is
 abundantly illustrated by dr. starbuck. our education in any
 practical accomplishment proceeds apparently by jerks and starts,
 just as the growth of our physical bodies does.
“an athlete ... sometimes awakens suddenly to an
 understanding of the fine points of the game and to a real enjoyment
 of it, just as the convert awakens to an appreciation of religion. if
 he keeps on engaging in the sport, there may come a day when all at
 once the game plays itself through him—when he loses himself in some
 great contest. in the same way, a musician may suddenly reach a point
 at which pleasure in the technique of the art entirely falls away,
 and in some moment of inspiration he becomes the instrument through
 which music flows. the writer has chanced to hear two different
 married persons, both of whose wedded lives had been beautiful from
 the beginning, relate that not until a year or more after marriage
 did they awake to the full blessedness of married life. so it is with
 the religious experience of these persons we are
 studying.”
[pg ]
we shall erelong
 hear still more remarkable illustrations of subconsciously maturing
 processes eventuating in results of which we suddenly grow conscious.
 sir william hamilton and professor laycock of edinburgh were among
 the first to call attention to this class of effects; but dr.
 carpenter first, unless i am mistaken, introduced the term
 “unconscious cerebration,” which has
 since then been a popular phrase of explanation. the facts are now
 known to us far more extensively than he could know them, and the
 adjective “unconscious,” being for
 many of them almost certainly a misnomer, is better replaced by the
 vaguer term “subconscious” or
 “subliminal.”
of the volitional
 type of conversion it would be easy to give examples, but
 they are as a rule less interesting [pg ] than those of the self-surrender type, in which
 the subconscious effects are more abundant and often startling. i
 will therefore hurry to the latter, the more so because the
 difference between the two types is after all not radical. even in
 the most voluntarily built-up sort of regeneration there are passages
 of partial self-surrender interposed; and in the great majority of
 all cases, when the will has done its uttermost towards bringing one
 close to the complete unification aspired after, it seems that the
 very last step must be left to other forces and performed without the
 help of its activity. in other words, self-surrender becomes then
 indispensable. “the personal will,”
 says dr. starbuck, “must be given up. in many
 cases relief persistently refuses to come until the person ceases to
 resist, or to make an effort in the direction he desires to
 go.”
“i had said i would not give up; but when my will was
 broken, it was all over,” writes
 one of starbuck's correspondents.—another says: “i simply said: ‘lord, i have done all i can; i leave the whole
 matter with thee;’
and immediately there came to me a great
 peace.”—another:
“all at once
 it occurred to me that i might be saved, too, if i would stop
 trying to do it all myself, and follow jesus: somehow i lost my
 load.”—another:
“i finally
 ceased to resist, and gave myself up, though it was a hard
 struggle. gradually the feeling came over me that i had done my
 part, and god was willing to do his.”—“lord,
 thy will be done; damn or save!” cries
 john nelson,
exhausted with the anxious struggle to
 escape damnation; and at that moment his soul was filled with
 peace.
[pg ]
dr. starbuck gives
 an interesting, and it seems to me a true, account—so far as
 conceptions so schematic can claim truth at all—of the reasons why
 self-surrender at the last moment should be so indispensable. to
 begin with, there are two things in the mind of the candidate for
 conversion: first, the present incompleteness or wrongness, the
 “sin” which he is eager to escape
 from; and, second, the positive ideal which he longs to compass. now
 with most of us the sense of our present wrongness is a far more
 distinct piece of our consciousness than is the imagination of any
 positive ideal we can aim at. in a majority of cases, indeed, the
 “sin” almost exclusively engrosses the
 attention, so that conversion is “a process of
 struggling away from sin rather than of striving towards
 righteousness.” a man's
 conscious wit and will, so far as they strain towards the ideal, are
 aiming at something only dimly and inaccurately imagined. yet all the
 while the forces of mere organic ripening within him are going on
 towards their own prefigured result, and his conscious strainings are
 letting loose subconscious allies behind the scenes, which in their
 way work towards rearrangement; and the rearrangement towards which
 all these deeper forces tend is pretty surely definite, and
 definitely different from what he consciously conceives and
 determines. it may consequently be actually interfered with
 (jammed, as it were, like the lost
 word when we seek too energetically to recall it), by his voluntary
 efforts slanting from the true direction.
starbuck seems to
 put his finger on the root of the matter when he says that to
 exercise the personal will is still to live in the region where the
 imperfect self is the thing most emphasized. where, on the contrary,
 the subconscious forces take the lead, it is more probably
 [pg ] the better self in posse which directs the
 operation. instead of being clumsily and vaguely aimed at from
 without, it is then itself the organizing centre. what then must the
 person do? “he must relax,” says dr.
 starbuck,—“that is, he must fall back on the
 larger power that makes for righteousness, which has been welling up
 in his own being, and let it finish in its own way the work it has
 begun.... the act of yielding, in this point of view, is giving one's
 self over to the new life, making it the centre of a new personality,
 and living, from within, the truth of it which had before been viewed
 objectively.”
“man's extremity is god's opportunity” is the
 theological way of putting this fact of the need of self-surrender;
 whilst the physiological way of stating it would be, “let one do all in one's power, and one's nervous system
 will do the rest.” both statements acknowledge the same
 fact.
to state it in
 terms of our own symbolism: when the new centre of personal energy
 has been subconsciously incubated so long as to be just ready to open
 into flower, “hands off” is the only
 word for us, it must burst forth unaided!
we have used the
 vague and abstract language of psychology. but since, in any terms,
 the crisis described is the throwing of our conscious selves upon the
 mercy of powers which, whatever they may be, are more ideal than we
 are actually, and make for our redemption, you see why self-surrender
 has been and always must be regarded as the vital turning-point of
 the religious life, so far as the religious life is spiritual and no
 affair of outer works and ritual and sacraments. one may say that the
 whole development of christianity in inwardness [pg ] has consisted in little more than the
 greater and greater emphasis attached to this crisis of
 self-surrender. from catholicism to lutheranism, and then to
 calvinism; from that to wesleyanism; and from this, outside of
 technical christianity altogether, to pure “liberalism” or transcendental idealism, whether
 or not of the mind-cure type, taking in the mediæval mystics, the
 quietists, the pietists, and quakers by the way, we can trace the
 stages of progress towards the idea of an immediate spiritual help,
 experienced by the individual in his forlornness and standing in no
 essential need of doctrinal apparatus or propitiatory machinery.
psychology and
 religion are thus in perfect harmony up to this point, since both
 admit that there are forces seemingly outside of the conscious
 individual that bring redemption to his life. nevertheless
 psychology, defining these forces as “subconscious,” and speaking of their effects as
 due to “incubation,” or “cerebration,” implies that they do not transcend
 the individual's personality; and herein she diverges from christian
 theology, which insists that they are direct supernatural operations
 of the deity. i propose to you that we do not yet consider this
 divergence final, but leave the question for a while in
 abeyance—continued inquiry may enable us to get rid of some of the
 apparent discord.
revert, then, for
 a moment more to the psychology of self-surrender.
when you find a
 man living on the ragged edge of his consciousness, pent in to his
 sin and want and incompleteness, and consequently inconsolable, and
 then simply tell him that all is well with him, that he must stop his
 worry, break with his discontent, and give up his anxiety, you seem
 to him to come with pure absurdities. the [pg ] only positive consciousness he has tells him
 that all is not well, and the better way you
 offer sounds simply as if you proposed to him to assert cold-blooded
 falsehoods. “the will to believe”
 cannot be stretched as far as that. we can make ourselves more
 faithful to a belief of which we have the rudiments, but we cannot
 create a belief out of whole cloth when our perception actively
 assures us of its opposite. the better mind proposed to us comes in
 that case in the form of a pure negation of the only mind we have,
 and we cannot actively will a pure negation.
there are only two
 ways in which it is possible to get rid of anger, worry, fear,
 despair, or other undesirable affections. one is that an opposite
 affection should overpoweringly break over us, and the other is by
 getting so exhausted with the struggle that we have to stop,—so we
 drop down, give up, and don't care any longer. our emotional
 brain-centres strike work, and we lapse into a temporary apathy. now
 there is documentary proof that this state of temporary exhaustion
 not infrequently forms part of the conversion crisis. so long as the
 egoistic worry of the sick soul guards the door, the expansive
 confidence of the soul of faith gains no presence. but let the former
 faint away, even but for a moment, and the latter can profit by the
 opportunity, and, having once acquired possession, may retain it.
 carlyle's teufelsdröckh passes from the everlasting no to the
 everlasting yes through a “centre of
 indifference.”
let me give you a
 good illustration of this feature in the conversion process. that
 genuine saint, david brainerd, describes his own crisis in the
 following words:—
“one morning, while i was walking in a solitary place
 as usual, i at once saw that all my contrivances and projects to
 effect or procure deliverance and salvation for myself were utterly
 in [pg
 ]vain; i was brought
 quite to a stand, as finding myself totally lost. i saw that it was
 forever impossible for me to do anything towards helping or
 delivering myself, that i had made all the pleas i ever could have
 made to all eternity; and that all my pleas were vain, for i saw that
 self-interest had led me to pray, and that i had never once prayed
 from any respect to the glory of god. i saw that there was no
 necessary connection between my prayers and the bestowment of divine
 mercy; that they laid not the least obligation upon god to bestow his
 grace upon me; and that there was no more virtue or goodness in them
 than there would be in my paddling with my hand in the water. i saw
 that i had been heaping up my devotions before god, fasting, praying,
 etc., pretending, and indeed really thinking sometimes that i was
 aiming at the glory of god; whereas i never once truly intended it,
 but only my own happiness. i saw that as i had never done anything
 for god, i had no claim on anything from him but perdition, on
 account of my hypocrisy and mockery. when i saw evidently that i had
 regard to nothing but self-interest, then my duties appeared a vile
 mockery and a continual course of lies, for the whole was nothing but
 self-worship, and an horrid abuse of god.
“i continued, as i remember, in this state of mind,
 from friday morning till the sabbath evening following (july ,
 ), when i was walking again in the same solitary place. here,
 in a mournful melancholy state i
 was attempting to pray; but found no heart to engage in that or any
 other duty; my former concern, exercise, and religious affections
 were now gone. i thought that the spirit of god had quite left me;
 but still was not distressed; yet disconsolate, as if there was
 nothing in heaven or earth could make me happy. having been thus
 endeavoring to pray—though, as i thought, very stupid and
 senseless—for near half an
 hour; then, as i was walking in a thick grove, unspeakable glory
 seemed to open to the apprehension of my soul. i do not mean any
 external brightness, nor any imagination of a body of light, but it
 was a new inward apprehension or view that i had of god, such as i
 never had before, nor anything which had the least resemblance to
 it. i had no particular apprehension of any one person in
[pg ]the trinity, either the father, the son, or the
 holy ghost; but it appeared to be divine glory. my soul rejoiced
 with joy unspeakable, to see such a god, such a glorious divine
 being; and i was inwardly pleased and satisfied that he should be
 god over all for ever and ever. my soul was so captivated and
 delighted with the excellency of god that i was even swallowed up
 in him; at least to that degree that i had no thought about my own
 salvation, and scarce reflected that there was such a creature as
 myself. i continued in this state of inward joy, peace, and
 astonishing, till near dark without any sensible abatement; and
 then began to think and examine what i had seen; and felt sweetly
 composed in my mind all the evening following. i felt myself in a
 new world, and everything about me appeared with a different aspect
 from what it was wont to do. at this time, the way of salvation
 opened to me with such infinite wisdom, suitableness, and
 excellency, that i wondered i should ever think of any other way of
 salvation; was amazed that i had not dropped my own contrivances,
 and complied with this lovely, blessed, and excellent way before.
 if i could have been saved by my own duties or any other way that i
 had formerly contrived, my whole soul would now have refused it. i
 wondered that all the world did not see and comply with this way of
 salvation, entirely by the righteousness of
 christ.”
i have italicized
 the passage which records the exhaustion of the anxious emotion
 hitherto habitual. in a large proportion, perhaps the majority, of
 reports, the writers speak as if the exhaustion of the lower and the
 entrance of the higher emotion were simultaneous, yet
 [pg ] often again they speak as if
 the higher actively drove the lower out. this is undoubtedly true in
 a great many instances, as we shall presently see. but often there
 seems little doubt that both conditions—subconscious ripening of the
 one affection and exhaustion of the other—must simultaneously have
 conspired, in order to produce the result.
t. w. b., a convert of nettleton's, being brought to
 an acute paroxysm of conviction of sin, ate nothing all day, locked
 himself in his room in the evening in complete despair, crying
 aloud, “how long, o
 lord, how long?”
“after repeating
 this and similar language,” he
 says, “several
 times, i seemed to sink away into a
 state of insensibility. when
 i came to myself again i was on my knees, praying not for myself but
 for others. i felt submission to the will of god, willing that he
 should do with me as should seem good in his sight. my concern seemed
 all lost in concern for others.”
our great american revivalist finney
 writes: “i said to
 myself: ‘what is this?
 i must have grieved the holy ghost entirely away. i have lost all
 my conviction. i have not a particle of concern about my soul; and
 it must be that the spirit has left me.’ ‘why!’ thought i, ‘i never was so far from being concerned about my
 own salvation in my life.’... i
 tried to recall my convictions, to get back again the load of sin
 under which i had been laboring. i tried in vain to make myself
 anxious. i was so quiet and peaceful that i tried to feel concerned
 about that, lest it should be the result of my having grieved the
 spirit away.”
but beyond all
 question there are persons in whom, quite independently of any
 exhaustion in the subject's capacity for feeling, or even in the
 absence of any acute [pg
 previous feeling, the higher condition, having reached the due degree
 of energy, bursts through all barriers and sweeps in like a sudden
 flood. these are the most striking and memorable cases, the cases of
 instantaneous conversion to which the conception of divine grace has
 been most peculiarly attached. i have given one of them at length—the
 case of mr. bradley. but i had better reserve the other cases and my
 comments on the rest of the subject for the following lecture.
[pg ]
lecture x.
 conversion—concluded.
in this lecture we
 have to finish the subject of conversion, considering at first those
 striking instantaneous instances of which saint paul's is the most
 eminent, and in which, often amid tremendous emotional excitement or
 perturbation of the senses, a complete division is established in the
 twinkling of an eye between the old life and the new. conversion of
 this type is an important phase of religious experience, owing to the
 part which it has played in protestant theology, and it behooves us
 to study it conscientiously on that account.
i think i had
 better cite two or three of these cases before proceeding to a more
 generalized account. one must know concrete instances first; for, as
 professor agassiz used to say, one can see no farther into a
 generalization than just so far as one's previous acquaintance with
 particulars enables one to take it in. i will go back, then, to the
 case of our friend henry alline, and quote his report of the th of
 march, , on which his poor divided mind became unified for
 good.
“as i was about sunset wandering in the fields
 lamenting my miserable lost and undone condition, and almost ready to
 sink under my burden, i thought i was in such a miserable case as
 never any man was before. i returned to the house, and when i got to
 the door, just as i was stepping off the threshold, the following
 impressions came into my mind like a powerful but small still voice.
 you have been seeking, praying, [pg ]reforming,
 laboring, reading, hearing, and meditating, and what have you done by
 it towards your salvation? are you any nearer to conversion now than
 when you first began? are you any more prepared for heaven, or fitter
 to appear before the impartial bar of god, than when you first began
 to seek?
“it brought such conviction on me that i was
 obliged to say that i did not think i was one step nearer than at
 first, but as much condemned, as much exposed, and as miserable as
 before. i cried out within myself, o lord god, i am lost, and if
 thou, o lord, dost not find out some new way, i know nothing of, i
 shall never be saved, for the ways and methods i have prescribed to
 myself have all failed me, and i am willing they should fail. o
 lord, have mercy! o lord, have mercy!
“these discoveries continued until i went into the
 house and sat down. after i sat down, being all in confusion, like
 a drowning man that was just giving up to sink, and almost in an
 agony, i turned very suddenly round in my chair, and seeing part of
 an old bible lying in one of the chairs, i caught hold of it in
 great haste; and opening it without any premeditation, cast my eyes
 on the th psalm, which was the first time i ever saw the word of
 god: it took hold of me with such power that it seemed to go
 through my whole soul, so that it seemed as if god was praying in,
 with, and for me. about this time my father called the family to
 attend prayers; i attended, but paid no regard to what he said in
 his prayer, but continued praying in those words of the psalm. oh,
 help me, help me! cried i, thou redeemer of souls, and save me, or
 i am gone forever; thou canst this night, if thou pleasest, with
 one drop of thy blood atone for my sins, and appease the wrath of
 an angry god. at that instant of time when i gave all up to him to
 do with me as he pleased, and was willing that god should rule over
 me at his pleasure, redeeming love broke into my soul with repeated
 scriptures, with such power that my whole soul seemed to be melted
 down with love; the burden of guilt and condemnation was gone,
 darkness was expelled, my heart humbled and filled with gratitude,
 and my whole soul, that was a few minutes ago groaning under
 mountains of death, and crying to an unknown god for help, was now
 filled with [pg
 ]immortal love,
 soaring on the wings of faith, freed from the chains of death and
 darkness, and crying out, my lord and my god; thou art my rock and
 my fortress, my shield and my high tower, my life, my joy, my
 present and my everlasting portion. looking up, i thought i saw
 that same light [he had on more than one previous occasion seen
 subjectively a bright blaze of light], though it appeared
 different; and as soon as i saw it, the design was opened to me,
 according to his promise, and i was obliged to cry out: enough,
 enough, o blessed god! the work of conversion, the change, and the
 manifestations of it are no more disputable than that light which i
 see, or anything that ever i saw.
“in the midst of all my joys, in less than half an
 hour after my soul was set at liberty, the lord discovered to me my
 labor in the ministry and call to preach the gospel. i cried out,
 amen, lord, i'll go; send me, send me. i spent the greatest part of
 the night in ecstasies of joy, praising and adoring the ancient of
 days for his free and unbounded grace. after i had been so long in
 this transport and heavenly frame that my nature seemed to require
 sleep, i thought to close my eyes for a few moments; then the devil
 stepped in, and told me that if i went to sleep, i should lose it
 all, and when i should awake in the morning i would find it to be
 nothing but a fancy and delusion. i immediately cried out, o lord
 god, if i am deceived, undeceive me.
“i then closed my eyes for a few minutes, and
 seemed to be refreshed with sleep; and when i awoke, the first
 inquiry was, where is my god? and in an instant of time, my soul
 seemed awake in and with god, and surrounded by the arms of
 everlasting love. about sunrise i arose with joy to relate to my
 parents what god had done for my soul, and declared to them the
 miracle of god's unbounded grace. i took a bible to show them the
 words that were impressed by god on my soul the evening before; but
 when i came to open the bible, it appeared all new to
 me.
“i so longed to be useful in the cause of christ,
 in preaching the gospel, that it seemed as if i could not rest any
 longer, but go i must and tell the wonders of redeeming love. i
 lost [pg
 ]all taste for
 carnal pleasures, and carnal company, and was enabled to forsake
 them.”
young mr. alline,
 after the briefest of delays, and with no book-learning but his
 bible, and no teaching save that of his own experience, became a
 christian minister, and thenceforward his life was fit to rank, for
 its austerity and single-mindedness, with that of the most devoted
 saints. but happy as he became in his strenuous way, he never got his
 taste for even the most innocent carnal pleasures back. we must class
 him, like bunyan and tolstoy, amongst those upon whose soul the iron
 of melancholy left a permanent imprint. his redemption was into
 another universe than this mere natural world, and life remained for
 him a sad and patient trial. years later we can find him making such
 an entry as this in his diary: “on wednesday
 the th i preached at a wedding, and had the happiness thereby to be
 the means of excluding carnal mirth.”
the next case i
 will give is that of a correspondent of professor leuba, printed in
 the latter's article, already cited, in vol. vi. of the american
 journal of psychology. this subject was an oxford graduate, the son
 of a clergyman, and the story resembles in many points the classic
 case of colonel gardiner, which everybody may be supposed to know.
 here it is, somewhat abridged:—
“between the period of leaving oxford and my
 conversion i never darkened the door of my father's church, although
 i lived with him for eight years, making what money i wanted by
 journalism, and spending it in high carousal with any one who would
 sit with me and drink it away. so i lived, sometimes drunk for a week
 together, and then a terrible repentance, and would not touch a drop
 for a whole month.[pg ]
“in all this period, that is, up to thirty-three
 years of age, i never had a desire to reform on religious grounds.
 but all my pangs were due to some terrible remorse i used to feel
 after a heavy carousal, the remorse taking the shape of regret
 after my folly in wasting my life in such a way—a man of superior
 talents and education. this terrible remorse turned me gray in one
 night, and whenever it came upon me i was perceptibly grayer the
 next morning. what i suffered in this way is beyond the expression
 of words. it was hell-fire in all its most dreadful tortures. often
 did i vow that if i got over ‘this time’ i
 would reform. alas, in about three days i fully recovered, and was
 as happy as ever. so it went on for years, but, with a physique
 like a rhinoceros, i always recovered, and as long as i let drink
 alone, no man was as capable of enjoying life as i
 was.
“i was converted in my own bedroom in my father's
 rectory house at precisely three o'clock in the afternoon of a hot
 july day (july , ). i was in perfect health, having been off
 from the drink for nearly a month. i was in no way troubled about
 my soul. in fact, god was not in my thoughts that day. a young lady
 friend sent me a copy of professor drummond's natural law in the
 spiritual world, asking me my opinion of it as a literary work
 only. being proud of my critical talents and wishing to enhance
 myself in my new friend's esteem, i took the book to my bedroom for
 quiet, intending to give it a thorough study, and then write her
 what i thought of it. it was here that god met me face to face, and
 i shall never forget the meeting. ‘he that hath the son hath life eternal, he that
 hath not the son hath not life.’ i had
 read this scores of times before, but this made all the difference.
 i was now in god's presence and my attention was absolutely
‘soldered’on to
 this verse, and i was not allowed to proceed with the book till i
 had fairly considered what these words really involved. only then
 was i allowed to proceed, feeling all the while that there was
 another being in my bedroom, though not seen by me. the stillness
 was very marvelous, and i felt supremely happy. it was most
 unquestionably shown me, in one second of time, that i had never
 touched the eternal: and [pg ]that if i died
 then, i must inevitably be lost. i was undone. i knew it as well as
 i now know i am saved. the spirit of god showed it me in ineffable
 love; there was no terror in it; i felt god's love so powerfully
 upon me that only a mighty sorrow crept over me that i had lost all
 through my own folly; and what was i to do? what could i do? i did
 not repent even; god never asked me to repent. all i felt
 was ‘i am
 undone,’and
 god cannot help it, although he loves me. no fault on the part of
 the almighty. all the time i was supremely happy: i felt like a
 little child before his father. i had done wrong, but my father did
 not scold me, but loved me most wondrously. still my doom was
 sealed. i was lost to a certainty, and being naturally of a brave
 disposition i did not quail under it, but deep sorrow for the past,
 mixed with regret for what i had lost, took hold upon me, and my
 soul thrilled within me to think it was all over. then there crept
 in upon me so gently, so lovingly, so unmistakably, a way of
 escape, and what was it after all? the old, old story over again,
 told in the simplest way: ‘there is no name under heaven whereby ye can be
 saved except that of the lord jesus christ.’ no
 words were spoken to me; my soul seemed to see my saviour in the
 spirit, and from that hour to this, nearly nine years now, there
 has never been in my life one doubt that the lord jesus christ and
 god the father both worked upon me that afternoon in july, both
 differently, and both in the most perfect love conceivable, and i
 rejoiced there and then in a conversion so astounding that the
 whole village heard of it in less than twenty-four
 hours.
“but a time of trouble was yet to come. the day
 after my conversion i went into the hay-field to lend a hand with
 the harvest, and not having made any promise to god to abstain or
 drink in moderation only, i took too much and came home drunk. my
 poor sister was heart-broken; and i felt ashamed of myself and got
 to my bedroom at once, where she followed me, weeping copiously.
 she said i had been converted and fallen away instantly. but
 although i was quite full of drink (not muddled, however), i knew
 that god's work begun in me was not going to be wasted. about
 midday i [pg
 ]made on my knees
 the first prayer before god for twenty years. i did not ask to be
 forgiven; i felt that was no good, for i would be sure to fall
 again. well, what did i do? i committed myself to him in the
 profoundest belief that my individuality was going to be destroyed,
 that he would take all from me, and i was willing. in such a
 surrender lies the secret of a holy life. from that hour drink has
 had no terrors for me: i never touch it, never want it. the same
 thing occurred with my pipe: after being a regular smoker from my
 twelfth year the desire for it went at once, and has never
 returned. so with every known sin, the deliverance in each case
 being permanent and complete. i have had no temptation since
 conversion, god seemingly having shut out satan from that course
 with me. he gets a free hand in other ways, but never on sins of
 the flesh. since i gave up to god all ownership in my own life, he
 has guided me in a thousand ways, and has opened my path in a way
 almost incredible to those who do not enjoy the blessing of a truly
 surrendered life.”
so much for our
 graduate of oxford, in whom you notice the complete abolition of an
 ancient appetite as one of the conversion's fruits.
the most curious
 record of sudden conversion with which i am acquainted is that of m.
 alphonse ratisbonne, a freethinking french jew, to catholicism, at
 rome in . in a letter to a clerical friend, written a few months
 later, the convert gives a palpitating account of the
 circumstances. the
 predisposing conditions appear to have been slight. he had an elder
 brother who had been converted and was a catholic priest. he was
 himself irreligious, and nourished an antipathy to the apostate
 brother and generally to his “cloth.”
 finding himself at rome in his twenty-ninth year, he fell in with a
 [pg ] french gentleman who tried to
 make a proselyte of him, but who succeeded no farther after two or
 three conversations than to get him to hang (half jocosely) a
 religious medal round his neck, and to accept and read a copy of a
 short prayer to the virgin. m. ratisbonne represents his own part in
 the conversations as having been of a light and chaffing order; but
 he notes the fact that for some days he was unable to banish the
 words of the prayer from his mind, and that the night before the
 crisis he had a sort of nightmare, in the imagery of which a black
 cross with no christ upon it figured. nevertheless, until noon of the
 next day he was free in mind and spent the time in trivial
 conversations. i now give his own words.
“if at this time any one had accosted me,
 saying: 
 ‘alphonse, in a quarter of an
 hour you shall be adoring jesus christ as your god and saviour; you
 shall lie prostrate with your face upon the ground in a humble
 church; you shall be smiting your breast at the foot of a priest;
 you shall pass the carnival in a college of jesuits to prepare
 yourself to receive baptism, ready to give your life for the
 catholic faith; you shall renounce the world and its pomps and
 pleasures; renounce your fortune, your hopes, and if need be, your
 betrothed; the affections of your family, the esteem of your
 friends, and your attachment to the jewish people; you shall have
 no other aspiration than to follow christ and bear his cross till
 death;’—if, i
 say, a prophet had come to me with such a prediction, i should have
 judged that only one person could be more mad than he,—whosoever,
 namely, might believe in the possibility of such senseless folly
 becoming true. and yet that folly is at present my only wisdom, my
 sole happiness.
“coming out of the café i met the carriage of
 monsieur b. [the proselyting friend]. he stopped and invited me in
 for a drive, but first asked me to wait for a few minutes whilst he
 attended to some duty at the church of san andrea delle fratte.
 instead of waiting in the carriage, i entered the church myself to
 look at it. the church of san andrea was poor, small, and
[pg ]empty; i believe that i found myself there almost
 alone. no work of art attracted my attention; and i passed my eyes
 mechanically over its interior without being arrested by any
 particular thought. i can only remember an entirely black dog which
 went trotting and turning before me as i mused. in an instant the
 dog had disappeared, the whole church had vanished, i no longer saw
 anything, ... or more truly i saw, o my god, one thing
 alone.
“heavens, how can i speak of it? oh no! human words
 cannot attain to expressing the inexpressible. any description,
 however sublime it might be, could be but a profanation of the
 unspeakable truth.
“i was there prostrate on the ground, bathed in my
 tears, with my heart beside itself, when m. b. called me back to
 life. i could not reply to the questions which followed from him
 one upon the other. but finally i took the medal which i had on my
 breast, and with all the effusion of my soul i kissed the image of
 the virgin, radiant with grace, which it bore. oh, indeed, it was
 she! it was indeed she! [what he had seen had been a vision of the
 virgin.]
“i did not know where i was: i did not know whether
 i was alphonse or another. i only felt myself changed and believed
 myself another me; i looked for myself in myself and did not find
 myself. in the bottom of my soul i felt an explosion of the most
 ardent joy; i could not speak; i had no wish to reveal what had
 happened. but i felt something solemn and sacred within me which
 made me ask for a priest. i was led to one; and there, alone, after
 he had given me the positive order, i spoke as best i could,
 kneeling, and with my heart still trembling. i could give no
 account to myself of the truth of which i had acquired a knowledge
 and a faith. all that i can say is that in an instant the bandage
 had fallen from my eyes; and not one bandage only, but the whole
 manifold of bandages in which i had been brought up. one after
 another they rapidly disappeared, even as the mud and ice disappear
 under the rays of the burning sun.
“i came out as from a sepulchre, from an abyss of
 darkness; and i was living, perfectly living. but i wept, for at
 the bottom [pg
 ]of that gulf i
 saw the extreme of misery from which i had been saved by an
 infinite mercy; and i shuddered at the sight of my iniquities,
 stupefied, melted, overwhelmed with wonder and with gratitude. you
 may ask me how i came to this new insight, for truly i had never
 opened a book of religion nor even read a single page of the bible,
 and the dogma of original sin is either entirely denied or
 forgotten by the hebrews of to-day, so that i had thought so little
 about it that i doubt whether i ever knew its name. but how came i,
 then, to this perception of it? i can answer nothing save this,
 that on entering that church i was in darkness altogether, and on
 coming out of it i saw the fullness of the light. i can explain the
 change no better than by the simile of a profound sleep or the
 analogy of one born blind who should suddenly open his eyes to the
 day. he sees, but cannot define the light which bathes him and by
 means of which he sees the objects which excite his wonder. if we
 cannot explain physical light, how can we explain the light which
 is the truth itself? and i think i remain within the limits of
 veracity when i say that without having any knowledge of the letter
 of religious doctrine, i now intuitively perceived its sense and
 spirit. better than if i saw them, i felt those hidden things; i felt them by the
 inexplicable effects they produced in me. it all happened in my
 interior mind; and those impressions, more rapid than thought,
 shook my soul, revolved and turned it, as it were, in another
 direction, towards other aims, by other paths. i express myself
 badly. but do you wish, lord, that i should inclose in poor and
 barren words sentiments which the heart alone can
 understand?”
i might multiply
 cases almost indefinitely, but these will suffice to show you how
 real, definite, and memorable an event a sudden conversion may be to
 him who has the experience. throughout the height of it he
 undoubtedly seems to himself a passive spectator or undergoer of an
 astounding process performed upon him from above. there is too much
 evidence of this for any doubt of it to be possible. theology,
 combining this fact with the doctrines of election and grace, has
 concluded that [pg
 ] the
 spirit of god is with us at these dramatic moments in a peculiarly
 miraculous way, unlike what happens at any other juncture of our
 lives. at that moment, it believes, an absolutely new nature is
 breathed into us, and we become partakers of the very substance of
 the deity.
that the
 conversion should be instantaneous seems called for on this view, and
 the moravian protestants appear to have been the first to see this
 logical consequence. the methodists soon followed suit, practically
 if not dogmatically, and a short time ere his death, john wesley
 wrote:—
“in london alone i found  members of our society
 who were exceeding clear in their experience, and whose testimony i
 could see no reason to doubt. and every one of these (without a
 single exception) has declared that his deliverance from sin was
 instantaneous; that the change was wrought in a moment. had half of
 these, or one third, or one in twenty, declared it was
gradually
wrought in them, i should have believed this, with regard to
them, and thought that 
some
were gradually sanctified and some
 instantaneously. but as i have not found, in so long a space of
 time, a single person speaking thus, i cannot but believe that
 sanctification is commonly, if not always, an instantaneous
 work.”
tyerman's life of wesley, i.
all this while the
 more usual sects of protestantism have set no such store by
 instantaneous conversion. for them as for the catholic church,
 christ's blood, the sacraments, and the individual's ordinary
 religious duties are practically supposed to suffice to his
 salvation, even though no acute crisis of self-despair and surrender
 followed by relief should be experienced. for methodism, on the
 contrary, unless there have been a crisis of this sort, salvation is
 only offered, not effectively received, and christ's sacrifice in so
 far forth is incomplete. methodism surely here follows, if not the
 healthier-minded, yet on [pg
 ] the
 whole the profounder spiritual instinct. the individual models which
 it has set up as typical and worthy of imitation are not only the
 more interesting dramatically, but psychologically they have been the
 more complete.
in the fully
 evolved revivalism of great britain and america we have, so to speak,
 the codified and stereotyped procedure to which this way of thinking
 has led. in spite of the unquestionable fact that saints of the
 once-born type exist, that there may be a gradual growth in holiness
 without a cataclysm; in spite of the obvious leakage (as one may say)
 of much mere natural goodness into the scheme of salvation;
 revivalism has always assumed that only its own type of religious
 experience can be perfect; you must first be nailed on the cross of
 natural despair and agony, and then in the twinkling of an eye be
 miraculously released.
it is natural that
 those who personally have traversed such an experience should carry
 away a feeling of its being a miracle rather than a natural process.
 voices are often heard, lights seen, or visions witnessed; automatic
 motor phenomena occur; and it always seems, after the surrender of
 the personal will, as if an extraneous higher power had flooded in
 and taken possession. moreover the sense of renovation, safety,
 cleanness, rightness, can be so marvelous and jubilant as well to
 warrant one's belief in a radically new substantial nature.
“conversion,” writes
 the new england puritan, joseph alleine, “is not the putting in a patch of holiness; but with
 the true convert holiness is woven into all his powers, principles,
 and practice. the sincere christian is quite a new fabric, from the
 foundation to the top-stone. he is a new man, a new
 creature.”
and jonathan edwards says in the same
 strain: “those
 gracious influences which are the effects of the spirit of
 god [pg
 ]are altogether
 supernatural—are quite different from anything that unregenerate
 men experience. they are what no improvement, or composition of
 natural qualifications or principles will ever produce; because
 they not only differ from what is natural, and from everything that
 natural men experience in degree and circumstances, but also in
 kind, and are of a nature far more excellent. from hence it follows
 that in gracious affections there are [also] new perceptions and
 sensations entirely different in their nature and kind from
 anything experienced by the [same] saints before they were
 sanctified.... the conceptions which the saints have of the
 loveliness of god, and that kind of delight which they experience
 in it, are quite peculiar, and entirely different from anything
 which a natural man can possess, or of which he can form any proper
 notion.”
and that such a
 glorious transformation as this ought of necessity to be preceded by
 despair is shown by edwards in another passage.
“surely it cannot be
 unreasonable,”
he says, “that before god delivers us from a state of sin
 and liability to everlasting woe, he should give us some
 considerable sense of the evil from which he delivers us, in order
 that we may know and feel the importance of salvation, and be
 enabled to appreciate the value of what god is pleased to do for
 us. as those who are saved are successively in two extremely
 different states—first in a state of condemnation and then in a
 state of justification and blessedness—and as god, in the salvation
 of men, deals with them as rational and intelligent creatures, it
 appears agreeable to this wisdom, that those who are saved should
 be made sensible of their being, in those two different states. in
 the first place, that they should be made sensible of their state
 of condemnation; and afterwards, of their state of deliverance and
 happiness.”
such quotations
 express sufficiently well for our purpose the doctrinal
 interpretation of these changes. whatever part suggestion and
 imitation may have played in producing them in men and women in
 excited assemblies, [pg
 they have at any rate been in countless individual instances an
 original and unborrowed experience. were we writing the story of the
 mind from the purely natural-history point of view, with no religious
 interest whatever, we should still have to write down man's liability
 to sudden and complete conversion as one of his most curious
 peculiarities.
what, now, must we
 ourselves think of this question? is an instantaneous conversion a
 miracle in which god is present as he is present in no change of
 heart less strikingly abrupt? are there two classes of human beings,
 even among the apparently regenerate, of which the one class really
 partakes of christ's nature while the other merely seems to do so?
 or, on the contrary, may the whole phenomenon of regeneration, even
 in these startling instantaneous examples, possibly be a strictly
 natural process, divine in its fruits, of course, but in one case
 more and in another less so, and neither more nor less divine in its
 mere causation and mechanism than any other process, high or low, of
 man's interior life?
before proceeding
 to answer this question, i must ask you to listen to some more
 psychological remarks. at our last lecture, i explained the shifting
 of men's centres of personal energy within them and the lighting up
 of new crises of emotion. i explained the phenomena as partly due to
 explicitly conscious processes of thought and will, but as due
 largely also to the subconscious incubation and maturing of motives
 deposited by the experiences of life. when ripe, the results hatch
 out, or burst into flower. i have now to speak of the subconscious
 region, in which such processes of flowering may occur, in a somewhat
 less vague way. i only regret that my limits of time here force me to
 be so short.[pg
the expression
 “field of consciousness” has but
 recently come into vogue in the psychology books. until quite lately
 the unit of mental life which figured most was the single
 “idea” supposed to be a definitely
 outlined thing. but at present psychologists are tending, first, to
 admit that the actual unit is more probably the total mental state,
 the entire wave of consciousness or field of objects present to the
 thought at any time; and, second, to see that it is impossible to
 outline this wave, this field, with any definiteness.
as our mental
 fields succeed one another, each has its centre of interest, around
 which the objects of which we are less and less attentively conscious
 fade to a margin so faint that its limits are unassignable. some
 fields are narrow fields and some are wide fields. usually when we
 have a wide field we rejoice, for we then see masses of truth
 together, and often get glimpses of relations which we divine rather
 than see, for they shoot beyond the field into still remoter regions
 of objectivity, regions which we seem rather to be about to perceive
 than to perceive actually. at other times, of drowsiness, illness, or
 fatigue, our fields may narrow almost to a point, and we find
 ourselves correspondingly oppressed and contracted.
different
 individuals present constitutional differences in this matter of
 width of field. your great organizing geniuses are men with
 habitually vast fields of mental vision, in which a whole programme
 of future operations will appear dotted out at once, the rays
 shooting far ahead into definite directions of advance. in common
 people there is never this magnificent inclusive view of a topic.
 they stumble along, feeling their way, as it were, from point to
 point, and often stop entirely. in certain diseased conditions
 consciousness is a mere spark, without memory of the past or thought
 of the future, and with the [pg
 present narrowed down to some one simple emotion or sensation of the
 body.
the important fact
 which this “field” formula
 commemorates is the indetermination of the margin. inattentively
 realized as is the matter which the margin contains, it is
 nevertheless there, and helps both to guide our behavior and to
 determine the next movement of our attention. it lies around us like
 a “magnetic field,” inside of which
 our centre of energy turns like a compass-needle, as the present
 phase of consciousness alters into its successor. our whole past
 store of memories floats beyond this margin, ready at a touch to come
 in; and the entire mass of residual powers, impulses, and knowledges
 that constitute our empirical self stretches continuously beyond it.
 so vaguely drawn are the outlines between what is actual and what is
 only potential at any moment of our conscious life, that it is always
 hard to say of certain mental elements whether we are conscious of
 them or not.
the ordinary
 psychology, admitting fully the difficulty of tracing the marginal
 outline, has nevertheless taken for granted, first, that all the
 consciousness the person now has, be the same focal or marginal,
 inattentive or attentive, is there in the “field” of the moment, all dim and impossible to
 assign as the latter's outline may be; and, second, that what is
 absolutely extra-marginal is absolutely non-existent, and cannot be a
 fact of consciousness at all.
and having reached
 this point, i must now ask you to recall what i said in my last
 lecture about the subconscious life. i said, as you may recollect,
 that those who first laid stress upon these phenomena could not know
 the facts as we now know them. my first duty now is to tell you what
 i meant by such a statement.[pg ]
i cannot but think
 that the most important step forward that has occurred in psychology
 since i have been a student of that science is the discovery, first
 made in , that, in certain subjects at least, there is not only
 the consciousness of the ordinary field, with its usual centre and
 margin, but an addition thereto in the shape of a set of memories,
 thoughts, and feelings which are extra-marginal and outside of the
 primary consciousness altogether, but yet must be classed as
 conscious facts of some sort, able to reveal their presence by
 unmistakable signs. i call this the most important step forward
 because, unlike the other advances which psychology has made, this
 discovery has revealed to us an entirely unsuspected peculiarity in
 the constitution of human nature. no other step forward which
 psychology has made can proffer any such claim as this.
in particular this
 discovery of a consciousness existing beyond the field, or
 subliminally as mr. myers terms it, casts light on many phenomena of
 religious biography. that is why i have to advert to it now, although
 it is naturally impossible for me in this place to give you any
 account of the evidence on which the admission of such a
 consciousness is based. you will find it set forth in many recent
 books, binet's alterations of personality being
 perhaps as good a one as any to recommend.
the human material
 on which the demonstration has been made has so far been rather
 limited and, in part at least, eccentric, consisting of unusually
 suggestible hypnotic subjects, and of hysteric patients. yet the
 elementary mechanisms of our life are presumably so uniform that what
 is shown to be true in a marked degree of some persons is probably
 true in some degree of all, and may in a few be true in an
 extraordinarily high degree.[pg ]
the most important
 consequence of having a strongly developed ultra-marginal life of
 this sort is that one's ordinary fields of consciousness are liable
 to incursions from it of which the subject does not guess the source,
 and which, therefore, take for him the form of unaccountable impulses
 to act, or inhibitions of action, of obsessive ideas, or even of
 hallucinations of sight or hearing. the impulses may take the
 direction of automatic speech or writing, the meaning of which the
 subject himself may not understand even while he utters it; and
 generalizing this phenomenon, mr. myers has given the name of
 automatism, sensory or motor,
 emotional or intellectual, to this whole sphere of effects, due to
 “uprushes” into the ordinary
 consciousness of energies originating in the subliminal parts of the
 mind.
the simplest
 instance of an automatism is the phenomenon of post-hypnotic
 suggestion, so-called. you give to a hypnotized subject, adequately
 susceptible, an order to perform some designated act—usual or
 eccentric, it makes no difference—after he wakes from his hypnotic
 sleep. punctually, when the signal comes or the time elapses upon
 which you have told him that the act must ensue, he performs it;—but
 in so doing he has no recollection of your suggestion, and he always
 trumps up an improvised pretext for his behavior if the act be of an
 eccentric kind. it may even be suggested to a subject to have a
 vision or to hear a voice at a certain interval after waking, and
 when the time comes the vision is seen or the voice heard, with no
 inkling on the subject's part of its source. in the wonderful
 explorations by binet, janet, breuer, freud, mason, prince, and
 others, of the subliminal consciousness of patients with hysteria, we
 have revealed to us whole systems of underground life, in the shape
 of memories of a painful sort which lead a [pg ] parasitic existence, buried outside of the
 primary fields of consciousness, and making irruptions thereinto with
 hallucinations, pains, convulsions, paralyses of feeling and of
 motion, and the whole procession of symptoms of hysteric disease of
 body and of mind. alter or abolish by suggestion these subconscious
 memories, and the patient immediately gets well. his symptoms were
 automatisms, in mr. myers's sense of the word. these clinical records
 sound like fairy-tales when one first reads them, yet it is
 impossible to doubt their accuracy; and, the path having been once
 opened by these first observers, similar observations have been made
 elsewhere. they throw, as i said, a wholly new light upon our natural
 constitution.
and it seems to me
 that they make a farther step inevitable. interpreting the unknown
 after the analogy of the known, it seems to me that hereafter,
 wherever we meet with a phenomenon of automatism, be it motor
 impulses, or obsessive idea, or unaccountable caprice, or delusion,
 or hallucination, we are bound first of all to make search whether it
 be not an explosion, into the fields of ordinary consciousness, of
 ideas elaborated outside of those fields in subliminal regions of the
 mind. we should look, therefore, for its source in the subject's
 subconscious life. in the hypnotic cases, we ourselves create the
 source by our suggestion, so we know it directly. in the hysteric
 cases, the lost memories which are the source have to be extracted
 from the patient's subliminal by a number of ingenious methods, for
 an account of which you must consult the books. in other pathological
 cases, insane delusions, for example, or psychopathic obsessions, the
 source is yet to seek, but by analogy it also should be in subliminal
 regions which improvements in our methods may yet conceivably put on
 tap. there lies the mechanism logically to be assumed,—but the
 assumption [pg
 involves a vast program of work to be done in the way of
 verification, in which the religious experiences of man must play
 their part.
and thus i return
 to our own specific subject of instantaneous conversions. you
 remember the cases of alline, bradley, brainerd, and the graduate of
 oxford converted at three in the afternoon. similar occurrences
 abound, some with and some without luminous visions, all with a sense
 of astonished happiness, and of being wrought on by a higher control.
 if, abstracting altogether from the question of their value for the
 future spiritual life of the individual, we take them on their
 psychological [pg
 side exclusively, so many peculiarities in them remind us of what we
 find outside of conversion that we are tempted to class them along
 with other automatisms, and to suspect that what makes the difference
 between a sudden and a gradual convert is not necessarily the
 presence of divine miracle in the case of one and of something less
 divine in that of the other, but rather a simple psychological
 peculiarity, the fact, namely, that in the recipient of the more
 instantaneous grace we have one of those subjects who are in
 possession of a large region in which mental work can go on
 subliminally, and from which invasive experiences, abruptly upsetting
 the equilibrium of the primary consciousness, may come.
i do not see why
 methodists need object to such a view. pray go back and recollect one
 of the conclusions to which i sought to lead you in my very first
 lecture. you may remember how i there argued against the notion that
 the worth of a thing can be decided by its origin. our spiritual
 judgment, i said, our opinion of the significance and value of a
 human event or condition, must be decided on empirical grounds
 exclusively. if the fruits for life of the state of
 conversion are good, we ought to idealize and venerate it, even
 though it be a piece of natural psychology; if not, we ought to make
 short work with it, no matter what supernatural being may have
 infused it.
well, how is it
 with these fruits? if we except the class of preëminent saints of
 whom the names illumine history, and consider only the usual run of
 “saints,” the shopkeeping
 church-members and ordinary youthful or middle-aged recipients of
 instantaneous conversion, whether at revivals or in the spontaneous
 course of methodistic growth, you will probably agree that no
 splendor worthy of a wholly supernatural creature fulgurates from
 [pg ] them, or sets them apart from
 the mortals who have never experienced that favor. were it true that
 a suddenly converted man as such is, as edwards says, of an
 entirely different kind from a natural man, partaking as he does
 directly of christ's substance, there surely ought to be some
 exquisite class-mark, some distinctive radiance attaching even to the
 lowliest specimen of this genus, to which no one of us could remain
 insensible, and which, so far as it went, would prove him more
 excellent than ever the most highly gifted among mere natural men.
 but notoriously there is no such radiance. converted men as a class
 are indistinguishable from natural men; some natural men even excel
 some converted men in their fruits; and no one ignorant of doctrinal
 theology could guess by mere every-day inspection of the “accidents” of the two groups of persons before
 him, that their substance differed as much as divine differs from
 human substance.
the believers in
 the non-natural character of sudden conversion have had practically
 to admit that there is no unmistakable class-mark distinctive of all
 true converts. the super-normal incidents, such as voices and visions
 and overpowering impressions of the meaning of suddenly presented
 scripture texts, the melting emotions and tumultuous affections
 connected with the crisis of change, may all come by way of nature,
 or worse still, be counterfeited by satan. the real witness of the
 spirit to the second birth is to be found only in the disposition of
 the genuine child of god, the permanently patient heart, the love of
 self eradicated. and this, it has to be admitted, [pg ] is also found in those who pass no
 crisis, and may even be found outside of christianity altogether.
throughout
 jonathan edwards's admirably rich and delicate description of the
 supernaturally infused condition, in his treatise on religious
 affections, there is not one decisive trait, not one mark, that
 unmistakably parts it off from what may possibly be only an
 exceptionally high degree of natural goodness. in fact, one could
 hardly read a clearer argument than this book unwittingly offers in
 favor of the thesis that no chasm exists between the orders of human
 excellence, but that here as elsewhere, nature shows continuous
 differences, and generation and regeneration are matters of
 degree.
all which denial
 of two objective classes of human beings separated by a chasm must
 not leave us blind to the extraordinary momentousness of the fact of
 his conversion to the individual himself who gets converted. there
 are higher and lower limits of possibility set to each personal life.
 if a flood but goes above one's head, its absolute elevation becomes
 a matter of small importance; and when we touch our own upper limit
 and live in our own highest centre of energy, we may call ourselves
 saved, no matter how much higher some one else's centre may be. a
 small man's salvation will always be a great salvation and the
 greatest of all facts for him, and we should remember this
 when the fruits of our ordinary evangelicism look discouraging. who
 knows how much less ideal still the lives of these spiritual grubs
 and earthworms, these crumps and stigginses, might have been, if such
 poor grace as they have received had never touched them at all?[pg ]
if we roughly
 arrange human beings in classes, each class standing for a grade of
 spiritual excellence, i believe we shall find natural men and
 converts both sudden and gradual in all the classes. the forms which
 regenerative change effects have, then, no general spiritual
 significance, but only a psychological significance. we have seen how
 starbuck's laborious statistical studies tend to assimilate
 conversion to ordinary spiritual growth. another american
 psychologist, prof. george a. coe, has
 analyzed the cases of seventy-seven converts or ex-candidates for
 conversion, known to him, and the results strikingly confirm the view
 that sudden conversion is connected with the possession of an active
 subliminal self. examining his subjects with reference to their
 hypnotic sensibility and to such automatisms as hypnagogic
 hallucinations, odd impulses, religious dreams about the time of
 their conversion, etc., he found these relatively much more frequent
 in the group of converts whose transformation had been “striking,” “striking” transformation being defined as a
 change which, though not necessarily instantaneous, seems to the
 subject of it to be distinctly different from a process of growth,
 however rapid.
 candidates for conversion at revivals are, as you know, often
 disappointed: they experience nothing striking. professor coe had a
 number of persons of this class among his seventy-seven subjects, and
 they almost all, when tested by hypnotism, proved to belong to a
 subclass which he [pg
 calls “spontaneous,” that is, fertile
 in self-suggestions, as distinguished from a “passive” subclass, to which most of the subjects
 of striking transformation belonged. his inference is that
 self-suggestion of impossibility had prevented the influence upon
 these persons of an environment which, on the more “passive” subjects, had easily brought forth the
 effects they looked for. sharp distinctions are difficult in these
 regions, and professor coe's numbers are small. but his methods were
 careful, and the results tally with what one might expect; and they
 seem, on the whole, to justify his practical conclusion, which is
 that if you should expose to a converting influence a subject in whom
 three factors unite: first, pronounced emotional sensibility; second,
 tendency to automatisms; and third, suggestibility of the passive
 type; you might then safely predict the result: there would be a
 sudden conversion, a transformation of the striking kind.
does this
 temperamental origin diminish the significance of the sudden
 conversion when it has occurred? not in the least, as professor coe
 well says; for “the ultimate test of
 religious values is nothing psychological, nothing definable in terms
 of how it
 happens, but something ethical, definable only in terms
 of what is
 attained.”
as we proceed
 farther in our inquiry we shall see that what is attained is often an
 altogether new level of spiritual vitality, a relatively heroic
 level, in which impossible things have become possible, and new
 energies and endurances are shown. the personality is changed, the
 man is born anew, whether or not his
 psychological idiosyncrasies are what give the particular shape to
 his metamorphosis. “sanctification” is
 the technical name of this result; and erelong examples of it shall
 be brought [pg
 before you. in this lecture i have still only to add a few remarks on
 the assurance and peace which fill the hour of change itself.
one word more,
 though, before proceeding to that point, lest the final purpose of my
 explanation of suddenness by subliminal activity be misunderstood. i
 do indeed believe that if the subject have no liability to such
 subconscious activity, or if his conscious fields have a hard rind of
 a margin that resists incursions from beyond it, his conversion must
 be gradual if it occur, and must resemble any simple growth into new
 habits. his possession of a developed subliminal self, and of a leaky
 or pervious margin, is thus a conditio sine qua
 non of the subject's becoming converted in the
 instantaneous way. but if you, being orthodox christians, ask me as a
 psychologist whether the reference of a phenomenon to a subliminal
 self does not exclude the notion of the direct presence of the deity
 altogether, i have to say frankly that as a psychologist i do not see
 why it necessarily should. the lower manifestations of the
 subliminal, indeed, fall within the resources of the personal
 subject: his ordinary sense-material, inattentively taken in and
 subconsciously remembered and combined, will account for all his
 usual automatisms. but just as our primary wide-awake consciousness
 throws open our senses to the touch of things material, so it is
 logically conceivable that if there be higher spiritual
 agencies that can directly touch us, the psychological condition of
 their doing so might be our possession of a
 subconscious region which alone should yield access to them. the
 hubbub of the waking life might close a door which in the dreamy
 subliminal might remain ajar or open.
thus that
 perception of external control which is so [pg ] essential a feature in conversion might, in
 some cases at any rate, be interpreted as the orthodox interpret it:
 forces transcending the finite individual might impress him, on
 condition of his being what we may call a subliminal human specimen.
 but in any case the value of these forces would have to
 be determined by their effects, and the mere fact of their
 transcendency would of itself establish no presumption that they were
 more divine than diabolical.
i confess that
 this is the way in which i should rather see the topic left lying in
 your minds until i come to a much later lecture, when i hope once
 more to gather these dropped threads together into more definitive
 conclusions. the notion of a subconscious self certainly ought not at
 this point of our inquiry to be held to exclude
 all notion of a higher penetration. if there be higher powers able to
 impress us, they may get access to us only through the subliminal
 door. (see below, p. 
 ff.)
let us turn now to
 the feelings which immediately fill the hour of the conversion
 experience. the first one to be noted is just this sense of higher
 control. it is not always, but it is very often present. we saw
 examples of it in alline, bradley, brainerd, and elsewhere. the need
 of such a higher controlling agency is well expressed in the short
 reference which the eminent french protestant adolphe monod makes to
 the crisis of his own conversion. it was at naples in his early
 manhood, in the summer of .
“my sadness,” he
 says, “was without
 limit, and having got entire possession of me, it filled my life from
 the most indifferent external acts to the most secret thoughts, and
 corrupted at their source my feelings, my judgment, and my happiness.
 it was then that i saw that to expect to put a stop to this
 disorder [pg
 ]by my reason and my
 will, which were themselves diseased, would be to act like a blind
 man who should pretend to correct one of his eyes by the aid of the
 other equally blind one. i had then no resource save in
some influence from
 without. i remembered the
 promise of the holy ghost; and what the positive declarations of the
 gospel had never succeeded in bringing home to me, i learned at last
 from necessity, and believed, for the first time in my life, in this
 promise, in the only sense in which it answered the needs of my soul,
 in that, namely, of a real external supernatural action, capable of
 giving me thoughts, and taking them away from me, and exerted on me
 by a god as truly master of my heart as he is of the rest of nature.
 renouncing then all merit, all strength, abandoning all my personal
 resources, and acknowledging no other title to his mercy than my own
 utter misery, i went home and threw myself on my knees, and prayed as
 i never yet prayed in my life. from this day onwards a new interior
 life began for me: not that my melancholy had disappeared, but it had
 lost its sting. hope had entered into my heart, and once entered on
 the path, the god of jesus christ, to whom i then had learned to give
 myself up, little by little did the rest.”
it is needless to
 remind you once more of the admirable congruity of protestant
 theology with the structure of the mind as shown in such experiences.
 in the extreme of melancholy the self that consciously is can do
 absolutely nothing. it is completely bankrupt and without resource,
 and no works it can accomplish will avail. redemption from such
 subjective conditions must be a free gift or nothing, and grace
 through christ's accomplished sacrifice is such a gift.
“god,” says
 luther, 
 “is the god of the humble, the
 miserable, the oppressed, and the desperate, and of those that are
 brought even to nothing; and his nature is to give sight to
 the [pg
 ]blind, to comfort
 the broken-hearted, to justify sinners, to save the very desperate
 and damned. now that pernicious and pestilent opinion of man's own
 righteousness, which will not be a sinner, unclean, miserable, and
 damnable, but righteous and holy, suffereth not god to come to his
 own natural and proper work. therefore god must take this maul in
 hand (the law, i mean) to beat in pieces and bring to nothing this
 beast with her vain confidence, that she may so learn at length by
 her own misery that she is utterly forlorn and damned. but here
 lieth the difficulty, that when a man is terrified and cast down,
 he is so little able to raise himself up again and say,
‘now i am
 bruised and afflicted enough; now is the time of grace; now is the
 time to hear christ.’ the
 foolishness of man's heart is so great that then he rather seeketh
 to himself more laws to satisfy his conscience. ‘if i live,’ saith
 he, ‘i will amend
 my life: i will do this, i will do that.’ but
 here, except thou do the quite contrary, except thou send moses
 away with his law, and in these terrors and this anguish lay hold
 upon christ who died for thy sins, look for no salvation. thy cowl,
 thy shaven crown, thy chastity, thy obedience, thy poverty, thy
 works, thy merits? what shall all these do? what shall the law of
 moses avail? if i, wretched and damnable sinner, through works or
 merits could have loved the son of god, and so come to him, what
 needed he to deliver himself for me? if i, being a wretch and
 damned sinner, could be redeemed by any other price, what needed
 the son of god to be given? but because there was no other price,
 therefore he delivered neither sheep, ox, gold, nor silver, but
 even god himself, entirely and wholly ‘for me,’ even ‘for
 me,’ i say, a miserable, wretched sinner. now,
 therefore, i take comfort and apply this to myself. and this manner of applying is the very true
 force and power of faith. for he died not to justify the righteous, but the
un-righteous, and to make them the children of god.”
that is, the more
 literally lost you are, the more literally you are the very being
 whom christ's sacrifice has already saved. nothing in catholic
 theology, i imagine, [pg
 ] has
 ever spoken to sick souls as straight as this message from luther's
 personal experience. as protestants are not all sick souls, of course
 reliance on what luther exults in calling the dung of one's merits,
 the filthy puddle of one's own righteousness, has come to the front
 again in their religion; but the adequacy of his view of christianity
 to the deeper parts of our human mental structure is shown by its
 wildfire contagiousness when it was a new and quickening thing.
faith that christ
 has genuinely done his work was part of what luther meant by faith,
 which so far is faith in a fact intellectually conceived of. but this
 is only one part of luther's faith, the other part being far more
 vital. this other part is something not intellectual but immediate
 and intuitive, the assurance, namely, that i, this individual i, just
 as i stand, without one plea, etc., am saved now and forever.
professor leuba is
 undoubtedly right in contending that the conceptual belief about
 christ's work, although so often efficacious and antecedent, is
 really accessory and non-essential, and that the “joyous conviction” can also [pg ] come by far other channels than this
 conception. it is to the joyous conviction itself, the assurance that
 all is well with one, that he would give the name of faith
 par
 excellence.
“when the sense of estrangement,” he
 writes, 
 “fencing man about in a
 narrowly limited ego, breaks down, the individual finds
 himself ‘at one with
 all creation.’
he lives in the universal life; he and
 man, he and nature, he and god, are one. that state of confidence,
 trust, union with all things, following upon the achievement of
 moral unity, is the faith-state.
 various dogmatic beliefs suddenly, on the advent of the
 faith-state, acquire a character of certainty, assume a new
 reality, become an object of faith. as the ground of assurance here
 is not rational, argumentation is irrelevant. but such conviction
 being a mere casual offshoot of the faith-state, it is a gross
 error to imagine that the chief practical value of the faith-state
 is its power to stamp with the seal of reality certain particular
 theological conceptions.
on the contrary, its value lies solely
 in the fact that it is the psychic correlate of a biological growth
 reducing contending desires to one direction; a growth which
 expresses itself in new affective states and new reactions; in
 larger, nobler, more christ-like activities. the ground of the
 specific assurance in religious dogmas is then an affective
 experience. the objects of faith may even be preposterous; the
 affective stream will float them along, and invest them with
 unshakable certitude. the more startling the affective experience,
 the less explicable it seems, the easier it is to make it the
 carrier of unsubstantiated notions.”
the
 characteristics of the affective experience which, to avoid
 ambiguity, should, i think, be called the state of assurance rather
 than the faith-state, can be easily enumerated, though it is probably
 difficult to realize their [pg
 intensity, unless one have been through the experience one's
 self.
the central one is
 the loss of all the worry, the sense that all is ultimately well with
 one, the peace, the harmony, the willingness to
 be, even though the outer conditions should remain the
 same. the certainty of god's “grace,”
 of “justification,” “salvation,” is an objective belief that usually
 accompanies the change in christians; but this may be entirely
 lacking and yet the affective peace remain the same—you will
 recollect the case of the oxford graduate: and many might be given
 where the assurance of personal salvation was only a later result. a
 passion of willingness, of acquiescence, of admiration, is the
 glowing centre of this state of mind.
the second feature
 is the sense of perceiving truths not known before. the mysteries of
 life become lucid, as professor leuba says; and often, nay usually,
 the solution is more or less unutterable in words. but these more
 intellectual phenomena may be postponed until we treat of
 mysticism.
a third
 peculiarity of the assurance state is the objective change which the
 world often appears to undergo. “an
 appearance of newness beautifies every object,” the precise
 opposite of that other sort of newness, that dreadful unreality and
 strangeness in the appearance of the world, which is experienced by
 melancholy patients, and of which you may recall my relating some
 examples. this
 sense of clean and beautiful newness within and without is one of the
 commonest entries in conversion records. jonathan edwards thus
 describes it in himself:—
“after this my sense of divine things gradually
 increased, and became more and more lively, and had more of that
 inward sweetness. the appearance of everything was altered;
 there [pg
 ]seemed to be, as it
 were, a calm, sweet cast, or appearance of divine glory, in almost
 everything. god's excellency, his wisdom, his purity and love, seemed
 to appear in everything; in the sun, moon, and stars; in the clouds
 and blue sky; in the grass, flowers, and trees; in the water and all
 nature; which used greatly to fix my mind. and scarce anything, among
 all the works of nature, was so sweet to me as thunder and lightning;
 formerly nothing had been so terrible to me. before, i used to be
 uncommonly terrified with thunder, and to be struck with terror when
 i saw a thunderstorm rising; but now, on the contrary, it rejoices
 me.”
billy bray, an
 excellent little illiterate english evangelist, records his sense of
 newness thus:—
“i said to the lord: 
‘thou hast said, they that ask shall receive, they
 that seek shall find, and to them that knock the door shall be
 opened, and i have faith to believe it.’ in an
 instant the lord made me so happy that i cannot express what i
 felt. i shouted for joy. i praised god with my whole heart.... i
 think this was in november, , but what day of the month i do
 not know. i remember this, that everything looked new to me, the
 people, the fields, the cattle, the trees. i was like a new man in
 a new world. i spent the greater part of my time in praising the
 lord.”
starbuck and leuba
 both illustrate this sense of newness by quotations. i take the two
 following from starbuck's manuscript collection. one, a woman,
 says:—
“i was taken to a camp-meeting, mother and religious
 friends seeking and praying for my conversion. my emotional nature
 was stirred to its depths; confessions of depravity and pleading with
 god for salvation from sin made me oblivious of all surroundings. i
 plead for mercy, and had a vivid realization of forgiveness and
 renewal of my nature. when rising from my knees i exclaimed,
‘old things have
 passed away, all things 
 [pg ]have become
 new.’
it was like entering another world, a
 new state of existence. natural objects were glorified, my
 spiritual vision was so clarified that i saw beauty in every
 material object in the universe, the woods were vocal with heavenly
 music; my soul exulted in the love of god, and i wanted everybody
 to share in my joy.”
the next case is
 that of a man:—
“i know not how i got back into the encampment, but
 found myself staggering up to rev. ——'s holiness tent—and as it was
 full of seekers and a terrible noise inside, some groaning, some
 laughing, and some shouting, and by a large oak, ten feet from the
 tent, i fell on my face by a bench, and tried to pray, and every time
 i would call on god, something like a man's hand would strangle me by
 choking. i don't know whether there were any one around or near me or
 not. i thought i should surely die if i did not get help, but just as
 often as i would pray, that unseen hand was felt on my throat and my
 breath squeezed off. finally something said: ‘venture on the atonement, for you will die anyway if
 you don't.’
so i made one final struggle to call on
 god for mercy, with the same choking and strangling, determined to
 finish the sentence of prayer for mercy, if i did strangle and die,
 and the last i remember that time was falling back on the ground with
 the same unseen hand on my throat. i don't know how long i lay there
 or what was going on. none of my folks were present. when i came to
 myself, there were a crowd around me praising god. the very heavens
 seemed to open and pour down rays of light and glory. not for a
 moment only, but all day and night, floods of light and glory seemed
 to pour through my soul, and oh, how i was changed, and everything
 became new. my horses and hogs and even everybody seemed
 changed.”
this man's case
 introduces the feature of automatisms, which in suggestible subjects
 have been so startling a feature at revivals since, in edwards's,
 wesley's, and whitfield's time, these became a regular means of
 gospel propagation. they were at first supposed to be semi-miraculous
 [pg ] proofs of “power” on the part of the holy ghost; but great
 divergence of opinion quickly arose concerning them. edwards, in his
 thoughts on the revival of religion in new england, has to defend
 them against their critics; and their value has long been matter of
 debate even within the revivalistic denominations. they
 undoubtedly have no essential spiritual significance, and although
 their presence makes his conversion more memorable to the convert, it
 has never been proved that converts who show them are more
 persevering or fertile in good fruits than those whose change of
 heart has had less violent accompaniments. on the whole,
 unconsciousness, convulsions, visions, involuntary vocal utterances,
 and suffocation, must be simply ascribed to the subject's having a
 large subliminal region, involving nervous instability. this is often
 the subject's own view of the matter afterwards. one of starbuck's
 correspondents writes, for instance:—
“i have been through the experience which is known as
 conversion. my explanation of it is this: the subject works his
 emotions up to the breaking point, at the same time resisting their
 physical manifestations, such as quickened pulse, etc., and then
 suddenly lets them have their full sway over his body. the relief is
 something wonderful, and the pleasurable effects of the emotions are
 experienced to the highest degree.”
there is one form
 of sensory automatism which possibly deserves special notice on
 account of its frequency. i refer to hallucinatory or
 pseudo-hallucinatory luminous phenomena, photisms,
 to use the term of the psychologists. saint paul's blinding heavenly
 vision seems to have been a phenomenon of this sort; so does
 constantine's [pg
 cross in the sky. the last case but one which i quoted mentions
 floods of light and glory. henry alline mentions a light, about whose
 externality he seems uncertain. colonel gardiner sees a blazing
 light. president finney writes:—
“all at once the glory of god shone upon and round
 about me in a manner almost marvelous.... a light perfectly ineffable
 shone in my soul, that almost prostrated me on the ground.... this
 light seemed like the brightness of the sun in every direction. it
 was too intense for the eyes.... i think i knew something then, by
 actual experience, of that light that prostrated paul on the way to
 damascus. it was surely a light such as i could not have endured
 long.”
such reports of
 photisms are indeed far from uncommon. here is another from
 starbuck's collection, where the light appeared evidently
 external:—
“i had attended a series of revival services for
 about two weeks off and on. had been invited to the altar several
 times, all the time becoming more deeply impressed, when finally i
 decided i must do this, or i should be lost. realization of
 conversion was very vivid, like a ton's weight being lifted from my
 heart; a strange light which seemed to light up the whole room (for
 it was dark); a conscious supreme bliss which caused me to
 repeat ‘glory to
 god’ for a long time. decided to be god's child for life,
 and to give up my pet ambition, wealth and social position. my former
 habits of life hindered my growth somewhat, but i set about
 overcoming these systematically, and in one year my whole nature was
 changed, i.e., my ambitions were of a different
 order.”
here is another
 one of starbuck's cases, involving a luminous element:—
“i had been clearly converted twenty-three years
 before, or rather reclaimed. my experience in regeneration was then
 clear and spiritual, and i had not backslidden. but i
 experienced [pg
 ]entire
 sanctification on the th day of march, , about eleven o'clock
 in the morning. the particular accompaniments of the experience were
 entirely unexpected. i was quietly sitting at home singing selections
 out of pentecostal hymns. suddenly there seemed to be a something
 sweeping into me and inflating my entire being—such a sensation as i
 had never experienced before. when this experience came, i seemed to
 be conducted around a large, capacious, well-lighted room. as i
 walked with my invisible conductor and looked around, a clear thought
 was coined in my mind, ‘they are not
 here, they are gone.’ as soon
 as the thought was definitely formed in my mind, though no word was
 spoken, the holy spirit impressed me that i was surveying my own
 soul. then, for the first time in all my life, did i know that i was
 cleansed from all sin, and filled with the fullness of
 god.”
leuba quotes the
 case of a mr. peek, where the luminous affection reminds one of the
 chromatic hallucinations produced by the intoxicant cactus buds
 called mescal by the mexicans:—
“when i went in the morning into the fields to work,
 the glory of god appeared in all his visible creation. i well
 remember we reaped oats, and how every straw and head of the oats
 seemed, as it were, arrayed in a kind of rainbow glory, or to glow,
 if i may so express it, in the glory of god.”
[pg ]
the most
 characteristic of all the elements of the conversion crisis, and the
 last one of which i shall speak, is the ecstasy of happiness
 produced. we have already heard several accounts of it, but i will
 add a couple more. president finney's is so vivid that i give it at
 length:—
“all my feelings seemed to rise and flow out; and the
 utterance of my heart was, ‘i want to pour my whole soul out to
 god.’
the rising of my soul was so great
 that i rushed into the back room of the front office, to pray.
 there was no fire and no light in the room; nevertheless it
 appeared to me as if it were perfectly light. as i went in and shut
 the door after me, it seemed as if i met the lord jesus christ face
 to face. it did not occur to me then, nor did it for some time
 afterwards, that it was wholly a mental state. on the contrary, it
 seemed to me that i saw him as i would see any other man. he said
 nothing, but looked at me in such a manner as to break me
[pg ]right down at his feet. i have always since
 regarded this as a most remarkable state of mind; for it seemed to
 me a reality that he stood before me, and i fell down at his feet
 and poured out my soul to him. i wept aloud like a child, and made
 such confessions as i could with my choked utterance. it seemed to
 me that i bathed his feet with my tears; and yet i had no distinct
 impression that i touched him, that i recollect. i must have
 continued in this state for a good while; but my mind was too much
 absorbed with the interview to recollect anything that i said. but
 i know, as soon as my mind became calm enough to break off from the
 interview, i returned to the front office, and found that the fire
 that i had made of large wood was nearly burned out. but as i
 turned and was about to take a seat by the fire, i received a
 mighty baptism of the holy ghost. without any expectation of it,
 without ever having the thought in my mind that there was any such
 thing for me, without any recollection that i had ever heard the
 thing mentioned by any person in the world, the holy spirit
 descended upon me in a manner that seemed to go through me, body
 and soul. i could feel the impression, like a wave of electricity,
 going through and through me. indeed, it seemed to come in waves
 and waves of liquid love; for i could not express it in any other
 way. it seemed like the very breath of god. i can recollect
 distinctly that it seemed to fan me, like immense
 wings.
“no words can express the wonderful love that was
 shed abroad in my heart. i wept aloud with joy and love; and i do
 not know but i should say i literally bellowed out the unutterable
 gushings of my heart. these waves came over me, and over me, and
 over me, one after the other, until i recollect i cried out,
‘i shall die
 if these waves continue to pass over me.’ i
 said, ‘lord, i
 cannot bear any more;’ yet i
 had no fear of death.
“how long i continued in this state, with this
 baptism continuing to roll over me and go through me, i do not
 know. but i know it was late in the evening when a member of my
 choir—for i was the leader of the choir—came into the office to see
 me. he was a member of the church. he found me [pg ]in this
 state of loud weeping, and said to me, ‘mr. finney, what ails you?’ i
 could make him no answer for some time. he then said,
‘are you in
 pain?’
i gathered myself up as best i could,
 and replied, ‘no, but so
 happy that i cannot live.’ ”
i just now quoted
 billy bray; i cannot do better than give his own brief account of his
 post-conversion feelings:—
“i can't help praising the lord. as i go along the
 street, i lift up one foot, and it seems to say ‘glory’; and i
 lift up the other, and it seems to say ‘amen’; and so
 they keep up like that all the time i am
 walking.”
one word, before i
 close this lecture, on the question of the transiency or permanence
 of these abrupt conversions. some of you, i feel sure, knowing that
 numerous [pg
 backslidings and relapses take place, make of these their
 apperceiving mass for interpreting the whole subject, and dismiss it
 with a pitying smile at so much “hysterics.” psychologically, as well as
 religiously, however, this is shallow. it misses the point of serious
 interest, which is not so much the duration as the nature and quality
 of these shiftings of character to higher levels. men lapse from
 every level—we need no statistics to tell us that. love is, for
 instance, well known not to be irrevocable, yet, constant or
 inconstant, it reveals new flights and reaches of ideality while it
 lasts. these revelations form its significance to men and women,
 whatever be its duration. so with the conversion experience: that it
 should for even a short time show a human being what the high-water
 mark of his spiritual capacity is, this is what constitutes its
 importance,—an importance which backsliding cannot diminish, although
 persistence might increase it. as a matter of fact, all the more
 striking instances of conversion, all those, for instance, which i
 have quoted, have been permanent. the case of
 which there might be most doubt, on account of its suggesting so
 strongly an epileptoid seizure, was the case of m. ratisbonne. yet i
 am informed that ratisbonne's whole future was shaped by those few
 minutes. he gave up his project of marriage, became a priest, founded
 at jerusalem, where he went to dwell, a mission of nuns for the
 conversion of the jews, showed no tendency to use for egotistic
 purposes the notoriety given him by the peculiar circumstances of his
 conversion,—which, for the rest, he could seldom refer to without
 tears,—and in short remained an exemplary son of the church until he
 died, late in the 's, if i remember rightly.
the only
 statistics i know of, on the subject of the duration of conversions,
 are those collected for professor [pg ] starbuck by miss johnston. they embrace only a
 hundred persons, evangelical church-members, more than half being
 methodists. according to the statement of the subjects themselves,
 there had been backsliding of some sort in nearly all the cases, 
 per cent. of the women,  per cent. of the men. discussing the
 returns more minutely, starbuck finds that only  per cent. are
 relapses from the religious faith which the conversion confirmed, and
 that the backsliding complained of is in most only a fluctuation in
 the ardor of sentiment. only six of the hundred cases report a change
 of faith. starbuck's conclusion is that the effect of conversion is
 to bring with it “a changed attitude towards
 life, which is fairly constant and permanent, although the feelings
 fluctuate.... in other words, the persons who have passed through
 conversion, having once taken a stand for the religious life, tend to
 feel themselves identified with it, no matter how much their
 religious enthusiasm declines.”
[pg ]
lectures xi, xii, and xiii.
 saintliness.
the last lecture
 left us in a state of expectancy. what may the practical fruits for
 life have been, of such movingly happy conversions as those we heard
 of? with this question the really important part of our task opens,
 for you remember that we began all this empirical inquiry not merely
 to open a curious chapter in the natural history of human
 consciousness, but rather to attain a spiritual judgment as to the
 total value and positive meaning of all the religious trouble and
 happiness which we have seen. we must, therefore, first describe the
 fruits of the religious life, and then we must judge them. this
 divides our inquiry into two distinct parts. let us without further
 preamble proceed to the descriptive task.
it ought to be the
 pleasantest portion of our business in these lectures. some small
 pieces of it, it is true, may be painful, or may show human nature in
 a pathetic light, but it will be mainly pleasant, because the best
 fruits of religious experience are the best things that history has
 to show. they have always been esteemed so; here if anywhere is the
 genuinely strenuous life; and to call to mind a succession of such
 examples as i have lately had to wander through, though it has been
 only in the reading of them, is to feel encouraged and uplifted and
 washed in better moral air.
the highest
 flights of charity, devotion, trust, patience, bravery to which the
 wings of human nature have spread [pg ] themselves have been flown for religious
 ideals. i can do no better than quote, as to this, some remarks which
 sainte-beuve in his history of port-royal makes on the results of
 conversion or the state of grace.
“even from the purely human point of view,”
 sainte-beuve says, “the phenomenon of grace
 must still appear sufficiently extraordinary, eminent, and rare, both
 in its nature and in its effects, to deserve a closer study. for the
 soul arrives thereby at a certain fixed and invincible state, a state
 which is genuinely heroic, and from out of which the greatest deeds
 which it ever performs are executed. through all the different forms
 of communion, and all the diversity of the means which help to
 produce this state, whether it be reached by a jubilee, by a general
 confession, by a solitary prayer and effusion, whatever in short be
 the place and the occasion, it is easy to recognize that it is
 fundamentally one state in spirit and in fruits. penetrate a little
 beneath the diversity of circumstances, and it becomes evident that
 in christians of different epochs it is always one and the same
 modification by which they are affected: there is veritably a single
 fundamental and identical spirit of piety and charity, common to
 those who have received grace; an inner state which before all things
 is one of love and humility, of infinite confidence in god, and of
 severity for one's self, accompanied with tenderness for others. the
 fruits peculiar to this condition of the soul have the same savor in
 all, under distant suns and in different surroundings, in saint
 teresa of avila just as in any moravian brother of
 herrnhut.”
sainte-beuve has
 here only the more eminent instances of regeneration in mind, and
 these are of course the instructive ones for us also to consider.
 these devotees [pg
 have often laid their course so differently from other men that,
 judging them by worldly law, we might be tempted to call them
 monstrous aberrations from the path of nature. i begin, therefore, by
 asking a general psychological question as to what the inner
 conditions are which may make one human character differ so extremely
 from another.
i reply at once
 that where the character, as something distinguished from the
 intellect, is concerned, the causes of human diversity lie chiefly in
 our differing susceptibilities of emotional
 excitement, and in the different impulses
 and inhibitions which these bring in their train. let me
 make this more clear.
speaking
 generally, our moral and practical attitude, at any given time, is
 always a resultant of two sets of forces within us, impulses pushing
 us one way and obstructions and inhibitions holding us back.
 “yes! yes!” say the impulses;
 “no! no!” say the inhibitions. few
 people who have not expressly reflected on the matter realize how
 constantly this factor of inhibition is upon us, how it contains and
 moulds us by its restrictive pressure almost as if we were fluids
 pent within the cavity of a jar. the influence is so incessant that
 it becomes subconscious. all of you, for example, sit here with a
 certain constraint at this moment, and entirely without express
 consciousness of the fact, because of the influence of the occasion.
 if left alone in the room, each of you would probably involuntarily
 rearrange himself, and make his attitude more “free and easy.” but proprieties and their
 inhibitions snap like cobwebs if any great emotional excitement
 supervenes. i have seen a dandy appear in the street with his face
 covered with shaving-lather because a house across the way was on
 fire; and a woman will run among strangers in her nightgown if
 [pg ] it be a question of saving her
 baby's life or her own. take a self-indulgent woman's life in
 general. she will yield to every inhibition set by her disagreeable
 sensations, lie late in bed, live upon tea or bromides, keep indoors
 from the cold. every difficulty finds her obedient to its
 “no.” but make a mother of her, and
 what have you? possessed by maternal excitement, she now confronts
 wakefulness, weariness, and toil without an instant of hesitation or
 a word of complaint. the inhibitive power of pain over her is
 extinguished wherever the baby's interests are at stake. the
 inconveniences which this creature occasions have become, as james
 hinton says, the glowing heart of a great joy, and indeed are now the
 very conditions whereby the joy becomes most deep.
this is an example
 of what you have already heard of as the “expulsive power of a higher affection.” but be
 the affection high or low, it makes no difference, so long as the
 excitement it brings be strong enough. in one of henry drummond's
 discourses he tells of an inundation in india where an eminence with
 a bungalow upon it remained unsubmerged, and became the refuge of a
 number of wild animals and reptiles in addition to the human beings
 who were there. at a certain moment a royal bengal tiger appeared
 swimming towards it, reached it, and lay panting like a dog upon the
 ground in the midst of the people, still possessed by such an agony
 of terror that one of the englishmen could calmly step up with a
 rifle and blow out its brains. the tiger's habitual ferocity was
 temporarily quelled by the emotion of fear, which became sovereign,
 and formed a new centre for his character.
sometimes no
 emotional state is sovereign, but many contrary ones are mixed
 together. in that case one hears [pg ] both “yeses” and
 “noes,” and the “will” is called on then to solve the conflict.
 take a soldier, for example, with his dread of cowardice impelling
 him to advance, his fears impelling him to run, and his propensities
 to imitation pushing him towards various courses if his comrades
 offer various examples. his person becomes the seat of a mass of
 interferences; and he may for a time simply waver, because no one
 emotion prevails. there is a pitch of intensity, though, which, if
 any emotion reach it, enthrones that one as alone effective and
 sweeps its antagonists and all their inhibitions away. the fury of
 his comrades' charge, once entered on, will give this pitch of
 courage to the soldier; the panic of their rout will give this pitch
 of fear. in these sovereign excitements, things ordinarily impossible
 grow natural because the inhibitions are annulled. their “no! no!” not only is not heard, it does not
 exist. obstacles are then like tissue-paper hoops to the circus
 rider—no impediment; the flood is higher than the dam they make.
 “lass sie betteln gehn wenn sie hungrig
 sind!” cries the grenadier, frantic over his emperor's
 capture, when his wife and babes are suggested; and men pent into a
 burning theatre have been known to cut their way through the crowd
 with knives.[pg ]
one mode of
 emotional excitability is exceedingly important in the composition of
 the energetic character, from its peculiarly destructive power over
 inhibitions. i mean what in its lower form is mere irascibility,
 susceptibility to wrath, the fighting temper; and what in subtler
 ways manifests itself as impatience, grimness, earnestness, severity
 of character. earnestness means willingness to live with energy,
 though energy bring pain. the pain may be pain to other people or
 pain to one's self—it makes little difference; for when the strenuous
 mood is on one, the aim is to break something, no matter whose or
 what. nothing annihilates an inhibition as irresistibly as anger does
 it; for, as moltke says of war, destruction pure and simple is its
 essence. this is what makes it so invaluable an ally of every other
 passion. the sweetest delights are trampled on with a ferocious
 pleasure the moment they offer themselves as checks to a cause by
 which our higher indignations are elicited. it costs then nothing to
 drop friendships, to renounce long-rooted privileges and possessions,
 to break with social ties. rather do we take a stern joy in the
 astringency and desolation; and what is called weakness of character
 seems in most cases to consist in the inaptitude for these
 sacrificial moods, of which one's own inferior self and its pet
 softnesses must often be the targets and the victims.[pg ]
so far i have
 spoken of temporary alterations produced by shifting excitements in
 the same person. but the relatively fixed differences of character of
 different persons are explained in a precisely similar way. in a man
 with a liability to a special sort of emotion, whole ranges of
 inhibition habitually vanish, which in other men remain effective,
 and other sorts of inhibition take their place. when a person has an
 inborn genius for certain emotions, his life differs strangely from
 that of ordinary people, for none of their usual deterrents check
 him. your mere aspirant to a type of character, on the contrary, only
 shows, when your natural lover, fighter, or reformer, with whom the
 passion is a gift of nature, comes along, the hopeless inferiority of
 voluntary to instinctive action. he has deliberately to overcome his
 inhibitions; the genius with the inborn passion seems not to feel
 them at all; he is free of all that inner friction and nervous waste.
 to a fox, a garibaldi, a general booth, a john brown, a louise
 michel, a bradlaugh, the obstacles omnipotent over those around them
 are as if non-existent. could the rest of us so disregard them, there
 might be many such heroes, for many have the wish to live for similar
 ideals, and only the adequate degree of inhibition-quenching fury is
 lacking.[pg ]
the difference
 between willing and merely wishing, between having ideals that are
 creative and ideals that are but pinings and regrets, thus depends
 solely either on the amount of steam-pressure chronically driving the
 character in the ideal direction, or on the amount of ideal
 excitement transiently acquired. given a certain amount of love,
 indignation, generosity, magnanimity, admiration, loyalty, or
 enthusiasm of self-surrender, the result is always the same. that
 whole raft of cowardly obstructions, which in tame persons and dull
 moods are sovereign impediments to action, sinks away at once. our
 conventionality, our
 shyness, laziness, and stinginess, our demands for precedent and
 permission, for guarantee and surety, our small suspicions,
 timidities, despairs, where are they now? severed like cobwebs,
 broken like bubbles in the sun—
“wo sind
 die sorge nun und noth
die mich noch gestern wollt'
 erschlaffen?
ich schäm' mich dess' im
 morgenroth.”
the flood we are
 borne on rolls them so lightly under that their very contact is
 unfelt. set free of them, we float and soar and sing. this auroral
 openness and [pg
 uplift gives to all creative ideal levels a bright and caroling
 quality, which is nowhere more marked than where the controlling
 emotion is religious. “the true monk,”
 writes an italian mystic, “takes nothing with
 him but his lyre.”
we may now turn
 from these psychological generalities to those fruits of the
 religious state which form the special subject of our present
 lecture. the man who lives in his religious centre of personal
 energy, and is actuated by spiritual enthusiasms, differs from his
 previous carnal self in perfectly definite ways. the new ardor which
 burns in his breast consumes in its glow the lower “noes” which formerly beset him, and keeps him
 immune against infection from the entire groveling portion of his
 nature. magnanimities once impossible are now easy; paltry
 conventionalities and mean incentives once tyrannical hold no sway.
 the stone wall inside of him has fallen, the hardness in his heart
 has broken down. the rest of us can, i think, imagine this by
 recalling our state of feeling in those temporary “melting moods” into which either the trials of
 real life, or the theatre, or a novel sometimes throw us. especially
 if we weep! for it is then as if our tears broke through an
 inveterate inner dam, and let all sorts of ancient peccancies and
 moral stagnancies drain away, leaving us now washed and soft of heart
 and open to every nobler leading. with most of us the customary
 hardness quickly returns, but not so with saintly persons. many
 saints, even as energetic ones as teresa and loyola, have possessed
 what the church traditionally reveres as a special grace, the
 so-called gift of tears. in these persons the melting mood seems to
 have held almost uninterrupted control. and as it is with tears and
 melting moods, so it is with [pg ] other exalted affections. their reign may come
 by gradual growth or by a crisis; but in either case it may have
 “come to stay.”
at the end of the
 last lecture we saw this permanence to be true of the general
 paramountcy of the higher insight, even though in the ebbs of
 emotional excitement meaner motives might temporarily prevail and
 backsliding might occur. but that lower temptations may remain
 completely annulled, apart from transient emotion and as if by
 alteration of the man's habitual nature, is also proved by
 documentary evidence in certain cases. before embarking on the
 general natural history of the regenerate character, let me convince
 you of this curious fact by one or two examples. the most numerous
 are those of reformed drunkards. you recollect the case of mr. hadley
 in the last lecture; the jerry mcauley water street mission abounds
 in similar instances. you
 also remember the graduate of oxford, converted at three in the
 afternoon, and getting drunk in the hay-field the next day, but after
 that permanently cured of his appetite. “from
 that hour drink has had no terrors for me: i never touch it, never
 want it. the same thing occurred with my pipe, ... the desire for it
 went at once and has never returned. so with every known sin, the
 deliverance in each case being permanent and complete. i have had no
 temptations since conversion.”
here is an
 analogous case from starbuck's manuscript collection:—
“i went into the old adelphi theatre, where there was
 a holiness meeting, ... and i began saying, ‘lord, lord, i must have this
 blessing.’
then what was to me an audible voice
 said: ‘are you willing
 to give up everything to the [pg ]lord?’ and
 question after question kept coming up, to all of which i
 said: ‘yes, lord; yes,
 lord!’
until this came: ‘why do you not accept it now?’ and i
 said: ‘i do,
 lord.’—i
 felt no particular joy, only a trust. just then the meeting closed,
 and, as i went out on the street, i met a gentleman smoking a fine
 cigar, and a cloud of smoke came into my face, and i took a long,
 deep breath of it, and praise the lord, all my appetite for it was
 gone. then as i walked along the street, passing saloons where the
 fumes of liquor came out, i found that all my taste and longing for
 that accursed stuff was gone. glory to god! ... [but] for ten or
 eleven long years [after that] i was in the wilderness with its ups
 and downs. my appetite for liquor never came
 back.”
the classic case
 of colonel gardiner is that of a man cured of sexual temptation in a
 single hour. to mr. spears the colonel said, “i was effectually cured of all inclination to that sin i
 was so strongly addicted to that i thought nothing but shooting me
 through the head could have cured me of it; and all desire and
 inclination to it was removed, as entirely as if i had been a sucking
 child; nor did the temptation return to this day.” mr.
 webster's words on the same subject are these: “one thing i have heard the colonel frequently say, that
 he was much addicted to impurity before his acquaintance with
 religion; but that, so soon as he was enlightened from above, he felt
 the power of the holy ghost changing his nature so wonderfully that
 his sanctification in this respect seemed more remarkable than in any
 other.”
such rapid
 abolition of ancient impulses and propensities reminds us so strongly
 of what has been observed as the result of hypnotic suggestion that
 it is difficult not to believe that subliminal influences play the
 decisive [pg
 part in these abrupt changes of heart, just as they do in
 hypnotism.
 suggestive therapeutics abound in records of cure, after a few
 sittings, of inveterate bad habits with which the patient, left to
 ordinary moral and physical influences, had struggled in vain. both
 drunkenness and sexual vice have been cured in this way, action
 through the subliminal seeming thus in many individuals to have the
 prerogative of inducing relatively stable change. if the grace of god
 miraculously operates, it probably operates through the subliminal
 door, then. but just how anything operates in this region
 is still unexplained, and we shall do well now to say good-by to the
 process of transformation
 altogether,—leaving it, if you like, a good deal of a psychological
 or theological mystery,—and to turn our attention to the fruits of
 the religious condition, no matter in what way they may have been
 produced.[pg ]
the collective
 name for the ripe fruits of religion in a character is
 saintliness. the
 saintly character is the character for which spiritual emotions are
 the habitual centre of the personal energy; and there is a certain
 composite photograph of universal saintliness, the same in all
 religions, of which the features can easily be traced.[pg ]
they are
 these:—
. a feeling of
 being in a wider life than that of this world's selfish little
 interests; and a conviction, not merely intellectual, but as it were
 sensible, of the existence of an ideal power. in christian
 saintliness this power is always personified as god; but abstract
 moral ideals, civic or patriotic utopias, or inner visions of
 holiness or right may also be felt as the true lords and enlargers of
 our life, in ways which i described in the lecture on the reality of
 the unseen.[pg ]
. a sense of the
 friendly continuity of the ideal power with our own life, and a
 willing self-surrender to its control.
. an immense
 elation and freedom, as the outlines of the confining selfhood melt
 down.
. a shifting of
 the emotional centre towards loving and harmonious affections,
 towards “yes, yes” and away from
 “no,” where the claims of the non-ego
 are concerned.
these fundamental
 inner conditions have characteristic practical consequences, as
 follows:—
a.
asceticism.—the self-surrender may
 become so passionate as to turn into self-immolation. it may then so
 overrule the ordinary inhibitions of the flesh that the saint finds
 positive pleasure in sacrifice and asceticism, measuring and
 expressing as they do the degree of his loyalty to the higher
 power.
b.
strength of
 soul.—the sense of enlargement of life may be so
 uplifting that personal motives and inhibitions, commonly omnipotent,
 become too insignificant for notice, and new reaches of patience and
 fortitude open out. fears and anxieties go, and blissful equanimity
 takes their place. come heaven, come hell, it makes no difference
 now!
“we forbid ourselves all seeking after popularity,
 all ambition to appear important. we pledge ourselves to abstain from
 falsehood, in all its degrees. we promise not to create or encourage
 illusions as to what is possible, by what we say or write. we promise
 to one another active sincerity, which strives to see truth clearly,
 and which never fears to declare what it sees.
“we promise deliberate resistance to the tidal
 waves of fashion, to the ‘booms’ and
 panics of the public mind, to all the forms of weakness and of
 fear.
“we forbid ourselves the use of sarcasm. of serious
 things we will speak seriously and unsmilingly, without banter and
 without the appearance of banter;—and even so of all things, for
 there are serious ways of being light of heart.
“we will put ourselves forward always for what we
 are, simply and without false humility, as well as without
 pedantry, affectation, or pride.”
[pg ]
c.
purity.—the shifting of the
 emotional centre brings with it, first, increase of purity. the
 sensitiveness to spiritual discords is enhanced, and the cleansing of
 existence from brutal and sensual elements becomes imperative.
 occasions of contact with such elements are avoided: the saintly life
 must deepen its spiritual consistency and keep unspotted from the
 world. in some temperaments this need of purity of spirit takes an
 ascetic turn, and weaknesses of the flesh are treated with relentless
 severity.
d.
charity.—the shifting of the
 emotional centre brings, secondly, increase of charity, tenderness
 for fellow-creatures. the ordinary motives to antipathy, which
 usually set such close bounds to tenderness among human beings, are
 inhibited. the saint loves his enemies, and treats loathsome beggars
 as his brothers.
i now have to give
 some concrete illustrations of these fruits of the spiritual tree.
 the only difficulty is to choose, for they are so abundant.
since the sense of
 presence of a higher and friendly power seems to be the fundamental
 feature in the spiritual life, i will begin with that.
in our narratives
 of conversion we saw how the world might look shining and
 transfigured to the convert, and,
 apart from anything acutely religious, we all have moments when the
 universal life seems to wrap us round with friendliness. in youth and
 health, in summer, in the woods or on the mountains, there come days
 when the weather seems all whispering with peace, hours when the
 goodness and beauty of existence enfold us like a dry warm climate,
 or chime through us as if our inner ears were subtly ringing with the
 world's security. thoreau writes:—[pg ]
“once, a few weeks after i came to the woods, for an
 hour i doubted whether the near neighborhood of man was not essential
 to a serene and healthy life. to be alone was somewhat unpleasant.
 but, in the midst of a gentle rain, while these thoughts prevailed, i
 was suddenly sensible of such sweet and beneficent society in nature,
 in the very pattering of the drops, and in every sight and sound
 around my house, an infinite and unaccountable friendliness all at
 once, like an atmosphere, sustaining me, as made the fancied
 advantages of human neighborhood insignificant, and i have never
 thought of them since. every little pine-needle expanded and swelled
 with sympathy and befriended me. i was so distinctly made aware of
 the presence of something kindred to me, that i thought no place
 could ever be strange to me again.”
in the christian
 consciousness this sense of the enveloping friendliness becomes most
 personal and definite. “the
 compensation,” writes a german author, “for the loss of that sense of personal independence
 which man so unwillingly gives up, is the disappearance of all
 fear from one's life, the quite
 indescribable and inexplicable feeling of an inner security,
 which one can only experience, but which, once it has been
 experienced, one can never forget.”
i find an
 excellent description of this state of mind in a sermon by mr.
 voysey:—
“it is the experience of myriads of trustful souls,
 that this sense of god's unfailing presence with them in their going
 out and in their coming in, and by night and day, is a source of
 absolute repose and confident calmness. it drives away all fear of
 what may befall them. that nearness of god is a constant security
 against terror and anxiety. it is not that they are at all assured of
 physical safety, or deem themselves protected by a love which is
 denied to others, but that they are in a state of mind equally ready
 to be safe or to meet with injury. if injury [pg ]befall them,
 they will be content to bear it because the lord is their keeper, and
 nothing can befall them without his will. if it be his will, then
 injury is for them a blessing and no calamity at all. thus and thus
 only is the trustful man protected and shielded from harm. and i for
 one—by no means a thick-skinned or hard-nerved man—am absolutely
 satisfied with this arrangement, and do not wish for any other kind
 of immunity from danger and catastrophe. quite as sensitive to pain
 as the most highly strung organism, i yet feel that the worst of it
 is conquered, and the sting taken out of it altogether, by the
 thought that god is our loving and sleepless keeper, and that nothing
 can hurt us without his will.”
more excited
 expressions of this condition are abundant in religious literature. i
 could easily weary you with their monotony. here is an account from
 mrs. jonathan edwards:—
“last night,” mrs.
 edwards writes, “was the
 sweetest night i ever had in my life. i never before, for so long a
 time together, enjoyed so much of the light and rest and sweetness of
 heaven in my soul, but without the least agitation of body during the
 whole time. part of the night i lay awake, sometimes asleep, and
 sometimes between sleeping and waking. but all night i continued in a
 constant, clear, and lively sense of the heavenly sweetness of
 christ's excellent love, of his nearness to me, and of my dearness to
 him; with an inexpressibly sweet calmness of soul in an entire rest
 in him. i seemed to myself to perceive a glow of divine love come
 down from the heart of christ in heaven into my heart in a constant
 stream, like a stream or pencil of sweet light. at the same time my
 heart and soul all flowed out in love to christ, so that there seemed
 to be a constant flowing and reflowing of heavenly love, and i
 appeared to myself to float or swim, in these bright, sweet beams,
 like the motes swimming in the beams of the sun, or the streams of
 his light which come in at the window. i think that what i felt each
 minute was worth more than all the outward comfort and pleasure which
 i had enjoyed in my whole life put [pg ]together. it was
 pleasure, without the least sting, or any interruption. it was a
 sweetness, which my soul was lost in; it seemed to be all that my
 feeble frame could sustain. there was but little difference,
 whether i was asleep or awake, but if there was any difference, the
 sweetness was greatest while i was asleep.
as i awoke early the next morning, it
 seemed to me that i had entirely done with myself. i felt that the
 opinions of the world concerning me were nothing, and that i had no
 more to do with any outward interest of my own than with that of a
 person whom i never saw. the glory of god seemed to swallow up
 every wish and desire of my heart.... after retiring to rest and
 sleeping a little while, i awoke, and was led to reflect on god's
 mercy to me, in giving me, for many years, a willingness to die;
 and after that, in making me willing to live, that i might do and
 suffer whatever he called me to here. i also thought how god had
 graciously given me an entire resignation to his will, with respect
 to the kind and manner of death that i should die; having been made
 willing to die on the rack, or at the stake, and if it were god's
 will, to die in darkness. but now it occurred to me, i used to
 think of living no longer than to the ordinary age of man. upon
 this i was led to ask myself, whether i was not willing to be kept
 out of heaven even longer; and my whole heart seemed immediately to
 reply: yes, a thousand years, and a thousand in horror, if it be
 most for the honor of god, the torment of my body being so great,
 awful, and overwhelming that none could bear to live in the country
 where the spectacle was seen, and the torment of my mind being
 vastly greater. and it seemed to me that i found a perfect
 willingness, quietness, and alacrity of soul in [pg ]consenting
 that it should be so, if it were most for the glory of god, so that
 there was no hesitation, doubt, or darkness in my mind. the glory
 of god seemed to overcome me and swallow me up, and every
 conceivable suffering, and everything that was terrible to my
 nature, seemed to shrink to nothing before it. this resignation
 continued in its clearness and brightness the rest of the night,
 and all the next day, and the night following, and on monday in the
 forenoon, without interruption or abatement.”
the annals of
 catholic saintship abound in records as ecstatic or more ecstatic
 than this. “often the assaults of the divine
 love,” it is said of the sister séraphique de la martinière,
 “reduced her almost to the point of death.
 she used tenderly to complain of this to god. ‘i cannot support it,’ she used to say.
 ‘bear gently with my weakness, or i shall
 expire under the violence of your love.’ ”
let me pass next
 to the charity and brotherly love which are a usual fruit of
 saintliness, and have always been reckoned essential theological
 virtues, however limited may have been the kinds of service which the
 particular theology enjoined. brotherly love would follow logically
 from the assurance of god's friendly presence, the notion of our
 brotherhood as men being an immediate inference from that of god's
 fatherhood of us all. when christ utters the precepts: “love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
 them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and
 persecute you,” he gives for a reason: “that ye may be the children of your father which is in
 heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good,
 and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.” one might
 therefore [pg
 ] be
 tempted to explain both the humility as to one's self and the charity
 towards others which characterize spiritual excitement, as results of
 the all-leveling character of theistic belief. but these affections
 are certainly not mere derivatives of theism. we find them in
 stoicism, in hinduism, and in buddhism in the highest possible
 degree. they harmonize with paternal theism beautifully; but they
 harmonize with all reflection
 whatever upon the dependence of mankind on general causes; and we
 must, i think, consider them not subordinate but coördinate parts of
 that great complex excitement in the study of which we are engaged.
 religious rapture, moral enthusiasm, ontological wonder, cosmic
 emotion, are all unifying states of mind, in which the sand and grit
 of the selfhood incline to disappear, and tenderness to rule. the
 best thing is to describe the condition integrally as a
 characteristic affection to which our nature is liable, a region in
 which we find ourselves at home, a sea in which we swim; but not to
 pretend to explain its parts by deriving them too cleverly from one
 another. like love or fear, the faith-state is a natural psychic
 complex, and carries charity with it by organic consequence.
 jubilation is an expansive affection, and all expansive affections
 are self-forgetful and kindly so long as they endure.
we find this the
 case even when they are pathological in origin. in his instructive
 work, la tristesse et la joie, m.
 georges dumas compares together the melancholy and the joyous phase
 of circular insanity, and shows that, while selfishness characterizes
 the one, the other is marked by altruistic impulses. no human being
 so stingy and useless as was marie in her melancholy period! but the
 moment the happy period begins, “sympathy and
 kindness become her characteristic sentiments. she displays
 [pg ] a universal goodwill, not only
 of intention, but in act.... she becomes solicitous of the health of
 other patients, interested in getting them out, desirous to procure
 wool to knit socks for some of them. never since she has been under
 my observation have i heard her in her joyous period utter any but
 charitable opinions.” and
 later, dr. dumas says of all such joyous conditions that “unselfish sentiments and tender emotions are the only
 affective states to be found in them. the subject's mind is closed
 against envy, hatred, and vindictiveness, and wholly transformed into
 benevolence, indulgence, and mercy.”
there is thus an
 organic affinity between joyousness and tenderness, and their
 companionship in the saintly life need in no way occasion surprise.
 along with the happiness, this increase of tenderness is often noted
 in narratives of conversion. “i began to work
 for others”;—“i had more tender
 feeling for my family and friends”;—“i
 spoke at once to a person with whom i had been
 angry”;—“i felt for every one, and
 loved my friends better”;—“i felt
 every one to be my friend”;—these are so many expressions from
 the records collected by professor starbuck.
“when,” says
 mrs. edwards, continuing the narrative from which i made quotation a
 moment ago, “i arose on the
 morning of the sabbath, i felt a love to all mankind, wholly peculiar
 in its strength and sweetness, far beyond all that i had ever felt
 before. the power of that love seemed inexpressible. i thought, if i
 were surrounded by enemies, who were venting their malice and cruelty
 upon me, in tormenting me, it would still be impossible that i should
 cherish any feelings towards them but those of love, and pity, and
 ardent desires for their happiness. i never before felt so far from a
 disposition to judge and censure others, as i did that morning. i
 realized also, in [pg
 ]an unusual and very
 lively manner, how great a part of christianity lies in the
 performance of our social and relative duties to one another. the
 same joyful sense continued throughout the day—a sweet love to god
 and all mankind.”
whatever be the
 explanation of the charity, it may efface all usual human
 barriers.
here, for
 instance, is an example of christian non-resistance from richard
 weaver's autobiography. weaver was a collier, a semi-professional
 pugilist in his younger days, who became a much beloved evangelist.
 fighting, after drinking, seems to have been the sin to which he
 originally felt his flesh most perversely inclined. after his first
 conversion he had a backsliding, which consisted in pounding a man
 who had insulted a girl. feeling that, having once fallen, he might
 as well be hanged for a sheep as for a lamb, he got drunk and went
 and broke the jaw of another man who had lately challenged him to
 fight and taunted him with cowardice for refusing as a christian
 man;—i mention these incidents to show how genuine a change of heart
 is implied in the later conduct which he describes as
 follows:—[pg
“i went down the drift and found the boy crying
 because a fellow-workman was trying to take the wagon from him by
 force. i said to him:—
“ ‘tom, you mustn't take that
 wagon.’
“he swore at me, and called me a methodist devil. i
 told him that god did not tell me to let him rob me. he cursed
 again, and said he would push the wagon over me.
“ ‘well,’ i
 said, ‘let us see
 whether the devil and thee are stronger than the lord and
 me.’
“and the lord and i proving stronger than the devil
 and he, he had to get out of the way, or the wagon would have gone
 over him. so i gave the wagon to the boy. then said
 tom:—
“ ‘i've a good mind to smack thee on the
 face.’
“ ‘well,’ i
 said, ‘if that will
 do thee any good, thou canst do it.’ so he
 struck me on the face.
“i turned the other cheek to him, and said,
‘strike
 again.’
“he struck again and again, till he had struck me
 five times. i turned my cheek for the sixth stroke; but he turned
 away cursing. i shouted after him: ‘the lord forgive thee, for i do, and the lord save
 thee.’
“this was on a saturday; and when i went home from
 the coal-pit my wife saw my face was swollen, and asked what was
 the matter with it. i said: ‘i've been fighting, and i've given a man a good
 thrashing.’
“she burst out weeping, and said,
‘o richard,
 what made you fight?’ then
 i told her all about it; and she thanked the lord i had not struck
 back.
“but the lord had struck, and his blows have more
 effect than man's. monday came. the devil began to tempt me,
 saying: ‘the other men
 will laugh at thee for allowing tom to treat thee as he did on
 saturday.’
i cried, ‘get thee behind me, satan;’—and
 went on my way to the coal-pit.
“tom was the first man i saw. i said
‘good-morning,’ but
 got no reply.
“he went down first. when i got down, i was
 surprised to see him sitting on the wagon-road waiting for me. when
 i came to him he burst into tears and said: ‘richard, will you forgive me for striking
 you?’[pg ]
“ ‘i have forgiven thee,’ said
 i; ‘ask god to
 forgive thee. the lord bless thee.’ i
 gave him my hand, and we went each to his work.”
“love your enemies!” mark you, not simply those
 who happen not to be your friends, but your enemies,
 your positive and active enemies. either this is a mere oriental
 hyperbole, a bit of verbal extravagance, meaning only that we should,
 as far as we can, abate our animosities, or else it is sincere and
 literal. outside of certain cases of intimate individual relation, it
 seldom has been taken literally. yet it makes one ask the question:
 can there in general be a level of emotion so unifying, so
 obliterative of differences between man and man, that even enmity may
 come to be an irrelevant circumstance and fail to inhibit the
 friendlier interests aroused? if positive well-wishing could attain
 so supreme a degree of excitement, those who were swayed by it might
 well seem superhuman beings. their life would be morally discrete
 from the life of other men, and there is no saying, in the absence of
 positive experience of an authentic kind,—for there are few active
 examples in our scriptures, and the buddhistic examples are
 legendary,—what
 the effects might be: they might conceivably transform the world.
psychologically
 and in principle, the precept “love your
 enemies” is not self-contradictory. it is merely the extreme
 limit of a kind of magnanimity with which, in the shape of pitying
 tolerance of our oppressors, we are fairly familiar. yet if radically
 followed, it would involve such a breach with our instinctive springs
 of action as a whole, and with the present world's arrangements,
 [pg ] that a critical point would
 practically be passed, and we should be born into another kingdom of
 being. religious emotion makes us feel that other kingdom to be close
 at hand, within our reach.
the inhibition of
 instinctive repugnance is proved not only by the showing of love to
 enemies, but by the showing of it to any one who is personally
 loathsome. in the annals of saintliness we find a curious mixture of
 motives impelling in this direction. asceticism plays its part; and
 along with charity pure and simple, we find humility or the desire to
 disclaim distinction and to grovel on the common level before god.
 certainly all three principles were at work when francis of assisi
 and ignatius loyola exchanged their garments with those of filthy
 beggars. all three are at work when religious persons consecrate
 their lives to the care of leprosy or other peculiarly unpleasant
 diseases. the nursing of the sick is a function to which the
 religious seem strongly drawn, even apart from the fact that church
 traditions set that way. but in the annals of this sort of charity we
 find fantastic excesses of devotion recorded which are only
 explicable by the frenzy of self-immolation simultaneously aroused.
 francis of assisi kisses his lepers; margaret mary alacoque, francis
 xavier, st. john of god, and others are said to have cleansed the
 sores and ulcers of their patients with their respective tongues; and
 the lives of such saints as elizabeth of hungary and madame de
 chantal are full of a sort of reveling in hospital purulence,
 disagreeable to read of, and which makes us admire and shudder at the
 same time.
so much for the
 human love aroused by the faith-state. let me next speak of the
 equanimity, resignation, fortitude, and patience which it
 brings.[pg
“a paradise of inward tranquillity” seems to be
 faith's usual result; and it is easy, even without being religious
 one's self, to understand this. a moment back, in treating of the
 sense of god's presence, i spoke of the unaccountable feeling of
 safety which one may then have. and, indeed, how can it possibly fail
 to steady the nerves, to cool the fever, and appease the fret, if one
 be sensibly conscious that, no matter what one's difficulties for the
 moment may appear to be, one's life as a whole is in the keeping of a
 power whom one can absolutely trust? in deeply religious men the
 abandonment of self to this power is passionate. whoever not only
 says, but feels, “god's will be done,” is mailed against every
 weakness; and the whole historic array of martyrs, missionaries, and
 religious reformers is there to prove the tranquil-mindedness, under
 naturally agitating or distressing circumstances, which
 self-surrender brings.
the temper of the
 tranquil-mindedness differs, of course, according as the person is of
 a constitutionally sombre or of a constitutionally cheerful cast of
 mind. in the sombre it partakes more of resignation and submission;
 in the cheerful it is a joyous consent. as an example of the former
 temper, i quote part of a letter from professor lagneau, a venerated
 teacher of philosophy who lately died, a great invalid, at
 paris:—
“my life, for the success of which you send good
 wishes, will be what it is able to be. i ask nothing from it, i
 expect nothing from it. for long years now i exist, think, and act,
 and am worth what i am worth, only through the despair which is my
 sole strength and my sole foundation. may it preserve for me, even in
 these last trials to which i am coming, the courage to do without the
 desire of deliverance. i ask nothing more from the source whence all
 strength cometh, and if that is granted, your wishes will have been
 accomplished.”
[pg ]
there is something
 pathetic and fatalistic about this, but the power of such a tone as a
 protection against outward shocks is manifest. pascal is another
 frenchman of pessimistic natural temperament. he expresses still more
 amply the temper of self-surrendering submissiveness:—
“deliver me, lord,” he
 writes in his prayers, “from the
 sadness at my proper suffering which self-love might give, but put
 into me a sadness like your own. let my sufferings appease your
 choler. make them an occasion for my conversion and salvation. i ask
 you neither for health nor for sickness, for life nor for death; but
 that you may dispose of my health and my sickness, my life and my
 death, for your glory, for my salvation, and for the use of the
 church and of your saints, of whom i would by your grace be one. you
 alone know what is expedient for me; you are the sovereign master; do
 with me according to your will. give to me, or take away from me,
 only conform my will to yours. i know but one thing, lord, that it is
 good to follow you, and bad to offend you. apart from that, i know
 not what is good or bad in anything. i know not which is most
 profitable to me, health or sickness, wealth or poverty, nor anything
 else in the world. that discernment is beyond the power of men or
 angels, and is hidden among the secrets of your providence, which i
 adore, but do not seek to fathom.”
when we reach more
 optimistic temperaments, the resignation grows less passive. examples
 are sown so broadcast throughout history that i might well pass on
 without citation. as it is, i snatch at the first that occurs to my
 mind. madame guyon, a frail creature physically, was yet of a happy
 native disposition. she went through many perils with admirable
 serenity of soul. after being sent to prison for heresy,—
“some of my friends,” she
 writes, 
 “wept bitterly at the hearing
 of it, but such was my state of acquiescence and resignation
[pg ]that it failed to draw any tears from me.... there
 appeared to be in me then, as i find it to be in me now, such an
 entire loss of what regards myself, that any of my own interests
 gave me little pain or pleasure; ever wanting to will or wish for
 myself only the very thing which god does.” in
 another place she writes: “we all of us came near perishing in a river which
 we found it necessary to pass. the carriage sank in the quicksand.
 others who were with us threw themselves out in excessive fright.
 but i found my thoughts so much taken up with god that i had no
 distinct sense of danger. it is true that the thought of being
 drowned passed across my mind, but it cost no other sensation or
 reflection in me than this—that i felt quite contented and willing
 it were so, if it were my heavenly father's
 choice.”
sailing from nice to genoa, a storm
 keeps her eleven days at sea. “as the irritated waves dashed round
 us,” she writes, “i could not help experiencing a certain degree of
 satisfaction in my mind. i pleased myself with thinking that those
 mutinous billows, under the command of him who does all things
 rightly, might probably furnish me with a watery grave. perhaps i
 carried the point too far, in the pleasure which i took in thus
 seeing myself beaten and bandied by the swelling waters. those who
 were with me took notice of my intrepidity.”
the contempt of
 danger which religious enthusiasm produces may be even more buoyant
 still. i take an example from that charming recent autobiography,
 “with christ at sea,” by frank bullen.
 a couple of days after he went through the conversion on shipboard of
 which he there gives an account,—
“it was blowing stiffly,” he
 writes, 
 “and we were carrying a press
 of canvas to get north out of the bad weather. shortly after four
 bells we hauled down the flying-jib, and i sprang out astride the
 boom to furl it. i was sitting astride the boom when suddenly it
 gave way with me. the sail slipped through my fingers, and i fell
 backwards, hanging head downwards [pg ]over the seething
 tumult of shining foam under the ship's bows, suspended by one
 foot. but i felt only high exultation in my certainty of eternal
 life. although death was divided from me by a hair's breadth, and i
 was acutely conscious of the fact, it gave me no sensation but joy.
 i suppose i could have hung there no longer than five seconds, but
 in that time i lived a whole age of delight. but my body asserted
 itself, and with a desperate gymnastic effort i regained the boom.
 how i furled the sail i don't know, but i sang at the utmost pitch
 of my voice praises to god that went pealing out over the dark
 waste of waters.”
the annals of
 martyrdom are of course the signal field of triumph for religious
 imperturbability. let me cite as an example the statement of a humble
 sufferer, persecuted as a huguenot under louis xiv.:—
“they shut all the doors,” blanche
 gamond writes, “and i saw six
 women, each with a bunch of willow rods as thick as the hand could
 hold, and a yard long. he gave me the order, ‘undress yourself,’ which i
 did. he said, ‘you are leaving
 on your shift; you must take it off.’ they
 had so little patience that they took it off themselves, and i was
 naked from the waist up. they brought a cord with which they tied me
 to a beam in the kitchen. they drew the cord tight with all their
 strength and asked me, ‘does it hurt
 you?’
and then they discharged their fury
 upon me, exclaiming as they struck me, ‘pray now to your god.’ it
 was the roulette woman who held this language. but at this moment i
 received the greatest consolation that i can ever receive in my
 life, since i had the honor of being whipped for the name of
 christ, and in addition of being crowned with his mercy and his
 consolations. why can i not write down the inconceivable
 influences, consolations, and peace which i felt interiorly? to
 understand them one must have passed by the same trial; they were
 so great that i was ravished, for there where afflictions abound
 grace is given superabundantly. in vain the women cried,
‘we must
 double our blows; she does not feel them, for she neither speaks
 nor [pg
 ]cries.’ and
 how should i have cried, since i was swooning with happiness
 within?”
the transition
 from tenseness, self-responsibility, and worry, to equanimity,
 receptivity, and peace, is the most wonderful of all those shiftings
 of inner equilibrium, those changes of the personal centre of energy,
 which i have analyzed so often; and the chief wonder of it is that it
 so often comes about, not by doing, but by simply relaxing and
 throwing the burden down. this abandonment of self-responsibility
 seems to be the fundamental act in specifically religious, as
 distinguished from moral practice. it antedates theologies and is
 independent of philosophies. mind-cure, theosophy, stoicism, ordinary
 neurological hygiene, insist on it as emphatically as christianity
 does, and it is capable of entering into closest marriage with every
 speculative creed.
 christians who have it strongly live in what is called “recollection,” and are never anxious about the
 future, nor worry over the outcome of the day. of saint catharine of
 genoa it is said that “she took cognizance of
 things, only as they were presented to her in succession, moment by
 moment.” to her holy soul, “the divine moment was the present moment,... and when
 the present moment was estimated in itself and in its relations, and
 when the duty that was involved in it was accomplished, it was
 permitted to pass away as if it had never been, and to give way to
 the facts and duties of the moment which came after.”[pg ]
hinduism,
 mind-cure, and theosophy all lay great emphasis upon this
 concentration of the consciousness upon the moment at hand.
the next religious
 symptom which i will note is what i have called purity of life. the
 saintly person becomes exceedingly sensitive to inner inconsistency
 or discord, and mixture and confusion grow intolerable. all the
 mind's objects and occupations must be ordered with reference to the
 special spiritual excitement which is now its keynote. whatever is
 unspiritual taints the pure water of the soul and is repugnant. mixed
 with this exaltation of the moral sensibilities there is also an
 ardor of sacrifice, for the beloved deity's sake, of everything
 unworthy of him. sometimes the spiritual ardor is so sovereign that
 purity is achieved at a stroke—we have seen examples. usually it is a
 more gradual conquest. billy bray's account of his abandonment of
 tobacco is a good example of the latter form of achievement.
“i had been a smoker as well as a drunkard, and i
 used to love my tobacco as much as i loved my meat, and i would
 rather go down into the mine without my dinner than without my pipe.
 in the days of old, the lord spoke by the mouths of his servants, the
 prophets; now he speaks to us by the spirit of his son. i had not
 only the feeling part of religion, but i could hear the small, still
 voice within speaking to me. when i took the pipe to smoke, it would
 be applied within, ‘it is an idol,
 a lust; worship the lord with clean lips.’ so, i
 felt it was not right to smoke. the lord also sent a woman to
 convince me. i was one day in a house, and i took out my pipe to
 light it at the fire, and mary hawke—for that was the woman's
 name—said, ‘do you not feel
 it is wrong to smoke?’ i said
 that i felt something inside telling me that it was an idol, a lust,
 and she said that was the lord. then i said, ‘now, i must give it up, for the lord is telling me
 of it inside, and the woman outside, [pg ]so the tobacco
 must go, love it as i may.’ there
 and then i took the tobacco out of my pocket, and threw it into the
 fire, and put the pipe under my foot, ‘ashes to ashes, dust to dust.’and i
 have not smoked since. i found it hard to break off old habits, but
 i cried to the lord for help, and he gave me strength, for he has
 said, ‘call upon me
 in the day of trouble, and i will deliver thee.’ the
 day after i gave up smoking i had the toothache so bad that i did
 not know what to do. i thought this was owing to giving up the
 pipe, but i said i would never smoke again, if i lost every tooth
 in my head. i said, ‘lord, thou
 hast told us my yoke is easy and my burden is
 light,’
and when i said that, all the pain
 left me. sometimes the thought of the pipe would come back to me
 very strong; but the lord strengthened me against the habit, and,
 bless his name, i have not smoked since.”
bray's biographer writes that after he had given
 up smoking, he thought that he would chew a little, but he
 conquered this dirty habit, too. “on one occasion,” bray
 said, “when at a
 prayer-meeting at hicks mill, i heard the lord say to me,
‘worship me
 with clean lips.’
so, when we got up from our knees, i
 took the quid out of my mouth and ‘whipped 'en’[threw
 it] under the form. but, when we got on our knees again, i put
 another quid into my mouth. then the lord said to me again,
‘worship me
 with clean lips.’
so i took the quid out of my mouth,
 and whipped 'en under the form again, and said, ‘yes, lord, i will.’ from
 that time i gave up chewing as well as smoking, and have been a
 free man.”
the ascetic forms
 which the impulse for veracity and purity of life may take are often
 pathetic enough. the early quakers, for example, had hard battles to
 wage against the worldliness and insincerity of the ecclesiastical
 christianity of their time. yet the battle that cost them most wounds
 was probably that which they fought in defense of their own right to
 social veracity and sincerity in their thee-ing and thou-ing, in not
 doffing the hat or giving titles of respect. it was laid on george
 fox [pg ] that these
 conventional customs were a lie and a sham, and the whole body of his
 followers thereupon renounced them, as a sacrifice to truth, and so
 that their acts and the spirit they professed might be more in
 accord.
“when the lord sent me into the
 world,”
says fox in his journal,
“he forbade me
 to put off my hat to any, high or low: and i was required to
‘thee’ and ‘thou’ all
 men and women, without any respect to rich or poor, great or small.
 and as i traveled up and down, i was not to bid people
 good-morning, or good-evening, neither might i bow or scrape with
 my leg to any one. this made the sects and professions rage. oh!
 the rage that was in the priests, magistrates, professors, and
 people of all sorts: and especially in priests and professors: for
 though ‘thou’ to a
 single person was according to their accidence and grammar rules,
 and according to the bible, yet they could not bear to hear it: and
 because i could not put off my hat to them, it set them all into a
 rage.... oh! the scorn, heat, and fury that arose! oh! the blows,
 punchings, beatings, and imprisonments that we underwent for not
 putting off our hats to men! some had their hats violently plucked
 off and thrown away, so that they quite lost them. the bad language
 and evil usage we received on this account is hard to be expressed,
 besides the danger we were sometimes in of losing our lives for
 this matter, and that by the great professors of christianity, who
 thereby discovered they were not true believers. and though it was
 but a small thing in the eye of man, yet a wonderful confusion it
 brought among all professors and priests: but, blessed be the lord,
 many came to see the vanity of that custom of putting off hats to
 men, and felt the weight of truth's testimony against
 it.”
in the
 autobiography of thomas elwood, an early quaker, who at one time was
 secretary to john milton, we find an exquisitely quaint and candid
 account of the trials he underwent both at home and abroad, in
 following fox's canons of sincerity. the anecdotes are too lengthy
 for citation; but elwood sets down his manner of feeling [pg ] about these things in a shorter passage,
 which i will quote as a characteristic utterance of spiritual
 sensibility:—
“by this divine light, then,” says
 elwood, 
 “i saw that though i had not
 the evil of the common uncleanliness, debauchery, profaneness, and
 pollutions of the world to put away, because i had, through the
 great goodness of god and a civil education, been preserved out of
 those grosser evils, yet i had many other evils to put away and to
 cease from; some of which were not by the world, which lies in
 wickedness ( john v. ), accounted evils, but by the light of
 christ were made manifest to me to be evils, and as such condemned
 in me.
“as particularly those fruits and effects of pride
 that discover themselves in the vanity and superfluity of apparel;
 which i took too much delight in. this evil of my doings i was
 required to put away and cease from; and judgment lay upon me till
 i did so.
“i took off from my apparel those unnecessary
 trimmings of lace, ribbons, and useless buttons, which had no real
 service, but were set on only for that which was by mistake called
 ornament; and i ceased to wear rings.
“again, the giving of flattering titles to men
 between whom and me there was not any relation to which such titles
 could be pretended to belong. this was an evil i had been much
 addicted to, and was accounted a ready artist in; therefore this
 evil also was i required to put away and cease from. so that
 thenceforward i durst not say, sir, master, my lord, madam (or my
 dame); or say your servant to any one to whom i did not stand in
 the real relation of a servant, which i had never done to
 any.
“again, respect of persons, in uncovering the head
 and bowing the knee or body in salutation, was a practice i had
 been much in the use of; and this, being one of the vain customs of
 the world, introduced by the spirit of the world, instead of the
 true honor which this is a false representation of, and used in
 deceit as a token of respect by persons one to another, who bear no
 real respect one to another; and besides this, being a
[pg ]type and a proper emblem of that divine honor
 which all ought to pay to almighty god, and which all of all sorts,
 who take upon them the christian name, appear in when they offer
 their prayers to him, and therefore should not be given to men;—i
 found this to be one of those evils which i had been too long
 doing; therefore i was now required to put it away and cease from
 it.
“again, the corrupt and unsound form of speaking in
 the plural number to a single person, you to one, instead of thou, contrary to the pure, plain, and single language
 of truth, thouto one, and you to more than one, which had always been used by
 god to men, and men to god, as well as one to another, from the
 oldest record of time till corrupt men, for corrupt ends, in later
 and corrupt times, to flatter, fawn, and work upon the corrupt
 nature in men, brought in that false and senseless way of
 speaking you to one, which has since corrupted the modern
 languages, and hath greatly debased the spirits and depraved the
 manners of men;—this evil custom i had been as forward in as
 others, and this i was now called out of and required to cease
 from.
“these and many more evil customs which had sprung
 up in the night of darkness and general apostasy from the truth and
 true religion were now, by the inshining of this pure ray of divine
 light in my conscience, gradually discovered to me to be what i
 ought to cease from, shun, and stand a witness
 against.”
these early
 quakers were puritans indeed. the slightest inconsistency between
 profession and deed jarred some of them to active protest. john
 woolman writes in his diary:—
“in these journeys i have been where much cloth hath
 been dyed; and have at sundry times walked over ground where much of
 their dyestuffs has drained away. this hath produced a longing in my
 mind that people might come into cleanness of spirit, cleanness of
 person, and cleanness about their houses [pg ]and garments.
 dyes being invented partly to please the eye, and partly to hide
 dirt, i have felt in this weak state, when traveling in dirtiness,
 and affected with unwholesome scents, a strong desire that the nature
 of dyeing cloth to hide dirt may be more fully
 considered.
“washing our garments to keep them sweet is
 cleanly, but it is the opposite to real cleanliness to hide dirt in
 them. through giving way to hiding dirt in our garments a spirit
 which would conceal that which is disagreeable is strengthened.
 real cleanliness becometh a holy people; but hiding that which is
 not clean by coloring our garments seems contrary to the sweetness
 of sincerity. through some sorts of dyes cloth is rendered less
 useful. and if the value of dyestuffs, and expense of dyeing, and
 the damage done to cloth, were all added together, and that cost
 applied to keeping all sweet and clean, how much more would real
 cleanliness prevail.
“thinking often on these things, the use of hats
 and garments dyed with a dye hurtful to them, and wearing more
 clothes in summer than are useful, grew more uneasy to me;
 believing them to be customs which have not their foundation in
 pure wisdom. the apprehension of being singular from my beloved
 friends was a strait upon me; and thus i continued in the use of
 some things, contrary to my judgment, about nine months. then i
 thought of getting a hat the natural color of the fur, but the
 apprehension of being looked upon as one affecting singularity felt
 uneasy to me. on this account i was under close exercise of mind in
 the time of our general spring meeting in , greatly desiring to
 be rightly directed; when, being deeply bowed in spirit before the
 lord, i was made willing to submit to what i apprehended was
 required of me; and when i returned home, got a hat of the natural
 color of the fur.
“in attending meetings, this singularity was a
 trial to me, and more especially at this time, as white hats were
 used by some who were fond of following the changeable modes of
 dress, and as some friends, who knew not from what motives i wore
 it, grew shy of me, i felt my way for a time shut up in the
 exercise of the ministry. some friends were apprehensive that my
 wearing such a hat savored of an affected singularity:
[pg ]those who spoke with me in a friendly way, i
 generally informed in a few words, that i believed my wearing it
 was not in my own will.”
when the craving
 for moral consistency and purity is developed to this degree, the
 subject may well find the outer world too full of shocks to dwell in,
 and can unify his life and keep his soul unspotted only by
 withdrawing from it. that law which impels the artist to achieve
 harmony in his composition by simply dropping out whatever jars, or
 suggests a discord, rules also in the spiritual life. to omit, says
 stevenson, is the one art in literature: “if
 i knew how to omit, i should ask no other knowledge.” and
 life, when full of disorder and slackness and vague superfluity, can
 no more have what we call character than literature can have it under
 similar conditions. so monasteries and communities of sympathetic
 devotees open their doors, and in their changeless order,
 characterized by omissions quite as much as constituted of actions,
 the holy-minded person finds that inner smoothness and cleanness
 which it is torture to him to feel violated at every turn by the
 discordancy and brutality of secular existence.
that the
 scrupulosity of purity may be carried to a fantastic extreme must be
 admitted. in this it resembles asceticism, to which further symptom
 of saintliness we had better turn next. the adjective “ascetic” is applied to conduct originating on
 diverse psychological levels, which i might as well begin by
 distinguishing from one another.
. asceticism may be a mere expression of organic
 hardihood, disgusted with too much ease.
. temperance in meat and drink, simplicity of
 apparel, [pg
 ]chastity, and
 non-pampering of the body generally, may be fruits of the love of
 purity, shocked by whatever savors of the sensual.
. they may also be fruits of love, that is, they
 may appeal to the subject in the light of sacrifices which he is
 happy in making to the deity whom he acknowledges.
. again, ascetic mortifications and torments may
 be due to pessimistic feelings about the self, combined with
 theological beliefs concerning expiation. the devotee may feel that
 he is buying himself free, or escaping worse sufferings hereafter,
 by doing penance now.
. in psychopathic persons, mortifications may be
 entered on irrationally, by a sort of obsession or fixed idea which
 comes as a challenge and must be worked off, because only thus does
 the subject get his interior consciousness feeling right
 again.
. finally, ascetic exercises may in rarer
 instances be prompted by genuine perversions of the bodily
 sensibility, in consequence of which normally pain-giving stimuli
 are actually felt as pleasures.
i will try to give
 an instance under each of these heads in turn; but it is not easy to
 get them pure, for in cases pronounced enough to be immediately
 classed as ascetic, several of the assigned motives usually work
 together. moreover, before citing any examples at all, i must invite
 you to some general psychological considerations which apply to all
 of them alike.
a strange moral
 transformation has within the past century swept over our western
 world. we no longer think that we are called on to face physical pain
 with equanimity. it is not expected of a man that he should either
 endure it or inflict much of it, and to listen to the recital of
 cases of it makes our flesh creep morally as well as physically. the
 way in which our ancestors [pg
 looked upon pain as an eternal ingredient of the world's order, and
 both caused and suffered it as a matter-of-course portion of their
 day's work, fills us with amazement. we wonder that any human beings
 could have been so callous. the result of this historic alteration is
 that even in the mother church herself, where ascetic discipline has
 such a fixed traditional prestige as a factor of merit, it has
 largely come into desuetude, if not discredit. a believer who
 flagellates or “macerates” himself
 to-day arouses more wonder and fear than emulation. many catholic
 writers who admit that the times have changed in this respect do so
 resignedly; and even add that perhaps it is as well not to waste
 feelings in regretting the matter, for to return to the heroic
 corporeal discipline of ancient days might be an extravagance.
where to seek the
 easy and the pleasant seems instinctive—and instinctive it appears to
 be in man; any deliberate tendency to pursue the hard and painful as
 such and for their own sakes might well strike one as purely
 abnormal. nevertheless, in moderate degrees it is natural and even
 usual to human nature to court the arduous. it is only the extreme
 manifestations of the tendency that can be regarded as a paradox.
the psychological
 reasons for this lie near the surface. when we drop abstractions and
 take what we call our will in the act, we see that it is a very
 complex function. it involves both stimulations and inhibitions; it
 follows generalized habits; it is escorted by reflective criticisms;
 and it leaves a good or a bad taste of itself behind, according to
 the manner of the performance. the result is that, quite apart from
 the immediate pleasure which any sensible experience may give us, our
 own general moral attitude in procuring or undergoing the experience
 brings with it a secondary satisfaction or distaste. some
 [pg ] men and women, indeed, there
 are who can live on smiles and the word “yes” forever. but for others (indeed for most),
 this is too tepid and relaxed a moral climate. passive happiness is
 slack and insipid, and soon grows mawkish and intolerable. some
 austerity and wintry negativity, some roughness, danger, stringency,
 and effort, some “no! no!” must be
 mixed in, to produce the sense of an existence with character and
 texture and power. the range of individual differences in this
 respect is enormous; but whatever the mixture of yeses and noes may
 be, the person is infallibly aware when he has struck it in the right
 proportion for him. this, he feels, is my
 proper vocation, this is the optimum, the law, the life for me to
 live. here i find the degree of equilibrium, safety, calm, and
 leisure which i need, or here i find the challenge, passion, fight,
 and hardship without which my soul's energy expires.
every individual
 soul, in short, like every individual machine or organism, has its
 own best conditions of efficiency. a given machine will run best
 under a certain steam-pressure, a certain amperage; an organism under
 a certain diet, weight, or exercise. you seem to do best, i heard a
 doctor say to a patient, at about  millimeters of arterial
 tension. and it is just so with our sundry souls: some are happiest
 in calm weather; some need the sense of tension, of strong volition,
 to make them feel alive and well. for these latter souls, whatever is
 gained from day to day must be paid for by sacrifice and inhibition,
 or else it comes too cheap and has no zest.
now when
 characters of this latter sort become religious, they are apt to turn
 the edge of their need of effort and negativity against their natural
 self; and the ascetic life gets evolved as a consequence.
when professor
 tyndall in one of his lectures tells us [pg ] that thomas carlyle put him into his bath-tub
 every morning of a freezing berlin winter, he proclaimed one of the
 lowest grades of asceticism. even without carlyle, most of us find it
 necessary to our soul's health to start the day with a rather cool
 immersion. a little farther along the scale we get such statements as
 this, from one of my correspondents, an agnostic:—
“often at night in my warm bed i would feel ashamed
 to depend so on the warmth, and whenever the thought would come over
 me i would have to get up, no matter what time of night it was, and
 stand for a minute in the cold, just so as to prove my
 manhood.”
such cases as
 these belong simply to our head . in the next case we probably have
 a mixture of heads  and —the asceticism becomes far more systematic
 and pronounced. the writer is a protestant, whose sense of moral
 energy could doubtless be gratified on no lower terms, and i take his
 case from starbuck's manuscript collection.
“i practiced fasting and mortification of the flesh.
 i secretly made burlap shirts, and put the burrs next the skin, and
 wore pebbles in my shoes. i would spend nights flat on my back on the
 floor without any covering.”
the roman church
 has organized and codified all this sort of thing, and given it a
 market-value in the shape of “merit.”
 but we see the cultivation of hardship cropping out under every sky
 and in every faith, as a spontaneous need of character. thus we read
 of channing, when first settled as a unitarian minister, that—
“he was now more simple than ever, and seemed to have
 become incapable of any form of self-indulgence. he took the smallest
 room in the house for his study, though he might easily have
 commanded one more light, airy, and in every way more suitable; and
 chose for his sleeping chamber an attic which he
[pg ]shared with a younger brother. the furniture of
 the latter might have answered for the cell of an anchorite, and
 consisted of a hard mattress on a cot-bedstead, plain wooden chairs
 and table, with matting on the floor. it was without fire, and to
 cold he was throughout life extremely sensitive; but he never
 complained or appeared in any way to be conscious of
 inconvenience. ‘i
 recollect,’
says his brother, ‘after one most severe night, that in the morning
 he sportively thus alluded to his suffering: “if my bed were my country, i should be somewhat
 like bonaparte: i have no control except over the part which i
 occupy; the instant i move, frost takes
 possession.” ’ in
 sickness only would he change for the time his apartment and accept
 a few comforts. the dress too that he habitually adopted was of
 most inferior quality; and garments were constantly worn which the
 world would call mean, though an almost feminine neatness preserved
 him from the least appearance of neglect.”
channing's
 asceticism, such as it was, was evidently a compound of hardihood and
 love of purity. the democracy which is an offshoot of the enthusiasm
 of humanity, and of which i will speak later under the head of the
 cult of poverty, doubtless bore also a share. certainly there was no
 pessimistic element in his case. in the next case we have a strongly
 pessimistic element, so that it belongs under head . john cennick
 was methodism's first lay preacher. in  he was convicted of sin,
 while walking in cheapside,—
“and at once left off song-singing, card-playing, and
 attending theatres. sometimes he wished to go to a popish monastery,
 to spend his life in devout retirement. at other times he longed to
 live in a cave, sleeping on fallen leaves, and feeding on forest
 fruits. he fasted long and often, and prayed nine times a day....
 fancying dry bread too great an indulgence for so great a sinner as
 himself, he began to feed on potatoes, acorns, crabs, and grass; and
 often wished that he could live on roots [pg ]and herbs. at
 length, in , he found peace with god, and went on his way
 rejoicing.”
in this poor man
 we have morbid melancholy and fear, and the sacrifices made are to
 purge out sin, and to buy safety. the hopelessness of christian
 theology in respect of the flesh and the natural man generally has,
 in systematizing fear, made of it one tremendous incentive to
 self-mortification. it would be quite unfair, however, in spite of
 the fact that this incentive has often been worked in a mercenary way
 for hortatory purposes, to call it a mercenary incentive. the impulse
 to expiate and do penance is, in its first intention, far too
 immediate and spontaneous an expression of self-despair and anxiety
 to be obnoxious to any such reproach. in the form of loving
 sacrifice, of spending all we have to show our devotion, ascetic
 discipline of the severest sort may be the fruit of highly optimistic
 religious feeling.
m. vianney, the
 curé of ars, was a french country priest, whose holiness was
 exemplary. we read in his life the following account of his inner
 need of sacrifice:—
“ ‘on this path,’ m.
 vianney said, ‘it is only the
 first step that costs. there is in mortification a balm and a savor
 without which one cannot live when once one has made their
 acquaintance. there is but one way in which to give one's self to
 god,—that is, to give one's self entirely, and to keep nothing for
 one's self. the little that one keeps is only good to double one and
 make one suffer.’
accordingly he imposed it on himself
 that he should never smell a flower, never drink when parched with
 thirst, never drive away a fly, never show disgust before a repugnant
 object, never complain of anything that had to do with his personal
 comfort, never sit down, never lean upon his elbows when he was
 kneeling. the curé of ars was very sensitive to cold, but he would
 never take means to protect [pg ]himself against it.
 during a very severe winter, one of his missionaries contrived a
 false floor to his confessional and placed a metal case of hot water
 beneath. the trick succeeded, and the saint was deceived:
‘god is very
 good,’
he said with emotion.
‘this year,
 through all the cold, my feet have always been
 warm.’ ”
in this case the
 spontaneous impulse to make sacrifices for the pure love of god was
 probably the uppermost conscious motive. we may class it, then, under
 our head . some authors think that the impulse to sacrifice is the
 main religious phenomenon. it is a prominent, a universal phenomenon
 certainly, and lies deeper than any special creed. here, for
 instance, is what seems to be a spontaneous example of it, simply
 expressing what seemed right at the time between the individual and
 his maker. cotton mather, the new england puritan divine, is
 generally reputed a rather grotesque pedant; yet what is more
 touchingly simple than his relation of what happened when his wife
 came to die?
“when i saw to what a point of resignation i was now
 called of the lord,” he
 says, “i resolved,
 with his help, therein to glorify him. so, two hours before my lovely
 consort expired, i kneeled by her bedside, and i took into my two
 hands a dear hand, the dearest in the world. with her thus in my
 hands, i solemnly and sincerely gave her up unto the lord: and in
 token of my real resignation,
 i gently put her out of my hands, and laid away a most lovely hand,
 resolving that i would never touch it more. this was the hardest,
 and perhaps the bravest action that ever i did. she ... told me
 that she signed and sealed my act of resignation. and though before
 that she called for me continually, she after this never asked for
 me any more.”
[pg ]
father vianney's
 asceticism taken in its totality was simply the result of a permanent
 flood of high spiritual enthusiasm, longing to make proof of itself.
 the roman church has, in its incomparable fashion, collected all the
 motives towards asceticism together, and so codified them that any
 one wishing to pursue christian perfection may find a practical
 system mapped out for him in any one of a number of ready-made
 manuals. the
 dominant church notion of perfection is of course the negative one of
 avoidance of sin. sin proceeds from concupiscence, and concupiscence
 from our carnal passions and temptations, chief of which are pride,
 sensuality in all its forms, and the loves of worldly excitement and
 possession. all these sources of sin must be resisted; and discipline
 and austerities are a most efficacious mode of meeting them. hence
 there are always in these books chapters on self-mortification. but
 whenever a procedure is codified, the more delicate spirit of it
 evaporates, and if we wish the undiluted ascetic spirit,—the passion
 of self-contempt wreaking itself on the poor flesh, the divine
 irrationality of devotion making a sacrificial gift of all it has
 (its sensibilities, namely) to the object of its adoration,—we must
 go to autobiographies, or other individual documents.
saint john of the
 cross, a spanish mystic who flourished—or rather who existed, for
 there was little that suggested flourishing about him—in the
 sixteenth century, will supply a passage suitable for our
 purpose.
“first of all, carefully excite in yourself an
 habitual affectionate will in all things to imitate jesus christ. if
 anything agreeable offers itself to your senses, yet does not at the
 same [pg
 ]time tend purely to
 the honor and glory of god, renounce it and separate yourself from it
 for the love of christ, who all his life long had no other taste or
 wish than to do the will of his father whom he called his meat and
 nourishment. for example, you take satisfaction in
hearing
of things in which the glory of god
 bears no part. deny yourself this satisfaction, mortify your wish
 to listen. you take pleasure in seeing
objects which do not raise your mind
 to god: refuse yourself this pleasure, and turn away your eyes. the
 same with conversations and all other things. act similarly, so far
 as you are able, with all the operations of the senses, striving to
 make yourself free from their yokes.
“the radical remedy lies in the mortification of
 the four great natural passions, joy, hope, fear, and grief. you
 must seek to deprive these of every satisfaction and leave them as
 it were in darkness and the void. let your soul therefore turn
 always:
“not to what is most easy, but to what is
 hardest;
“not to what tastes best, but to what is most
 distasteful;
“not to what most pleases, but to what
 disgusts;
“not to matter of consolation, but to matter for
 desolation rather;
“not to rest, but to labor;
“not to desire the more, but the
 less;
“not to aspire to what is highest and most
 precious, but to what is lowest and most
 contemptible;
“not to will anything, but to will
 nothing;
“not to seek the best in everything, but to seek
 the worst, so that you may enter for the love of christ into a
 complete destitution, a perfect poverty of spirit, and an absolute
 renunciation of everything in this world.
“embrace these practices with all the energy of
 your soul and you will find in a short time great delights and
 unspeakable consolations.
“despise yourself, and wish that others should
 despise you.
“speak to your own disadvantage, and desire others
 to do the same;
“conceive a low opinion of yourself, and find it
 good when others hold the same;[pg ]
“to enjoy the taste of all things, have no taste
 for anything.
“to know all things, learn to know
 nothing.
“to possess all things, resolve to possess
 nothing.
“to be all things, be willing to be
 nothing.
“to get to where you have no taste for anything, go
 through whatever experiences you have no taste
 for.
“to learn to know nothing, go whither you are
 ignorant.
“to reach what you possess not, go whithersoever
 you own nothing.
“to be what you are not, experience what you are
 not.”
these later verses
 play with that vertigo of self-contradiction which is so dear to
 mysticism. those that come next are completely mystical, for in them
 saint john passes from god to the more metaphysical notion of the
 all.
“when you stop at one thing, you cease to open
 yourself to the all.
“for to come to the all you must give up the
 all.
“and if you should attain to owning the all, you
 must own it, desiring nothing.
“in this spoliation, the soul finds its
 tranquillity and rest. profoundly established in the centre of its
 own nothingness, it can be assailed by naught that comes from
 below; and since it no longer desires anything, what comes from
 above cannot depress it; for its desires alone are the causes of
 its woes.”
and now, as a more
 concrete example of heads  and , in fact of all our heads together,
 and of the irrational extreme to which a psychopathic individual may
 go in the line of bodily austerity, i will quote the sincere suso's
 account of his own self-tortures. suso, you will remember, was one of
 the fourteenth century german mystics; his autobiography, written in
 the third person, is a classic religious document.[pg ]
“he was in his youth of a temperament full of fire
 and life; and when this began to make itself felt, it was very
 grievous to him; and he sought by many devices how he might bring his
 body into subjection. he wore for a long time a hair shirt and an
 iron chain, until the blood ran from him, so that he was obliged to
 leave them off. he secretly caused an undergarment to be made for
 him; and in the undergarment he had strips of leather fixed, into
 which a hundred and fifty brass nails, pointed and filed sharp, were
 driven, and the points of the nails were always turned towards the
 flesh. he had this garment made very tight, and so arranged as to go
 round him and fasten in front, in order that it might fit the closer
 to his body, and the pointed nails might be driven into his flesh;
 and it was high enough to reach upwards to his navel. in this he used
 to sleep at night. now in summer, when it was hot, and he was very
 tired and ill from his journeyings, or when he held the office of
 lecturer, he would sometimes, as he lay thus in bonds, and oppressed
 with toil, and tormented also by noxious insects, cry aloud and give
 way to fretfulness, and twist round and round in agony, as a worm
 does when run through with a pointed needle. it often seemed to him
 as if he were lying upon an ant-hill, from the torture caused by the
 insects; for if he wished to sleep, or when he had fallen asleep,
 they vied with one another.sometimes
 he cried to almighty god in the fullness of his heart: alas! gentle
 god, what a dying is this! when a man is killed by murderers or
 strong beasts of prey it is soon over; but i lie dying here under
 the cruel insects, and yet cannot die. the nights in winter were
 never so long, nor was the summer so hot, as to make him leave off
 this exercise. on the contrary, he devised something farther—two
 leathern loops into which he put his hands, and fastened one on
 each side his throat, and made the fastenings so secure that even
 if his cell had been [pg ]on fire about
 him, he could not have helped himself. this he continued until his
 hands and arms had become almost tremulous with the strain, and
 then he devised something else: two leather gloves; and he caused a
 brazier to fit them all over with sharp-pointed brass tacks, and he
 used to put them on at night, in order that if he should try while
 asleep to throw off the hair undergarment, or relieve himself from
 the gnawings of the vile insects, the tacks might then stick into
 his body. and so it came to pass. if ever he sought to help himself
 with his hands in his sleep, he drove the sharp tacks into his
 breast, and tore himself, so that his flesh festered. when after
 many weeks the wounds had healed, he tore himself again and made
 fresh wounds.
“he continued this tormenting exercise for about
 sixteen years. at the end of this time, when his blood was now
 chilled, and the fire of his temperament destroyed, there appeared
 to him in a vision on whitsunday, a messenger from heaven, who told
 him that god required this of him no longer. whereupon he
 discontinued it, and threw all these things away into a running
 stream.”
suso then tells how, to emulate the sorrows of his
 crucified lord, he made himself a cross with thirty protruding iron
 needles and nails. this he bore on his bare back between his
 shoulders day and night. “the first time that he stretched out this cross
 upon his back his tender frame was struck with terror at it, and
 blunted the sharp nails slightly against a stone. but soon,
 repenting of this womanly cowardice, he pointed them all again with
 a file, and placed once more the cross upon him. it made his back,
 where the bones are, bloody and seared. whenever he sat down or
 stood up, it was as if a hedgehog-skin were on him. if any one
 touched him unawares, or pushed against his clothes, it tore
 him.”
suso next tells of his penitences by means of
 striking this cross and forcing the nails deeper into the flesh,
 and likewise of his self-scourgings,—a dreadful story,—and then
 goes on as follows: “at this same
 period the servitor procured an old castaway door, and he used to
 lie upon it at night without any bedclothes to make him
 comfortable, except that he took off [pg ]his shoes
 and wrapped a thick cloak round him. he thus secured for himself a
 most miserable bed; for hard pea-stalks lay in humps under his
 head, the cross with the sharp nails stuck into his back, his arms
 were locked fast in bonds, the horsehair undergarment was round his
 loins, and the cloak too was heavy and the door hard. thus he lay
 in wretchedness, afraid to stir, just like a log, and he would send
 up many a sigh to god.
“in winter he suffered very much from the frost. if
 he stretched out his feet they lay bare on the floor and froze, if
 he gathered them up the blood became all on fire in his legs, and
 this was great pain. his feet were full of sores, his legs
 dropsical, his knees bloody and seared, his loins covered with
 scars from the horsehair, his body wasted, his mouth parched with
 intense thirst, and his hands tremulous from weakness. amid these
 torments he spent his nights and days; and he endured them all out
 of the greatness of the love which he bore in his heart to the
 divine and eternal wisdom, our lord jesus christ, whose agonizing
 sufferings he sought to imitate. after a time he gave up this
 penitential exercise of the door, and instead of it he took up his
 abode in a very small cell, and used the bench, which was so narrow
 and short that he could not stretch himself upon it, as his bed. in
 this hole, or upon the door, he lay at night in his usual bonds,
 for about eight years. it was also his custom, during the space of
 twenty-five years, provided he was staying in the convent, never to
 go after compline in winter into any warm room, or to the convent
 stove to warm himself, no matter how cold it might be, unless he
 was obliged to do so for other reasons. throughout all these years
 he never took a bath, either a water or a sweating bath; and this
 he did in order to mortify his comfort-seeking body. he practiced
 during a long time such rigid poverty that he would neither receive
 nor touch a penny, either with leave or without it. for a
 considerable time he strove to attain such a high degree of purity
 that he would neither scratch nor touch any part of his body, save
 only his hands and feet.”
[pg ]
i spare you the
 recital of poor suso's self-inflicted tortures from thirst. it is
 pleasant to know that after his fortieth year, god showed him by a
 series of visions that he had sufficiently broken down the natural
 man, and that he might leave these exercises off. his case is
 distinctly pathological, but he does not seem to have had the
 alleviation, which some ascetics have enjoyed, of an alteration of
 sensibility capable of actually turning torment into a perverse kind
 of pleasure. of the founder of the sacred heart order, for example,
 we read that
“her love of pain and suffering was insatiable....
 she said that she could cheerfully live till the day of judgment,
 provided she might always have matter for suffering for god; but that
 to live a single day without suffering would be intolerable. she said
 again that she was devoured with two unassuageable fevers, one for
 the holy communion, the other for suffering, humiliation, and
 annihilation. ‘nothing but
 pain,’
she continually said in her
 letters, ‘makes my life
 supportable.’ ”
so much for the
 phenomena to which the ascetic impulse will in certain persons give
 rise. in the ecclesiastically consecrated character three minor
 branches of self-mortification have been recognized as indispensable
 pathways to perfection. i refer to the chastity, obedience, and
 poverty which the monk vows to observe; and upon the heads of
 obedience and poverty i will make a few remarks.
first, of
 obedience. the secular life of our twentieth century opens with this
 virtue held in no high esteem. the duty of the individual to
 determine his own conduct and profit or suffer by the consequences
 seems, on the [pg
 contrary, to be one of our best rooted contemporary protestant social
 ideals. so much so that it is difficult even imaginatively to
 comprehend how men possessed of an inner life of their own could ever
 have come to think the subjection of its will to that of other finite
 creatures recommendable. i confess that to myself it seems something
 of a mystery. yet it evidently corresponds to a profound interior
 need of many persons, and we must do our best to understand it.
on the lowest
 possible plane, one sees how the expediency of obedience in a firm
 ecclesiastical organization must have led to its being viewed as
 meritorious. next, experience shows that there are times in every
 one's life when one can be better counseled by others than by one's
 self. inability to decide is one of the commonest symptoms of
 fatigued nerves; friends who see our troubles more broadly, often see
 them more wisely than we do; so it is frequently an act of excellent
 virtue to consult and obey a doctor, a partner, or a wife. but,
 leaving these lower prudential regions, we find, in the nature of
 some of the spiritual excitements which we have been studying, good
 reasons for idealizing obedience. obedience may spring from the
 general religious phenomenon of inner softening and self-surrender
 and throwing one's self on higher powers. so saving are these
 attitudes felt to be that in themselves, apart from utility, they
 become ideally consecrated; and in obeying a man whose fallibility we
 see through thoroughly, we, nevertheless, may feel much as we do when
 we resign our will to that of infinite wisdom. add self-despair and
 the passion of self-crucifixion to this, and obedience becomes an
 ascetic sacrifice, agreeable quite irrespective of whatever
 prudential uses it might have.
it is as a
 sacrifice, a mode of “mortification,”
 that [pg ] obedience is primarily
 conceived by catholic writers, a “sacrifice
 which man offers to god, and of which he is himself both the priest
 and the victim. by poverty he immolates his exterior possessions; by
 chastity he immolates his body; by obedience he completes the
 sacrifice, and gives to god all that he yet holds as his own, his two
 most precious goods, his intellect and his will. the sacrifice is
 then complete and unreserved, a genuine holocaust, for the entire
 victim is now consumed for the honor of god.”
 accordingly, in catholic discipline, we obey our superior not as mere
 man, but as the representative of christ. obeying god in him by our
 intention, obedience is easy. but when the text-book theologians
 marshal collectively all their reasons for recommending it, the
 mixture sounds to our ears rather odd.
“one of the great consolations of the monastic
 life,”
says a jesuit authority,
“is the
 assurance we have that in obeying we can commit no fault. the
 superior may commit a fault in commanding you to do this thing or
 that, but you are certain that you commit no fault so long as you
 obey, because god will only ask you if you have duly performed what
 orders you received, and if you can furnish a clear account in that
 respect, you are absolved entirely. whether the things you did were
 opportune, or whether there were not something better that might
 have been done, these are questions not asked of you, but rather of
 your superior. the moment what you did was done obediently, god
 wipes it out of your account, and charges it to the superior. so
 that saint jerome well exclaimed, in celebrating the advantages of
 obedience, ‘oh, sovereign
 liberty! oh, holy and blessed security by which one becomes almost
 impeccable!’
“saint john climachus is of the same sentiment when
 he calls obedience an excuse before god. in fact, when god asks why
 you have done this or that, and you reply, it is because i
[pg ]was so ordered by my superiors, god will ask for
 no other excuse. as a passenger in a good vessel with a good pilot
 need give himself no farther concern, but may go to sleep in peace,
 because the pilot has charge over all, and ‘watches for him’; so a
 religious person who lives under the yoke of obedience goes to
 heaven as if while sleeping, that is, while leaning entirely on the
 conduct of his superiors, who are the pilots of his vessel, and
 keep watch for him continually. it is no small thing, of a truth,
 to be able to cross the stormy sea of life on the shoulders and in
 the arms of another, yet that is just the grace which god accords
 to those who live under the yoke of obedience. their superior bears
 all their burdens.... a certain grave doctor said that he would
 rather spend his life in picking up straws by obedience, than by
 his own responsible choice busy himself with the loftiest works of
 charity, because one is certain of following the will of god in
 whatever one may do from obedience, but never certain in the same
 degree of anything which we may do of our own proper
 movement.”
one should read
 the letters in which ignatius loyola recommends obedience as the
 backbone of his order, if one would gain insight into the full spirit
 of its cult. they
 are too long to quote; but ignatius's belief is so vividly expressed
 in a couple of sayings reported by companions that, though they have
 been so often cited, i will ask your permission to copy them once
 more:—
“i ought,” an
 early biographer reports him as saying, “on entering religion, and thereafter, to place
 myself entirely in the hands of god, and of him who takes his place
 by his authority. i ought to desire that my superior should oblige me
 to give up my own judgment, and conquer my own mind. i ought to set
 up no difference between one superior and another, ... but recognize
 them all as equal before god, whose place they fill. for if i
 distinguish persons, i weaken the spirit of obedience.
[pg ]in the hands of my superior, i must be a soft wax,
 a thing, from which he is to require whatever pleases him, be it to
 write or receive letters, to speak or not to speak to such a
 person, or the like; and i must put all my fervor in executing
 zealously and exactly what i am ordered. i must consider myself as
 a corpse which has neither intelligence nor will; be like a mass of
 matter which without resistance lets itself be placed wherever it
 may please any one; like a stick in the hand of an old man, who
 uses it according to his needs and places it where it suits him. so
 must i be under the hands of the order, to serve it in the way it
 judges most useful.
“i must never ask of the superior to be sent to a
 particular place, to be employed in a particular duty.... i must
 consider nothing as belonging to me personally, and as regards the
 things i use, be like a statue which lets itself be stripped and
 never opposes resistance.”
the other saying
 is reported by rodriguez in the chapter from which i a moment ago
 made quotations. when speaking of the pope's authority, rodriguez
 writes:—
“saint ignatius said, when general of his company,
 that if the holy father were to order him to set sail in the first
 bark which he might find in the port of ostia, near rome, and to
 abandon himself to the sea, without a mast, without sails, without
 oars or rudder or any of the things that are needful for navigation
 or subsistence, he would obey not only with alacrity, but without
 anxiety or repugnance, and even with a great internal
 satisfaction.”
with a solitary
 concrete example of the extravagance to which the virtue we are
 considering has been carried, i will pass to the topic next in
 order.
“sister marie claire [of port royal] had been greatly
 imbued with the holiness and excellence of m. de langres. this
 prelate, soon after he came to port royal, said to her one day,
 seeing her so tenderly attached to mother angélique, that it
[pg ]would perhaps be better not to speak to her again.
 marie claire, greedy of obedience, took this inconsiderate word for
 an oracle of god, and from that day forward remained for several
 years without once speaking to her sister.”
our next topic
 shall be poverty, felt at all times and under all creeds as one
 adornment of a saintly life. since the instinct of ownership is
 fundamental in man's nature, this is one more example of the ascetic
 paradox. yet it appears no paradox at all, but perfectly reasonable,
 the moment one recollects how easily higher excitements hold lower
 cupidities in check. having just quoted the jesuit rodriguez on the
 subject of obedience, i will, to give immediately a concrete turn to
 our discussion of poverty, also read you a page from his chapter on
 this latter virtue. you must remember that he is writing instructions
 for monks of his own order, and bases them all on the text,
 “blessed are the poor in spirit.”
“if any one of you,” he
 says, “will know
 whether or not he is really poor in spirit, let him consider whether
 he loves the ordinary consequences and effects of poverty, which are
 hunger, thirst, cold, fatigue, and the denudation of all
 conveniences. see if you are glad to wear a worn-out habit full of
 patches. see if you are glad when something is lacking to your meal,
 when you are passed by in serving it, when what you receive is
 distasteful to you, when your cell is out of repair. if you are not
 glad of these things, if instead of loving them you avoid them, then
 there is proof that you have not attained the perfection of poverty
 of spirit.”
rodriguez then goes on to describe the
 practice of poverty in more detail. “the first point is that which saint ignatius
 proposes in his constitutions, when he says, ‘let no one use anything as if it were his private
 possession.’
‘a religious
 person,’
he says, 
‘ought in respect to all the things that he uses,
 to be like a statue which one may drape with clothing, but which
 feels no grief and makes no resistance when one [pg ]strips it
 again. it is in this way that you should feel towards your clothes,
 your books, your cell, and everything else that you make use of; if
 ordered to quit them, or to exchange them for others, have no more
 sorrow than if you were a statue being uncovered. in this way you
 will avoid using them as if they were your private possession. but
 if, when you give up your cell, or yield possession of this or that
 object or exchange it for another, you feel repugnance and are not
 like a statue, that shows that you view these things as if they
 were your private property.’
“and this is why our holy founder wished the
 superiors to test their monks somewhat as god tested abraham, and
 to put their poverty and their obedience to trial, that by this
 means they may become acquainted with the degree of their virtue,
 and gain a chance to make ever farther progress in perfection, ...
 making the one move out of his room when he finds it comfortable
 and is attached to it; taking away from another a book of which he
 is fond; or obliging a third to exchange his garment for a worse
 one. otherwise we should end by acquiring a species of property in
 all these several objects, and little by little the wall of poverty
 that surrounds us and constitutes our principal defense would be
 thrown down. the ancient fathers of the desert used often thus to
 treat their companions.... saint dositheus, being sick-nurse,
 desired a certain knife, and asked saint dorotheus for it, not for
 his private use, but for employment in the infirmary of which he
 had charge. whereupon saint dorotheus answered him:
‘ha!
 dositheus, so that knife pleases you so much! will you be the slave
 of a knife or the slave of jesus christ? do you not blush with
 shame at wishing that a knife should be your master? i will not let
 you touch it.’
which reproach and refusal had such an
 effect upon the holy disciple that since that time he never touched
 the knife again.”
“therefore, in our rooms,” father rodriguez continues, “there must be no other furniture than a bed, a
 table, a bench, and a candlestick, things purely necessary, and
 nothing more. it is not allowed among us that our cells should be
 ornamented with pictures or aught else, neither armchairs, carpets,
 curtains, [pg
 ]nor any sort of
 cabinet or bureau of any elegance. neither is it allowed us to keep
 anything to eat, either for ourselves or for those who may come to
 visit us. we must ask permission to go to the refectory even for a
 glass of water; and finally we may not keep a book in which we can
 write a line, or which we may take away with us. one cannot deny
 that thus we are in great poverty. but this poverty is at the same
 time a great repose and a great perfection. for it would be
 inevitable, in case a religious person were allowed to own
 superfluous possessions, that these things would greatly occupy his
 mind, be it to acquire them, to preserve them, or to increase them;
 so that in not permitting us at all to own them, all these
 inconveniences are remedied. among the various good reasons why the
 company forbids secular persons to enter our cells, the principal
 one is that thus we may the easier be kept in poverty. after all,
 we are all men, and if we were to receive people of the world into
 our rooms, we should not have the strength to remain within the
 bounds prescribed, but should at least wish to adorn them with some
 books to give the visitors a better opinion of our
 scholarship.”
since hindu
 fakirs, buddhist monks, and mohammedan dervishes unite with jesuits
 and franciscans in idealizing poverty as the loftiest individual
 state, it is worth while to examine into the spiritual grounds for
 such a seemingly unnatural opinion. and first, of those which lie
 closest to common human nature.
the opposition
 between the men who have and the men who are is
 immemorial. though the gentleman, in the old-fashioned sense of the
 man who is well born, has usually in point of fact been predaceous
 and reveled in lands and goods, yet he has never identified his
 essence with these possessions, but rather with the personal
 superiorities, the courage, generosity, and pride supposed to be his
 birthright. to certain huckstering kinds of [pg ] consideration he thanked god he was forever
 inaccessible, and if in life's vicissitudes he should become
 destitute through their lack, he was glad to think that with his
 sheer valor he was all the freer to work out his salvation.
 “wer nur selbst was hätte,” says
 lessing's tempelherr, in nathan the wise, “mein gott, mein gott, ich habe nichts!” this
 ideal of the well-born man without possessions was embodied in
 knight-errantry and templardom; and, hideously corrupted as it has
 always been, it still dominates sentimentally, if not practically,
 the military and aristocratic view of life. we glorify the soldier as
 the man absolutely unencumbered. owning nothing but his bare life,
 and willing to toss that up at any moment when the cause commands
 him, he is the representative of unhampered freedom in ideal
 directions. the laborer who pays with his person day by day, and has
 no rights invested in the future, offers also much of this ideal
 detachment. like the savage, he may make his bed wherever his right
 arm can support him, and from his simple and athletic attitude of
 observation, the property-owner seems buried and smothered in ignoble
 externalities and trammels, “wading in straw
 and rubbish to his knees.” the claims which things
 make are corrupters of manhood, mortgages on the soul, and a drag
 anchor on our progress towards the empyrean.
“everything i meet with,” writes
 whitefield, “seems to carry
 this voice with it,—‘go thou and
 preach the gospel; be a pilgrim on earth; have no party or certain
 dwelling place.’my heart
 echoes back, ‘lord jesus,
 help me to do or suffer thy will. when thou seest me in danger
 of nestling,—in
 pity—in tender pity,—put a thorn in my nest to prevent me from
 it.’ ”
[pg ]
the loathing of
 “capital” with which our laboring
 classes to-day are growing more and more infected seems largely
 composed of this sound sentiment of antipathy for lives based on mere
 having. as an anarchist poet writes:—
“not by accumulating riches, but by giving away that
 which you have,
“shall you become beautiful;
“you must undo the wrappings, not case yourself in
 fresh ones;
“not by multiplying clothes shall you make your
 body sound and healthy, but rather by discarding them
“for a soldier who is going on a campaign does not
 seek what fresh furniture he can carry on his back, but rather what
 he can leave behind;
“knowing well that every additional thing which he
 cannot freely use and handle is an impediment.”
in short, lives
 based on having are less free than lives based either on doing or on
 being, and in the interest of action people subject to spiritual
 excitement throw away possessions as so many clogs. only those who
 have no private interests can follow an ideal straight away. sloth
 and cowardice creep in with every dollar or guinea we have to guard.
 when a brother novice came to saint francis, saying: “father, it would be a great consolation to me to own a
 psalter, but even supposing that our general should concede to me
 this indulgence, still i should like also to have your
 consent,” francis put him off with the examples of
 charlemagne, roland, and oliver, pursuing the infidels in sweat and
 labor, and finally dying on the field of battle. “so care not,” he said, “for owning books and knowledge, but care rather for
 works of goodness.” and when some weeks later the novice came
 [pg ] again to talk of his craving
 for the psalter, francis said: “after you
 have got your psalter you will crave a breviary; and after you have
 got your breviary you will sit in your stall like a grand prelate,
 and will say to your brother: ‘hand me my
 breviary.’ ... and thenceforward he denied all such requests,
 saying: ‘a man possesses of learning only so
 much as comes out of him in action, and a monk is a good preacher
 only so far as his deeds proclaim him such, for every tree is known
 by its fruits.’ ”
but beyond this
 more worthily athletic attitude involved in doing and being, there
 is, in the desire of not having, something profounder still,
 something related to that fundamental mystery of religious
 experience, the satisfaction found in absolute surrender to the
 larger power. so long as any secular safeguard is retained, so long
 as any residual prudential guarantee is clung to, so long the
 surrender is incomplete, the vital crisis is not passed, fear still
 stands sentinel, and mistrust of the divine obtains: we hold by two
 anchors, looking to god, it is true, after a fashion, but also
 holding by our proper machinations. in certain medical experiences we
 have the same critical point to overcome. a drunkard, or a morphine
 or cocaine maniac, offers himself to be cured. he appeals to the
 doctor to wean him from his enemy, but he dares not face blank
 abstinence. the tyrannical drug is still an anchor to windward: he
 hides supplies of it among his clothing; arranges secretly to have it
 smuggled in in case of need. even so an incompletely regenerate man
 still trusts in his own expedients. his money is like the sleeping
 potion which the chronically wakeful patient keeps beside his bed; he
 throws himself on god, but if he should need the other help,
 there it [pg
 will be also. every one knows cases of this incomplete and
 ineffective desire for reform,—drunkards whom, with all their
 self-reproaches and resolves, one perceives to be quite unwilling
 seriously to contemplate never being drunk again! really to
 give up anything on which we have relied, to give it up definitively,
 “for good and all” and forever,
 signifies one of those radical alterations of character which came
 under our notice in the lectures on conversion. in it the inner man
 rolls over into an entirely different position of equilibrium, lives
 in a new centre of energy from this time on, and the turning-point
 and hinge of all such operations seems usually to involve the sincere
 acceptance of certain nakednesses and destitutions.
accordingly,
 throughout the annals of the saintly life, we find this
 ever-recurring note: fling yourself upon god's providence without
 making any reserve whatever,—take no thought for the morrow,—sell all
 you have and give it to the poor,—only when the sacrifice is ruthless
 and reckless will the higher safety really arrive. as a concrete
 example let me read a page from the biography of antoinette
 bourignon, a good woman, much persecuted in her day by both
 protestants and catholics, because she would not take her religion at
 second hand. when a young girl, in her father's house,—
“she spent whole nights in prayer, oft
 repeating: lord, what wilt thou have me to
 do? and being one night in
 a most profound penitence, she said from the bottom of her
 heart: ‘o my lord! what
 must i do to please thee? for i have nobody to teach me. speak to my
 soul and it will hear thee.’at that
 instant she heard, as if another had spoke within her:
forsake all earthly things.
 separate thyself from the love of the creatures. deny
 thyself. she was quite
 astonished, not understanding this language, and mused long on these
 three points, thinking how she could fulfill them. she thought she
 could not live without earthly things, nor without loving the
 creatures, [pg
 ]nor without loving
 herself. yet she said, ‘by thy grace i
 will do it, lord!’
but when she would perform her promise,
 she knew not where to begin. having thought on the religious in
 monasteries, that they forsook all earthly things by being shut up in
 a cloister, and the love of themselves by subjecting of their wills,
 she asked leave of her father to enter into a cloister of the
 barefoot carmelites, but he would not permit it, saying he would
 rather see her laid in her grave. this seemed to her a great cruelty,
 for she thought to find in the cloister the true christians she had
 been seeking, but she found afterwards that he knew the cloisters
 better than she; for after he had forbidden her, and told her he
 would never permit her to be a religious, nor give her any money to
 enter there, yet she went to father laurens, the director, and
 offered to serve in the monastery and work hard for her bread, and be
 content with little, if he would receive her. at which he smiled and
 said: that cannot be. we must have
 money to build; we take no maids without money; you must find the way
 to get it, else there is no entry here.
“this astonished her greatly, and she was thereby
 undeceived as to the cloisters, resolving to forsake all company
 and live alone till it should please god to show her what she ought
 to do and whither to go. she asked always earnestly,
‘when shall i
 be perfectly thine, o my god?’ and
 she thought he still answered her, when
 thou shalt no longer possess anything, and shalt die to
 thyself.
‘and where
 shall i do that, lord?’ he
 answered her, in the
 desert. this made so
 strong an impression on her soul that she aspired after this; but
 being a maid of eighteen years only, she was afraid of unlucky
 chances, and was never used to travel, and knew no way. she laid
 aside all these doubts and said, ‘lord, thou wilt guide me how and where it shall
 please thee. it is for thee that i do it. i will lay aside my habit
 of a maid, and will take that of a hermit that i may pass
 unknown.’
having then secretly made ready this
 habit, while her parents thought to have married her, her father
 having promised her to a rich french merchant, she prevented the
 time, and on easter evening, having cut her hair, put on the habit,
 and slept a little, she went out of her chamber [pg ]about four
 in the morning, taking nothing but one penny to buy bread for that
 day. and it being said to her in the going out, where
 is thy faith? in a penny? she threw it away, begging pardon of god for her
 fault, and saying, ‘no, lord, my
 faith is not in a penny, but in thee alone.’ thus
 she went away wholly delivered from the heavy burthen of the cares
 and good things of this world, and found her soul so satisfied that
 she no longer wished for anything upon earth, resting entirely upon
 god, with this only fear lest she should be discovered and be
 obliged to return home; for she felt already more content in this
 poverty than she had done for all her life in all the delights of
 the world.”
the penny was a
 small financial safeguard, but an effective spiritual obstacle. not
 till it was thrown away could the character settle into the new
 equilibrium completely.
over and above the
 mystery of self-surrender, there are in the cult of poverty other
 religious mysteries. there is [pg ] the mystery of veracity: “naked came i into the world,” etc.,—whoever first
 said that, possessed this mystery. my own bare entity must fight the
 battle—shams cannot save me. there is also the mystery of democracy,
 or sentiment of the equality before god of all his creatures. this
 sentiment (which seems in general to have been more widespread in
 mohammedan than in christian lands) tends to nullify man's usual
 acquisitiveness. those who have it spurn dignities and honors,
 privileges and advantages, preferring, as i said in a former lecture,
 to grovel on the common level before the face of god. it is not
 exactly the sentiment of humility, though it comes so close to it in
 practice. it is humanity, rather, refusing to enjoy
 anything that others do not share. a profound moralist, writing of
 christ's saying, “sell all thou hast and
 follow me,” proceeds as follows:—
“christ may have meant: if you love mankind
 absolutely you will as a result not care for any possessions
 whatever, and this seems a very likely proposition. but it is one
 thing to believe that a proposition is probably true; it is another
 thing to see it as a fact. if you loved mankind as christ loved them,
 you would see his conclusion as a fact. it would be obvious. you
 would sell your goods, and they would be no loss to you. these
 truths, while literal to christ, and to any mind that has christ's
 love for mankind, become parables to lesser natures. there are in
 every generation people who, beginning innocently, with no
 predetermined intention of becoming saints, find themselves drawn
 into the vortex by their interest in helping mankind, and by the
 understanding that comes from actually doing it. the abandonment of
 their old mode of life is like dust in the balance. it is done
 gradually, incidentally, imperceptibly. thus the whole question of
 the abandonment of luxury is no question at all, but a mere incident
 to another question, namely, the degree to which we abandon ourselves
 to the remorseless logic of our love for others.”
[pg ]
but in all these
 matters of sentiment one must have “been
 there” one's self in order to understand them. no american can
 ever attain to understanding the loyalty of a briton towards his
 king, of a german towards his emperor; nor can a briton or german
 ever understand the peace of heart of an american in having no king,
 no kaiser, no spurious nonsense, between him and the common god of
 all. if sentiments as simple as these are mysteries which one must
 receive as gifts of birth, how much more is this the case with those
 subtler religious sentiments which we have been considering! one can
 never fathom an emotion or divine its dictates by standing outside of
 it. in the glowing hour of excitement, however, all
 incomprehensibilities are solved, and what was so enigmatical from
 without becomes transparently obvious. each emotion obeys a logic of
 its own, and makes deductions which no other logic can draw. piety
 and charity live in a different universe from worldly lusts and
 fears, and form another centre of energy altogether. as in a supreme
 sorrow lesser vexations may become a consolation; as a supreme love
 may turn minor sacrifices into gain; so a supreme trust may render
 common safeguards odious, and in certain glows of generous excitement
 it may appear unspeakably mean to retain one's hold of personal
 possessions. the only sound plan, if we are ourselves outside the
 pale of such emotions, is to observe as well as we are able those who
 feel them, and to record faithfully what we observe; and this, i need
 hardly say, is what i have striven to do in these last two
 descriptive lectures, which i now hope will have covered the ground
 sufficiently for our present needs.
[pg ]
lectures xiv and xv. the value of
 saintliness.
we have now passed
 in review the more important of the phenomena which are regarded as
 fruits of genuine religion and characteristics of men who are devout.
 to-day we have to change our attitude from that of description to
 that of appreciation; we have to ask whether the fruits in question
 can help us to judge the absolute value of what religion adds to
 human life. were i to parody kant, i should say that a “critique of pure saintliness” must be our
 theme.
if, in turning to
 this theme, we could descend upon our subject from above like
 catholic theologians, with our fixed definitions of man and man's
 perfection and our positive dogmas about god, we should have an easy
 time of it. man's perfection would be the fulfillment of his end; and
 his end would be union with his maker. that union could be pursued by
 him along three paths, active, purgative, and contemplative,
 respectively; and progress along either path would be a simple matter
 to measure by the application of a limited number of theological and
 moral conceptions and definitions. the absolute significance and
 value of any bit of religious experience we might hear of would thus
 be given almost mathematically into our hands.
if convenience
 were everything, we ought now to grieve at finding ourselves cut off
 from so admirably convenient a method as this. but we did cut
 ourselves off from it deliberately in those remarks which you
 remember we [pg
 made, in our first lecture, about the empirical method; and it must
 be confessed that after that act of renunciation we can never hope
 for clean-cut and scholastic results. we cannot
 divide man sharply into an animal and a rational part. we cannot
 distinguish natural from supernatural effects; nor among the latter
 know which are favors of god, and which are counterfeit operations of
 the demon. we have merely to collect things together without any
 special a priori
 theological system, and out of an aggregate of piecemeal judgments as
 to the value of this and that experience—judgments in which our
 general philosophic prejudices, our instincts, and our common sense
 are our only guides—decide that on the whole one type of religion is
 approved by its fruits, and another type condemned. “on the whole,”—i fear we shall never escape
 complicity with that qualification, so dear to your practical man, so
 repugnant to your systematizer!
i also fear that
 as i make this frank confession, i may seem to some of you to throw
 our compass overboard, and to adopt caprice as our pilot. skepticism
 or wayward choice, you may think, can be the only results of such a
 formless method as i have taken up. a few remarks in deprecation of
 such an opinion, and in farther explanation of the empiricist
 principles which i profess, may therefore appear at this point to be
 in place.
abstractly, it
 would seem illogical to try to measure the worth of a religion's
 fruits in merely human terms of value. how can you
 measure their worth without considering whether the god really exists
 who is supposed to inspire them? if he really exists, then all the
 conduct instituted by men to meet his wants must necessarily be a
 reasonable fruit of his religion,—it would be [pg ] unreasonable only in case he did not
 exist. if, for instance, you were to condemn a religion of human or
 animal sacrifices by virtue of your subjective sentiments, and if all
 the while a deity were really there demanding such sacrifices, you
 would be making a theoretical mistake by tacitly assuming that the
 deity must be non-existent; you would be setting up a theology of
 your own as much as if you were a scholastic philosopher.
to this extent, to
 the extent of disbelieving peremptorily in certain types of deity, i
 frankly confess that we must be theologians. if disbeliefs can be
 said to constitute a theology, then the prejudices, instincts, and
 common sense which i chose as our guides make theological partisans
 of us whenever they make certain beliefs abhorrent.
but such
 common-sense prejudices and instincts are themselves the fruit of an
 empirical evolution. nothing is more striking than the secular
 alteration that goes on in the moral and religious tone of men, as
 their insight into nature and their social arrangements progressively
 develop. after an interval of a few generations the mental climate
 proves unfavorable to notions of the deity which at an earlier date
 were perfectly satisfactory: the older gods have fallen below the
 common secular level, and can no longer be believed in. to-day a
 deity who should require bleeding sacrifices to placate him would be
 too sanguinary to be taken seriously. even if powerful historical
 credentials were put forward in his favor, we would not look at them.
 once, on the contrary, his cruel appetites were of themselves
 credentials. they positively recommended him to men's imaginations in
 ages when such coarse signs of power were respected and no others
 could be understood. such deities then were worshiped because such
 fruits were relished.[pg
doubtless historic
 accidents always played some later part, but the original factor in
 fixing the figure of the gods must always have been psychological.
 the deity to whom the prophets, seers, and devotees who founded the
 particular cult bore witness was worth something to them personally.
 they could use him. he guided their imagination, warranted their
 hopes, and controlled their will,—or else they required him as a
 safeguard against the demon and a curber of other people's crimes. in
 any case, they chose him for the value of the fruits he seemed to
 them to yield. so soon as the fruits began to seem quite worthless;
 so soon as they conflicted with indispensable human ideals, or
 thwarted too extensively other values; so soon as they appeared
 childish, contemptible, or immoral when reflected on, the deity grew
 discredited, and was erelong neglected and forgotten. it was in this
 way that the greek and roman gods ceased to be believed in by
 educated pagans; it is thus that we ourselves judge of the hindu,
 buddhist, and mohammedan theologies; protestants have so dealt with
 the catholic notions of deity, and liberal protestants with older
 protestant notions; it is thus that chinamen judge of us, and that
 all of us now living will be judged by our descendants. when we cease
 to admire or approve what the definition of a deity implies, we end
 by deeming that deity incredible.
few historic
 changes are more curious than these mutations of theological opinion.
 the monarchical type of sovereignty was, for example, so ineradicably
 planted in the mind of our own forefathers that a dose of cruelty and
 arbitrariness in their deity seems positively to have been required
 by their imagination. they called the cruelty “retributive justice,” and a god without it would
 certainly have struck them as not “sovereign” enough. but [pg ] to-day we abhor the very notion of eternal
 suffering inflicted; and that arbitrary dealing-out of salvation and
 damnation to selected individuals, of which jonathan edwards could
 persuade himself that he had not only a conviction, but a
 “delightful conviction,” as of a
 doctrine “exceeding pleasant, bright, and
 sweet,” appears to us, if sovereignly anything, sovereignly
 irrational and mean. not only the cruelty, but the paltriness of
 character of the gods believed in by earlier centuries also strikes
 later centuries with surprise. we shall see examples of it from the
 annals of catholic saintship which make us rub our protestant eyes.
 ritual worship in general appears to the modern transcendentalist, as
 well as to the ultra-puritanic type of mind, as if addressed to a
 deity of an almost absurdly childish character, taking delight in
 toy-shop furniture, tapers and tinsel, costume and mumbling and
 mummery, and finding his “glory”
 incomprehensibly enhanced thereby;—just as on the other hand the
 formless spaciousness of pantheism appears quite empty to ritualistic
 natures, and the gaunt theism of evangelical sects seems intolerably
 bald and chalky and bleak. luther, says emerson, would have cut off
 his right hand rather than nail his theses to the door at wittenberg,
 if he had supposed that they were destined to lead to the pale
 negations of boston unitarianism.
so far, then,
 although we are compelled, whatever may be our pretensions to
 empiricism, to employ some sort of a standard of theological
 probability of our own whenever we assume to estimate the fruits of
 other men's religion, yet this very standard has been begotten out of
 the drift of common life. it is the voice of human experience within
 us, judging and condemning all gods that stand athwart the pathway
 along which it feels itself to be advancing. experience, if we take
 it in the largest sense, is [pg
 thus the parent of those disbeliefs which, it was charged, were
 inconsistent with the experiential method. the inconsistency, you
 see, is immaterial, and the charge may be neglected.
if we pass from
 disbeliefs to positive beliefs, it seems to me that there is not even
 a formal inconsistency to be laid against our method. the gods we
 stand by are the gods we need and can use, the gods whose demands on
 us are reinforcements of our demands on ourselves and on one another.
 what i then propose to do is, briefly stated, to test saintliness by
 common sense, to use human standards to help us decide how far the
 religious life commends itself as an ideal kind of human activity. if
 it commends itself, then any theological beliefs that may inspire it,
 in so far forth will stand accredited. if not, then they will be
 discredited, and all without reference to anything but human working
 principles. it is but the elimination of the humanly unfit, and the
 survival of the humanly fittest, applied to religious beliefs; and if
 we look at history candidly and without prejudice, we have to admit
 that no religion has ever in the long run established or proved
 itself in any other way. religions have approved
 themselves; they have ministered to sundry vital needs which they
 found reigning. when they violated other needs too strongly, or when
 other faiths came which served the same needs better, the first
 religions were supplanted.
the needs were
 always many, and the tests were never sharp. so the reproach of
 vagueness and subjectivity and “on the
 whole”-ness, which can with perfect legitimacy be addressed to
 the empirical method as we are forced to use it, is after all a
 reproach to which the entire life of man in dealing with these
 matters is obnoxious. no religion has ever yet owed its prevalence to
 “apodictic [pg ] certainty.” in a later lecture i will
 ask whether objective certainty can ever be added by theological
 reasoning to a religion that already empirically prevails.
one word, also,
 about the reproach that in following this sort of an empirical method
 we are handing ourselves over to systematic skepticism.
since it is
 impossible to deny secular alterations in our sentiments and needs,
 it would be absurd to affirm that one's own age of the world can be
 beyond correction by the next age. skepticism cannot, therefore, be
 ruled out by any set of thinkers as a possibility against which their
 conclusions are secure; and no empiricist ought to claim exemption
 from this universal liability. but to admit one's liability to
 correction is one thing, and to embark upon a sea of wanton doubt is
 another. of willfully playing into the hands of skepticism we cannot
 be accused. he who acknowledges the imperfectness of his instrument,
 and makes allowance for it in discussing his observations, is in a
 much better position for gaining truth than if he claimed his
 instrument to be infallible. or is dogmatic or scholastic theology
 less doubted in point of fact for claiming, as it does, to be in
 point of right undoubtable? and if not, what command over truth would
 this kind of theology really lose if, instead of absolute certainty,
 she only claimed reasonable probability for her conclusions? if
 we claim only reasonable
 probability, it will be as much as men who love the truth can ever at
 any given moment hope to have within their grasp. pretty surely it
 will be more than we could have had, if we were unconscious of our
 liability to err.
nevertheless,
 dogmatism will doubtless continue to condemn us for this confession.
 the mere outward form of [pg
 inalterable certainty is so precious to some minds that to renounce
 it explicitly is for them out of the question. they will claim it
 even where the facts most patently pronounce its folly. but the safe
 thing is surely to recognize that all the insights of creatures of a
 day like ourselves must be provisional. the wisest of critics is an
 altering being, subject to the better insight of the morrow, and
 right at any moment, only “up to date”
 and “on the whole.” when larger ranges
 of truth open, it is surely best to be able to open ourselves to
 their reception, unfettered by our previous pretensions. “heartily know, when half-gods go, the gods
 arrive.”
the fact of
 diverse judgments about religious phenomena is therefore entirely
 unescapable, whatever may be one's own desire to attain the
 irreversible. but apart from that fact, a more fundamental question
 awaits us, the question whether men's opinions ought to be expected
 to be absolutely uniform in this field. ought all men to have the
 same religion? ought they to approve the same fruits and follow the
 same leadings? are they so like in their inner needs that, for hard
 and soft, for proud and humble, for strenuous and lazy, for
 healthy-minded and despairing, exactly the same religious incentives
 are required? or are different functions in the organism of humanity
 allotted to different types of man, so that some may really be the
 better for a religion of consolation and reassurance, whilst others
 are better for one of terror and reproof? it might conceivably be so;
 and we shall, i think, more and more suspect it to be so as we go on.
 and if it be so, how can any possible judge or critic help being
 biased in favor of the religion by which his own needs are best met?
 he aspires to impartiality; but he is too close to the struggle not
 to be to some degree a participant, and he is sure to approve
 [pg ] most warmly those fruits of
 piety in others which taste most good and prove most nourishing to
 him.
i am well aware of
 how anarchic much of what i say may sound. expressing myself thus
 abstractly and briefly, i may seem to despair of the very notion of
 truth. but i beseech you to reserve your judgment until we see it
 applied to the details which lie before us. i do indeed disbelieve
 that we or any other mortal men can attain on a given day to
 absolutely incorrigible and unimprovable truth about such matters of
 fact as those with which religions deal. but i reject this dogmatic
 ideal not out of a perverse delight in intellectual instability. i am
 no lover of disorder and doubt as such. rather do i fear to lose
 truth by this pretension to possess it already wholly. that we can
 gain more and more of it by moving always in the right direction, i
 believe as much as any one, and i hope to bring you all to my way of
 thinking before the termination of these lectures. till then, do not,
 i pray you, harden your minds irrevocably against the empiricism
 which i profess.
i will waste no
 more words, then, in abstract justification of my method, but seek
 immediately to use it upon the facts.
in critically
 judging of the value of religious phenomena, it is very important to
 insist on the distinction between religion as an individual personal
 function, and religion as an institutional, corporate, or tribal
 product. i drew this distinction, you may remember, in my second
 lecture. the word “religion,” as
 ordinarily used, is equivocal. a survey of history shows us that, as
 a rule, religious geniuses attract disciples, and produce groups of
 sympathizers. when these groups get strong enough to “organize” themselves, they become ecclesiastical
 institutions [pg
 with corporate ambitions of their own. the spirit of politics and the
 lust of dogmatic rule are then apt to enter and to contaminate the
 originally innocent thing; so that when we hear the word “religion” nowadays, we think inevitably of some
 “church” or other; and to some persons
 the word “church” suggests so much
 hypocrisy and tyranny and meanness and tenacity of superstition that
 in a wholesale undiscerning way they glory in saying that they are
 “down” on religion altogether. even we
 who belong to churches do not exempt other churches than our own from
 the general condemnation.
but in this course
 of lectures ecclesiastical institutions hardly concern us at all. the
 religious experience which we are studying is that which lives itself
 out within the private breast. first-hand individual experience of
 this kind has always appeared as a heretical sort of innovation to
 those who witnessed its birth. naked comes it into the world and
 lonely; and it has always, for a time at least, driven him who had it
 into the wilderness, often into the literal wilderness out of doors,
 where the buddha, jesus, mohammed, st. francis, george fox, and so
 many others had to go. george fox expresses well this isolation; and
 i can do no better at this point than read to you a page from his
 journal, referring to the period of his youth when religion began to
 ferment within him seriously.
“i fasted much,” fox
 says, “walked abroad
 in solitary places many days, and often took my bible, and sat in
 hollow trees and lonesome places until night came on; and frequently
 in the night walked mournfully about by myself; for i was a man of
 sorrows in the time of the first workings of the lord in
 me.
“during all this time i was never joined in
 profession of religion with any, but gave up myself to the lord,
 having forsaken [pg
 ]all evil company,
 taking leave of father and mother, and all other relations, and
 traveled up and down as a stranger on the earth, which way the lord
 inclined my heart; taking a chamber to myself in the town where i
 came, and tarrying sometimes more, sometimes less in a place: for i
 durst not stay long in a place, being afraid both of professor and
 profane, lest, being a tender young man, i should be hurt by
 conversing much with either. for which reason i kept much as a
 stranger, seeking heavenly wisdom and getting knowledge from the
 lord; and was brought off from outward things, to rely on the lord
 alone. as i had forsaken the priests, so i left the separate
 preachers also, and those called the most experienced people; for i
 saw there was none among them all that could speak to my condition.
 and when all my hopes in them and in all men were gone so that i
 had nothing outwardly to help me, nor could tell what to do; then,
 oh then, i heard a voice which said, ‘there is one, even jesus christ, that can speak to
 thy condition.’when i
 heard it, my heart did leap for joy. then the lord let me see why
 there was none upon the earth that could speak to my condition. i
 had not fellowship with any people, priests, nor professors, nor
 any sort of separated people. i was afraid of all carnal talk and
 talkers, for i could see nothing but corruptions. when i was in the
 deep, under all shut up, i could not believe that i should ever
 overcome; my troubles, my sorrows, and my temptations were so great
 that i often thought i should have despaired, i was so tempted. but
 when christ opened to me how he was tempted by the same devil, and
 had overcome him, and had bruised his head; and that through him
 and his power, life, grace, and spirit, i should overcome also, i
 had confidence in him. if i had had a king's diet, palace, and
 attendance, all would have been as nothing; for nothing gave me
 comfort but the lord by his power. i saw professors, priests, and
 people were whole and at ease in that condition which was my
 misery, and they loved that which i would have been rid of. but the
 lord did stay my desires upon himself, and my care was cast upon
 him alone.”
[pg ]
a genuine
 first-hand religious experience like this is bound to be a heterodoxy
 to its witnesses, the prophet appearing as a mere lonely madman. if
 his doctrine prove contagious enough to spread to any others, it
 becomes a definite and labeled heresy. but if it then still prove
 contagious enough to triumph over persecution, it becomes itself an
 orthodoxy; and when a religion has become an orthodoxy, its day of
 inwardness is over: the spring is dry; the faithful live at second
 hand exclusively and stone the prophets in their turn. the new
 church, in spite of whatever human goodness it may foster, can be
 henceforth counted on as a staunch ally in every attempt to stifle
 the spontaneous religious spirit, and to stop all later bubblings of
 the fountain from which in purer days it drew its own supply of
 inspiration. unless, indeed, by adopting new movements of the spirit
 it can make capital out of them and use them for its selfish
 corporate designs! of protective action of this politic sort,
 promptly or tardily decided on, the dealings of the roman
 ecclesiasticism with many individual saints and prophets yield
 examples enough for our instruction.
the plain fact is
 that men's minds are built, as has been often said, in water-tight
 compartments. religious after a fashion, they yet have many other
 things in them beside their religion, and unholy entanglements and
 associations inevitably obtain. the basenesses so commonly charged to
 religion's account are thus, almost all of them, not chargeable at
 all to religion proper, but rather to religion's wicked practical
 partner, the spirit of corporate dominion. and the bigotries are most
 of them in their turn chargeable to religion's wicked intellectual
 partner, the spirit of dogmatic dominion, the passion for laying down
 the law in the form of an absolutely closed-in theoretic system. the
 ecclesiastical spirit in general is the [pg ] sum of these two spirits of dominion; and i
 beseech you never to confound the phenomena of mere tribal or
 corporate psychology which it presents with those manifestations of
 the purely interior life which are the exclusive object of our study.
 the baiting of jews, the hunting of albigenses and waldenses, the
 stoning of quakers and ducking of methodists, the murdering of
 mormons and the massacring of armenians, express much rather that
 aboriginal human neophobia, that pugnacity of which we all share the
 vestiges, and that inborn hatred of the alien and of eccentric and
 non-conforming men as aliens, than they express the positive piety of
 the various perpetrators. piety is the mask, the inner force is
 tribal instinct. you believe as little as i do, in spite of the
 christian unction with which the german emperor addressed his troops
 upon their way to china, that the conduct which he suggested, and in
 which other christian armies went beyond them, had anything whatever
 to do with the interior religious life of those concerned in the
 performance.
well, no more for
 past atrocities than for this atrocity should we make piety
 responsible. at most we may blame piety for not availing to check our
 natural passions, and sometimes for supplying them with hypocritical
 pretexts. but hypocrisy also imposes obligations, and with the
 pretext usually couples some restriction; and when the passion gust
 is over, the piety may bring a reaction of repentance which the
 irreligious natural man would not have shown.
for many of the
 historic aberrations which have been laid to her charge, religion as
 such, then, is not to blame. yet of the charge that over-zealousness
 or fanaticism is one of her liabilities we cannot wholly acquit her,
 so i will next make a remark upon that point. but i will [pg ] preface it by a preliminary remark which
 connects itself with much that follows.
our survey of the
 phenomena of saintliness has unquestionably produced in your minds an
 impression of extravagance. is it necessary, some of you have asked,
 as one example after another came before us, to be quite so
 fantastically good as that? we who have no vocation for the extremer
 ranges of sanctity will surely be let off at the last day if our
 humility, asceticism, and devoutness prove of a less convulsive sort.
 this practically amounts to saying that much that it is legitimate to
 admire in this field need nevertheless not be imitated, and that
 religious phenomena, like all other human phenomena, are subject to
 the law of the golden mean. political reformers accomplish their
 successive tasks in the history of nations by being blind for the
 time to other causes. great schools of art work out the effects which
 it is their mission to reveal, at the cost of a one-sidedness for
 which other schools must make amends. we accept a john howard, a
 mazzini, a botticelli, a michael angelo, with a kind of indulgence.
 we are glad they existed to show us that way, but we are glad there
 are also other ways of seeing and taking life. so of many of the
 saints whom we have looked at. we are proud of a human nature that
 could be so passionately extreme, but we shrink from advising others
 to follow the example. the conduct we blame ourselves for not
 following lies nearer to the middle line of human effort. it is less
 dependent on particular beliefs and doctrines. it is such as wears
 well in different ages, such as under different skies all judges are
 able to commend.
the fruits of
 religion, in other words, are, like all human products, liable to
 corruption by excess. common [pg ] sense must judge them. it need not blame the
 votary; but it may be able to praise him only conditionally, as one
 who acts faithfully according to his lights. he shows us heroism in
 one way, but the unconditionally good way is that for which no
 indulgence need be asked.
we find that error
 by excess is exemplified by every saintly virtue. excess, in human
 faculties, means usually one-sidedness or want of balance; for it is
 hard to imagine an essential faculty too strong, if only other
 faculties equally strong be there to coöperate with it in action.
 strong affections need a strong will; strong active powers need a
 strong intellect; strong intellect needs strong sympathies, to keep
 life steady. if the balance exist, no one faculty can possibly be too
 strong—we only get the stronger all-round character. in the life of
 saints, technically so called, the spiritual faculties are strong,
 but what gives the impression of extravagance proves usually on
 examination to be a relative deficiency of intellect. spiritual
 excitement takes pathological forms whenever other interests are too
 few and the intellect too narrow. we find this exemplified by all the
 saintly attributes in turn—devout love of god, purity, charity,
 asceticism, all may lead astray. i will run over these virtues in
 succession.
first of all let
 us take devoutness. when unbalanced, one of its vices is called
 fanaticism. fanaticism (when not a mere expression of ecclesiastical
 ambition) is only loyalty carried to a convulsive extreme. when an
 intensely loyal and narrow mind is once grasped by the feeling that a
 certain superhuman person is worthy of its exclusive devotion, one of
 the first things that happens is that it idealizes the devotion
 itself. to adequately realize the merits of the idol gets to be
 considered the [pg
 ] one
 great merit of the worshiper; and the sacrifices and servilities by
 which savage tribesmen have from time immemorial exhibited their
 faithfulness to chieftains are now outbid in favor of the deity.
 vocabularies are exhausted and languages altered in the attempt to
 praise him enough; death is looked on as gain if it attract his
 grateful notice; and the personal attitude of being his devotee
 becomes what one might almost call a new and exalted kind of
 professional specialty within the tribe. the
 legends that gather round the lives of holy persons are fruits of
 this impulse to celebrate and glorify. the buddha and
 mohammed and
 their companions and many christian saints are incrusted with a heavy
 jewelry [pg ] of anecdotes which are
 meant to be honorific, but are simply abgeschmackt and silly, and form a
 touching expression of man's misguided propensity to praise.
an immediate
 consequence of this condition of mind is jealousy for the deity's
 honor. how can the devotee show his loyalty better than by
 sensitiveness in this regard? the slightest affront or neglect must
 be resented, the deity's enemies must be put to shame. in exceedingly
 narrow minds and active wills, such a care may become an engrossing
 preoccupation; and crusades have been preached and massacres
 instigated for no other reason than to remove a fancied slight upon
 the god. theologies representing the gods as mindful of their glory,
 and churches with imperialistic policies, have conspired to fan this
 temper to a glow, so that intolerance and persecution have come to be
 vices associated by some of us inseparably with the saintly mind.
 they are unquestionably its besetting sins. the saintly temper is a
 moral temper, and a moral temper has often to be cruel. it is a
 partisan temper, and that is cruel. between his own and jehovah's
 enemies a david knows no difference; a catherine of siena, panting to
 stop the warfare among christians which was the scandal of her epoch,
 can think of no better method of union among them than a crusade to
 massacre the turks; luther finds no word of protest or regret over
 the atrocious tortures with which the anabaptist leaders were put to
 death; and a cromwell praises the lord for delivering his enemies
 into his hands for “execution.”
 politics come in in all such cases; but piety finds the partnership
 not quite unnatural. so, when “freethinkers” tell us that religion and
 fanaticism are twins, we cannot make an unqualified denial of the
 charge.
fanaticism must
 then be inscribed on the wrong side [pg ] of religion's account, so long as the religious
 person's intellect is on the stage which the despotic kind of god
 satisfies. but as soon as the god is represented as less intent on
 his own honor and glory, it ceases to be a danger.
fanaticism is
 found only where the character is masterful and aggressive. in gentle
 characters, where devoutness is intense and the intellect feeble, we
 have an imaginative absorption in the love of god to the exclusion of
 all practical human interests, which, though innocent enough, is too
 one-sided to be admirable. a mind too narrow has room but for one
 kind of affection. when the love of god takes possession of such a
 mind, it expels all human loves and human uses. there is no english
 name for such a sweet excess of devotion, so i will refer to it as a
 theopathic condition.
the blessed
 margaret mary alacoque may serve as an example.
“to be loved here upon the
 earth,”
her recent biographer exclaims:
“to be loved
 by a noble, elevated, distinguished being; to be loved with
 fidelity, with devotion,—what enchantment! but to be loved by god!
 and loved by him to distraction [aimé jusqù'à la folie]!—margaret
 melted away with love at the thought of such a thing. like saint
 philip of neri in former times, or like saint francis xavier, she
 said to god: ‘hold back, o
 my god, these torrents which overwhelm me, or else enlarge my
 capacity for their reception.’ ”
the most signal proofs of god's love which
 margaret mary received were her hallucinations of sight, touch, and
 hearing, and the most signal in turn of these were the revelations
 of christ's sacred heart, “surrounded with rays more brilliant than the sun,
 and transparent like a crystal. the wound which he received on the
 cross visibly appeared upon it. there [pg ]was a crown
 of thorns round about this divine heart, and a cross above
 it.” at the same time christ's voice told her that,
 unable longer to contain the flames of his love for mankind, he had
 chosen her by a miracle to spread the knowledge of them. he
 thereupon took out her mortal heart, placed it inside of his own
 and inflamed it, and then replaced it in her breast, adding:
“hitherto thou
 hast taken the name of my slave, hereafter thou shalt be called the
 well-beloved disciple of my sacred heart.”
in a later vision the saviour revealed to her in
 detail the “great
 design”
which he wished to establish through
 her instrumentality. “i ask of thee
 to bring it about that every first friday after the week of holy
 sacrament shall be made into a special holy day for honoring my
 heart by a general communion and by services intended to make
 honorable amends for the indignities which it has received. and i
 promise thee that my heart will dilate to shed with abundance the
 influences of its love upon all those who pay to it these honors,
 or who bring it about that others do the same.”
“this revelation,” says mgr. bougaud, “is unquestionably the most important of all the
 revelations which have illumined the church since that of the
 incarnation and of the lord's supper.... after the eucharist, the
 supreme effort of the sacred heart.” well,
 what were its good fruits for margaret mary's life? apparently little
 else but sufferings and prayers and absences of mind and swoons and
 ecstasies. she became increasingly useless about the convent, her
 absorption in christ's love,—
“which grew upon her daily, rendering her more and
 more incapable of attending to external duties. they tried her in the
 infirmary, but without much success, although her kindness, zeal, and
 devotion were without bounds, and her charity rose to acts of such a
 heroism that our readers would not bear the recital
[pg ]of them. they tried her in the kitchen, but were
 forced to give it up as hopeless—everything dropped out of her
 hands. the admirable humility with which she made amends for her
 clumsiness could not prevent this from being prejudicial to the
 order and regularity which must always reign in a community. they
 put her in the school, where the little girls cherished her, and
 cut pieces out of her clothes [for relics] as if she were already a
 saint, but where she was too absorbed inwardly to pay the necessary
 attention. poor dear sister, even less after her visions than
 before them was she a denizen of earth, and they had to leave her
 in her heaven.”
poor dear sister,
 indeed! amiable and good, but so feeble of intellectual outlook that
 it would be too much to ask of us, with our protestant and modern
 education, to feel anything but indulgent pity for the kind of
 saintship which she embodies. a lower example still of theopathic
 saintliness is that of saint gertrude, a benedictine nun of the
 thirteenth century, whose “revelations,” a well-known mystical authority,
 consist mainly of proofs of christ's partiality for her undeserving
 person. assurances of his love, intimacies and caresses and
 compliments of the most absurd and puerile sort, addressed by christ
 to gertrude as an individual, form the tissue of this paltry-minded
 recital. in
 reading such a narrative, [pg
 ] we
 realize the gap between the thirteenth and the twentieth century, and
 we feel that saintliness of character may yield almost absolutely
 worthless fruits if it be associated with such inferior intellectual
 sympathies. what with science, idealism, and democracy, our own
 imagination has grown to need a god of an entirely different
 temperament from that being interested exclusively in dealing out
 personal favors, with whom our ancestors were so contented. smitten
 as we are with the vision of social righteousness, a god indifferent
 to everything but adulation, and full of partiality for his
 individual favorites, lacks an essential element of largeness; and
 even the best professional sainthood of former centuries, pent in as
 it is to such a conception, seems to us curiously shallow and
 unedifying.
take saint teresa,
 for example, one of the ablest women, in many respects, of whose life
 we have the record. she had a powerful intellect of the practical
 order. she wrote admirable descriptive psychology, possessed a will
 equal to any emergency, great talent for politics and business, a
 buoyant disposition, and a first-rate literary style. she was
 tenaciously aspiring, and put her whole life at the service of her
 religious ideals. yet so paltry were these, according to our present
 way of thinking, that (although i know that others have been moved
 differently) i confess that my only feeling in [pg ] reading her has been pity that so much
 vitality of soul should have found such poor employment.
in spite of the
 sufferings which she endured, there is a curious flavor of
 superficiality about her genius. a birmingham anthropologist, dr.
 jordan, has divided the human race into two types, whom he calls
 “shrews” and “non-shrews” respectively. the
 shrew-type is defined as possessing an “active unimpassioned temperament.” in other
 words, shrews are the “motors,” rather
 than the “sensories,” and
 their expressions are as a rule more energetic than the feelings
 which appear to prompt them. saint teresa, paradoxical as such a
 judgment may sound, was a typical shrew, in this sense of the term.
 the bustle of her style, as well as of her life, proves it. not only
 must she receive unheard-of personal favors and spiritual graces from
 her saviour, but she must immediately write about them and exploiter
 them professionally, and use her expertness to give instruction to
 those less privileged. her voluble egotism; her sense, not of radical
 bad being, as the really contrite have it, but of her “faults” and “imperfections” in the plural; her stereotyped
 humility and return upon herself, as covered with “confusion” at each new manifestation of god's
 singular partiality for a person so unworthy, are typical of
 shrewdom: a paramountly feeling nature would be objectively lost in
 gratitude, and silent. she had some public instincts, it is true; she
 hated the lutherans, and longed for the church's triumph over them;
 but in the main her idea of religion seems to have been that of an
 endless amatory flirtation—if one may say so without
 irreverence—between [pg
 ] the
 devotee and the deity; and apart from helping younger nuns to go in
 this direction by the inspiration of her example and instruction,
 there is absolutely no human use in her, or sign of any general human
 interest. yet the spirit of her age, far from rebuking her, exalted
 her as superhuman.
we have to pass a
 similar judgment on the whole notion of saintship based on merits.
 any god who, on the one hand, can care to keep a pedantically minute
 account of individual shortcomings, and on the other can feel such
 partialities, and load particular creatures with such insipid marks
 of favor, is too small-minded a god for our credence. when luther, in
 his immense manly way, swept off by a stroke of his hand the very
 notion of a debit and credit account kept with individuals by the
 almighty, he stretched the soul's imagination and saved theology from
 puerility.
so much for mere
 devotion, divorced from the intellectual conceptions which might
 guide it towards bearing useful human fruit.
the next saintly
 virtue in which we find excess is purity. in theopathic characters,
 like those whom we have just considered, the love of god must not be
 mixed with any other love. father and mother, sisters, brothers, and
 friends are felt as interfering distractions; for sensitiveness and
 narrowness, when they occur together, as they often do, require above
 all things a simplified world to dwell in. variety and confusion are
 too much for their powers of comfortable adaptation. but whereas your
 aggressive pietist reaches his unity objectively, by forcibly
 stamping disorder and divergence out, your retiring pietist reaches
 his subjectively, leaving disorder in the world at large, but making
 a smaller world in which he dwells [pg ] himself and from which he eliminates it
 altogether. thus, alongside of the church militant with its prisons,
 dragonnades, and inquisition methods, we have the church fugient, as one might call it,
 with its hermitages, monasteries, and sectarian organizations, both
 churches pursuing the same object—to unify the life, and
 simplify the spectacle presented to the soul. a mind extremely
 sensitive to inner discords will drop one external relation after
 another, as interfering with the absorption of consciousness in
 spiritual things. amusements must go first, then conventional
 “society,” then business, then family
 duties, until at last seclusion, with a subdivision of the day into
 hours for stated religious acts, is the only thing that can be borne.
 the lives of saints are a history of successive renunciations of
 complication, one form of contact with the outer life being dropped
 after another, to save the purity of inner tone.
“is it not better,” a young sister
 [pg ] asks her superior,
 “that i should not speak at all during the
 hour of recreation, so as not to run the risk, by speaking, of
 falling into some sin of which i might not be
 conscious?” if the
 life remains a social one at all, those who take part in it must
 follow one identical rule. embosomed in this monotony, the zealot for
 purity feels clean and free once more. the minuteness of uniformity
 maintained in certain sectarian communities, whether monastic or not,
 is something almost inconceivable to a man of the world. costume,
 phraseology, hours, and habits are absolutely stereotyped, and there
 is no doubt that some persons are so made as to find in this
 stability an incomparable kind of mental rest.
we have no time to
 multiply examples, so i will let the case of saint louis of gonzaga
 serve as a type of excess in purification. i think you will agree
 that this youth carried the elimination of the external and
 discordant to a point which we cannot unreservedly admire. at the age
 of ten, his biographer says:—
“the inspiration came to him to consecrate to the
 mother of god his own virginity—that being to her the most agreeable
 of possible presents. without delay, then, and with all the fervor
 there was in him, joyous of heart, and burning with love, he made his
 vow of perpetual chastity. mary accepted the offering of his innocent
 heart, and obtained for him from god, as a recompense, the
 extraordinary grace of never feeling during his entire life the
 slightest touch of temptation against the virtue of purity. this was
 an altogether exceptional favor, rarely accorded even to saints
 themselves, and all the more marvelous in that louis dwelt always in
 courts and among great folks, where danger and opportunity are so
 unusually frequent. it is true that louis from his earliest childhood
 had shown a natural repugnance for whatever might be impure or
[pg ]unvirginal, and even for relations of any sort
 whatever between persons of opposite sex. but this made it all the
 more surprising that he should, especially since this vow, feel it
 necessary to have recourse to such a number of expedients for
 protecting against even the shadow of danger the virginity which he
 had thus consecrated. one might suppose that if any one could have
 contented himself with the ordinary precautions, prescribed for all
 christians, it would assuredly have been he. but no! in the use of
 preservatives and means of defense, in flight from the most
 insignificant occasions, from every possibility of peril, just as
 in the mortification of his flesh, he went farther than the
 majority of saints. he, who by an extraordinary protection of god's
 grace was never tempted, measured all his steps as if he were
 threatened on every side by particular dangers. thenceforward he
 never raised his eyes, either when walking in the streets, or when
 in society. not only did he avoid all business with females even
 more scrupulously than before, but he renounced all conversation
 and every kind of social recreation with them, although his father
 tried to make him take part; and he commenced only too early to
 deliver his innocent body to austerities of every
 kind.”
at the age of
 twelve, we read of this young man that “if by
 chance his mother sent one of her maids of honor to him with a
 message, he never allowed her to come in, but listened to her through
 the barely opened door, and dismissed her immediately. he did not
 like to be alone with his own mother, whether at table or in
 conversation; and when the rest of the company withdrew, he sought
 also a pretext for retiring.... several great ladies, relatives of
 his, he avoided learning to know even by sight; and he made a sort of
 treaty with his father, engaging promptly and readily to accede to
 all his wishes, if he might only be excused from all visits to
 ladies.” (ibid., p. .)[pg ]
when he was
 seventeen years old louis joined the jesuit order against
 his father's passionate entreaties, for he was heir of a princely
 house; and when a year later the father died, he took the loss as a
 “particular attention” to himself on
 god's part, and wrote letters of stilted good advice, as from a
 spiritual superior, to his grieving mother. he soon became so good a
 monk that if any one asked him the number of his brothers and
 sisters, he had to reflect and count them over before replying. a
 father asked him one day if he were never troubled by the thought of
 his family, to which, “i never think of them
 except when praying for them,” was his only answer. never was
 he seen to hold in his hand a flower or anything perfumed, that he
 might take pleasure in it. on the contrary, in the hospital, he used
 to seek for whatever was most disgusting, and eagerly snatch the
 bandages of ulcers, etc., from the hands of his companions. he
 avoided worldly talk, and immediately tried to turn every
 conversation on to pious subjects, or else he remained silent. he
 systematically refused to notice his surroundings. being ordered one
 day to bring a book from the rector's seat in the refectory, he had
 to ask where the rector sat, for in the three months he had eaten
 bread there, so carefully did he guard his eyes that he had not
 noticed the place. one day, during recess, having looked by chance on
 one of his companions, he reproached himself as for a grave sin
 against modesty. he cultivated silence, as preserving from sins of
 the tongue; and his greatest penance was the limit which his
 superiors set to his bodily penances. he sought after [pg ] false accusations and unjust reprimands
 as opportunities of humility; and such was his obedience that, when a
 room-mate, having no more paper, asked him for a sheet, he did not
 feel free to give it to him without first obtaining the permission of
 the superior, who, as such, stood in the place of god, and
 transmitted his orders.
i can find no
 other sorts of fruit than these of louis's saintship. he died in
 , in his twenty-ninth year, and is known in the church as the
 patron of all young people. on his festival, the altar in the chapel
 devoted to him in a certain church in rome “is embosomed in flowers, arranged with exquisite taste;
 and a pile of letters may be seen at its foot, written to the saint
 by young men and women, and directed to ‘paradiso.’ they are supposed to be burnt unread
 except by san luigi, who must find singular petitions in these pretty
 little missives, tied up now with a green ribbon, expressive of hope,
 now with a red one, emblematic of love,” etc.[pg ]
our final judgment
 of the worth of such a life as this will depend largely on our
 conception of god, and of the sort of conduct he is best pleased with
 in his creatures. the catholicism of the sixteenth century paid
 little heed to social righteousness; and to leave the world to the
 devil whilst saving one's own soul was then accounted no
 discreditable scheme. to-day, rightly or wrongly, helpfulness in
 general human affairs is, in consequence of one of those secular
 mutations in moral sentiment of which i spoke, deemed an essential
 element of worth in character; and to be of some public or private
 use is also reckoned as a species of divine service. other early
 jesuits, especially the missionaries among them, the xaviers,
 brébeufs, jogues, were objective minds, and fought in their way for
 the world's welfare; so their lives to-day inspire us. but when the
 intellect, as in this louis, is originally no larger than a pin's
 head, and cherishes ideas of god of corresponding smallness, the
 result, notwithstanding the heroism put forth, is on the whole
 repulsive. purity, we see in the object-lesson, is not the
 one thing needful; and it is better that a life should contract many
 a dirt-mark, than forfeit usefulness in its efforts to remain
 unspotted.[pg
proceeding onwards
 in our search of religious extravagance, we next come upon excesses
 of tenderness and charity. here saintliness has to face the charge of
 preserving the unfit, and breeding parasites and beggars.
 “resist not evil,” “love your enemies,” these are saintly maxims of
 which men of this world find it hard to speak without impatience. are
 the men of this world right, or are the saints in possession of the
 deeper range of truth?
no simple answer
 is possible. here, if anywhere, one feels the complexity of the moral
 life, and the mysteriousness of the way in which facts and ideals are
 interwoven.
perfect conduct is
 a relation between three terms: the actor, the objects for which he
 acts, and the recipients of the action. in order that conduct should
 be abstractly perfect, all three terms, intention, execution, and
 reception, should be suited to one another. the best intention will
 fail if it either work by false means or address itself to the wrong
 recipient. thus no critic or estimator of the value of conduct can
 confine himself to the actor's animus alone, apart from the other
 elements of the performance. as there is no worse lie than a truth
 misunderstood by those who hear it, so reasonable arguments,
 challenges to magnanimity, and appeals to sympathy or justice, are
 folly when we are dealing with human crocodiles and boa-constrictors.
 the saint may simply give the universe into the hands of the enemy by
 his trustfulness. he may by non-resistance cut off his own
 survival.
herbert spencer
 tells us that the perfect man's conduct will appear perfect only when
 the environment is perfect: to no inferior environment is it suitably
 adapted. we may paraphrase this by cordially admitting that
 [pg ] saintly conduct would be the
 most perfect conduct conceivable in an environment where all were
 saints already; but by adding that in an environment where few are
 saints, and many the exact reverse of saints, it must be ill adapted.
 we must frankly confess, then, using our empirical common sense and
 ordinary practical prejudices, that in the world that actually is,
 the virtues of sympathy, charity, and non-resistance may be, and
 often have been, manifested in excess. the powers of darkness have
 systematically taken advantage of them. the whole modern scientific
 organization of charity is a consequence of the failure of simply
 giving alms. the whole history of constitutional government is a
 commentary on the excellence of resisting evil, and when one cheek is
 smitten, of smiting back and not turning the other cheek also.
you will agree to
 this in general, for in spite of the gospel, in spite of quakerism,
 in spite of tolstoi, you believe in fighting fire with fire, in
 shooting down usurpers, locking up thieves, and freezing out
 vagabonds and swindlers.
and yet you are
 sure, as i am sure, that were the world confined to these
 hard-headed, hard-hearted, and hard-fisted methods exclusively, were
 there no one prompt to help a brother first, and find out afterwards
 whether he were worthy; no one willing to drown his private wrongs in
 pity for the wronger's person; no one ready to be duped many a time
 rather than live always on suspicion; no one glad to treat
 individuals passionately and impulsively rather than by general rules
 of prudence; the world would be an infinitely worse place than it is
 now to live in. the tender grace, not of a day that is dead, but of a
 day yet to be born somehow, with the golden rule grown natural, would
 be cut out from the perspective of our imaginations.[pg ]
the saints,
 existing in this way, may, with their extravagances of human
 tenderness, be prophetic. nay, innumerable times they have proved
 themselves prophetic. treating those whom they met, in spite of the
 past, in spite of all appearances, as worthy, they have stimulated
 them to be worthy, miraculously transformed
 them by their radiant example and by the challenge of their
 expectation.
from this point of
 view we may admit the human charity which we find in all saints, and
 the great excess of it which we find in some saints, to be a
 genuinely creative social force, tending to make real a degree of
 virtue which it alone is ready to assume as possible. the saints are
 authors, auctores, increasers, of goodness.
 the potentialities of development in human souls are unfathomable. so
 many who seemed irretrievably hardened have in point of fact been
 softened, converted, regenerated, in ways that amazed the subjects
 even more than they surprised the spectators, that we never can be
 sure in advance of any man that his salvation by the way of love is
 hopeless. we have no right to speak of human crocodiles and
 boa-constrictors as of fixedly incurable beings. we know not the
 complexities of personality, the smouldering emotional fires, the
 other facets of the character-polyhedron, the resources of the
 subliminal region. st. paul long ago made our ancestors familiar with
 the idea that every soul is virtually sacred. since christ died for
 us all without exception, st. paul said, we must despair of no one.
 this belief in the essential sacredness of every one expresses itself
 to-day in all sorts of humane customs and reformatory institutions,
 and in a growing aversion to the death penalty and to brutality in
 punishment. the saints, with their extravagance of human tenderness,
 are the great torch-bearers of this [pg ] belief, the tip of the wedge, the clearers of
 the darkness. like the single drops which sparkle in the sun as they
 are flung far ahead of the advancing edge of a wave-crest or of a
 flood, they show the way and are forerunners. the world is not yet
 with them, so they often seem in the midst of the world's affairs to
 be preposterous. yet they are impregnators of the world, vivifiers
 and animaters of potentialities of goodness which but for them would
 lie forever dormant. it is not possible to be quite as mean as we
 naturally are, when they have passed before us. one fire kindles
 another; and without that over-trust in human worth which they show,
 the rest of us would lie in spiritual stagnancy.
momentarily
 considered, then, the saint may waste his tenderness and be the dupe
 and victim of his charitable fever, but the general function of his
 charity in social evolution is vital and essential. if things are
 ever to move upward, some one must be ready to take the first step,
 and assume the risk of it. no one who is not willing to try charity,
 to try non-resistance as the saint is always willing, can tell
 whether these methods will or will not succeed. when they do succeed,
 they are far more powerfully successful than force or worldly
 prudence. force destroys enemies; and the best that can be said of
 prudence is that it keeps what we already have in safety. but
 non-resistance, when successful, turns enemies into friends; and
 charity regenerates its objects. these saintly methods are, as i
 said, creative energies; and genuine saints find in the elevated
 excitement with which their faith endows them an authority and
 impressiveness which makes them irresistible in situations where men
 of shallower nature cannot get on at all without the use of worldly
 prudence. this practical proof that worldly wisdom may be safely
 transcended is the saint's [pg
 magic gift to mankind. not
 only does his vision of a better world console us for the generally
 prevailing prose [pg
 ] and
 barrenness; but even when on the whole we have to confess him ill
 adapted, he makes some converts, and the environment gets better for
 his ministry. he is an effective ferment of goodness, a slow
 transmuter of the earthly into a more heavenly order.
in this respect
 the utopian dreams of social justice in which many contemporary
 socialists and anarchists indulge are, in spite of their
 impracticability and non-adaptation to present environmental
 conditions, analogous to the saint's belief in an existent kingdom of
 heaven. they help to break the edge of the general reign of hardness,
 and are slow leavens of a better order.
the next topic in
 order is asceticism, which i fancy you are all ready to consider
 without argument a virtue liable to extravagance and excess. the
 optimism and refinement of the modern imagination has, as i have
 already said elsewhere, changed the attitude of the church towards
 corporeal mortification, and a suso or a saint peter of
 alcantara appear
 to us to-day rather in the [pg
 light of tragic mountebanks than of sane men inspiring us with
 respect. if the inner dispositions are right, we ask, what need of
 all this torment, this violation of the outer nature? it keeps the
 outer nature too important. any one who is genuinely emancipated from
 the flesh will look on pleasures and pains, abundance and privation,
 as alike irrelevant and indifferent. he can engage in actions and
 experience enjoyments without fear of corruption or enslavement. as
 the bhagavad-gita says, only those need renounce worldly actions who
 are still inwardly attached thereto. if one be really unattached to
 the fruits of action, one may mix in the world with equanimity. i
 quoted in a former lecture saint augustine's antinomian saying: if
 you only love god enough, you may safely follow all your
 inclinations. “he needs no devotional
 practices,” is one of ramakrishna's maxims, “whose heart is moved to tears at the mere mention of the
 name of hari.” and the
 buddha, in pointing out what he called “the
 middle way” to his disciples, told them to abstain from both
 extremes, excessive mortification being as unreal and unworthy as
 mere desire and pleasure. the only perfect life, he said, is that of
 inner wisdom, which makes one thing as indifferent to [pg ] us as another, and thus leads to rest, to
 peace, and to nirvâna.
we find
 accordingly that as ascetic saints have grown older, and directors of
 conscience more experienced, they usually have shown a tendency to
 lay less stress on special bodily mortifications. catholic teachers
 have always professed the rule that, since health is needed for
 efficiency in god's service, health must not be sacrificed to
 mortification. the general optimism and healthy-mindedness of liberal
 protestant circles to-day makes mortification for mortification's
 sake repugnant to us. we can no longer sympathize with cruel deities,
 and the notion that god can take delight in the spectacle of
 sufferings self-inflicted in his honor is abhorrent. in consequence
 of all these motives you probably are disposed, unless some special
 utility can be shown in some individual's discipline, to treat the
 general tendency to asceticism as pathological.
yet i believe that
 a more careful consideration of the whole matter, distinguishing
 between the general good intention of asceticism and the uselessness
 of some of the particular acts of which it may be guilty, ought to
 rehabilitate it in our esteem. for in its spiritual meaning
 asceticism stands for nothing less than for the essence of the
 twice-born philosophy. it symbolizes, lamely enough no doubt, but
 sincerely, the belief that there is an element of real wrongness in
 this world, which is neither to be ignored nor evaded, but which must
 be squarely met and overcome by an appeal to the soul's heroic
 resources, and neutralized and cleansed away by suffering. as against
 this view, the ultra-optimistic form of the once-born philosophy
 thinks we may treat evil by the method of ignoring. let a man who, by
 fortunate health and circumstances, [pg ] escapes the suffering of any great amount of
 evil in his own person, also close his eyes to it as it exists in the
 wider universe outside his private experience, and he will be quit of
 it altogether, and can sail through life happily on a healthy-minded
 basis. but we saw in our lectures on melancholy how precarious this
 attempt necessarily is. moreover it is but for the individual; and
 leaves the evil outside of him, unredeemed and unprovided for in his
 philosophy.
no such attempt
 can be a general solution of the problem; and
 to minds of sombre tinge, who naturally feel life as a tragic
 mystery, such optimism is a shallow dodge or mean evasion. it
 accepts, in lieu of a real deliverance, what is a lucky personal
 accident merely, a cranny to escape by. it leaves the general world
 unhelped and still in the clutch of satan. the real deliverance, the
 twice-born folk insist, must be of universal application. pain and
 wrong and death must be fairly met and overcome in higher excitement,
 or else their sting remains essentially unbroken. if one has ever
 taken the fact of the prevalence of tragic death in this world's
 history fairly into his mind,—freezing, drowning, entombment alive,
 wild beasts, worse men, and hideous diseases,—he can with difficulty,
 it seems to me, continue his own career of worldly prosperity without
 suspecting that he may all the while not be really inside the game,
 that he may lack the great initiation.
well, this is
 exactly what asceticism thinks; and it voluntarily takes the
 initiation. life is neither farce nor genteel comedy, it says, but
 something we must sit at in mourning garments, hoping its bitter
 taste will purge us of our folly. the wild and the heroic are indeed
 such rooted parts of it that healthy-mindedness pure and simple, with
 its sentimental optimism, can hardly be regarded [pg ] by any thinking man as a serious
 solution. phrases of neatness, cosiness, and comfort can never be an
 answer to the sphinx's riddle.
in these remarks i
 am leaning only upon mankind's common instinct for reality, which in
 point of fact has always held the world to be essentially a theatre
 for heroism. in heroism, we feel, life's supreme mystery is hidden.
 we tolerate no one who has no capacity whatever for it in any
 direction. on the other hand, no matter what a man's frailties
 otherwise may be, if he be willing to risk death, and still more if
 he suffer it heroically, in the service he has chosen, the fact
 consecrates him forever. inferior to ourselves in this or that way,
 if yet we cling to life, and he is able “to
 fling it away like a flower” as caring nothing for it, we
 account him in the deepest way our born superior. each of us in his
 own person feels that a high-hearted indifference to life would
 expiate all his shortcomings.
the metaphysical
 mystery, thus recognized by common sense, that he who feeds on death
 that feeds on men possesses life supereminently and excellently, and
 meets best the secret demands of the universe, is the truth of which
 asceticism has been the faithful champion. the folly of the cross, so
 inexplicable by the intellect, has yet its indestructible vital
 meaning.
representatively,
 then, and symbolically, and apart from the vagaries into which the
 unenlightened intellect of former times may have let it wander,
 asceticism must, i believe, be acknowledged to go with the profounder
 way of handling the gift of existence. naturalistic optimism is mere
 syllabub and flattery and sponge-cake in comparison. the practical
 course of action for us, as religious men, would therefore, it seems
 to me, not be simply to turn our backs upon the ascetic impulse, as
 most of us to-day [pg
 turn them, but rather to discover some outlet for it of which the
 fruits in the way of privation and hardship might be objectively
 useful. the older monastic asceticism occupied itself with pathetic
 futilities, or terminated in the mere egotism of the individual,
 increasing his own perfection. but is
 it not possible for us to discard most of these older forms of
 mortification, and yet find saner channels for the heroism which
 inspired them?
does not, for
 example, the worship of material luxury and wealth, which constitutes
 so large a portion of the “spirit” of
 our age, make somewhat for effeminacy and unmanliness? is not the
 exclusively sympathetic and facetious way in which most children are
 brought up to-day—so different from the education of a hundred years
 ago, especially in evangelical circles—in danger, in spite of its
 many advantages, of developing a certain trashiness of fibre? are
 there not hereabouts some points of application for a renovated and
 revised ascetic discipline?
many of you would
 recognize such dangers, but would point to athletics, militarism, and
 individual and national enterprise and adventure as the remedies.
 these contemporary ideals are quite as remarkable for the energy with
 which they make for heroic standards of life, as contemporary
 religion is remarkable for the way in which it neglects them. war and
 adventure assuredly keep all who engage in them from treating
 themselves too tenderly. they demand such incredible efforts, depth
 [pg ] beyond depth of exertion, both
 in degree and in duration, that the whole scale of motivation alters.
 discomfort and annoyance, hunger and wet, pain and cold, squalor and
 filth, cease to have any deterrent operation whatever. death turns
 into a commonplace matter, and its usual power to check our action
 vanishes. with the annulling of these customary inhibitions, ranges
 of new energy are set free, and life seems cast upon a higher plane
 of power.
the beauty of war
 in this respect is that it is so congruous with ordinary human
 nature. ancestral evolution has made us all potential warriors; so
 the most insignificant individual, when thrown into an army in the
 field, is weaned from whatever excess of tenderness towards his
 precious person he may bring with him, and may easily develop into a
 monster of insensibility.
but when we
 compare the military type of self-severity with that of the ascetic
 saint, we find a world-wide difference in all their spiritual
 concomitants.
“ ‘live and let
 live,’ ” writes a clear-headed austrian officer,
 “is no device for an army. contempt for one's
 own comrades, for the troops of the enemy, and, above all, fierce
 contempt for one's own person, are what war demands of every one. far
 better is it for an army to be too savage, too cruel, too barbarous,
 than to possess too much sentimentality and human reasonableness. if
 the soldier is to be good for anything as a soldier, he must be
 exactly the opposite of a reasoning and thinking man. the measure of
 goodness in him is his possible use in war. war, and even peace,
 require of the soldier absolutely peculiar standards of morality. the
 recruit brings with him common moral notions, of which he must seek
 immediately to get rid. for him victory, success, must be everything. the most barbaric
 tendencies [pg
 ] in
 men come to life again in war, and for war's uses they are
 incommensurably good.”
these words are of
 course literally true. the immediate aim of the soldier's life is, as
 moltke said, destruction, and nothing but destruction; and whatever
 constructions wars result in are remote and non-military.
 consequently the soldier cannot train himself to be too feelingless
 to all those usual sympathies and respects, whether for persons or
 for things, that make for conservation. yet the fact remains that war
 is a school of strenuous life and heroism; and, being in the line of
 aboriginal instinct, is the only school that as yet is universally
 available. but when we gravely ask ourselves whether this wholesale
 organization of irrationality and crime be our only bulwark against
 effeminacy, we stand aghast at the thought, and think more kindly of
 ascetic religion. one hears of the mechanical equivalent of heat.
 what we now need to discover in the social realm is the moral
 equivalent of war: something heroic that will speak to men as
 universally as war does, and yet will be as compatible with their
 spiritual selves as war has proved itself to be incompatible. i have
 often thought that in the old monkish poverty-worship, in spite of
 the pedantry which infested it, there might be something like that
 moral equivalent of war which we are seeking. may not voluntarily
 accepted poverty be “the strenuous
 life,” without the need of crushing weaker peoples?
poverty indeed
 is the strenuous life,—without brass
 bands or uniforms or hysteric popular applause or lies or
 circumlocutions; and when one sees the way in which wealth-getting
 enters as an ideal into the very bone and marrow of our generation,
 one wonders whether a revival [pg ] of the belief that poverty is a worthy
 religious vocation may not be “the
 transformation of military courage,” and the spiritual reform
 which our time stands most in need of.
among us
 english-speaking peoples especially do the praises of poverty need
 once more to be boldly sung. we have grown literally afraid to be
 poor. we despise any one who elects to be poor in order to simplify
 and save his inner life. if he does not join the general scramble and
 pant with the money-making street, we deem him spiritless and lacking
 in ambition. we have lost the power even of imagining what the
 ancient idealization of poverty could have meant: the liberation from
 material attachments, the unbribed soul, the manlier indifference,
 the paying our way by what we are or do and not by what we have, the
 right to fling away our life at any moment irresponsibly,—the more
 athletic trim, in short, the moral fighting shape. when we of the
 so-called better classes are scared as men were never scared in
 history at material ugliness and hardship; when we put off marriage
 until our house can be artistic, and quake at the thought of having a
 child without a bank-account and doomed to manual labor, it is time
 for thinking men to protest against so unmanly and irreligious a
 state of opinion.
it is true that so
 far as wealth gives time for ideal ends and exercise to ideal
 energies, wealth is better than poverty and ought to be chosen. but
 wealth does this in only a portion of the actual cases. elsewhere the
 desire to gain wealth and the fear to lose it are our chief breeders
 of cowardice and propagators of corruption. there are thousands of
 conjunctures in which a wealth-bound man must be a slave, whilst a
 man for whom poverty has no terrors becomes a freeman. think of the
 strength which personal indifference to poverty would [pg ] give us if we were devoted to unpopular
 causes. we need no longer hold our tongues or fear to vote the
 revolutionary or reformatory ticket. our stocks might fall, our hopes
 of promotion vanish, our salaries stop, our club doors close in our
 faces; yet, while we lived, we would imperturbably bear witness to
 the spirit, and our example would help to set free our generation.
 the cause would need its funds, but we its servants would be potent
 in proportion as we personally were contented with our poverty.
i recommend this
 matter to your serious pondering, for it is certain that the
 prevalent fear of poverty among the educated classes is the worst
 moral disease from which our civilization suffers.
i have now said
 all that i can usefully say about the several fruits of religion as
 they are manifested in saintly lives, so i will make a brief review
 and pass to my more general conclusions.
our question, you
 will remember, is as to whether religion stands approved by its
 fruits, as these are exhibited in the saintly type of character.
 single attributes of saintliness may, it is true, be temperamental
 endowments, found in non-religious individuals. but the whole group
 of them forms a combination which, as such, is religious, for it
 seems to flow from the sense of the divine as from its psychological
 centre. whoever possesses strongly this sense comes naturally to
 think that the smallest details of this world derive infinite
 significance from their relation to an unseen divine order. the
 thought of this order yields him a superior denomination of
 happiness, and a steadfastness of soul with which no other can
 compare. in social relations his serviceability is exemplary; he
 abounds in impulses to help. his help is inward [pg ] as well as outward, for his sympathy
 reaches souls as well as bodies, and kindles unsuspected faculties
 therein. instead of placing happiness where common men place it, in
 comfort, he places it in a higher kind of inner excitement, which
 converts discomforts into sources of cheer and annuls unhappiness. so
 he turns his back upon no duty, however thankless; and when we are in
 need of assistance, we can count upon the saint lending his hand with
 more certainty than we can count upon any other person. finally, his
 humble-mindedness and his ascetic tendencies save him from the petty
 personal pretensions which so obstruct our ordinary social
 intercourse, and his purity gives us in him a clean man for a
 companion. felicity, purity, charity, patience, self-severity,—these
 are splendid excellencies, and the saint of all men shows them in the
 completest possible measure.
but, as we saw,
 all these things together do not make saints infallible. when their
 intellectual outlook is narrow, they fall into all sorts of holy
 excesses, fanaticism or theopathic absorption, self-torment, prudery,
 scrupulosity, gullibility, and morbid inability to meet the world. by
 the very intensity of his fidelity to the paltry ideals with which an
 inferior intellect may inspire him, a saint can be even more
 objectionable and damnable than a superficial carnal man would be in
 the same situation. we must judge him not sentimentally only, and not
 in isolation, but using our own intellectual standards, placing him
 in his environment, and estimating his total function.
now in the matter
 of intellectual standards, we must bear in mind that it is unfair,
 where we find narrowness of mind, always to impute it as a vice to
 the individual, for in religious and theological matters he probably
 absorbs his narrowness from his generation. moreover, we [pg ] must not confound the essentials of
 saintliness, which are those general passions of which i have spoken,
 with its accidents, which are the special determinations of these
 passions at any historical moment. in these determinations the saints
 will usually be loyal to the temporary idols of their tribe. taking
 refuge in monasteries was as much an idol of the tribe in the middle
 ages, as bearing a hand in the world's work is to-day. saint francis
 or saint bernard, were they living to-day, would undoubtedly be
 leading consecrated lives of some sort, but quite as undoubtedly they
 would not lead them in retirement. our animosity to special historic
 manifestations must not lead us to give away the saintly impulses in
 their essential nature to the tender mercies of inimical critics.
the most inimical
 critic of the saintly impulses whom i know is nietzsche. he contrasts
 them with the worldly passions as we find these embodied in the
 predaceous military character, altogether to the advantage of the
 latter. your born saint, it must be confessed, has something about
 him which often makes the gorge of a carnal man rise, so it will be
 worth while to consider the contrast in question more fully.
dislike of the
 saintly nature seems to be a negative result of the biologically
 useful instinct of welcoming leadership, and glorifying the chief of
 the tribe. the chief is the potential, if not the actual tyrant, the
 masterful, overpowering man of prey. we confess our inferiority and
 grovel before him. we quail under his glance, and are at the same
 time proud of owning so dangerous a lord. such instinctive and
 submissive hero-worship must have been indispensable in primeval
 tribal life. in the endless wars of those times, leaders were
 absolutely needed for the tribe's survival. if there were any tribes
 who owned no leaders, they can have left no [pg ] issue to narrate their doom. the leaders always
 had good consciences, for conscience in them coalesced with will, and
 those who looked on their face were as much smitten with wonder at
 their freedom from inner restraint as with awe at the energy of their
 outward performances.
compared with
 these beaked and taloned graspers of the world, saints are
 herbivorous animals, tame and harmless barn-yard poultry. there are
 saints whose beard you may, if you ever care to, pull with impunity.
 such a man excites no thrills of wonder veiled in terror; his
 conscience is full of scruples and returns; he stuns us neither by
 his inward freedom nor his outward power; and unless he found within
 us an altogether different faculty of admiration to appeal to, we
 should pass him by with contempt.
in point of fact,
 he does appeal to a different faculty. reënacted in human nature is
 the fable of the wind, the sun, and the traveler. the sexes embody
 the discrepancy. the woman loves the man the more admiringly the
 stormier he shows himself, and the world deifies its rulers the more
 for being willful and unaccountable. but the woman in turn subjugates
 the man by the mystery of gentleness in beauty, and the saint has
 always charmed the world by something similar. mankind is susceptible
 and suggestible in opposite directions, and the rivalry of influences
 is unsleeping. the saintly and the worldly ideal pursue their feud in
 literature as much as in real life.
for nietzsche the
 saint represents little but sneakingness and slavishness. he is the
 sophisticated invalid, the degenerate par
 excellence, the man of insufficient vitality. his
 prevalence would put the human type in danger.
“the sick are the greatest danger for the well. the
 weaker, not the stronger, are the strong's undoing. it is not
fear of our fellow-man, which we should wish to see
 diminished; for [pg
 ]fear rouses those
 who are strong to become terrible in turn themselves, and preserves
 the hard-earned and successful type of humanity. what is to be
 dreaded by us more than any other doom is not fear, but rather the
 great disgust, not fear, but rather the great pity—disgust and pity
 for our human fellows.... the morbid
are our greatest peril—not the
‘bad’ men,
 not the predatory beings. those born wrong, the miscarried, the
 broken—they it is, the weakest,
 who are undermining the vitality of the race, poisoning our trust
 in life, and putting humanity in question. every look of them is a
 sigh,—‘would i were
 something other! i am sick and tired of what i
 am.’ in this swamp-soil of self-contempt, every
 poisonous weed flourishes, and all so small, so secret, so
 dishonest, and so sweetly rotten. here swarm the worms of
 sensitiveness and resentment; here the air smells odious with
 secrecy, with what is not to be acknowledged; here is woven
 endlessly the net of the meanest of conspiracies, the conspiracy of
 those who suffer against those who succeed and are victorious; here
 the very aspect of the victorious is hated—as if health, success,
 strength, pride, and the sense of power were in themselves things
 vicious, for which one ought eventually to make bitter expiation.
 oh, how these people would themselves like to inflict the
 expiation, how they thirst to be the hangmen! and all the while
 their duplicity never confesses their hatred to be
 hatred.”
poor nietzsche's
 antipathy is itself sickly enough, but we all know what he means, and
 he expresses well the clash between the two ideals. the
 carnivorous-minded “strong man,” the
 adult male and cannibal, can see nothing but mouldiness and
 morbidness in the saint's gentleness and self-severity, and regards
 him with pure loathing. the whole feud revolves essentially upon two
 pivots: shall the seen world or the unseen world be our chief sphere
 of adaptation? and must our means of adaptation in this seen world be
 aggressiveness or non-resistance?[pg ]
the debate is
 serious. in some sense and to some degree both worlds must be
 acknowledged and taken account of; and in the seen world both
 aggressiveness and non-resistance are needful. it is a question of
 emphasis, of more or less. is the saint's type or the strong-man's
 type the more ideal?
it has often been
 supposed, and even now, i think, it is supposed by most persons, that
 there can be one intrinsically ideal type of human character. a
 certain kind of man, it is imagined, must be the best man absolutely
 and apart from the utility of his function, apart from economical
 considerations. the saint's type, and the knight's or gentleman's
 type, have always been rival claimants of this absolute ideality; and
 in the ideal of military religious orders both types were in a manner
 blended. according to the empirical philosophy, however, all ideals
 are matters of relation. it would be absurd, for example, to ask for
 a definition of “the ideal horse,” so
 long as dragging drays and running races, bearing children, and
 jogging about with tradesmen's packages all remain as indispensable
 differentiations of equine function. you may take what you call a
 general all-round animal as a compromise, but he will be inferior to
 any horse of a more specialized type, in some one particular
 direction. we must not forget this now when, in discussing
 saintliness, we ask if it be an ideal type of manhood. we must test
 it by its economical relations.
i think that the
 method which mr. spencer uses in his data of ethics will help to fix
 our opinion. ideality in conduct is altogether a matter of
 adaptation. a society where all were invariably aggressive would
 destroy itself by inner friction, and in a society where some are
 aggressive, others must be non-resistant, if there is to be any kind
 of order. this is the present constitution of society, [pg ] and to the mixture we owe many of our
 blessings. but the aggressive members of society are always tending
 to become bullies, robbers, and swindlers; and no one believes that
 such a state of things as we now live in is the millennium. it is
 meanwhile quite possible to conceive an imaginary society in which
 there should be no aggressiveness, but only sympathy and
 fairness,—any small community of true friends now realizes such a
 society. abstractly considered, such a society on a large scale would
 be the millennium, for every good thing might be realized there with
 no expense of friction. to such a millennial society the saint would
 be entirely adapted. his peaceful modes of appeal would be
 efficacious over his companions, and there would be no one extant to
 take advantage of his non-resistance. the saint is therefore
 abstractly a higher type of man than the “strong man,” because he is adapted to the highest
 society conceivable, whether that society ever be concretely possible
 or not. the strong man would immediately tend by his presence to make
 that society deteriorate. it would become inferior in everything save
 in a certain kind of bellicose excitement, dear to men as they now
 are.
but if we turn
 from the abstract question to the actual situation, we find that the
 individual saint may be well or ill adapted, according to particular
 circumstances. there is, in short, no absoluteness in the excellence
 of sainthood. it must be confessed that as far as this world goes,
 any one who makes an out-and-out saint of himself does so at his
 peril. if he is not a large enough man, he may appear more
 insignificant and contemptible, for all his saintship, than if he had
 remained a worldling.
 accordingly religion has seldom been so radically [pg ] taken in our western world that the
 devotee could not mix it with some worldly temper. it has always
 found good men who could follow most of its impulses, but who stopped
 short when it came to non-resistance. christ himself was fierce upon
 occasion. cromwells, stonewall jacksons, gordons, show that
 christians can be strong men also.
how is success to
 be absolutely measured when there are so many environments and so
 many ways of looking at the adaptation? it cannot be measured
 absolutely; the verdict will vary according to the point of view
 adopted. from the biological point of view saint paul was a failure,
 because he was beheaded. yet he was magnificently adapted to the
 larger environment of history; and so far as any saint's example is a
 leaven of righteousness in the world, and draws it in the direction
 of more prevalent habits of saintliness, he is a success, no matter
 what his immediate bad fortune may be. the greatest saints, the
 spiritual heroes whom every one acknowledges, the francises,
 bernards, luthers, loyolas, wesleys, channings, moodys, gratrys, the
 phillips brookses, the agnes joneses, margaret hallahans, and dora
 pattisons, are successes from the outset. they show themselves, and
 there is no question; every one perceives their strength and stature.
 their sense of mystery in things, their passion, their goodness,
 irradiate about them and enlarge their outlines while they soften
 them. they are like pictures with an atmosphere and background; and,
 placed alongside of them, the strong men of this world and no other
 seem as dry as sticks, as hard and crude as blocks of stone or
 brickbats.[pg
in a general way,
 then, and “on the whole,” our
 abandonment of theological criteria, and our testing of religion by
 practical common sense and the empirical method, leave it in
 possession of its towering place in history. economically, the
 saintly group of qualities is indispensable to the world's welfare.
 the great saints are immediate successes; the smaller ones are at
 least heralds and harbingers, and they may be leavens also, of a
 better mundane order. let us be saints, then, if we can, whether or
 not we succeed visibly and temporally. but in our father's house are
 many mansions, and each of us must discover for himself the kind of
 religion and the amount of saintship which best comports with what he
 believes to be his powers and feels to be his truest mission and
 vocation. there are no successes to be guaranteed and no set orders
 to be given to individuals, so long as we follow the methods of
 empirical philosophy.
this is my
 conclusion so far. i know that on some of your minds it leaves a
 feeling of wonder that such a method should have been applied to such
 a subject, and this in spite of all those remarks about empiricism
 which i made at the beginning of lecture xiii. how,
 you say, can religion, which believes in two worlds and an invisible
 order, be estimated by the adaptation of its fruits to this world's
 order alone? it is its truth, not its utility, you insist,
 upon which our verdict ought to depend. if religion is true, its
 fruits are good fruits, even though in this world they should prove
 uniformly ill adapted and full of naught but pathos. it goes back,
 then, after all, to the question of the truth of theology. the plot
 inevitably thickens upon us; we cannot escape theoretical
 considerations. i propose, then, that to some [pg ] degree we face the responsibility.
 religious persons have often, though not uniformly, professed to see
 truth in a special manner. that manner is known as mysticism. i will
 consequently now proceed to treat at some length of mystical
 phenomena, and after that, though more briefly, i will consider
 religious philosophy.
[pg ]
lectures xvi and xvii.
 mysticism.
over and over
 again in these lectures i have raised points and left them open and
 unfinished until we should have come to the subject of mysticism.
 some of you, i fear, may have smiled as you noted my reiterated
 postponements. but now the hour has come when mysticism must be faced
 in good earnest, and those broken threads wound up together. one may
 say truly, i think, that personal religious experience has its root
 and centre in mystical states of consciousness; so for us, who in
 these lectures are treating personal experience as the exclusive
 subject of our study, such states of consciousness ought to form the
 vital chapter from which the other chapters get their light. whether
 my treatment of mystical states will shed more light or darkness, i
 do not know, for my own constitution shuts me out from their
 enjoyment almost entirely, and i can speak of them only at second
 hand. but though forced to look upon the subject so externally, i
 will be as objective and receptive as i can; and i think i shall at
 least succeed in convincing you of the reality of the states in
 question, and of the paramount importance of their function.
first of all,
 then, i ask, what does the expression “mystical states of consciousness” mean? how do we
 part off mystical states from other states?
the words
 “mysticism” and “mystical” are often used as terms of mere
 reproach, to throw at any opinion which we regard as vague and vast
 and sentimental, and without [pg ] a base in either facts or logic. for some
 writers a “mystic” is any person who
 believes in thought-transference, or spirit-return. employed in this
 way the word has little value: there are too many less ambiguous
 synonyms. so, to keep it useful by restricting it, i will do what i
 did in the case of the word “religion,” and simply propose to you four marks
 which, when an experience has them, may justify us in calling it
 mystical for the purpose of the present lectures. in this way we
 shall save verbal disputation, and the recriminations that generally
 go therewith.
. ineffability.—the handiest of the
 marks by which i classify a state of mind as mystical is negative.
 the subject of it immediately says that it defies expression, that no
 adequate report of its contents can be given in words. it follows
 from this that its quality must be directly experienced; it cannot be
 imparted or transferred to others. in this peculiarity mystical
 states are more like states of feeling than like states of intellect.
 no one can make clear to another who has never had a certain feeling,
 in what the quality or worth of it consists. one must have musical
 ears to know the value of a symphony; one must have been in love
 one's self to understand a lover's state of mind. lacking the heart
 or ear, we cannot interpret the musician or the lover justly, and are
 even likely to consider him weak-minded or absurd. the mystic finds
 that most of us accord to his experiences an equally incompetent
 treatment.
. noetic
 quality.—although so similar to states of feeling,
 mystical states seem to those who experience them to be also states
 of knowledge. they are states of insight into depths of truth
 unplumbed by the discursive intellect. they are illuminations,
 revelations, full of significance and importance, all inarticulate
 though they [pg
 remain; and as a rule they carry with them a curious sense of
 authority for after-time.
these two
 characters will entitle any state to be called mystical, in the sense
 in which i use the word. two other qualities are less sharply marked,
 but are usually found. these are:—
. transiency.—mystical states cannot
 be sustained for long. except in rare instances, half an hour, or at
 most an hour or two, seems to be the limit beyond which they fade
 into the light of common day. often, when faded, their quality can
 but imperfectly be reproduced in memory; but when they recur it is
 recognized; and from one recurrence to another it is susceptible of
 continuous development in what is felt as inner richness and
 importance.
. passivity.—although the oncoming
 of mystical states may be facilitated by preliminary voluntary
 operations, as by fixing the attention, or going through certain
 bodily performances, or in other ways which manuals of mysticism
 prescribe; yet when the characteristic sort of consciousness once has
 set in, the mystic feels as if his own will were in abeyance, and
 indeed sometimes as if he were grasped and held by a superior power.
 this latter peculiarity connects mystical states with certain
 definite phenomena of secondary or alternative personality, such as
 prophetic speech, automatic writing, or the mediumistic trance. when
 these latter conditions are well pronounced, however, there may be no
 recollection whatever of the phenomenon, and it may have no
 significance for the subject's usual inner life, to which, as it
 were, it makes a mere interruption. mystical states, strictly so
 called, are never merely interruptive. some memory of their content
 always remains, and a profound sense of their importance. they modify
 the inner life [pg
 ] of
 the subject between the times of their recurrence. sharp divisions in
 this region are, however, difficult to make, and we find all sorts of
 gradations and mixtures.
these four
 characteristics are sufficient to mark out a group of states of
 consciousness peculiar enough to deserve a special name and to call
 for careful study. let it then be called the mystical group.
our next step
 should be to gain acquaintance with some typical examples.
 professional mystics at the height of their development have often
 elaborately organized experiences and a philosophy based thereupon.
 but you remember what i said in my first lecture: phenomena are best
 understood when placed within their series, studied in their germ and
 in their over-ripe decay, and compared with their exaggerated and
 degenerated kindred. the range of mystical experience is very wide,
 much too wide for us to cover in the time at our disposal. yet the
 method of serial study is so essential for interpretation that if we
 really wish to reach conclusions we must use it. i will begin,
 therefore, with phenomena which claim no special religious
 significance, and end with those of which the religious pretensions
 are extreme.
the simplest
 rudiment of mystical experience would seem to be that deepened sense
 of the significance of a maxim or formula which occasionally sweeps
 over one. “i've heard that said all my
 life,” we exclaim, “but i never
 realized its full meaning until now.” “when a fellow-monk,” said luther, “one day repeated the words of the creed: ‘i believe in the forgiveness of sins,’ i saw the
 scripture in an entirely new light; and straightway i felt as if i
 were born anew. it was as if i had found the door of paradise thrown
 wide open.” this
 sense [pg ] of deeper significance
 is not confined to rational propositions. single words, and
 conjunctions of words, effects of light on land and sea, odors and
 musical sounds, all bring it when the mind is tuned aright. most of
 us can remember the strangely moving power of passages in certain
 poems read when we were young, irrational doorways as they were
 through which the mystery of fact, the wildness and the pang of life,
 stole into our hearts and thrilled them. the words have now perhaps
 become mere polished surfaces for us; but lyric poetry and music are
 alive and significant only in proportion as they fetch these vague
 vistas of a life continuous with our own, beckoning and inviting, yet
 ever eluding our pursuit. we are alive or dead to the eternal inner
 message of the arts according as we have kept or lost this mystical
 susceptibility.
a more pronounced
 step forward on the mystical ladder is found in an extremely frequent
 phenomenon, that sudden feeling, namely, which sometimes sweeps over
 us, of having “been here before,” as
 if at some indefinite past time, in just this place, with just these
 people, we were already saying just these things. as tennyson
 writes:
“moreover,
 something is or seems,
that touches me with mystic
 gleams,
like glimpses of forgotten
 dreams—
“of
 something felt, like something here;
of something done, i know not
 where;
such as no language may
 declare.”
[pg ]
sir james
 crichton-browne has given the technical name of “dreamy states” to these sudden invasions of
 vaguely reminiscent consciousness. they
 bring a sense of mystery and of the metaphysical duality of things,
 and the feeling of an enlargement of perception which seems imminent
 but which never completes itself. in dr. crichton-browne's opinion
 they connect themselves with the perplexed and scared disturbances of
 self-consciousness which occasionally precede epileptic attacks. i
 think that this learned alienist takes a rather absurdly alarmist
 view of an intrinsically insignificant phenomenon. he follows it
 along the downward ladder, to insanity; our path pursues the upward
 ladder chiefly. the divergence shows how important it is to neglect
 no part of a phenomenon's connections, for we make it appear
 admirable or dreadful according to the context by which we set it
 off.
somewhat deeper
 plunges into mystical consciousness are met with in yet other dreamy
 states. such feelings [pg
 ] as
 these which charles kingsley describes are surely far from being
 uncommon, especially in youth:—
“when i walk the fields, i am oppressed now and then
 with an innate feeling that everything i see has a meaning, if i
 could but understand it. and this feeling of being surrounded with
 truths which i cannot grasp amounts to indescribable awe
 sometimes.... have you not felt that your real soul was imperceptible
 to your mental vision, except in a few hallowed
 moments?”
a much more
 extreme state of mystical consciousness is described by j. a.
 symonds; and probably more persons than we suspect could give
 parallels to it from their own experience.
“suddenly,” writes
 symonds, 
 “at church, or in company, or
 when i was reading, and always, i think, when my muscles were at
 rest, i felt the approach of the mood. irresistibly it took
 possession of my mind and will, lasted what seemed an eternity, and
 disappeared in a series of rapid sensations which resembled the
 awakening from anæsthetic influence. one reason why i disliked this
 kind of trance was that i could not describe it to myself. i cannot
 even now find words to render it intelligible. it consisted in a
 gradual but swiftly progressive obliteration of space, time,
 sensation, and the multitudinous factors of experience which seem
 to qualify what we are pleased to call our self. in proportion as
 these conditions of ordinary consciousness were subtracted, the
 sense of an underlying or essential consciousness acquired
 intensity. at last nothing remained but a pure, absolute, abstract
 self. the universe became without form and void of content. but
 self persisted, formidable in its vivid keenness, feeling the most
 poignant doubt about reality, ready, as it seemed, to find
 existence break as breaks a bubble round about it. and what then?
 the apprehension of a coming dissolution, the grim conviction that
 this state was the last state of the conscious self, the sense
 that [pg
 ]i had followed
 the last thread of being to the verge of the abyss, and had arrived
 at demonstration of eternal maya or illusion, stirred or seemed to
 stir me up again. the return to ordinary conditions of sentient
 existence began by my first recovering the power of touch, and then
 by the gradual though rapid influx of familiar impressions and
 diurnal interests. at last i felt myself once more a human being;
 and though the riddle of what is meant by life remained unsolved, i
 was thankful for this return from the abyss—this deliverance from
 so awful an initiation into the mysteries of
 skepticism.
“this trance recurred with diminishing frequency
 until i reached the age of twenty-eight. it served to impress upon
 my growing nature the phantasmal unreality of all the circumstances
 which contribute to a merely phenomenal consciousness. often have i
 asked myself with anguish, on waking from that formless state of
 denuded, keenly sentient being, which is the unreality?—the trance
 of fiery, vacant, apprehensive, skeptical self from which i issue,
 or these surrounding phenomena and habits which veil that inner
 self and build a self of flesh-and-blood conventionality? again,
 are men the factors of some dream, the dream-like unsubstantiality
 of which they comprehend at such eventful moments? what would
 happen if the final stage of the trance were
 reached?”
in a recital like
 this there is certainly something suggestive of pathology. the
 next step into mystical states carries us into a realm that public
 opinion and ethical philosophy have long since branded as
 pathological, though private practice and certain lyric strains of
 poetry [pg ] seem still to bear
 witness to its ideality. i refer to the consciousness produced by
 intoxicants and anæsthetics, especially by alcohol. the sway of
 alcohol over mankind is unquestionably due to its power to stimulate
 the mystical faculties of human nature, usually crushed to earth by
 the cold facts and dry criticisms of the sober hour. sobriety
 diminishes, discriminates, and says no; drunkenness expands, unites,
 and says yes. it is in fact the great exciter of the yes
 function in man. it brings its votary from the chill periphery of
 things to the radiant core. it makes him for the moment one with
 truth. not through mere perversity do men run after it. to the poor
 and the unlettered it stands in the place of symphony concerts and of
 literature; and it is part of the deeper mystery and tragedy of life
 that whiffs and gleams of something that we immediately recognize as
 excellent should be vouchsafed to so many of us only in the fleeting
 earlier phases of what in its totality is so degrading a poisoning.
 the drunken consciousness is one bit of the mystic consciousness, and
 our total opinion of it must find its place in our opinion of that
 larger whole.
nitrous oxide and
 ether, especially nitrous oxide, when sufficiently diluted with air,
 stimulate the mystical consciousness in an extraordinary degree.
 depth beyond depth of truth seems revealed to the inhaler. this truth
 fades out, however, or escapes, at the moment of coming to; and if
 any words remain over in which it seemed to clothe itself, they prove
 to be the veriest nonsense. nevertheless, the sense of a profound
 meaning having been there persists; and i know more than one person
 who is persuaded that in the nitrous oxide trance we have a genuine
 metaphysical revelation.
some years ago i
 myself made some observations on this aspect of nitrous oxide
 intoxication, and reported [pg
 them in print. one conclusion was forced upon my mind at that time,
 and my impression of its truth has ever since remained unshaken. it
 is that our normal waking consciousness, rational consciousness as we
 call it, is but one special type of consciousness, whilst all about
 it, parted from it by the filmiest of screens, there lie potential
 forms of consciousness entirely different. we may go through life
 without suspecting their existence; but apply the requisite stimulus,
 and at a touch they are there in all their completeness, definite
 types of mentality which probably somewhere have their field of
 application and adaptation. no account of the universe in its
 totality can be final which leaves these other forms of consciousness
 quite disregarded. how to regard them is the question,—for they are
 so discontinuous with ordinary consciousness. yet they may determine
 attitudes though they cannot furnish formulas, and open a region
 though they fail to give a map. at any rate, they forbid a premature
 closing of our accounts with reality. looking back on my own
 experiences, they all converge towards a kind of insight to which i
 cannot help ascribing some metaphysical significance. the keynote of
 it is invariably a reconciliation. it is as if the opposites of the
 world, whose contradictoriness and conflict make all our difficulties
 and troubles, were melted into unity. not only do they, as contrasted
 species, belong to one and the same genus, but one of the
 species, the nobler and better one, is itself the genus,
 and so soaks up and absorbs its opposite into itself.
 this is a dark saying, i know, when thus expressed in terms of common
 logic, but i cannot wholly escape from its authority. i feel as if it
 must mean something, something like what the hegelian philosophy
 means, if one could only lay hold of it more clearly. those who have
 ears to hear, let them hear; [pg ] to me the living sense of its reality only
 comes in the artificial mystic state of mind.
i just now spoke
 of friends who believe in the anæsthetic revelation. for them too it
 is a monistic insight, in which the other in
 its various forms appears absorbed into the one.
“into this pervading genius,” writes
 one of them, “we pass,
 forgetting and forgotten, and thenceforth each is all, in god. there
 is no higher, no deeper, no other, than the life in which we are
 founded. 
 ‘the one remains, the many
 change and pass;’
and each and every one of us
is the one that remains.... this is the ultimatum....
 as sure as being—whence is all our care—so sure is content, beyond
 duplexity, antithesis, or trouble, where i have triumphed in a
 solitude that god is not above.”
[pg ]
this has the
 genuine religious mystic ring! i just now quoted j. a. symonds. he
 also records a mystical experience with chloroform, as
 follows:—[pg
“after the choking and stifling had passed away, i
 seemed at first in a state of utter blankness; then came flashes of
 intense light, alternating with blackness, and with a keen vision of
 what was going on in the room around me, but no sensation of touch. i
 thought that i was near death; when, suddenly, my soul became aware
 of god, who was manifestly dealing with me, handling me, so to speak,
 in an intense personal present reality. i felt him streaming in like
 light upon me.... i cannot describe the ecstasy i felt. then, as i
 gradually awoke from the influence of the anæsthetics, the old sense
 of my relation to the world began to return, the new sense of my
 relation to god began to fade. i suddenly leapt to my feet on the
 chair where i was sitting, and shrieked out, ‘it is too horrible, it is too horrible, it is too
 horrible,’
meaning that i could not bear this
 disillusionment. then i flung myself on the ground, and at last awoke
 covered with blood, calling to the two surgeons (who were
 frightened), ‘why did you not
 kill me? why would you not let me die?’ only
 think of it. to have felt for that long dateless ecstasy of vision
 the very god, in all purity and tenderness and truth and absolute
 love, and then to find that i had after all had no revelation, but
 that i had been tricked by the abnormal excitement of my
 brain.[pg
“yet, this question remains, is it possible that
 the inner sense of reality which succeeded, when my flesh was dead
 to impressions from without, to the ordinary sense of physical
 relations, was not a delusion but an actual experience? is it
 possible that i, in that moment, felt what some of the saints have
 said they always felt, the undemonstrable but irrefragable
 certainty of god?”
[pg ]
with this we make
 connection with religious mysticism pure and simple. symonds's
 question takes us back to those examples which you will remember my
 quoting in the lecture on the reality of the unseen, of sudden
 realization of the immediate presence of god. the phenomenon in one
 shape or another is not uncommon.
“i know,” writes
 mr. trine, “an officer on
 our police force who has told me that many times when off duty, and
 on his way home in the evening, there comes to him such a vivid and
 vital realization of his oneness with this infinite power, and this
 spirit of infinite peace so takes hold of and so fills him,
[pg ]that it seems as if his feet could hardly keep to
 the pavement, so buoyant and so exhilarated does he become by
 reason of this inflowing tide.”
certain aspects of
 nature seem to have a peculiar power of awakening such mystical
 moods. most of
 the striking cases which i have collected have occurred out of doors.
 literature has commemorated this fact in many passages of great
 beauty—this extract, for example, from amiel's journal intime:—
“shall i ever again have any of those prodigious
 reveries which sometimes came to me in former days? one day,
 in [pg
 ]youth, at sunrise,
 sitting in the ruins of the castle of faucigny; and again in the
 mountains, under the noonday sun, above lavey, lying at the foot of a
 tree and visited by three butterflies; once more at night upon the
 shingly shore of the northern ocean, my back upon the sand and my
 vision ranging through the milky way;—such grand and spacious,
 immortal, cosmogonic reveries, when one reaches to the stars, when
 one owns the infinite! moments divine, ecstatic hours; in which our
 thought flies from world to world, pierces the great enigma, breathes
 with a respiration broad, tranquil, and deep as the respiration of
 the ocean, serene and limitless as the blue firmament; ... instants
 of irresistible intuition in which one feels one's self great as the
 universe, and calm as a god.... what hours, what memories! the
 vestiges they leave behind are enough to fill us with belief and
 enthusiasm, as if they were visits of the holy
 ghost.”
here is a similar
 record from the memoirs of that interesting german idealist, malwida
 von meysenbug:—
“i was alone upon the seashore as all these thoughts
 flowed over me, liberating and reconciling; and now again, as once
 before in distant days in the alps of dauphiné, i was impelled to
 kneel down, this time before the illimitable ocean, symbol of the
 infinite. i felt that i prayed as i had never prayed before, and knew
 now what prayer really is: to return from the solitude of
 individuation into the consciousness of unity with all that is, to
 kneel down as one that passes away, and to rise up as one
 imperishable. earth, heaven, and sea resounded as in one vast
 world-encircling harmony. it was as if the chorus of all the great
 who had ever lived were about me. i felt myself one with them, and it
 appeared as if i heard their greeting: ‘thou too belongest to the company of those who
 overcome.’ ”
the well-known
 passage from walt whitman is a classical expression of this sporadic
 type of mystical experience.[pg ]
“i believe
 in you, my soul ...
loaf with me on the grass, loose
 the stop from your throat;...
only the lull i like, the hum of
 your valved voice.
i mind how once we lay, such a
 transparent summer morning.
swiftly arose and spread around me
 the peace and knowledge that pass all the argument of the
 earth,
and i know that the hand of god is
 the promise of my own,
and i know that the spirit of god
 is the brother of my own,
and that all the men ever born are
 also my brothers and the women my sisters and lovers,
and that a kelson of the creation is
 love.”
i could easily
 give more instances, but one will suffice. i take it from the
 autobiography of j. trevor.
“one brilliant sunday morning, my wife and boys went
 to the unitarian chapel in macclesfield. i felt it impossible to
 accompany them—as though to leave the sunshine on the hills, and go
 down there to the chapel, would be for the time an act of spiritual
 suicide. and i felt such need for new inspiration and expansion in my
 life. so, very reluctantly and sadly, i left my wife and boys to go
 down into the town, while i went further up into the hills with my
 stick and my dog. in the loveliness of the morning, and the beauty of
 the hills and valleys, i soon lost my sense of sadness and regret.
 for nearly an hour i walked along the road to the
‘cat and
 fiddle,’
and then returned. on the way back,
 suddenly, without warning, i felt that i was in heaven—an inward
 state of peace and joy [pg ]and assurance
 indescribably intense, accompanied with a sense of being bathed in
 a warm glow of light, as though the external condition had brought
 about the internal effect—a feeling of having passed beyond the
 body, though the scene around me stood out more clearly and as if
 nearer to me than before, by reason of the illumination in the
 midst of which i seemed to be placed. this deep emotion lasted,
 though with decreasing strength, until i reached home, and for some
 time after, only gradually passing away.”
the writer adds
 that having had further experiences of a similar sort, he now knows
 them well.
“the spiritual life,” he
 writes, 
 “justifies itself to those who
 live it; but what can we say to those who do not understand? this,
 at least, we can say, that it is a life whose experiences are
 proved real to their possessor, because they remain with him when
 brought closest into contact with the objective realities of life.
 dreams cannot stand this test. we wake from them to find that they
 are but dreams. wanderings of an overwrought brain do not stand
 this test. these highest experiences that i have had of god's
 presence have been rare and brief—flashes of consciousness which
 have compelled me to exclaim with surprise—god is here!—or conditions of exaltation and insight, less
 intense, and only gradually passing away. i have severely
 questioned the worth of these moments. to no soul have i named
 them, lest i should be building my life and work on mere phantasies
 of the brain. but i find that, after every questioning and test,
 they stand out to-day as the most real experiences of my life, and
 experiences which have explained and justified and unified all past
 experiences and all past growth. indeed, their reality and their
 far-reaching significance are ever becoming more clear and evident.
 when they came, i was living the fullest, strongest, sanest,
 deepest life. i was not seeking them. what i was seeking, with
 resolute determination, was to live more intensely my own life, as
 against what i knew would be the adverse judgment of the world. it
 was in the most real seasons that the real presence
[pg ]came, and i was aware that i was immersed in the
 infinite ocean of god.”
even the least
 mystical of you must by this time be convinced of the existence of
 mystical moments as states of consciousness of an entirely specific
 quality, and of the deep impression which they make on those who have
 them. a canadian psychiatrist, dr. r. m. bucke, gives to the more
 distinctly characterized of these phenomena the name of cosmic
 consciousness. “cosmic consciousness in its
 more striking instances is not,” dr. bucke says, “simply an expansion or extension of the self-conscious
 mind with which we are all familiar, but the superaddition of a
 function as distinct from any possessed by the average man as
 self-consciousness is distinct from
 any function possessed by one of the higher animals.”
“the prime characteristic of cosmic consciousness is
 a consciousness of the cosmos, that is, of the life and order of the
 universe. along with the consciousness of the cosmos there occurs an
 intellectual enlightenment which alone would place the individual on
 a new plane of existence—would make him almost a member of a new
 species. to this is added a state of moral exaltation, an
 indescribable feeling of elevation, elation, and joyousness, and a
 quickening of the moral sense, which is fully as striking, and more
 important than is the enhanced intellectual power. with these come
 what may be called a sense of immortality, a consciousness of eternal
 life, not a conviction that he shall have this, but the consciousness
 that he has it already.”
it was dr. bucke's
 own experience of a typical onset of cosmic consciousness in his own
 person which led him to investigate it in others. he has printed his
 conclusions in a highly interesting volume, from which i take the
 following account of what occurred to him:—[pg ]
“i had spent the evening in a great city, with two
 friends, reading and discussing poetry and philosophy. we parted at
 midnight. i had a long drive in a hansom to my lodging. my mind,
 deeply under the influence of the ideas, images, and emotions called
 up by the reading and talk, was calm and peaceful. i was in a state
 of quiet, almost passive enjoyment, not actually thinking, but
 letting ideas, images, and emotions flow of themselves, as it were,
 through my mind. all at once, without warning of any kind, i found
 myself wrapped in a flame-colored cloud. for an instant i thought of
 fire, an immense conflagration somewhere close by in that great city;
 the next, i knew that the fire was within myself. directly afterward
 there came upon me a sense of exultation, of immense joyousness
 accompanied or immediately followed by an intellectual illumination
 impossible to describe. among other things, i did not merely come to
 believe, but i saw that the universe is not composed of dead matter,
 but is, on the contrary, a living presence; i became conscious in
 myself of eternal life. it was not a conviction that i would have
 eternal life, but a consciousness that i possessed eternal life then;
 i saw that all men are immortal; that the cosmic order is such that
 without any peradventure all things work together for the good of
 each and all; that the foundation principle of the world, of all the
 worlds, is what we call love, and that the happiness of each and all
 is in the long run absolutely certain. the vision lasted a few
 seconds and was gone; but the memory of it and the sense of the
 reality of what it taught has remained during the quarter of a
 century which has since elapsed. i knew that what the vision showed
 was true. i had attained to a point of view from which i saw that it
 must be true. that view, that conviction, i may say that
 consciousness, has never, even during periods of the deepest
 depression, been lost.”
we have now seen
 enough of this cosmic or mystic consciousness, as it comes
 sporadically. we must next [pg
 pass to its methodical cultivation as an element of the religious
 life. hindus, buddhists, mohammedans, and christians all have
 cultivated it methodically.
in india, training
 in mystical insight has been known from time immemorial under the
 name of yoga. yoga means the experimental union of the individual
 with the divine. it is based on persevering exercise; and the diet,
 posture, breathing, intellectual concentration, and moral discipline
 vary slightly in the different systems which teach it. the yogi, or
 disciple, who has by these means overcome the obscurations of his
 lower nature sufficiently, enters into the condition termed
 samâdhi, “and comes face to face with facts which no instinct or
 reason can ever know.” he learns—
“that the mind itself has a higher state of
 existence, beyond reason, a superconscious state, and that when the
 mind gets to that higher state, then this knowledge beyond reasoning
 comes.... all the different steps in yoga are intended to bring us
 scientifically to the superconscious state or samâdhi.... just as
 unconscious work is beneath consciousness, so there is another work
 which is above consciousness, and which, also, is not accompanied
 with the feeling of egoism.... there is no feeling of
i, and yet the mind works, desireless, free from
 restlessness, objectless, bodiless. then the truth shines in its full
 effulgence, and we know ourselves—for samâdhi lies potential in us
 all—for what we truly are, free, immortal, omnipotent, loosed from
 the finite, and its contrasts of good and evil altogether, and
 identical with the atman or universal soul.”
the vedantists say
 that one may stumble into superconsciousness sporadically, without
 the previous discipline, but it is then impure. their test of its
 purity, like [pg
 ] our
 test of religion's value, is empirical: its fruits must be good for
 life. when a man comes out of samâdhi, they assure us that he remains
 “enlightened, a sage, a prophet, a saint, his
 whole character changed, his life changed, illumined.”
the buddhists use
 the word “samâdhi” as well as the
 hindus; but “dhyâna” is their special
 word for higher states of contemplation. there seem to be four stages
 recognized in dhyâna. the first stage comes through concentration of
 the mind upon one point. it excludes desire, but not discernment or
 judgment: it is still intellectual. in the second stage the
 intellectual functions drop off, and the satisfied sense of unity
 remains. in the third stage the satisfaction departs, and
 indifference begins, along with memory and self-consciousness. in the
 fourth stage the indifference, memory, and self-consciousness are
 perfected. [just what “memory” and
 “self-consciousness” mean in this
 connection is doubtful. they cannot be the faculties familiar to us
 in the lower life.] higher stages still of contemplation are
 mentioned—a region where there exists nothing, and where the
 meditator says: “there exists absolutely
 nothing,” and stops. then he reaches another region where he
 says: “there are neither ideas nor absence of
 ideas,” and stops again. then another region where,
 “having reached the end of both idea and
 perception, he stops [pg
 finally.” this would seem to be, not yet nirvâna, but as close
 an approach to it as this life affords.
in the mohammedan
 world the sufi sect and various dervish bodies are the possessors of
 the mystical tradition. the sufis have existed in persia from the
 earliest times, and as their pantheism is so at variance with the hot
 and rigid monotheism of the arab mind, it has been suggested that
 sufism must have been inoculated into islam by hindu influences. we
 christians know little of sufism, for its secrets are disclosed only
 to those initiated. to give its existence a certain liveliness in
 your minds, i will quote a moslem document, and pass away from the
 subject.
al-ghazzali, a
 persian philosopher and theologian, who flourished in the eleventh
 century, and ranks as one of the greatest doctors of the moslem
 church, has left us one of the few autobiographies to be found
 outside of christian literature. strange that a species of book so
 abundant among ourselves should be so little represented
 elsewhere—the absence of strictly personal confessions is the chief
 difficulty to the purely literary student who would like to become
 acquainted with the inwardness of religions other than the
 christian.
m. schmölders has
 translated a part of al-ghazzali's autobiography into french:—
“the science of the sufis,” says
 the moslem author, “aims at
 detaching the heart from all that is not god, and at giving to it for
 sole occupation the meditation of the divine being. theory being more
 easy for me than practice, i read [certain books] until i understood
 all that can be learned by study and [pg ]hearsay. then i
 recognized that what pertains most exclusively to their method is
 just what no study can grasp, but only transport, ecstasy, and the
 transformation of the soul. how great, for example, is the
 difference between knowing the definitions of health, of satiety,
 with their causes and conditions, and being really healthy or
 filled. how different to know in what drunkenness consists,—as
 being a state occasioned by a vapor that rises from the
 stomach,—and being drunk effectively. without doubt, the drunken man
 knows neither the definition of drunkenness nor what makes it
 interesting for science. being drunk, he knows nothing; whilst the
 physician, although not drunk, knows well in what drunkenness
 consists, and what are its predisposing conditions. similarly there
 is a difference between knowing the nature of abstinence,
 and being abstinent or having one's soul detached from the
 world.—thus i had learned what words could teach of sufism, but
 what was left could be learned neither by study nor through the
 ears, but solely by giving one's self up to ecstasy and leading a
 pious life.
“reflecting on my situation, i found myself tied
 down by a multitude of bonds—temptations on every side. considering
 my teaching, i found it was impure before god. i saw myself
 struggling with all my might to achieve glory and to spread my
 name. [here follows an account of his six months' hesitation to
 break away from the conditions of his life at bagdad, at the end of
 which he fell ill with a paralysis of the tongue.] then, feeling my
 own weakness, and having entirely given up my own will, i repaired
 to god like a man in distress who has no more resources. he
 answered, as he answers the wretch who invokes him. my heart no
 longer felt any difficulty in renouncing glory, wealth, and my
 children. so i quitted bagdad, and reserving from my fortune only
 what was indispensable for my subsistence, i distributed the rest.
 i went to syria, where i remained about two years, with no other
 occupation than living in retreat and solitude, conquering my
 desires, combating my passions, training myself to purify my soul,
 to make my character perfect, to prepare my heart for meditating on
 god—all according to the methods of the sufis, as i had read of
 them.[pg
“this retreat only increased my desire to live in
 solitude, and to complete the purification of my heart and fit it
 for meditation. but the vicissitudes of the times, the affairs of
 the family, the need of subsistence, changed in some respects my
 primitive resolve, and interfered with my plans for a purely
 solitary life. i had never yet found myself completely in ecstasy,
 save in a few single hours; nevertheless, i kept the hope of
 attaining this state. every time that the accidents led me astray,
 i sought to return; and in this situation i spent ten years. during
 this solitary state things were revealed to me which it is
 impossible either to describe or to point out. i recognized for
 certain that the sufis are assuredly walking in the path of god.
 both in their acts and in their inaction, whether internal or
 external, they are illumined by the light which proceeds from the
 prophetic source. the first condition for a sufi is to purge his
 heart entirely of all that is not god. the next key of the
 contemplative life consists in the humble prayers which escape from
 the fervent soul, and in the meditations on god in which the heart
 is swallowed up entirely. but in reality this is only the beginning
 of the sufi life, the end of sufism being total absorption in god.
 the intuitions and all that precede are, so to speak, only the
 threshold for those who enter. from the beginning, revelations take
 place in so flagrant a shape that the sufis see before them, whilst
 wide awake, the angels and the souls of the prophets. they hear
 their voices and obtain their favors. then the transport rises from
 the perception of forms and figures to a degree which escapes all
 expression, and which no man may seek to give an account of without
 his words involving sin.
“whoever has had no experience of the transport
 knows of the true nature of prophetism nothing but the name. he may
 meanwhile be sure of its existence, both by experience and by what
 he hears the sufis say. as there are men endowed only with the
 sensitive faculty who reject what is offered them in the way of
 objects of the pure understanding, so there are intellectual men
 who reject and avoid the things perceived by the prophetic faculty.
 a blind man can understand nothing of colors save what he has
 learned by narration and hearsay. yet god [pg ]has brought
 prophetism near to men in giving them all a state analogous to it
 in its principal characters. this state is sleep. if you were to
 tell a man who was himself without experience of such a phenomenon
 that there are people who at times swoon away so as to resemble
 dead men, and who [in dreams] yet perceive things that are hidden,
 he would deny it [and give his reasons]. nevertheless, his
 arguments would be refuted by actual experience. wherefore, just as
 the understanding is a stage of human life in which an eye opens to
 discern various intellectual objects uncomprehended by sensation;
 just so in the prophetic the sight is illumined by a light which
 uncovers hidden things and objects which the intellect fails to
 reach. the chief properties of prophetism are perceptible only
 during the transport, by those who embrace the sufi life. the
 prophet is endowed with qualities to which you possess nothing
 analogous, and which consequently you cannot possibly understand.
 how should you know their true nature, since one knows only what
 one can comprehend? but the transport which one attains by the
 method of the sufis is like an immediate perception, as if one
 touched the objects with one's hand.”
this
 incommunicableness of the transport is the keynote of all mysticism.
 mystical truth exists for the individual who has the transport, but
 for no one else. in this, as i have said, it resembles the knowledge
 given to us in sensations more than that given by conceptual thought.
 thought, with its remoteness and abstractness, has often enough in
 the history of philosophy been contrasted unfavorably with sensation.
 it is a commonplace of metaphysics that god's knowledge cannot be
 discursive but must be intuitive, that is, must be constructed more
 after the pattern of what in ourselves is called immediate feeling,
 than after that of proposition and judgment. but our
 immediate feelings have no content [pg ] but what the five senses supply; and we have
 seen and shall see again that mystics may emphatically deny that the
 senses play any part in the very highest type of knowledge which
 their transports yield.
in the christian
 church there have always been mystics. although many of them have
 been viewed with suspicion, some have gained favor in the eyes of the
 authorities. the experiences of these have been treated as
 precedents, and a codified system of mystical theology has been based
 upon them, in which everything legitimate finds its place. the
 basis of the system is “orison” or
 meditation, the methodical elevation of the soul towards god. through
 the practice of orison the higher levels of mystical experience may
 be attained. it is odd that protestantism, especially evangelical
 protestantism, should seemingly have abandoned everything methodical
 in this line. apart from what prayer may lead to, protestant mystical
 experience appears to have been almost exclusively sporadic. it has
 been left to our mind-curers to reintroduce methodical meditation
 into our religious life.
the first thing to
 be aimed at in orison is the mind's detachment from outer sensations,
 for these interfere with its concentration upon ideal things. such
 manuals as saint ignatius's spiritual exercises recommend the
 disciple to expel sensation by a graduated series of efforts to
 imagine holy scenes. the acme of this kind of discipline would be a
 semi-hallucinatory mono-ideism—an imaginary figure of christ, for
 example, coming fully to [pg
 occupy the mind. sensorial images of this sort, whether literal or
 symbolic, play an enormous part in mysticism. but in
 certain cases imagery may fall away entirely, and in the very highest
 raptures it tends to do so. the state of consciousness becomes then
 insusceptible of any verbal description. mystical teachers are
 unanimous as to this. saint john of the cross, for instance, one of
 the best of them, thus describes the condition called the
 “union of love,” which, he says, is
 reached by “dark contemplation.” in
 this the deity compenetrates the soul, but in such a hidden way that
 the soul—
“finds no terms, no means, no comparison whereby to
 render the sublimity of the wisdom and the delicacy of the spiritual
 feeling with which she is filled.... we receive this mystical
 knowledge of god clothed in none of the kinds of images, in none of
 the sensible representations, which our mind makes use of in other
 circumstances. accordingly in this knowledge, since the senses and
 the imagination are not employed, we get neither form nor impression,
 nor can we give any account or furnish any likeness, although the
 mysterious and sweet-tasting wisdom comes home so clearly to the
 inmost parts of our soul. fancy a man seeing a certain kind of thing
 for the first time in his life. he can understand it, use and enjoy
 it, but he cannot apply a name to it, nor communicate any idea of it,
 even though all the while it be a mere thing of sense. how much
 greater will be his powerlessness when it goes beyond the senses!
 this is the peculiarity of the divine language. the more infused,
 intimate, spiritual, and supersensible it is, the more does it exceed
 the senses, both inner and outer, and impose silence upon them....
 the soul then feels as if placed in a vast and profound solitude, to
 which no created thing has access, in an immense and boundless
 desert, desert the more delicious the [pg ]more solitary it
 is. there, in this abyss of wisdom, the soul grows by what it
 drinks in from the well-springs of the comprehension of love, ...
 and recognizes, however sublime and learned may be the terms we
 employ, how utterly vile, insignificant, and improper they are,
 when we seek to discourse of divine things by their
 means.”
i cannot pretend
 to detail to you the sundry stages of the christian mystical
 life. our
 time would not suffice, for one thing; and moreover, i confess that
 the subdivisions and names which we find in the catholic books seem
 to me to represent nothing objectively distinct. so many men, so many
 minds: i imagine that these experiences can be as infinitely varied
 as are the idiosyncrasies of individuals.
the cognitive
 aspects of them, their value in the way of revelation, is what we are
 directly concerned with, and it is easy to show by citation how
 strong an impression they leave of being revelations of new depths of
 truth. saint teresa is the expert of experts in describing such
 conditions, so i will turn immediately to what she says of one of the
 highest of them, the “orison of
 union.”
“in the orison of union,” says
 saint teresa, “the soul is
 fully awake as regards god, but wholly asleep as regards things of
 this world and in respect of herself. during the short time the union
 lasts, she is as it were deprived of every feeling, and even if she
 would, she could not think of any single thing. [pg ]thus she
 needs to employ no artifice in order to arrest the use of her
 understanding: it remains so stricken with inactivity that she
 neither knows what she loves, nor in what manner she loves, nor what
 she wills. in short, she is utterly dead to the things of the world
 and lives solely in god.... i do not even know whether in this state
 she has enough life left to breathe. it seems to me she has not; or
 at least that if she does breathe, she is unaware of it. her
 intellect would fain understand something of what is going on within
 her, but it has so little force now that it can act in no way
 whatsoever. so a person who falls into a deep faint appears as if
 dead....
“thus does god, when he raises a soul to union with
 himself, suspend the natural action of all her faculties. she
 neither sees, hears, nor understands, so long as she is united with
 god. but this time is always short, and it seems even shorter than
 it is. god establishes himself in the interior of this soul in such
 a way, that when she returns to herself, it is wholly impossible
 for her to doubt that she has been in god, and god in her. this
 truth remains so strongly impressed on her that, even though many
 years should pass without the condition returning, she can neither
 forget the favor she received, nor doubt of its reality. if you,
 nevertheless, ask how it is possible that the soul can see and
 understand that she has been in god, since during the union she has
 neither sight nor understanding, i reply that she does not see it
 then, but that she sees it clearly later, after she has returned to
 herself, not by any vision, but by a certitude which abides with
 her and which god alone can give her. i knew a person who was
 ignorant of the truth that god's mode of being in everything must
 be either by presence, by power, or by essence, but who, after
 having received the grace of which i am speaking, believed this
 truth in the most unshakable manner. so much so that, having
 consulted a half-learned man who was as ignorant on this point as
 she had been before she was enlightened, when he replied that god
 is in us only by ‘grace,’ she
 disbelieved his reply, so sure she was of the true answer; and when
 she came to ask wiser doctors, they confirmed her in her belief,
 which much consoled her....[pg ]
“but how, you will repeat, can one have such certainty in respect to what one
 does not see? this question, i am powerless to answer. these are
 secrets of god's omnipotence which it does not appertain to me to
 penetrate. all that i know is that i tell the truth; and i shall
 never believe that any soul who does not possess this certainty has
 ever been really united to god.”
the kinds of truth
 communicable in mystical ways, whether these be sensible or
 supersensible, are various. some of them relate to this
 world,—visions of the future, the reading of hearts, the sudden
 understanding of texts, the knowledge of distant events, for example;
 but the most important revelations are theological or
 metaphysical.
“saint ignatius confessed one day to father laynez
 that a single hour of meditation at manresa had taught him more
 truths about heavenly things than all the teachings of all the
 doctors put together could have taught him.... one day in orison, on
 the steps of the choir of the dominican church, he saw in a distinct
 manner the plan of divine wisdom in the creation of the world. on
 another occasion, during a procession, his spirit was ravished in
 god, and it was given him to contemplate, in a form and images fitted
 to the weak understanding of a dweller on the earth, the deep mystery
 of the holy trinity. this last vision flooded his heart with such
 sweetness, that the mere memory of it in after times made him shed
 abundant tears.”[pg ]
similarly with saint teresa. “one day, being in orison,”she
 writes, “it was
 granted me to perceive in one instant how all things are seen and
 contained in god. i did not perceive them in their proper form, and
 nevertheless the view i had of them was of a sovereign clearness,
 and has remained vividly impressed upon my soul. it is one of the
 most signal of all the graces which the lord has granted me.... the
 view was so subtile and delicate that the understanding cannot
 grasp it.”
she goes on to
 tell how it was as if the deity were an enormous and sovereignly
 limpid diamond, in which all our actions were contained in such a way
 that their full sinfulness appeared evident as never before. on
 another day, she relates, while she was reciting the athanasian
 creed,—
“our lord made me comprehend in what way it is that
 one god can be in three persons. he made me see it so clearly
[pg ]that i remained as extremely surprised as i was
 comforted, ... and now, when i think of the holy trinity, or hear
 it spoken of, i understand how the three adorable persons form only
 one god and i experience an unspeakable
 happiness.”
on still another
 occasion, it was given to saint teresa to see and understand in what
 wise the mother of god had been assumed into her place in
 heaven.
the deliciousness
 of some of these states seems to be beyond anything known in ordinary
 consciousness. it evidently involves organic sensibilities, for it is
 spoken of as something too extreme to be borne, and as verging on
 bodily pain. but it
 is too subtle and piercing a delight for ordinary words to denote.
 god's touches, the wounds of his spear, references to ebriety and to
 nuptial union have to figure in the phraseology by which it is
 shadowed forth. intellect and senses both swoon away in these highest
 states of ecstasy. “if our understanding
 comprehends,” says saint teresa, “it
 is in a mode which remains unknown to it, and it can understand
 nothing of what it comprehends. for my own part, i do not believe
 that it does comprehend, because, as i said, it does not understand
 itself to do so. i confess that it is all a mystery in which i am
 lost.” in the
 condition called raptus or ravishment by
 theologians, breathing and circulation are so depressed that it is a
 question among the doctors whether the soul be or be not temporarily
 dissevered from the body. one must read saint teresa's descriptions
 and the very exact distinctions which she makes, to [pg ] persuade one's self that one is dealing,
 not with imaginary experiences, but with phenomena which, however
 rare, follow perfectly definite psychological types.
to the medical
 mind these ecstasies signify nothing but suggested and imitated
 hypnoid states, on an intellectual basis of superstition, and a
 corporeal one of degeneration and hysteria. undoubtedly these
 pathological conditions have existed in many and possibly in all the
 cases, but that fact tells us nothing about the value for knowledge
 of the consciousness which they induce. to pass a spiritual judgment
 upon these states, we must not content ourselves with superficial
 medical talk, but inquire into their fruits for life.
their fruits
 appear to have been various. stupefaction, for one thing, seems not
 to have been altogether absent as a result. you may remember the
 helplessness in the kitchen and schoolroom of poor margaret mary
 alacoque. many other ecstatics would have perished but for the care
 taken of them by admiring followers. the “other-worldliness” encouraged by the mystical
 consciousness makes this over-abstraction from practical life
 peculiarly liable to befall mystics in whom the character is
 naturally passive and the intellect feeble; but in natively strong
 minds and characters we find quite opposite results. the great
 spanish mystics, who carried the habit of ecstasy as far as it has
 often been carried, appear for the most part to have shown
 indomitable spirit and energy, and all the more so for the trances in
 which they indulged.
saint ignatius was
 a mystic, but his mysticism made him assuredly one of the most
 powerfully practical human engines that ever lived. saint john of the
 cross, writing of the intuitions and “touches” by which god reaches the substance of
 the soul, tells us that—[pg
“they enrich it marvelously. a single one of them may
 be sufficient to abolish at a stroke certain imperfections of which
 the soul during its whole life had vainly tried to rid itself, and to
 leave it adorned with virtues and loaded with supernatural gifts. a
 single one of these intoxicating consolations may reward it for all
 the labors undergone in its life—even were they numberless. invested
 with an invincible courage, filled with an impassioned desire to
 suffer for its god, the soul then is seized with a strange
 torment—that of not being allowed to suffer
 enough.”
saint teresa is as
 emphatic, and much more detailed. you may perhaps remember a passage
 i quoted from her in my first lecture. there
 are many similar pages in her autobiography. where in literature is a
 more evidently veracious account of the formation of a new centre of
 spiritual energy, than is given in her description of the effects of
 certain ecstasies which in departing leave the soul upon a higher
 level of emotional excitement?
“often, infirm and wrought upon with dreadful pains
 before the ecstasy, the soul emerges from it full of health and
 admirably disposed for action ... as if god had willed that the body
 itself, already obedient to the soul's desires, should share in the
 soul's happiness.... the soul after such a favor is animated with a
 degree of courage so great that if at that moment its body should be
 torn to pieces for the cause of god, it would feel nothing but the
 liveliest comfort. then it is that promises and heroic resolutions
 spring up in profusion in us, soaring desires, horror of the world,
 and the clear perception of our proper nothingness.... what empire is
 comparable to that of a soul who, from this sublime summit to which
 god has raised her, sees all the things of earth beneath her feet,
 and is captivated by no one of them? how ashamed she is of her former
 attachments! how amazed at her blindness! what lively pity she feels
 for those whom she recognizes still shrouded in the darkness!... she
 groans at having ever been sensitive [pg ]to points of
 honor, at the illusion that made her ever see as honor what the
 world calls by that name. now she sees in this name nothing more
 than an immense lie of which the world remains a victim. she
 discovers, in the new light from above, that in genuine honor there
 is nothing spurious, that to be faithful to this honor is to give
 our respect to what deserves to be respected really, and to
 consider as nothing, or as less than nothing, whatsoever perishes
 and is not agreeable to god.... she laughs when she sees grave
 persons, persons of orison, caring for points of honor for which
 she now feels profoundest contempt. it is suitable to the dignity
 of their rank to act thus, they pretend, and it makes them more
 useful to others. but she knows that in despising the dignity of
 their rank for the pure love of god they would do more good in a
 single day than they would effect in ten years by preserving it....
 she laughs at herself that there should ever have been a time in
 her life when she made any case of money, when she ever desired
 it.... oh! if human beings might only agree together to regard it
 as so much useless mud, what harmony would then reign in the world!
 with what friendship we would all treat each other if our interest
 in honor and in money could but disappear from earth! for my own
 part, i feel as if it would be a remedy for all our
 ills.”
mystical
 conditions may, therefore, render the soul more energetic in the
 lines which their inspiration favors. but this could be reckoned an
 advantage only in case the inspiration were a true one. if the
 inspiration were erroneous, the energy would be all the more mistaken
 and misbegotten. so we stand once more before that problem of truth
 which confronted us at the end of the lectures on saintliness. you
 will remember that we turned to mysticism precisely to get some light
 on truth. do mystical states establish the truth of those theological
 affections in which the saintly life has its root?
in spite of their
 repudiation of articulate self-description, [pg ] mystical states in general assert a pretty
 distinct theoretic drift. it is possible to give the outcome of the
 majority of them in terms that point in definite philosophical
 directions. one of these directions is optimism, and the other is
 monism. we pass into mystical states from out of ordinary
 consciousness as from a less into a more, as from a smallness into a
 vastness, and at the same time as from an unrest to a rest. we feel
 them as reconciling, unifying states. they appeal to the yes-function
 more than to the no-function in us. in them the unlimited absorbs the
 limits and peacefully closes the account. their very denial of every
 adjective you may propose as applicable to the ultimate truth,—he,
 the self, the atman, is to be described by “no! no!” only, say the upanishads,—though
 it seems on the surface to be a no-function, is a denial made on
 behalf of a deeper yes. whoso calls the absolute anything in
 particular, or says that it is this, seems implicitly to shut it
 off from being that—it is as if he lessened it. so
 we deny the “this,” negating the
 negation which it seems to us to imply, in the interests of the
 higher affirmative attitude by which we are possessed. the
 fountain-head of christian mysticism is dionysius the areopagite. he
 describes the absolute truth by negatives exclusively.
“the cause of all things is neither soul nor
 intellect; nor has it imagination, opinion, or reason, or
 intelligence; nor is it reason or intelligence; nor is it spoken or
 thought. it is neither number, nor order, nor magnitude, nor
 littleness, nor equality, nor inequality, nor similarity, nor
 dissimilarity. it neither stands, nor moves, nor rests.... it is
 neither essence, nor eternity, nor time. even intellectual contact
 does not belong to it. it is neither science nor truth. it is not
 even royalty or wisdom; not one; not unity; not divinity
[pg ]or goodness; nor even spirit as we know
 it,” etc., ad
 libitum.
but these
 qualifications are denied by dionysius, not because the truth falls
 short of them, but because it so infinitely excels them. it is above
 them. it is super-lucent, super-splendent, super-essential, super-sublime, super
 everything that can be named. like hegel in his logic, mystics
 journey towards the positive pole of truth only by the “methode der absoluten negativität.”
thus come the
 paradoxical expressions that so abound in mystical writings. as when
 eckhart tells of the still desert of the godhead, “where never was seen difference, neither father, son,
 nor holy ghost, where there is no one at home, yet where the spark of
 the soul is more at peace than in itself.” as when
 boehme writes of the primal love, that “it
 may fitly be compared to nothing, for it is deeper than any thing,
 and is as nothing with respect to all things, forasmuch as it is not
 comprehensible by any of them. and because it is nothing
 respectively, it is therefore free from all things, and is that only
 good, which a man cannot express or utter what it is, there being
 nothing to which it may be compared, to express it by.” or as
 when angelus silesius sings:—
“gott ist
 ein lauter nichts, ihn rührt kein nun noch hier;
je mehr du nach ihm greiffst, je mehr entwind
 er dir.”
to this
 dialectical use, by the intellect, of negation as [pg ] a mode of passage towards a higher kind
 of affirmation, there is correlated the subtlest of moral
 counterparts in the sphere of the personal will. since denial of the
 finite self and its wants, since asceticism of some sort, is found in
 religious experience to be the only doorway to the larger and more
 blessed life, this moral mystery intertwines and combines with the
 intellectual mystery in all mystical writings.
“love,” continues behmen, is nothing, for
“when thou art
 gone forth wholly from the creature and from that which is visible,
 and art become nothing to all that is nature and creature, then
 thou art in that eternal one, which is god himself, and then thou
 shalt feel within thee the highest virtue of love.... the treasure
 of treasures for the soul is where she goeth out of the somewhat
 into that nothing out of which all things may be made. the soul
 here saith, i have
 nothing, for i am
 utterly stripped and naked; i can
 do nothing, for i have
 no manner of power, but am as water poured out; i am
 nothing, for all that i
 am is no more than an image of being, and only god is to me i am;
 and so, sitting down in my own nothingness, i give glory to the
 eternal being, and will nothing
of myself, that so god may will all in
 me, being unto me my god and all things.”
in paul's
 language, i live, yet not i, but christ liveth in me. only when i
 become as nothing can god enter in and no difference between his life
 and mine remain outstanding.[pg ]
this overcoming of
 all the usual barriers between the individual and the absolute is the
 great mystic achievement. in mystic states we both become one with
 the absolute and we become aware of our oneness. this is the
 everlasting and triumphant mystical tradition, hardly altered by
 differences of clime or creed. in hinduism, in neoplatonism, in
 sufism, in christian mysticism, in whitmanism, we find the same
 recurring note, so that there is about mystical utterances an eternal
 unanimity which ought to make a critic stop and think, and which
 brings it about that the mystical classics have, as has been said,
 neither birthday nor native land. perpetually telling of the unity of
 man with god, their speech antedates languages, and they do not grow
 old.
“that art thou!” say the upanishads, and the
 vedantists add: “not a part, not a mode of
 that, but identically that, that absolute spirit of the
 world.” “as pure water poured into
 pure water remains the same, thus, o gautama, is the self of a
 thinker who knows. [pg
 water in water, fire in fire, ether in ether, no one can distinguish
 them; likewise a man whose mind has entered into the
 self.”
“ ‘every man,’
 says the sufi gulshan-râz, ‘whose heart is no
 longer shaken by any doubt, knows with certainty that there is no
 being save only one.... in his divine majesty the me, the
 we, the thou, are
 not found, for in the one there can be no distinction. every being
 who is annulled and entirely separated from himself, hears resound
 outside of him this voice and this echo: i am god:
 he has an eternal way of existing, and is no longer subject to
 death.’ ” in the
 vision of god, says plotinus, “what sees is
 not our reason, but something prior and superior to our reason.... he
 who thus sees does not properly see, does not distinguish or imagine
 two things. he changes, he ceases to be himself, preserves nothing of
 himself. absorbed in god, he makes but one with him, like a centre of
 a circle coinciding with another centre.”
“here,” writes suso, “the spirit dies, and yet is all alive in the marvels of
 the godhead ... and is lost in the stillness of the glorious dazzling
 obscurity and of the naked simple unity. it is in this modeless
 where that the highest bliss is to
 be found.”
“ich bin so gross als gott,” sings
 angelus silesius again, “er ist als ich so
 klein; er kann nicht über mich, ich unter ihm nicht
 sein.”
in mystical
 literature such self-contradictory phrases as “dazzling obscurity,” “whispering silence,” “teeming desert,” are continually met with. they
 prove that not conceptual speech, but music rather, is the element
 through which we [pg
 ] are
 best spoken to by mystical truth. many mystical scriptures are indeed
 little more than musical compositions.
“he who would hear the voice of nada,
‘the soundless
 sound,’
and comprehend it, he has to learn the
 nature of dhâranâ.... when to himself his form appears unreal, as
 do on waking all the forms he sees in dreams; when he has ceased to
 hear the many, he may discern the one—the inner sound which kills
 the outer.... for then the soul will hear, and will remember. and
 then to the inner ear will speak the voice of the
 silence.... and now
 thy self is lost in self,
thyself
unto thyself,
 merged in that self
from which thou first didst
 radiate.... behold! thou hast become the light, thou hast become
 the sound, thou art thy master and thy god. thou art
thyself
the object of thy search: the
voiceunbroken,
 that resounds throughout eternities, exempt from change, from sin
 exempt, the seven sounds in one, the voice of the
 silence.
om tat
 sat.”
these words, if
 they do not awaken laughter as you receive them, probably stir chords
 within you which music and language touch in common. music gives us
 ontological messages which non-musical criticism is unable to
 contradict, though it may laugh at our foolishness in minding them.
 there is a verge of the mind which these things haunt; and whispers
 therefrom mingle with the operations of our understanding, even as
 the waters of the infinite ocean send their waves to break among the
 pebbles that lie upon our shores.
“here
 begins the sea that ends not till the world's end. where we
 stand,
could we know the next high
 sea-mark set beyond these waves that gleam,
we should know what never man hath
 known, nor eye of man hath scanned....
ah, but here man's heart leaps,
 yearning towards the gloom with venturous glee,
from the shore that hath no shore beyond it,
 set in all the sea.”
[pg ]
that doctrine, for
 example, that eternity is timeless, that our “immortality,” if we live in the eternal, is not
 so much future as already now and here, which we find so often
 expressed to-day in certain philosophic circles, finds its support in
 a “hear, hear!” or an “amen,” which floats up from that mysteriously
 deeper level. we
 recognize the passwords to the mystical region as we hear them, but
 we cannot use them ourselves; it alone has the keeping of
 “the password primeval.”
i have now
 sketched with extreme brevity and insufficiency, but as fairly as i
 am able in the time allowed, the general traits of the mystic range
 of consciousness. it is on the whole pantheistic and optimistic,
 or at least the opposite of pessimistic. it is anti-naturalistic, and
 harmonizes best with twice-bornness and so-called other-worldly
 states of mind.
my next task is to
 inquire whether we can invoke it as authoritative. does it furnish
 any warrant
 for the truth of the twice-bornness and supernaturality
 and pantheism which it favors? i must give my answer to this question
 as concisely as i can.
in brief my answer
 is this,—and i will divide it into three parts:—
() mystical
 states, when well developed, usually are, and have the right to be,
 absolutely authoritative over the individuals to whom they come.
() no authority
 emanates from them which should make it a duty for those who stand
 outside of them to accept their revelations
 uncritically.[pg
() they break
 down the authority of the non-mystical or rationalistic
 consciousness, based upon the understanding and the senses alone.
 they show it to be only one kind of consciousness. they open out the
 possibility of other orders of truth, in which, so far as anything in
 us vitally responds to them, we may freely continue to have
 faith.
i will take up
 these points one by one.
as a matter of
 psychological fact, mystical states of a well-pronounced and
 emphatic sort are usually authoritative over
 those who have them. they
 have been “there,” and know. it is
 vain for rationalism to grumble about this. if the mystical truth
 that comes to a man proves to be a force that he can live by, what
 mandate have we of the majority to order him to live in another
 way? we can throw him into a prison or a madhouse, but we cannot
 change his mind—we commonly attach it only the more stubbornly to
 its beliefs. it
 mocks our utmost efforts, as a matter of fact, and in point of
 logic it absolutely escapes our jurisdiction. our own more
 “rational” beliefs are based on
 evidence exactly similar in nature to that which mystics quote for
 theirs. our senses, namely, have assured us of certain states of
 fact; but mystical experiences are as direct perceptions
 [pg ] of fact for those
 who have them as any sensations ever were for us. the records show
 that even though the five senses be in abeyance in them, they are
 absolutely sensational in their epistemological quality, if i may
 be pardoned the barbarous expression,—that is, they are face to
 face presentations of what seems immediately to exist.
the mystic is,
 in short, invulnerable, and must be left,
 whether we relish it or not, in undisturbed enjoyment of his creed.
 faith, says tolstoy, is that by which men live. and faith-state and
 mystic state are practically convertible terms.
but i now
 proceed to add that mystics have no right to claim that we ought to
 accept the deliverance of their peculiar experiences, if we are
 ourselves outsiders and feel no private call thereto. the utmost
 they can ever ask of us in this life is to admit that they
 establish a presumption. they form a consensus and have an
 unequivocal outcome; and it would be odd, mystics might say, if
 such a unanimous type of experience should prove to be altogether
 wrong. at bottom, however, this would only be an appeal to numbers,
 like the appeal of rationalism the other way; and the appeal to
 numbers has no logical force. if we acknowledge it, it is for
 “suggestive,” not for logical
 reasons: we follow the majority because to do so suits our
 life.
but even this
 presumption from the unanimity of mystics is far from being strong.
 in characterizing mystic states as pantheistic, optimistic, etc., i
 am afraid i over-simplified the truth. i did so for expository
 reasons, and to keep the closer to the classic mystical tradition.
 the classic religious mysticism, it now must be confessed,
 [pg ] is only a
 “privileged case.” it is an
 extract, kept true to type by the
 selection of the fittest specimens and their preservation in
 “schools.” it is carved out from a
 much larger mass; and if we take the larger mass as seriously as
 religious mysticism has historically taken itself, we find that the
 supposed unanimity largely disappears. to begin with, even
 religious mysticism itself, the kind that accumulates traditions
 and makes schools, is much less unanimous than i have allowed. it
 has been both ascetic and antinomianly self-indulgent within the
 christian church. it is
 dualistic in sankhya, and monistic in vedanta philosophy. i called
 it pantheistic; but the great spanish mystics are anything but
 pantheists. they are with few exceptions non-metaphysical minds,
 for whom “the category of
 personality” is absolute. the “union” of man with god is for them much more
 like an occasional miracle than like an original identity. how
 different again, apart from the happiness common to all, is the
 mysticism of walt whitman, edward carpenter, richard jefferies, and
 other naturalistic pantheists, from the more distinctively
 christian sort. the
 fact is that the mystical feeling of enlargement, union, and
 emancipation has no specific intellectual content whatever of its
 own. it is capable of forming matrimonial alliances with material
 furnished by the most diverse philosophies and theologies, provided
 only they [pg
 can find a place in their framework for its peculiar emotional
 mood. we have no right, therefore, to invoke its prestige as
 distinctively in favor of any special belief, such as that in
 absolute idealism, or in the absolute monistic identity, or in the
 absolute goodness, of the world. it is only relatively in favor of
 all these things—it passes out of common human consciousness in the
 direction in which they lie.
so much for
 religious mysticism proper. but more remains to be told, for
 religious mysticism is only one half of mysticism. the other half
 has no accumulated traditions except those which the text-books on
 insanity supply. open any one of these, and you will find abundant
 cases in which “mystical ideas” are
 cited as characteristic symptoms of enfeebled or deluded states of
 mind. in delusional insanity, paranoia, as they sometimes call it,
 we may have a diabolical mysticism, a sort of
 religious mysticism turned upside down. the same sense of ineffable
 importance in the smallest events, the same texts and words coming
 with new meanings, the same voices and visions and leadings and
 missions, the same controlling by extraneous powers; only this time
 the emotion is pessimistic: instead of consolations we have
 desolations; the meanings are dreadful; and the powers are enemies
 to life. it is evident that from the point of view of their
 psychological mechanism, the classic mysticism and these lower
 mysticisms spring from the same mental level, from that great
 subliminal or transmarginal region of which science is beginning to
 admit the existence, but of which so little is really known. that
 region contains every kind of matter: “seraph and snake” abide there side by side. to
 come from thence is no infallible credential. what comes must be
 sifted and tested, and run the gauntlet of confrontation with the
 total context of experience, [pg ] just like what comes from the outer world of
 sense. its value must be ascertained by empirical methods, so long
 as we are not mystics ourselves.
once more, then,
 i repeat that non-mystics are under no obligation to acknowledge in
 mystical states a superior authority conferred on them by their
 intrinsic nature.
yet, i repeat
 once more, the existence of mystical states absolutely overthrows
 the pretension of non-mystical states to be the sole and ultimate
 dictators of what we may believe. as a rule, mystical states merely
 add a supersensuous meaning to the ordinary outward data of
 consciousness. they are excitements like the emotions of love or
 ambition, gifts to our spirit by means of which facts already
 objectively before us fall into a new expressiveness and make a new
 connection with our active life. they do not contradict these facts
 as such, or deny anything that our senses have immediately
 seized. it is
 the rationalistic critic rather who plays the part of denier in
 [pg ] the controversy, and
 his denials have no strength, for there never can be a state of
 facts to which new meaning may not truthfully be added, provided
 the mind ascend to a more enveloping point of view. it must always
 remain an open question whether mystical states may not possibly be
 such superior points of view, windows through which the mind looks
 out upon a more extensive and inclusive world. the difference of
 the views seen from the different mystical windows need not prevent
 us from entertaining this supposition. the wider world would in
 that case prove to have a mixed constitution like that of this
 world, that is all. it would have its celestial and its infernal
 regions, its tempting and its saving moments, its valid experiences
 and its counterfeit ones, just as our world has them; but it would
 be a wider world all the same. we should have to use its
 experiences by selecting and subordinating and substituting just as
 is our custom in this ordinary naturalistic world; we should be
 liable to error just as we are now; yet the counting in of that
 wider world of meanings, and the serious dealing with it, might, in
 spite of all the perplexity, be indispensable stages in our
 approach to the final fullness of the truth.
in this shape, i
 think, we have to leave the subject. mystical states indeed wield
 no authority due simply to their being mystical states. but the
 higher ones among them point in directions to which the religious
 sentiments even of non-mystical men incline. they tell of the
 supremacy of the ideal, of vastness, of union, of safety, and of
 rest. they offer us hypotheses, hypotheses which we
 may voluntarily ignore, but which as thinkers we cannot possibly
 upset. the supernaturalism and optimism to which they would
 persuade us may, interpreted in one way or another, be after all
 the truest of insights into the meaning of this
 life.[pg
“oh, the little more, and how much it is; and the
 little less, and what worlds away!” it may be that
 possibility and permission of this sort are all that the religious
 consciousness requires to live on. in my last lecture i shall have
 to try to persuade you that this is the case. meanwhile, however, i
 am sure that for many of my readers this diet is too slender. if
 supernaturalism and inner union with the divine are true, you
 think, then not so much permission, as compulsion to believe, ought
 to be found. philosophy has always professed to prove religious
 truth by coercive argument; and the construction of philosophies of
 this kind has always been one favorite function of the religious
 life, if we use this term in the large historic sense. but
 religious philosophy is an enormous subject, and in my next lecture
 i can only give that brief glance at it which my limits will
 allow.
[pg ]
lecture xviii. philosophy.
the subject of
 saintliness left us face to face with the question, is the sense of
 divine presence a sense of anything objectively true? we turned first
 to mysticism for an answer, and found that although mysticism is
 entirely willing to corroborate religion, it is too private (and also
 too various) in its utterances to be able to claim a universal
 authority. but philosophy publishes results which claim to be
 universally valid if they are valid at all, so we now turn with our
 question to philosophy. can philosophy stamp a warrant of veracity
 upon the religious man's sense of the divine?
i imagine that
 many of you at this point begin to indulge in guesses at the goal to
 which i am tending. i have undermined the authority of mysticism, you
 say, and the next thing i shall probably do is to seek to discredit
 that of philosophy. religion, you expect to hear me conclude, is
 nothing but an affair of faith, based either on vague sentiment, or
 on that vivid sense of the reality of things unseen of which in my
 second lecture and in the lecture on mysticism i gave so many
 examples. it is essentially private and individualistic; it always
 exceeds our powers of formulation; and although attempts to pour its
 contents into a philosophic mould will probably always go on, men
 being what they are, yet these attempts are always secondary
 processes which in no way add to the authority, or warrant the
 veracity, of the sentiments from which they derive their own stimulus
 [pg ] and borrow whatever glow of
 conviction they may themselves possess. in short, you suspect that i
 am planning to defend feeling at the expense of reason, to
 rehabilitate the primitive and unreflective, and to dissuade you from
 the hope of any theology worthy of the name.
to a certain
 extent i have to admit that you guess rightly. i do believe that
 feeling is the deeper source of religion, and that philosophic and
 theological formulas are secondary products, like translations of a
 text into another tongue. but all such statements are misleading from
 their brevity, and it will take the whole hour for me to explain to
 you exactly what i mean.
when i call
 theological formulas secondary products, i mean that in a world in
 which no religious feeling had ever existed, i doubt whether any
 philosophic theology could ever have been framed. i doubt if
 dispassionate intellectual contemplation of the universe, apart from
 inner unhappiness and need of deliverance on the one hand and
 mystical emotion on the other, would ever have resulted in religious
 philosophies such as we now possess. men would have begun with
 animistic explanations of natural fact, and criticised these away
 into scientific ones, as they actually have done. in the science they
 would have left a certain amount of “psychical research,” even as they now will
 probably have to re-admit a certain amount. but high-flying
 speculations like those of either dogmatic or idealistic theology,
 these they would have had no motive to venture on, feeling no need of
 commerce with such deities. these speculations must, it seems to me,
 be classed as over-beliefs, buildings-out performed by the intellect
 into directions of which feeling originally supplied the hint.
but even if
 religious philosophy had to have its first hint supplied by feeling,
 may it not have dealt in a superior [pg ] way with the matter which feeling suggested?
 feeling is private and dumb, and unable to give an account of itself.
 it allows that its results are mysteries and enigmas, declines to
 justify them rationally, and on occasion is willing that they should
 even pass for paradoxical and absurd. philosophy takes just the
 opposite attitude. her aspiration is to reclaim from mystery and
 paradox whatever territory she touches. to find an escape from
 obscure and wayward personal persuasion to truth objectively valid
 for all thinking men has ever been the intellect's most cherished
 ideal. to redeem religion from unwholesome privacy, and to give
 public status and universal right of way to its deliverances, has
 been reason's task.
i believe that
 philosophy will always have opportunity to labor at this task. we are
 thinking beings, and we cannot exclude the intellect from
 participating in any of our functions. even in soliloquizing with
 ourselves, we construe our feelings intellectually. both our personal
 ideals and our religious and mystical experiences must be interpreted
 congruously with the kind of scenery which our thinking mind
 inhabits. the philosophic climate of our time inevitably forces its
 own clothing on us. moreover, we must exchange our feelings with one
 another, and in doing so we have to speak, and to use general and
 abstract verbal formulas. conceptions and constructions are thus a
 necessary part of our religion; and as moderator amid the clash of
 hypotheses, and mediator among the criticisms of one man's
 constructions by another, philosophy will always have much to do. it
 would be strange if i disputed this, when these very lectures which i
 am giving are (as you will see more clearly [pg ] from now onwards) a laborious attempt to
 extract from the privacies of religious experience some general facts
 which can be defined in formulas upon which everybody may agree.
religious
 experience, in other words, spontaneously and inevitably engenders
 myths, superstitions, dogmas, creeds, and metaphysical theologies,
 and criticisms of one set of these by the adherents of another. of
 late, impartial classifications and comparisons have become possible,
 alongside of the denunciations and anathemas by which the commerce
 between creeds used exclusively to be carried on. we have the
 beginnings of a “science of
 religions,” so-called; and if these lectures could ever be
 accounted a crumb-like contribution to such a science, i should be
 made very happy.
but all these
 intellectual operations, whether they be constructive or comparative
 and critical, presuppose immediate experiences as their
 subject-matter. they are interpretative and inductive operations,
 operations after the fact, consequent upon religious feeling, not
 coördinate with it, not independent of what it ascertains.
the
 intellectualism in religion which i wish to discredit pretends to be
 something altogether different from this. it assumes to construct
 religious objects out of the resources of logical reason alone, or of
 logical reason drawing rigorous inference from non-subjective facts.
 it calls its conclusions dogmatic theology, or philosophy of the
 absolute, as the case may be; it does not call them science of
 religions. it reaches them in an a priori way, and warrants their
 veracity.
warranted systems
 have ever been the idols of aspiring souls. all-inclusive, yet
 simple; noble, clean, luminous, stable, rigorous, true;—what more
 ideal refuge could [pg
 there be than such a system would offer to spirits vexed by the
 muddiness and accidentality of the world of sensible things?
 accordingly, we find inculcated in the theological schools of to-day,
 almost as much as in those of the fore-time, a disdain for merely
 possible or probable truth, and of results that only private
 assurance can grasp. scholastics and idealists both express this
 disdain. principal john caird, for example, writes as follows in his
 introduction to the philosophy of religion:—
“religion must indeed be a thing of the heart; but in
 order to elevate it from the region of subjective caprice and
 waywardness, and to distinguish between that which is true and false
 in religion, we must appeal to an objective standard. that which
 enters the heart must first be discerned by the intelligence to
 be true. it must be seen as having in its own nature
 a right to dominate feeling, and as constituting the
 principle by which feeling must be judged.
in estimating the religious character
 of individuals, nations, or races, the first question is, not how
 they feel, but what they think and believe—not whether their
 religion is one which manifests itself in emotions, more or less
 vehement and enthusiastic, but what are the conceptionsof
 god and divine things by which these emotions are called forth.
 feeling is necessary in religion, but it is by the
content
or intelligent basis of a religion,
 and not by feeling, that its character and worth are to be
 determined.”
cardinal newman,
 in his work, the idea of a university, gives more emphatic expression
 still to this disdain for sentiment.
 theology, he says, is a science in the strictest sense of the word. i
 will tell you, he says, what it is not—not “physical evidences” for god, not “natural religion,” for these are but vague
 subjective interpretations:—[pg ]
“if,” he
 continues, “the supreme
 being is powerful or skillful, just so far as the telescope shows
 power, or the microscope shows skill, if his moral law is to be
 ascertained simply by the physical processes of the animal frame, or
 his will gathered from the immediate issues of human affairs, if his
 essence is just as high and deep and broad as the universe and no
 more; if this be the fact, then will i confess that there is no
 specific science about god, that theology is but a name, and a
 protest in its behalf an hypocrisy. then, pious as it is to think of
 him, while the pageant of experiment or abstract reasoning passes by,
 still such piety is nothing more than a poetry of thought, or an
 ornament of language, a certain view taken of nature which one man
 has and another has not, which gifted minds strike out, which others
 see to be admirable and ingenious, and which all would be the better
 for adopting. it is but the theology of nature, just as we talk of
 the philosophy
or the 
romance
of history, or the poetry
of childhood, or the picturesque or
 the sentimental or the humorous, or any other abstract quality
 which the genius or the caprice of the individual, or the fashion
 of the day, or the consent of the world, recognizes in any set of
 objects which are subjected to its contemplation. i do not see much
 difference between avowing that there is no god, and implying that
 nothing definite can be known for certain about
 him.”
what i mean by theology, continues newman, is none
 of these things: “i simply mean
 the science of
 god, or the truths we
 know about god, put into a system, just as we have a science of the
 stars and call it astronomy, or of the crust of the earth and call
 it geology.”
in both these
 extracts we have the issue clearly set before us: feeling valid only
 for the individual is pitted against reason valid universally. the
 test is a perfectly plain one of fact. theology based on pure reason
 must in point of fact convince men universally. if it did not,
 wherein would its superiority consist? if it only formed sects and
 schools, even as sentiment and mysticism form them, how would it
 fulfill its programme of freeing us [pg ] from personal caprice and waywardness? this
 perfectly definite practical test of the pretensions of philosophy to
 found religion on universal reason simplifies my procedure to-day. i
 need not discredit philosophy by laborious criticism of its
 arguments. it will suffice if i show that as a matter of history it
 fails to prove its pretension to be “objectively” convincing. in fact, philosophy does
 so fail. it does not banish differences; it founds schools and sects
 just as feeling does. i believe, in fact, that the logical reason of
 man operates in this field of divinity exactly as it has always
 operated in love, or in patriotism, or in politics, or in any other
 of the wider affairs of life, in which our passions or our mystical
 intuitions fix our beliefs beforehand. it finds arguments for our
 conviction, for indeed it has to find them. it amplifies and
 defines our faith, and dignifies it and lends it words and
 plausibility. it hardly ever engenders it; it cannot now secure
 it.
lend me your
 attention while i run through some of the points of the older
 systematic theology. you find them in both protestant and catholic
 manuals, best of all in the innumerable text-books published since
 pope leo's encyclical recommending the study of saint thomas. i
 glance first at the arguments by which dogmatic theology [pg ] establishes god's existence, after that
 at those by which it establishes his nature.
the arguments for
 god's existence have stood for hundreds of years with the waves of
 unbelieving criticism breaking against them, never totally
 discrediting them in the ears of the faithful, but on the whole
 slowly and surely washing out the mortar from between their joints.
 if you have a god already whom you believe in, these arguments
 confirm you. if you are atheistic, they fail to set you right. the
 proofs are various. the “cosmological”
 one, so-called, reasons from the contingence of the world to a first
 cause which must contain whatever perfections the world itself
 contains. the “argument from design”
 reasons, from the fact that nature's laws are mathematical, and her
 parts benevolently adapted to each other, that this cause is both
 intellectual and benevolent. the “moral
 argument” is that the moral law presupposes a lawgiver. the
 “argument ex
 consensu gentium” is that the belief in god is
 so widespread as to be grounded in the rational nature of man, and
 should therefore carry authority with it.
as i just said, i
 will not discuss these arguments technically. the bare fact that all
 idealists since kant have felt entitled either to scout or to neglect
 them shows that they are not solid enough to serve as religion's
 all-sufficient foundation. absolutely impersonal reasons would be in
 duty bound to show more general convincingness. causation is indeed
 too obscure a principle to bear the weight of the whole structure of
 theology. as for the [pg
 argument from design, see how darwinian ideas have revolutionized it.
 conceived as we now conceive them, as so many fortunate escapes from
 almost limitless processes of destruction, the benevolent adaptations
 which we find in nature suggest a deity very different from the one
 who figured in the earlier versions of the argument.[pg ]
the fact is that
 these arguments do but follow the combined suggestions of the facts
 and of our feeling. they prove nothing rigorously. they only
 corroborate our pre-existent partialities.
if philosophy can
 do so little to establish god's existence, how stands it with her
 efforts to define his attributes? it is worth while to look at the
 attempts of systematic theology in this direction.
since god is first cause, this science of sciences
 says, he differs from all his creatures in possessing
 existence a
 se. from this
“a-se-ity” on
 god's part, theology deduces by mere logic most of his other
 perfections. for instance, he must be both necessary
and absolute,
 cannot not be, and cannot in any way be determined by anything
 else. this makes him absolutely unlimited from without, and
 unlimited also from within; for limitation is non-being; and god is
 being itself. this unlimitedness makes god infinitely perfect.
 moreover, god is one, and only, for the infinitely perfect can admit no peer. he
 is spiritual,
 for were he composed of physical parts, some other power would have
 to combine them into the total, and his aseity would thus be
 contradicted. he is therefore both simple and non-physical in
 nature. he is simple
 metaphysicallyalso, that
 is to say, his nature and his existence cannot [pg ]be
 distinct, as they are in finite substances which share their formal
 natures with one another, and are individual only in their material
 aspect. since god is one and only, his essentiaand
 his esse
must be given at one stroke. this
 excludes from his being all those distinctions, so familiar in the
 world of finite things, between potentiality and actuality,
 substance and accidents, being and activity, existence and
 attributes. we can talk, it is true, of god's powers, acts, and
 attributes, but these discriminations are only “virtual,” and
 made from the human point of view. in god all these points of view
 fall into an absolute identity of being.
this absence of all potentiality in god obliges
 him to be immutable.
 he is actuality, through and through. were there anything potential
 about him, he would either lose or gain by its actualization, and
 either loss or gain would contradict his perfection. he cannot,
 therefore, change. furthermore, he is immense,
boundless;
 for could he be outlined in space, he would be composite, and this
 would contradict his indivisibility. he is therefore
omnipresent,
 indivisibly there, at every point of space. he is similarly wholly
 present at every point of time,—in other words eternal.
 for if he began in time, he would need a prior cause, and that
 would contradict his aseity. if he ended, it would contradict his
 necessity. if he went through any succession, it would contradict
 his immutability.
he has intelligence
and will and every other creature-perfection, for
we have them, and effectus nequit superare
 causam. in him, however,
 they are absolutely and eternally in act, and their
object, since god can be bounded by naught that is
 external, can primarily be nothing else than god himself. he knows
 himself, then, in one eternal indivisible act, and wills himself
 with an infinite self-pleasure.
since he must of logical necessity
 thus love and will himself, he cannot be called “free” ad
 intra, with the freedom
 of contrarieties that characterizes finite creatures.
ad
 extra, however, or with
 respect to his creation, god is free. he cannot need to create, being perfect in being and in happiness
 already. he wills to create, then, by an absolute
 freedom.[pg
being thus a substance endowed with intellect and
 will and freedom, god is a person; and a living
person also, for he is both object and
 subject of his own activity, and to be this distinguishes the
 living from the lifeless. he is thus absolutely self-sufficient:
 his self-knowledge
and self-love
are both of them infinite and
 adequate, and need no extraneous conditions to perfect
 them.
he is omniscient,
 for in knowing himself as cause he knows all creature things and
 events by implication. his knowledge is previsive,
 for he is present to all time. even our free acts are known
 beforehand to him, for otherwise his wisdom would admit of
 successive moments of enrichment, and this would contradict his
 immutability. he is omnipotent
for everything that does not involve
 logical contradiction. he can make being—in other words his power includes
creation.
 if what he creates were made of his own substance, it would have to
 be infinite in essence, as that substance is; but it is finite; so
 it must be non-divine in substance. if it were made of a substance,
 an eternally existing matter, for example, which god found there to
 his hand, and to which he simply gave its form, that would
 contradict god's definition as first cause, and make him a mere
 mover of something caused already. the things he creates, then, he
 creates ex
 nihilo, and gives them
 absolute being as so many finite substances additional to himself.
 the forms which he imprints upon them have their prototypes in his
 ideas. but as in god there is no such thing as multiplicity, and as
 these ideas for us are manifold, we must distinguish the ideas as
 they are in god and the way in which our minds externally imitate
 them. we must attribute them to him only in a terminative
sense, as differing aspects, from the
 finite point of view, of his unique essence.
god of course is holy, good, and just. he can do
 no evil, for he is positive being's fullness, and evil is negation.
 it is true that he has created physical evil in places, but only as
 a means of wider good, for bonum totius præeminet bonum
 partis. moral evil he
 cannot will, either as end or means, for that would contradict his
 holiness. by creating free beings he permits
it only, neither his justice nor his
 goodness obliging [pg
 ]him to prevent
 the recipients of freedom from misusing the gift.
as regards god's purpose in creating, primarily it
 can only have been to exercise his absolute freedom by the
 manifestation to others of his glory. from this it follows that the
 others must be rational beings, capable in the first place of
 knowledge, love, and honor, and in the second place of happiness,
 for the knowledge and love of god is the mainspring of felicity. in
 so far forth one may say that god's secondary purpose in creating
 is love.
i will not weary
 you by pursuing these metaphysical determinations farther, into the
 mysteries of god's trinity, for example. what i have given will serve
 as a specimen of the orthodox philosophical theology of both
 catholics and protestants. newman, filled with enthusiasm at god's
 list of perfections, continues the passage which i began to quote to
 you by a couple of pages of a rhetoric so magnificent that i can
 hardly refrain from adding them, in spite of the inroad they would
 make upon our time. he
 first enumerates god's attributes sonorously, then celebrates his
 ownership of everything in earth and heaven, and the dependence of
 all that happens upon his permissive will. he gives us scholastic
 philosophy “touched with emotion,” and
 every philosophy should be touched with emotion to be rightly
 understood. emotionally, then, dogmatic theology is worth something
 to minds of the type of newman's. it will aid us to estimate what it
 is worth intellectually, if at this point i make a short
 digression.
what god hath
 joined together, let no man put asunder. the continental schools of
 philosophy have too often overlooked the fact that man's thinking is
 organically connected with his conduct. it seems to me to be
 [pg ] the chief glory of english and
 scottish thinkers to have kept the organic connection in view. the
 guiding principle of british philosophy has in fact been that every
 difference must make a difference, every theoretical
 difference somewhere issue in a practical difference, and that the
 best method of discussing points of theory is to begin by
 ascertaining what practical difference would result from one
 alternative or the other being true. what is the particular truth in
 question known as? in what facts does it
 result? what is its cash-value in terms of particular experience?
 this is the characteristic english way of taking up a question. in
 this way, you remember, locke takes up the question of personal
 identity. what you mean by it is just your chain of particular
 memories, says he. that is the only concretely verifiable part of its
 significance. all further ideas about it, such as the oneness or
 manyness of the spiritual substance on which it is based, are
 therefore void of intelligible meaning; and propositions touching
 such ideas may be indifferently affirmed or denied. so berkeley with
 his “matter.” the cash-value of matter
 is our physical sensations. that is what it is known as, all that we
 concretely verify of its conception. that, therefore, is the whole
 meaning of the term “matter”—any other
 pretended meaning is mere wind of words. hume does the same thing
 with causation. it is known as habitual antecedence, and as tendency
 on our part to look for something definite to come. apart from this
 practical meaning it has no significance whatever, and books about it
 may be committed to the flames, says hume. dugald stewart and thomas
 brown, james mill, john mill, and professor bain, have followed more
 or less consistently the same method; and shadworth hodgson has used
 the principle with full explicitness. when all is [pg ] said and done, it was english and scotch
 writers, and not kant, who introduced “the
 critical method” into philosophy, the one method fitted to
 make philosophy a study worthy of serious men. for what seriousness
 can possibly remain in debating philosophic propositions that will
 never make an appreciable difference to us in action? and what could
 it matter, if all propositions were practically indifferent, which of
 them we should agree to call true or which false?
an american
 philosopher of eminent originality, mr. charles sanders peirce, has
 rendered thought a service by disentangling from the particulars of
 its application the principle by which these men were instinctively
 guided, and by singling it out as fundamental and giving to it a
 greek name. he calls it the principle of pragmatism, and he defends it
 somewhat as follows:—
thought in
 movement has for its only conceivable motive the attainment of
 belief, or thought at rest. only when our thought about a subject has
 found its rest in belief can our action on the subject firmly and
 safely begin. beliefs, in short, are rules for action; and the whole
 function of thinking is but one step in the production of active
 habits. if there were any part of a thought that made no difference
 in the thought's practical consequences, then that part would be no
 proper element of the thought's significance. to develop a thought's
 meaning we need therefore only determine what conduct it is fitted to
 produce; that conduct is for us its sole significance; and the
 tangible fact at the root of all our thought-distinctions is that
 there is no one of them so fine as to consist in anything but a
 possible difference of practice. to attain perfect clearness in our
 [pg ] thoughts of an object, we need
 then only consider what sensations, immediate or remote, we are
 conceivably to expect from it, and what conduct we must prepare in
 case the object should be true. our conception of these practical
 consequences is for us the whole of our conception of the object, so
 far as that conception has positive significance at all.
this is the
 principle of peirce, the principle of pragmatism. such a principle
 will help us on this occasion to decide, among the various attributes
 set down in the scholastic inventory of god's perfections, whether
 some be not far less significant than others.
if, namely, we
 apply the principle of pragmatism to god's metaphysical attributes,
 strictly so called, as distinguished from his moral attributes, i
 think that, even were we forced by a coercive logic to believe them,
 we still should have to confess them to be destitute of all
 intelligible significance. take god's aseity, for example; or his
 necessariness; his immateriality; his “simplicity” or superiority to the kind of inner
 variety and succession which we find in finite beings, his
 indivisibility, and lack of the inner distinctions of being and
 activity, substance and accident, potentiality and actuality, and the
 rest; his repudiation of inclusion in a genus; his actualized
 infinity; his “personality,” apart
 from the moral qualities which it may comport; his relations to evil
 being permissive and not positive; his self-sufficiency, self-love,
 and absolute felicity in himself:—candidly speaking, how do such
 qualities as these make any definite connection with our life? and if
 they severally call for no distinctive adaptations of our conduct,
 what vital difference can it possibly make to a man's religion
 whether they be true or false?
for my own part,
 although i dislike to say aught that [pg ] may grate upon tender associations, i must
 frankly confess that even though these attributes were faultlessly
 deduced, i cannot conceive of its being of the smallest consequence
 to us religiously that any one of them should be true. pray, what
 specific act can i perform in order to adapt myself the better to
 god's simplicity? or how does it assist me to plan my behavior, to
 know that his happiness is anyhow absolutely complete? in the middle
 of the century just past, mayne reid was the great writer of books of
 out-of-door adventure. he was forever extolling the hunters and
 field-observers of living animals' habits, and keeping up a fire of
 invective against the “closet-naturalists,” as he called them, the
 collectors and classifiers, and handlers of skeletons and skins. when
 i was a boy, i used to think that a closet-naturalist must be the
 vilest type of wretch under the sun. but surely the systematic
 theologians are the closet-naturalists of the deity, even in captain
 mayne reid's sense. what is their deduction of metaphysical
 attributes but a shuffling and matching of pedantic
 dictionary-adjectives, aloof from morals, aloof from human needs,
 something that might be worked out from the mere word “god” by one of those logical machines of wood and
 brass which recent ingenuity has contrived as well as by a man of
 flesh and blood. they have the trail of the serpent over them. one
 feels that in the theologians' hands, they are only a set of titles
 obtained by a mechanical manipulation of synonyms; verbality has
 stepped into the place of vision, professionalism into that of life.
 instead of bread we have a stone; instead of a fish, a serpent. did
 such a conglomeration of abstract terms give really the gist of our
 knowledge of the deity, schools of theology might indeed continue to
 flourish, but religion, vital religion, would have taken its flight
 from [pg ] this world. what keeps
 religion going is something else than abstract definitions and
 systems of concatenated adjectives, and something different from
 faculties of theology and their professors. all these things are
 after-effects, secondary accretions upon those phenomena of vital
 conversation with the unseen divine, of which i have shown you so
 many instances, renewing themselves in
 sæcula sæculorum in the lives of humble private
 men.
so much for the
 metaphysical attributes of god! from the point of view of practical
 religion, the metaphysical monster which they offer to our worship is
 an absolutely worthless invention of the scholarly mind.
what shall we now
 say of the attributes called moral? pragmatically, they stand on an
 entirely different footing. they positively determine fear and hope
 and expectation, and are foundations for the saintly life. it needs
 but a glance at them to show how great is their significance.
god's holiness,
 for example: being holy, god can will nothing but the good. being
 omnipotent, he can secure its triumph. being omniscient, he can see
 us in the dark. being just, he can punish us for what he sees. being
 loving, he can pardon too. being unalterable, we can count on him
 securely. these qualities enter into connection with our life, it is
 highly important that we should be informed concerning them. that
 god's purpose in creation should be the manifestation of his glory is
 also an attribute which has definite relations to our practical life.
 among other things it has given a definite character to worship in
 all christian countries. if dogmatic theology really does prove
 beyond dispute that a god with characters like these exists, she may
 well claim to give a solid basis to religious sentiment. but verily,
 how stands it with her arguments?[pg ]
it stands with
 them as ill as with the arguments for his existence. not only do
 post-kantian idealists reject them root and branch, but it is a plain
 historic fact that they never have converted any one who has found in
 the moral complexion of the world, as he experienced it, reasons for
 doubting that a good god can have framed it. to prove god's goodness
 by the scholastic argument that there is no non-being in his essence
 would sound to such a witness simply silly.
no! the book of
 job went over this whole matter once for all and definitively.
 ratiocination is a relatively superficial and unreal path to the
 deity: “i will lay mine hand upon my mouth; i
 have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye seeth
 thee.” an intellect perplexed and baffled, yet a trustful
 sense of presence—such is the situation of the man who is sincere
 with himself and with the facts, but who remains religious
 still.
we must therefore,
 i think, bid a definitive good-by to dogmatic theology. in all
 sincerity our faith must do without that warrant. modern idealism, i
 repeat, has said good-by to this theology forever. can modern
 idealism give faith a better warrant, or must she still rely on her
 poor self for witness?
the basis of
 modern idealism is kant's doctrine of the [pg ] transcendental ego of apperception. by this
 formidable term kant merely meant the fact that the consciousness
 “i think them” must (potentially or
 actually) accompany all our objects. former skeptics had said as
 much, but the “i” in question had
 remained for them identified with the personal individual. kant
 abstracted and depersonalized it, and made it the most universal of
 all his categories, although for kant himself the transcendental ego
 had no theological implications.
it was reserved
 for his successors to convert kant's notion of bewusstsein überhaupt, or abstract
 consciousness, into an infinite concrete self-consciousness which is
 the soul of the world, and in which our sundry personal
 self-consciousnesses have their being. it would lead me into
 technicalities to show you even briefly how this transformation was
 in point of fact effected. suffice it to say that in the hegelian
 school, which to-day so deeply influences both british and american
 thinking, two principles have borne the brunt of the operation.
the first of these
 principles is that the old logic of identity never gives us more than
 a post-mortem dissection of disjecta
 membra, and that the fullness of life can be construed
 to thought only by recognizing that every object which our thought
 may propose to itself involves the notion of some other object which
 seems at first to negate the first one.
the second
 principle is that to be conscious of a negation is already virtually
 to be beyond it. the mere asking of a question or expression of a
 dissatisfaction proves that the answer or the satisfaction is already
 imminent; the finite, realized as such, is already the infinite
 in posse.
applying these
 principles, we seem to get a propulsive force into our logic which
 the ordinary logic of a bare, [pg ] stark self-identity in each thing never attains
 to. the objects of our thought now act
 within our thought, act as objects act when given in experience. they
 change and develop. they introduce something other than themselves
 along with them; and this other, at first only ideal or potential,
 presently proves itself also to be actual. it supersedes the thing at
 first supposed, and both verifies and corrects it, in developing the
 fullness of its meaning.
the program is
 excellent; the universe is a place where things are followed
 by other things that both correct and fulfill them; and a logic which
 gave us something like this movement of fact would express truth far
 better than the traditional school-logic, which never gets of its own
 accord from anything to anything else, and registers only predictions
 and subsumptions, or static resemblances and differences. nothing
 could be more unlike the methods of dogmatic theology than those of
 this new logic. let me quote in illustration some passages from the
 scottish transcendentalist whom i have already named.
“how are we to conceive,” principal caird writes, “of the reality in which all intelligence
 rests?”
he replies: “two things may without difficulty be proved, viz.,
 that this reality is an absolute spirit, and conversely that it is
 only in communion with this absolute spirit or intelligence that
 the finite spirit can realize itself. it is absolute; for the
 faintest movement of human intelligence would be arrested, if it
 did not presuppose the absolute reality of intelligence, of thought
 itself. doubt or denial themselves presuppose and indirectly affirm
 it. when i pronounce anything to be true, i pronounce it, indeed,
 to be relative to thought, but not to be relative to my thought, or
 to the thought of any other individual mind. from the existence of
 all individual minds as such i can abstract; i can think them away.
 but that which i cannot think away is thought or self-consciousness
 itself, in its independence [pg ]and absoluteness,
 or, in other words, an absolute thought or
 self-consciousness.”
here, you see,
 principal caird makes the transition which kant did not make: he
 converts the omnipresence of consciousness in general as a condition
 of “truth” being anywhere possible,
 into an omnipresent universal consciousness, which he identifies with
 god in his concreteness. he next proceeds to use the principle that
 to acknowledge your limits is in essence to be beyond them; and makes
 the transition to the religious experience of individuals in the
 following words:—
“if [man] were only a creature of transient
 sensations and impulses, of an ever coming and going succession of
 intuitions, fancies, feelings, then nothing could ever have for him
 the character of objective truth or reality. but it is the
 prerogative of man's spiritual nature that he can yield himself up to
 a thought and will that are infinitely larger than his own. as a
 thinking, self-conscious being, indeed, he may be said, by his very
 nature, to live in the atmosphere of the universal life. as a
 thinking being, it is possible for me to suppress and quell in my
 consciousness every movement of self-assertion, every notion and
 opinion that is merely mine, every desire that belongs to me as this
 particular self, and to become the pure medium of a thought that is
 universal—in one word, to live no more my own life, but let my
 consciousness be possessed and suffused by the infinite and eternal
 life of spirit. and yet it is just in this renunciation of self that
 i truly gain myself, or realize the highest possibilities of my own
 nature. for whilst in one sense we give up self to live the universal
 and absolute life of reason, yet that to which we thus surrender
 ourselves is in reality our truer self. the life of absolute reason
 is not a life that is foreign to us.”
nevertheless,
 principal caird goes on to say, so far as we are able outwardly to
 realize this doctrine, the balm it offers remains incomplete.
 whatever we may be in posse, the
 very best of us in actu falls
 very short of [pg
 being absolutely divine. social morality, love, and self-sacrifice
 even, merge our self only in some other finite self or selves. they
 do not quite identify it with the infinite. man's ideal destiny,
 infinite in abstract logic, might thus seem in practice forever
 unrealizable.
“is there, then,” our
 author continues, “no solution of
 the contradiction between the ideal and the actual? we answer, there
 is such a solution, but in order to reach it we are carried beyond
 the sphere of morality into that of religion. it may be said to be
 the essential characteristic of religion as contrasted with morality,
 that it changes aspiration into fruition, anticipation into
 realization; that instead of leaving man in the interminable pursuit
 of a vanishing ideal, it makes him the actual partaker of a divine or
 infinite life. whether we view religion from the human side or the
 divine—as the surrender of the soul to god, or as the life of god in
 the soul—in either aspect it is of its very essence that the infinite
 has ceased to be a far-off vision, and has become a present reality.
 the very first pulsation of the spiritual life, when we rightly
 apprehend its significance, is the indication that the division
 between the spirit and its object has vanished, that the ideal has
 become real, that the finite has reached its goal and become suffused
 with the presence and life of the infinite.
“oneness of mind and will with the divine mind and
 will is not the future hope and aim of religion, but its very
 beginning and birth in the soul. to enter on the religious life is
 to terminate the struggle. in that act which constitutes the
 beginning of the religious life—call it faith, or trust, or
 self-surrender, or by whatever name you will—there is involved the
 identification of the finite with a life which is eternally
 realized. it is true indeed that the religious life is progressive;
 but understood in the light of the foregoing idea, religious
 progress is not progress towards,
 but within
the sphere of the infinite. it is not
 the vain attempt by endless finite additions or increments to
 become possessed of infinite wealth, but it is the endeavor, by the
 constant exercise of spiritual activity, to appropriate that
 infinite inheritance of which we are already in [pg ]possession.
 the whole future of the religious life is given in its beginning,
 but it is given implicitly. the position of the man who has entered
 on the religious life is that evil, error, imperfection, do not
 really belong to him: they are excrescences which have no organic
 relation to his true nature: they are already virtually, as they
 will be actually, suppressed and annulled, and in the very process
 of being annulled they become the means of spiritual progress.
 though he is not exempt from temptation and conflict, [yet] in that
 inner sphere in which his true life lies, the struggle is over, the
 victory already achieved. it is not a finite but an infinite life
 which the spirit lives. every pulse-beat of its [existence] is the
 expression and realization of the life of god.”
you will readily
 admit that no description of the phenomena of the religious
 consciousness could be better than these words of your lamented
 preacher and philosopher. they reproduce the very rapture of those
 crises of conversion of which we have been hearing; they utter what
 the mystic felt but was unable to communicate; and the saint, in
 hearing them, recognizes his own experience. it is indeed gratifying
 to find the content of religion reported so unanimously. but when all
 is said and done, has principal caird—and i only use him as an
 example of that whole mode of thinking—transcended the sphere of
 feeling and of the direct experience of the individual, and laid the
 foundations of religion in impartial reason? has he made religion
 universal by coercive reasoning, transformed it from a private faith
 into a public certainty? has he rescued its affirmations from
 obscurity and mystery?
i believe that he
 has done nothing of the kind, but that he has simply reaffirmed the
 individual's experiences in a more generalized vocabulary. and again,
 i can be [pg
 excused from proving technically that the transcendentalist
 reasonings fail to make religion universal, for i can point to the
 plain fact that a majority of scholars, even religiously disposed
 ones, stubbornly refuse to treat them as convincing. the whole of
 germany, one may say, has positively rejected the hegelian
 argumentation. as for scotland, i need only mention professor
 fraser's and professor pringle-pattison's memorable criticisms, with
 which so many of you are familiar. once
 more, i ask, if transcendental idealism were as objectively and
 absolutely rational as it pretends to be, could it possibly fail so
 egregiously to be persuasive?
what religion
 reports, you must remember, always purports to be a fact of
 experience: the divine is actually present, religion says, and
 between it and ourselves relations of give and take are actual. if
 definite perceptions of fact like this cannot stand upon their own
 feet, [pg ] surely abstract
 reasoning cannot give them the support they are in need of.
 conceptual processes can class facts, define them, interpret them;
 but they do not produce them, nor can they reproduce their
 individuality. there is always a plus, a
 thisness, which feeling alone can
 answer for. philosophy in this sphere is thus a secondary function,
 unable to warrant faith's veracity, and so i revert to the thesis
 which i announced at the beginning of this lecture.
in all sad
 sincerity i think we must conclude that the attempt to demonstrate by
 purely intellectual processes the truth of the deliverances of direct
 religious experience is absolutely hopeless.
it would be unfair
 to philosophy, however, to leave her under this negative sentence.
 let me close, then, by briefly enumerating what she can do
 for religion. if she will abandon metaphysics and deduction for
 criticism and induction, and frankly transform herself from theology
 into science of religions, she can make herself enormously
 useful.
the spontaneous
 intellect of man always defines the divine which it feels in ways
 that harmonize with its temporary intellectual prepossessions.
 philosophy can by comparison eliminate the local and the accidental
 from these definitions. both from dogma and from worship she can
 remove historic incrustations. by confronting the spontaneous
 religious constructions with the results of natural science,
 philosophy can also eliminate doctrines that are now known to be
 scientifically absurd or incongruous.
sifting out in
 this way unworthy formulations, she can leave a residuum of
 conceptions that at least are possible. with these she can deal as
 hypotheses, testing them in
 [pg ] all the manners, whether
 negative or positive, by which hypotheses are ever tested. she can
 reduce their number, as some are found more open to objection. she
 can perhaps become the champion of one which she picks out as being
 the most closely verified or verifiable. she can refine upon the
 definition of this hypothesis, distinguishing between what is
 innocent over-belief and symbolism in the expression of it, and what
 is to be literally taken. as a result, she can offer mediation
 between different believers, and help to bring about consensus of
 opinion. she can do this the more successfully, the better she
 discriminates the common and essential from the individual and local
 elements of the religious beliefs which she compares.
i do not see why a
 critical science of religions of this sort might not eventually
 command as general a public adhesion as is commanded by a physical
 science. even the personally non-religious might accept its
 conclusions on trust, much as blind persons now accept the facts of
 optics—it might appear as foolish to refuse them. yet as the science
 of optics has to be fed in the first instance, and continually
 verified later, by facts experienced by seeing persons; so the
 science of religions would depend for its original material on facts
 of personal experience, and would have to square itself with personal
 experience through all its critical reconstructions. it could never
 get away from concrete life, or work in a conceptual vacuum. it would
 forever have to confess, as every science confesses, that the
 subtlety of nature flies beyond it, and that its formulas are but
 approximations. philosophy lives in words, but truth and fact well up
 into our lives in ways that exceed verbal formulation. there is in
 the living act of perception always something that glimmers and
 twinkles and will not be caught, and for which reflection
 [pg ] comes too late. no one knows
 this as well as the philosopher. he must fire his volley of new
 vocables out of his conceptual shotgun, for his profession condemns
 him to this industry, but he secretly knows the hollowness and
 irrelevancy. his formulas are like stereoscopic or kinetoscopic
 photographs seen outside the instrument; they lack the depth, the
 motion, the vitality. in the religious sphere, in particular, belief
 that formulas are true can never wholly take the place of personal
 experience.
in my next lecture
 i will try to complete my rough description of religious experience;
 and in the lecture after that, which is the last one, i will try my
 own hand at formulating conceptually the truth to which it is a
 witness.
[pg ]
lecture xix. other
 characteristics.
we have wound our
 way back, after our excursion through mysticism and philosophy, to
 where we were before: the uses of religion, its uses to the
 individual who has it, and the uses of the individual himself to the
 world, are the best arguments that truth is in it. we return to the
 empirical philosophy: the true is what works well, even though the
 qualification “on the whole” may
 always have to be added. in this lecture we must revert to
 description again, and finish our picture of the religious
 consciousness by a word about some of its other characteristic
 elements. then, in a final lecture, we shall be free to make a
 general review and draw our independent conclusions.
the first point i
 will speak of is the part which the æsthetic life plays in
 determining one's choice of a religion. men, i said awhile ago,
 involuntarily intellectualize their religious experience. they need
 formulas, just as they need fellowship in worship. i spoke,
 therefore, too contemptuously of the pragmatic uselessness of the
 famous scholastic list of attributes of the deity, for they have one
 use which i neglected to consider. the eloquent passage in which
 newman enumerates them puts us
 on the track of it. intoning them as he would intone a cathedral
 service, he shows how high is their æsthetic value. it enriches our
 bare piety to carry these exalted and mysterious verbal additions
 just as it enriches [pg
 ] a
 church to have an organ and old brasses, marbles and frescoes and
 stained windows. epithets lend an atmosphere and overtones to our
 devotion. they are like a hymn of praise and service of glory, and
 may sound the more sublime for being incomprehensible. minds like
 newman's grow as
 jealous of their credit as heathen priests are of that of the jewelry
 and ornaments that blaze upon their idols.
among the
 buildings-out of religion which the mind spontaneously indulges in,
 the æsthetic motive must never be forgotten. i promised to say
 nothing of ecclesiastical systems in these lectures. i may be
 allowed, however, to put in a word at this point on the way in which
 their satisfaction of certain æsthetic needs contributes to their
 hold on human nature. although some persons aim most at intellectual
 purity and simplification, for others richness
 is the supreme imaginative requirement. when
 one's mind is strongly of this type, an individual religion will
 hardly serve the purpose. the inner need is rather [pg ] of something institutional and complex,
 majestic in the hierarchic interrelatedness of its parts, with
 authority descending from stage to stage, and at every stage objects
 for adjectives of mystery and splendor, derived in the last resort
 from the godhead who is the fountain and culmination of the system.
 one feels then as if in presence of some vast incrusted work of
 jewelry or architecture; one hears the multitudinous liturgical
 appeal; one gets the honorific vibration coming from every quarter.
 compared with such a noble complexity, in which ascending and
 descending movements seem in no way to jar upon stability, in which
 no single item, however humble, is insignificant, because so many
 august institutions hold it in its place, how flat does evangelical
 protestantism appear, how bare the atmosphere of those isolated
 religious lives whose boast it is that “man
 in the bush with god may meet.” what a
 pulverization and leveling of what a gloriously piled-up structure!
 to an imagination used to the perspectives of dignity and glory, the
 naked gospel scheme seems to offer an almshouse for a palace.
it is much like
 the patriotic sentiment of those brought up in ancient empires. how
 many emotions must be frustrated of their object, when one gives up
 the titles of dignity, the crimson lights and blare of brass, the
 gold embroidery, the plumed troops, the fear and trembling, and puts
 up with a president in a black coat who shakes hands with you, and
 comes, it may be, from a “home” upon a
 veldt or prairie with one sitting-room and a bible on its
 centre-table. it pauperizes the monarchical imagination!
the strength of
 these æsthetic sentiments makes it [pg ] rigorously impossible, it seems to me, that
 protestantism, however superior in spiritual profundity it may be to
 catholicism, should at the present day succeed in making many
 converts from the more venerable ecclesiasticism. the latter offers a
 so much richer pasturage and shade to the fancy, has so many cells
 with so many different kinds of honey, is so indulgent in its
 multiform appeals to human nature, that protestantism will always
 show to catholic eyes the almshouse physiognomy. the bitter
 negativity of it is to the catholic mind incomprehensible. to
 intellectual catholics many of the antiquated beliefs and practices
 to which the church gives countenance are, if taken literally, as
 childish as they are to protestants. but they are childish in the
 pleasing sense of “childlike”—innocent
 and amiable, and worthy to be smiled on in consideration of the
 undeveloped condition of the dear people's intellects. to the
 protestant, on the contrary, they are childish in the sense of being
 idiotic falsehoods. he must stamp out their delicate and lovable
 redundancy, leaving the catholic to shudder at his literalness. he
 appears to the latter as morose as if he were some hard-eyed, numb,
 monotonous kind of reptile. the two will never understand each
 other—their centres of emotional energy are too different. rigorous
 truth and human nature's intricacies are always in need of a mutual
 interpreter. so much
 for the æsthetic diversities in the religious
 consciousness.[pg
in most books on
 religion, three things are represented as its most essential
 elements. these are sacrifice, confession, and prayer. i must say a
 word in turn of each of these elements, though briefly. first of
 sacrifice.
sacrifices to gods
 are omnipresent in primeval worship; but, as cults have grown
 refined, burnt offerings and the blood of he-goats have been
 superseded by sacrifices more spiritual in their nature. judaism,
 islam, and buddhism get along without ritual sacrifice; so does
 christianity, save in so far as the notion is preserved in
 transfigured form in the mystery of christ's atonement. these
 religions substitute offerings of the heart, renunciations of the
 inner self, for all those vain oblations. in the ascetic practices
 which islam, buddhism, and the older christianity encourage we see
 how indestructible is the idea that sacrifice of some sort is a
 religious exercise. in lecturing on asceticism i spoke of its
 significance as symbolic of the sacrifices which life, whenever it is
 taken strenuously, calls for. but, as
 i said my say about those, and as these lectures expressly avoid
 earlier religious usages and questions of derivation, i will pass
 from the subject of sacrifice altogether and turn to that of
 confession.
in regard to
 confession i will also be most brief, saying my word about it
 psychologically, not historically. not nearly as widespread as
 sacrifice, it corresponds to a more inward and moral stage of
 sentiment. it is part of the general system of purgation and
 cleansing which one feels one's self in need of, in order to be in
 right relations to one's deity. for him who confesses, shams are over
 and realities have begun; he has exteriorized his rottenness. if he
 has not actually got rid of it, he at least [pg ] no longer smears it over with a hypocritical
 show of virtue—he lives at least upon a basis of veracity. the
 complete decay of the practice of confession in anglo-saxon
 communities is a little hard to account for. reaction against popery
 is of course the historic explanation, for in popery confession went
 with penances and absolution, and other inadmissible practices. but
 on the side of the sinner himself it seems as if the need ought to
 have been too great to accept so summary a refusal of its
 satisfaction. one would think that in more men the shell of secrecy
 would have had to open, the pent-in abscess to burst and gain relief,
 even though the ear that heard the confession were unworthy. the
 catholic church, for obvious utilitarian reasons, has substituted
 auricular confession to one priest for the more radical act of public
 confession. we english-speaking protestants, in the general
 self-reliance and unsociability of our nature, seem to find it enough
 if we take god alone into our confidence.
the next topic on
 which i must comment is prayer,—and this time it must be less
 briefly. we have heard much talk of late against prayer, especially
 against prayers for better weather and for the recovery of sick
 people. as regards prayers for the sick, if any medical fact can be
 considered to stand firm, it is that in certain environments prayer
 may contribute to recovery, and should be encouraged as a therapeutic
 measure. being a normal factor of moral health in the person, its
 omission would be deleterious. the case of the weather is different.
 notwithstanding the recency of the opposite belief,
[pg ] every one now knows that
 droughts and storms follow from physical antecedents, and that moral
 appeals cannot avert them. but petitional prayer is only one
 department of prayer; and if we take the word in the wider sense as
 meaning every kind of inward communion or conversation with the power
 recognized as divine, we can easily see that scientific criticism
 leaves it untouched.
prayer in this
 wide sense is the very soul and essence of religion. “religion,” says a liberal french theologian,
 “is an intercourse, a conscious and voluntary
 relation, entered into by a soul in distress with the mysterious
 power upon which it feels itself to depend, and upon which its fate
 is contingent. this intercourse with god is realized by prayer.
 prayer is religion in act; that is, prayer is real religion. it is
 prayer that distinguishes the religious phenomenon from such similar
 or neighboring phenomena as purely moral or æsthetic sentiment.
 religion is nothing if it be not the vital act by which the entire
 mind seeks to save itself by clinging to the principle from which it
 draws its life. this act is prayer, by which term i understand no
 vain exercise of words, no mere repetition of certain sacred formulæ,
 but the very movement itself of the soul, putting itself in a
 personal relation of contact with the mysterious power of which it
 feels the presence,—it may be even before it has a name by which to
 call it. wherever this interior prayer is lacking, there is no
 religion; wherever, on the other hand, this prayer rises and stirs
 the soul, even in the absence of forms or of doctrines, we have
 living religion. one sees from this why ‘natural religion,’ so-called, [pg ] is not properly a religion. it cuts man
 off from prayer. it leaves him and god in mutual remoteness, with no
 intimate commerce, no interior dialogue, no interchange, no action of
 god in man, no return of man to god. at bottom this pretended
 religion is only a philosophy. born at epochs of rationalism, of
 critical investigations, it never was anything but an abstraction. an
 artificial and dead creation, it reveals to its examiner hardly one
 of the characters proper to religion.”
it seems to me
 that the entire series of our lectures proves the truth of m.
 sabatier's contention. the religious phenomenon, studied as an inner
 fact, and apart from ecclesiastical or theological complications, has
 shown itself to consist everywhere, and at all its stages, in the
 consciousness which individuals have of an intercourse between
 themselves and higher powers with which they feel themselves to be
 related. this intercourse is realized at the time as being both
 active and mutual. if it be not effective; if it be not a give and
 take relation; if nothing be really transacted while it lasts; if the
 world is in no whit different for its having taken place; then
 prayer, taken in this wide meaning of a sense that something is
 transacting, is of course a feeling of what is illusory,
 and religion must on the whole be classed, not simply as containing
 elements of delusion,—these undoubtedly everywhere exist,—but as
 being rooted in delusion altogether, just as materialists and
 atheists have always said it was. at most there might remain, when
 the direct experiences of prayer were ruled out as false witnesses,
 some inferential belief that the whole order of existence must have a
 divine cause. but this way of contemplating nature, pleasing as it
 would doubtless be [pg
 ] to
 persons of a pious taste, would leave to them but the spectators'
 part at a play, whereas in experimental religion and the prayerful
 life, we seem ourselves to be actors, and not in a play, but in a
 very serious reality.
the genuineness of
 religion is thus indissolubly bound up with the question whether the
 prayerful consciousness be or be not deceitful. the conviction that
 something is genuinely transacted in this consciousness is the very
 core of living religion. as to what is transacted, great differences
 of opinion have prevailed. the unseen powers have been supposed, and
 are yet supposed, to do things which no enlightened man can nowadays
 believe in. it may well prove that the sphere of influence in prayer
 is subjective exclusively, and that what is immediately changed is
 only the mind of the praying person. but however our opinion of
 prayer's effects may come to be limited by criticism, religion, in
 the vital sense in which these lectures study it, must stand or fall
 by the persuasion that effects of some sort genuinely do occur.
 through prayer, religion insists, things which cannot be realized in
 any other manner come about: energy which but for prayer would be
 bound is by prayer set free and operates in some part, be it
 objective or subjective, of the world of facts.
this postulate is
 strikingly expressed in a letter written by the late frederic w. h.
 myers to a friend, who allows me to quote from it. it shows how
 independent the prayer-instinct is of usual doctrinal complications.
 mr. myers writes:—
“i am glad that you have asked me about prayer,
 because i have rather strong ideas on the subject. first consider
 what are the facts. there exists around us a spiritual universe, and
 that universe is in actual relation with the material. from the
 spiritual universe comes the energy which maintains the
 material; [pg
 ]the energy which
 makes the life of each individual spirit. our spirits are supported
 by a perpetual indrawal of this energy, and the vigor of that
 indrawal is perpetually changing, much as the vigor of our absorption
 of material nutriment changes from hour to hour.
“i call these ‘facts’ because i think that some scheme of this kind is
 the only one consistent with our actual evidence; too complex to
 summarize here. how, then, should we act on these facts? plainly we must endeavor to draw
 in as much spiritual life as possible, and we must place our minds
 in any attitude which experience shows to be favorable to such
 indrawal. prayer
is the general name for that attitude
 of open and earnest expectancy. if we then ask to whom to pray, the answer (strangely enough) must be
 that that does not much matter. the prayer is not indeed a
 purely subjective thing;—it means a real increase in intensity of
 absorption of spiritual power or grace;—but we do not know enough
 of what takes place in the spiritual world to know how the prayer
 operates;—whois cognizant of it, or through what channel the
 grace is given. better let children pray to christ, who is at any
 rate the highest individual spirit of whom we have any knowledge.
 but it would be rash to say that christ himself hears
 us; while to say
 that god hears us is merely to restate the first
 principle,—that grace flows in from the infinite spiritual
 world.”
let us reserve the
 question of the truth or falsehood of the belief that power is
 absorbed until the next lecture, when our dogmatic conclusions, if we
 have any, must be reached. let this lecture still confine itself to
 the description of phenomena; and as a concrete example of an extreme
 sort, of the way in which the prayerful life may still be led, let me
 take a case with which most of you must be acquainted, that of george
 müller of bristol, who died in . müller's prayers were of the
 crassest petitional order. early in life he resolved on taking
 certain bible promises in literal sincerity, and on letting himself
 be fed, not by his own worldly foresight, [pg ] but by the lord's hand. he had an
 extraordinarily active and successful career, among the fruits of
 which were the distribution of over two million copies of the
 scripture text, in different languages; the equipment of several
 hundred missionaries; the circulation of more than a hundred and
 eleven million of scriptural books, pamphlets, and tracts; the
 building of five large orphanages, and the keeping and educating of
 thousands of orphans; finally, the establishment of schools in which
 over a hundred and twenty-one thousand youthful and adult pupils were
 taught. in the course of this work mr. müller received and
 administered nearly a million and a half of pounds sterling, and
 traveled over two hundred thousand miles of sea and land. during
 the sixty-eight years of his ministry, he never owned any property
 except his clothes and furniture, and cash in hand; and he left, at
 the age of eighty-six, an estate worth only a hundred and sixty
 pounds.
his method was to let his general wants be publicly
 known, but not to acquaint other people with the details of his
 temporary necessities. for the relief of the latter, he prayed
 directly to the lord, believing that sooner or later prayers are
 always answered if one have trust enough. “when i lose such a thing as a
 key,”
he writes, “i ask the lord to direct me to it, and i look for
 an answer to my prayer; when a person with whom i have made an
 appointment does not come, according to the fixed time, and i begin
 to be inconvenienced by it, i ask the lord to be pleased to hasten
 him to me, and i look for an answer; when i do not understand a
 passage of the word of god, i lift up my heart to the lord that he
 would be pleased by his holy spirit to instruct me, and i expect to
 be taught, though i do not fix the time when, and the manner how it
 should be; when i am going to minister in the word, i seek help
 from the lord, and ... am not cast down, but of good cheer because
 i look for his assistance.”[pg ]
müller's custom was to never run up bills, not
 even for a week. “as the lord
 deals out to us by the day, ... the week's payment might become due
 and we have no money to meet it; and thus those with whom we deal
 might be inconvenienced by us, and we be found acting against the
 commandment of the lord: ‘owe no man anything.’ from
 this day and henceforward whilst the lord gives to us our supplies
 by the day, we purpose to pay at once for every article as it is
 purchased, and never to buy anything except we can pay for it at
 once, however much it may seem to be needed, and however much those
 with whom we deal may wish to be paid only by the
 week.”
the articles needed of which müller speaks were
 the food, fuel, etc., of his orphanages. somehow, near as they
 often come to going without a meal, they hardly ever seem actually
 to have done so. “greater and
 more manifest nearness of the lord's presence i have never had than
 when after breakfast there were no means for dinner for more than a
 hundred persons; or when after dinner there were no means for the
 tea, and yet the lord provided the tea; and all this without one
 single human being having been informed about our need.... through
 grace my mind is so fully assured of the faithfulness of the lord,
 that in the midst of the greatest need, i am enabled in peace to go
 about my other work. indeed, did not the lord give me this, which
 is the result of trusting in him, i should scarcely be able to work
 at all; for it is now comparatively a rare thing that a day comes
 when i am not in need for one or another part of the
 work.”
in building his orphanages simply by prayer and
 faith, müller affirms that his prime motive was “to have something to point to as a visible proof
 that our god and father is the same faithful god that he ever
 was,—as willing as ever to prove himself the living god, in our day
 as formerly, to all that put their trust in him.”
for this reason he refused to borrow
 money for any of his enterprises. “how does it work [pg ]when we thus
 anticipate god by going our own way? we certainly weaken faith
 instead of increasing it; and each time we work thus a deliverance
 of our own we find it more and more difficult to trust in god, till
 at last we give way entirely to our natural fallen reason and
 unbelief prevails. how different if one is enabled to wait god's
 own time, and to look alone to him for help and deliverance! when
 at last help comes, after many seasons of prayer it may be, how
 sweet it is, and what a present recompense! dear christian reader,
 if you have never walked in this path of obedience before, do so
 now, and you will then know experimentally the sweetness of the joy
 which results from it.”
when the supplies came in but slowly, müller
 always considered that this was for the trial of his faith and
 patience. when his faith and patience had been sufficiently tried,
 the lord would send more means. “and thus it has proved,”—i
 quote from his diary,—“for to-day
 was given me the sum of  pounds, of which  are for the
 building fund [of a certain house], and  for present necessities.
 it is impossible to describe my joy in god when i received this
 donation. i was neither excited nor surprised; for i
look out
for answers to my prayers.
i believe that god hears
 me. yet my heart was so
 full of joy that i could only sit before god, and admire him, like david in  samuel
 vii. at last i cast myself flat down upon my face and burst forth
 in thanksgiving to god and in surrendering my heart afresh to him
 for his blessed service.”
george müller's is
 a case extreme in every respect, and in no respect more so than in
 the extraordinary narrowness of the man's intellectual horizon. his
 god was, as he often said, his business partner. he seems to have
 been for müller little more than a sort of supernatural clergyman
 interested in the congregation of tradesmen and others in bristol who
 were his saints, and in the orphanages and other enterprises, but
 unpossessed of [pg
 ] any
 of those vaster and wilder and more ideal attributes with which the
 human imagination elsewhere has invested him. müller, in short, was
 absolutely unphilosophical. his intensely private and practical
 conception of his relations with the deity continued the traditions
 of the most primitive human thought. when we
 compare a mind like his with such a mind as, for example, emerson's
 or phillips brooks's, we see the range which the religions
 consciousness covers.
there is an
 immense literature relating to answers to petitional prayer. the
 evangelical journals are filled [pg ] with such answers, and books are devoted to the
 subject, but for
 us müller's case will suffice.
a less sturdy
 beggar-like fashion of leading the prayerful life is followed by
 innumerable other christians. persistence in leaning on the almighty
 for support and guidance will, such persons say, bring with it
 proofs, palpable but much more subtle, of his presence and active
 influence. the following description of a “led” life, by a german writer whom i have already
 quoted, would no doubt appear to countless christians in every
 country as if transcribed from their own personal experience. one
 finds in this guided sort of life, says dr. hilty,—
“that books and words (and sometimes people) come to
 one's cognizance just at the very moment in which one needs them;
 that one glides over great dangers as if with shut eyes, remaining
 ignorant of what would have terrified one or led one astray, until
 the peril is past—this being especially the case with temptations to
 vanity and sensuality; that paths on which one ought not to wander
 are, as it were, hedged off with thorns; but that on the other side
 great obstacles are suddenly removed; that when the time has come for
 something, one suddenly receives a courage that formerly failed, or
 perceives the root of a matter that until then was concealed, or
 discovers thoughts, talents, yea, even pieces of knowledge and
 insight, in one's self, of which it is impossible to say whence they
 come; finally, that persons help us or decline to help us, favor us
 or refuse us, as if they had to do so against their will, so that
 often those indifferent or even unfriendly to us yield us the
 greatest service and furtherance. (god takes often their worldly
 goods, from those whom he leads, at just the right
[pg ]moment, when they threaten to impede the effort
 after higher interests.)
“besides all this, other noteworthy things come to
 pass, of which it is not easy to give account. there is no doubt
 whatever that now one walks continually through ‘open doors’ and
 on the easiest roads, with as little care and trouble as it is
 possible to imagine.
“furthermore one finds one's self settling one's
 affairs neither too early nor too late, whereas they were wont to
 be spoiled by untimeliness, even when the preparations had been
 well laid. in addition to this, one does them with perfect
 tranquillity of mind, almost as if they were matters of no
 consequence, like errands done by us for another person, in which
 case we usually act more calmly than when we act in our own
 concerns. again, one finds that one can wait for everything patiently, and that is one of
 life's great arts. one finds also that each thing comes duly, one
 thing after the other, so that one gains time to make one's footing
 sure before advancing farther. and then everything occurs to us at
 the right moment, just what we ought to do, etc., and often in a
 very striking way, just as if a third person were keeping watch
 over those things which we are in easy danger of
 forgetting.
“often, too, persons are sent to us at the right
 time, to offer or ask for what is needed, and what we should never
 have had the courage or resolution to undertake of our own
 accord.
“through all these experiences one finds that one
 is kindly and tolerant of other people, even of such as are
 repulsive, negligent, or ill-willed, for they also are instruments
 of good in god's hand, and often most efficient ones. without these
 thoughts it would be hard for even the best of us always to keep
 our equanimity. but with the consciousness of divine guidance, one
 sees many a thing in life quite differently from what would
 otherwise be possible.
“all these are things that every human being
knows, who has had experience of them; and of which the
 most speaking examples could be brought forward. the highest
 resources of worldly wisdom are unable to attain that which, under
 divine leading, comes to us of its own accord.”
[pg ]
such accounts as
 this shade away into others where the belief is, not that particular
 events are tempered more towardly to us by a superintending
 providence, as a reward for our reliance, but that by cultivating the
 continuous sense of our connection with the power that made things as
 they are, we are tempered more towardly for their reception. the
 outward face of nature need not alter, but the expressions of meaning
 in it alter. it was dead and is alive again. it is like the
 difference between looking on a person without love, or upon the same
 person with love. in the latter case intercourse springs into new
 vitality. so when one's affections keep in touch with the divinity of
 the world's authorship, fear and egotism fall away; and in the
 equanimity that follows, one finds in the hours, as they succeed each
 other, a series of purely benignant opportunities. it is as if all
 doors were opened, and all paths freshly smoothed. we meet a new
 world when we meet the old world in the spirit which this kind of
 prayer infuses.
such a spirit was
 that of marcus aurelius and epictetus. it is
 that of mind-curers, of the transcendentalists, and of the so-called
 “liberal” christians. as an expression
 [pg ] of it, i will quote a page
 from one of martineau's sermons:—
“the universe, open to the eye to-day, looks as it
 did a thousand years ago: and the morning hymn of milton does but
 tell the beauty with which our own familiar sun dressed the earliest
 fields and gardens of the world. we see what all our fathers saw. and
 if we cannot find god in your house or in mine, upon the roadside or
 the margin of the sea; in the bursting seed or opening flower; in the
 day duty or the night musing; in the general laugh and the secret
 grief; in the procession of life, ever entering afresh, and solemnly
 passing by and dropping off; i do not think we should discern him any
 more on the grass of eden, or beneath the moonlight of gethsemane.
 depend upon it, it is not the want of greater miracles, but of the
 soul to perceive such as are allowed us still, that makes us push all
 the sanctities into the far spaces we cannot reach. the devout feel
 that wherever god's hand is, there is miracle: and it is simply an indevoutness which
 imagines that only where miracle is, can there be the real hand of
 god. the customs of heaven ought surely to be more sacred in our eyes
 than its anomalies; the dear old ways, of which the most high is
 never tired, than the strange things which he does not love well
 enough ever to repeat. and he who will but discern beneath the sun,
 as he rises any morning, the supporting finger of the almighty, may
 recover the sweet and reverent surprise with which adam gazed on the
 first dawn in paradise. it is no outward change, no shifting in time
 or place; but only the loving meditation of the pure in heart, that
 can reawaken the eternal from the sleep within our souls: that can
 render him a reality again, and reassert for him once more his
 ancient name of ‘the living
 god.’ ”
when we see all
 things in god, and refer all things to him, we read in common matters
 superior expressions of [pg
 meaning. the deadness with which custom invests the familiar
 vanishes, and existence as a whole appears transfigured. the state of
 a mind thus awakened from torpor is well expressed in these words,
 which i take from a friend's letter:—
“if we occupy ourselves in summing up all the mercies
 and bounties we are privileged to have, we are overwhelmed by their
 number (so great that we can imagine ourselves unable to give
 ourselves time even to begin to review the things we may
 imagine we have
 not). we sum them and
 realize that we are actually killed with
 god's kindness; that we are
 surrounded by bounties upon bounties, without which all would fall.
 should we not love it; should we not feel buoyed up by the eternal
 arms?”
sometimes this
 realization that facts are of divine sending, instead of being
 habitual, is casual, like a mystical experience. father gratry gives
 this instance from his youthful melancholy period:—
“one day i had a moment of consolation, because i met
 with something which seemed to me ideally perfect. it was a poor
 drummer beating the tattoo in the streets of paris. i walked behind
 him in returning to the school on the evening of a holiday. his drum
 gave out the tattoo in such a way that, at that moment at least,
 however peevish i were, i could find no pretext for fault-finding. it
 was impossible to conceive more nerve or spirit, better time or
 measure, more clearness or richness, than were in this drumming.
 ideal desire could go no farther in that direction. i was enchanted
 and consoled; the perfection of this wretched act did me good. good
 is at least possible, i said, since the ideal can thus sometimes get
 embodied.”
in sénancour's
 novel of obermann a similar transient lifting of the veil is
 recorded. in paris streets, on a march day, he comes across a flower
 in bloom, a jonquil:[pg
“it was the strongest expression of desire: it was
 the first perfume of the year. i felt all the happiness destined for
 man. this unutterable harmony of souls, the phantom of the ideal
 world, arose in me complete. i never felt anything so great or so
 instantaneous. i know not what shape, what analogy, what secret of
 relation it was that made me see in this flower a limitless
 beauty.... i shall never inclose in a conception this power, this
 immensity that nothing will express; this form that nothing will
 contain; this ideal of a better world which one feels, but which, it
 seems, nature has not made actual.”
we heard in
 previous lectures of the vivified face of the world as it may appear
 to converts after their awakening. as a
 rule, religious persons generally assume that whatever natural facts
 connect themselves in any way with their destiny are significant of
 the divine purposes with them. through prayer the purpose, often far
 from obvious, comes home to them, and if it be “trial,” strength to endure the trial is given.
 thus at all stages of the prayerful life we find the persuasion that
 in the process of communion energy from on high flows in to meet
 demand, and becomes operative within the phenomenal world. so long as
 this operativeness is admitted to be real, it makes no essential
 difference whether its immediate effects be subjective or objective.
 the fundamental religious point is that in prayer, spiritual energy,
 which otherwise would slumber, does become active, and spiritual work
 of some kind is effected really.
so much for
 prayer, taken in the wide sense of any kind of communion. as the core
 of religion, we must return to it in the next lecture.
the last aspect of
 the religious life which remains for [pg ] me to touch upon is the fact that its
 manifestations so frequently connect themselves with the subconscious
 part of our existence. you may remember what i said in my opening
 lecture about
 the prevalence of the psychopathic temperament in religious
 biography. you will in point of fact hardly find a religious leader
 of any kind in whose life there is no record of automatisms. i speak
 not merely of savage priests and prophets, whose followers regard
 automatic utterance and action as by itself tantamount to
 inspiration, i speak of leaders of thought and subjects of
 intellectualized experience. saint paul had his visions, his
 ecstasies, his gift of tongues, small as was the importance he
 attached to the latter. the whole array of christian saints and
 heresiarchs, including the greatest, the bernards, the loyolas, the
 luthers, the foxes, the wesleys, had their visions, voices, rapt
 conditions, guiding impressions, and “openings.” they had these things, because they
 had exalted sensibility, and to such things persons of exalted
 sensibility are liable. in such liability there lie, however,
 consequences for theology. beliefs are strengthened wherever
 automatisms corroborate them. incursions from beyond the
 transmarginal region have a peculiar power to increase conviction.
 the inchoate sense of presence is infinitely stronger than
 conception, but strong as it may be, it is seldom equal to the
 evidence of hallucination. saints who actually see or hear their
 saviour reach the acme of assurance. motor automatisms, though rarer,
 are, if possible, even more convincing than sensations. the subjects
 here actually feel themselves played upon by powers beyond their
 will. the evidence is dynamic; the god or spirit moves the very
 organs of their body.[pg ]
the great field
 for this sense of being the instrument of a higher power is of course
 “inspiration.” it is easy to
 discriminate between the religious leaders who have been habitually
 subject to inspiration and those who have not. in the teachings of
 the buddha, of jesus, of saint paul (apart from his gift of tongues),
 of saint augustine, of huss, of luther, of wesley, automatic or
 semi-automatic composition appears to have been only occasional. in
 the hebrew prophets, on the contrary, in mohammed, in some of the
 alexandrians, in many minor catholic saints, in fox, in joseph smith,
 something like it appears to have been frequent, sometimes habitual.
 we have distinct professions of being under the direction of a
 foreign power, and serving as its mouthpiece. as regards the hebrew
 prophets, it is extraordinary, writes an author who has made a
 careful study of them, to see—
“how, one after another, the same features are
 reproduced in the prophetic books. the process is always extremely
 different from what it would be if the prophet arrived at his insight
 into spiritual things by the tentative efforts of his own
[pg ]genius. there is something sharp and sudden about
 it. he can lay his finger, so to speak, on the moment when it came.
 and it always comes in the form of an overpowering force from
 without, against which he struggles, but in vain. listen, for
 instance, [to] the opening of the book of jeremiah. read through in
 like manner the first two chapters of the prophecy of
 ezekiel.
“it is not, however, only at the beginning of his
 career that the prophet passes through a crisis which is clearly
 not self-caused. scattered all through the prophetic writings are
 expressions which speak of some strong and irresistible impulse
 coming down upon the prophet, determining his attitude to the
 events of his time, constraining his utterance, making his words
 the vehicle of a higher meaning than their own. for instance, this
 of isaiah's: ‘the lord
 spake thus to me with a strong hand,’—an
 emphatic phrase which denotes the overmastering nature of the
 impulse,—‘and
 instructed me that i should not walk in the way of this
 people.’
... or passages like this from
 ezekiel: ‘the hand of
 the lord god fell upon me,’ ‘the hand of the lord was strong upon
 me.’ the one standing characteristic of the prophet is
 that he speaks with the authority of jehovah himself. hence it is
 that the prophets one and all preface their addresses so
 confidently, ‘the word of
 the lord,’
or ‘thus saith the lord.’ they
 have even the audacity to speak in the first person, as if jehovah
 himself were speaking. as in isaiah: ‘hearken unto me, o jacob, and israel my called; i
 am he, i am the first, i also am the last,’—and
 so on. the personality of the prophet sinks entirely into the
 background; he feels himself for the time being the mouthpiece of
 the almighty.”
“we need to remember that prophecy was a
 profession, and that the prophets formed a professional class.
 there were schools of the prophets, in which the gift was regularly
 cultivated. a group of young men would gather round some commanding
 figure—a samuel or an elisha—and would not only record or spread
 the knowledge of his sayings and doings, but seek to catch
 themselves something of his inspiration. it [pg ]seems that
 music played its part in their exercises.... it is perfectly clear
 that by no means all of these sons of the prophets ever succeeded
 in acquiring more than a very small share in the gift which they
 sought. it was clearly possible to ‘counterfeit’ prophecy. sometimes this was done deliberately....
 but it by no means follows that in all cases where a false message
 was given, the giver of it was altogether conscious of what he was
 doing.”
here, to take
 another jewish case, is the way in which philo of alexandria
 describes his inspiration:—
“sometimes, when i have come to my work empty, i have
 suddenly become full; ideas being in an invisible manner showered
 upon me, and implanted in me from on high; so that through the
 influence of divine inspiration, i have become greatly excited, and
 have known neither the place in which i was, nor those who were
 present, nor myself, nor what i was saying, nor what i was writing;
 for then i have been conscious of a richness of interpretation, an
 enjoyment of light, a most penetrating insight, a most manifest
 energy in all that was to be done; having such effect on my mind as
 the clearest ocular demonstration would have on the
 eyes.”
if we turn to
 islam, we find that mohammed's revelations all came from the
 subconscious sphere. to the question in what way he got them,—
“mohammed is said to have answered that sometimes he
 heard a knell as from a bell, and that this had the strongest effect
 on him; and when the angel went away, he had received the revelation.
 sometimes again he held converse with the angel as with a man, so as
 easily to understand his words. the later authorities, however, ...
 distinguish still other kinds. in the itgân () the following are
 enumerated: , revelations with [pg ]sound of bell, ,
 by inspiration of the holy spirit in m.'s heart, , by gabriel in
 human form, , by god immediately, either when awake (as in his
 journey to heaven) or in dream.... in almawâhib alladunîya the kinds
 are thus given: , dream, , inspiration of gabriel in the prophet's
 heart, , gabriel taking dahya's form, , with the bell-sound, etc.,
 , gabriel in propriâ personâ (only twice), , revelation in heaven,
 , god appearing in person, but veiled, , god revealing himself
 immediately without veil. others add two other stages, namely: ,
 gabriel in the form of still another man, , god showing himself
 personally in dream.”
in none of these
 cases is the revelation distinctly motor. in the case of joseph smith
 (who had prophetic revelations innumerable in addition to the
 revealed translation of the gold plates which resulted in the book of
 mormon), although there may have been a motor element, the
 inspiration seems to have been predominantly sensorial. he began his
 translation by the aid of the “peep-stones” which he found, or thought or said
 that he found, with the gold plates,—apparently a case of
 “crystal gazing.” for some of the
 other revelations he used the peep-stones, but seems generally to
 have asked the lord for more direct instruction.[pg ]
other revelations
 are described as “openings”—fox's, for
 example, were evidently of the kind known in spiritistic circles of
 to-day as “impressions.” as all
 effective initiators of change must needs live to some degree upon
 this psychopathic level of sudden perception or conviction of new
 truth, or of impulse to action so obsessive that it must be worked
 off, i will say nothing more about so very common a phenomenon.
when, in addition
 to these phenomena of inspiration, we take religious mysticism into
 the account, when we recall the striking and sudden unifications of a
 discordant self which we saw in conversion, and when we review the
 extravagant obsessions of tenderness, purity, and self-severity met
 with in saintliness, we cannot, i think, avoid the conclusion that in
 religion we have a department of human nature with unusually close
 relations to the trans-marginal or subliminal region. if the word
 “subliminal” is offensive to any of
 you, as smelling too much of psychical research or other aberrations,
 call it by any other name you please, to distinguish it from the
 level of full sunlit consciousness. call this latter the a-region of
 personality, if you care to, and call the other the b-region. the
 b-region, then, is obviously the larger part of each of us, for it is
 the abode of everything that is latent and the reservoir of
 everything that passes unrecorded or unobserved. it contains, for
 example, such things as all our momentarily inactive memories, and it
 harbors the springs of all our obscurely motived passions, impulses,
 likes, dislikes, and prejudices. our intuitions, hypotheses, fancies,
 superstitions, persuasions, convictions, and in general all our
 non-rational operations, come from it. [pg ] it is the source of our dreams, and apparently
 they may return to it. in it arise whatever mystical experiences we
 may have, and our automatisms, sensory or motor; our life in hypnotic
 and “hypnoid” conditions, if we are
 subjects to such conditions; our delusions, fixed ideas, and
 hysterical accidents, if we are hysteric subjects; our supra-normal
 cognitions, if such there be, and if we are telepathic subjects. it
 is also the fountain-head of much that feeds our religion. in persons
 deep in the religious life, as we have now abundantly seen,—and this
 is my conclusion,—the door into this region seems unusually wide
 open; at any rate, experiences making their entrance through that
 door have had emphatic influence in shaping religious history.
with this
 conclusion i turn back and close the circle which i opened in my
 first lecture, terminating thus the review which i then announced of
 inner religious phenomena as we find them in developed and articulate
 human individuals. i might easily, if the time allowed, multiply both
 my documents and my discriminations, but a broad treatment is, i
 believe, in itself better, and the most important characteristics of
 the subject lie, i think, before us already. in the next lecture,
 which is also the last one, we must try to draw the critical
 conclusions which so much material may suggest.
[pg ]
lecture xx. conclusions.
the material of
 our study of human nature is now spread before us; and in this
 parting hour, set free from the duty of description, we can draw our
 theoretical and practical conclusions. in my first lecture, defending
 the empirical method, i foretold that whatever conclusions we might
 come to could be reached by spiritual judgments only, appreciations
 of the significance for life of religion, taken “on the whole.” our conclusions cannot be as sharp
 as dogmatic conclusions would be, but i will formulate them, when the
 time comes, as sharply as i can.
summing up in the
 broadest possible way the characteristics of the religious life, as
 we have found them, it includes the following beliefs:—
. that the
 visible world is part of a more spiritual universe from which it
 draws its chief significance;
. that union or
 harmonious relation with that higher universe is our true end;
. that prayer or
 inner communion with the spirit thereof—be that spirit “god” or “law”—is a
 process wherein work is really done, and spiritual energy flows in
 and produces effects, psychological or material, within the
 phenomenal world.
religion includes
 also the following psychological characteristics:—
. a new zest
 which adds itself like a gift to life, and takes the form either of
 lyrical enchantment or of appeal to earnestness and
 heroism.[pg
. an assurance of
 safety and a temper of peace, and, in relation to others, a
 preponderance of loving affections.
in illustrating
 these characteristics by documents, we have been literally bathed in
 sentiment. in re-reading my manuscript, i am almost appalled at the
 amount of emotionality which i find in it. after so much of this, we
 can afford to be dryer and less sympathetic in the rest of the work
 that lies before us.
the sentimentality
 of many of my documents is a consequence of the fact that i sought
 them among the extravagances of the subject. if any of you are
 enemies of what our ancestors used to brand as enthusiasm, and are,
 nevertheless, still listening to me now, you have probably felt my
 selection to have been sometimes almost perverse, and have wished i
 might have stuck to soberer examples. i reply that i took these
 extremer examples as yielding the profounder information. to learn
 the secrets of any science, we go to expert specialists, even though
 they may be eccentric persons, and not to commonplace pupils. we
 combine what they tell us with the rest of our wisdom, and form our
 final judgment independently. even so with religion. we who have
 pursued such radical expressions of it may now be sure that we know
 its secrets as authentically as any one can know them who learns them
 from another; and we have next to answer, each of us for himself, the
 practical question: what are the dangers in this element of life? and
 in what proportion may it need to be restrained by other elements, to
 give the proper balance?
but this question
 suggests another one which i will answer immediately and get it out
 of the way, for it has more than once already vexed us. ought
 it to be assumed [pg
 that in all men the mixture of religion with other elements should be
 identical? ought it, indeed, to be assumed that the lives of all men
 should show identical religious elements? in other words, is the
 existence of so many religious types and sects and creeds
 regrettable?
to these questions
 i answer “no” emphatically. and my
 reason is that i do not see how it is possible that creatures in such
 different positions and with such different powers as human
 individuals are, should have exactly the same functions and the same
 duties. no two of us have identical difficulties, nor should we be
 expected to work out identical solutions. each, from his peculiar
 angle of observation, takes in a certain sphere of fact and trouble,
 which each must deal with in a unique manner. one of us must soften
 himself, another must harden himself; one must yield a point, another
 must stand firm,—in order the better to defend the position assigned
 him. if an emerson were forced to be a wesley, or a moody forced to
 be a whitman, the total human consciousness of the divine would
 suffer. the divine can mean no single quality, it must mean a group
 of qualities, by being champions of which in alternation, different
 men may all find worthy missions. each attitude being a syllable in
 human nature's total message, it takes the whole of us to spell the
 meaning out completely. so a “god of
 battles” must be allowed to be the god for one kind of person,
 a god of peace and heaven and home, the god for another. we must
 frankly recognize the fact that we live in partial systems, and that
 parts are not interchangeable in the spiritual life. if we are
 peevish and jealous, destruction of the self must be an element of
 our religion; why need it be one if we are good and sympathetic from
 the outset? if we are sick souls, we require a religion of
 deliverance; but why think so much [pg ] of deliverance, if we are healthy-minded?
 unquestionably, some men have the completer experience and the higher
 vocation, here just as in the social world; but for each man to stay
 in his own experience, whate'er it be, and for others to tolerate him
 there, is surely best.
but, you may now
 ask, would not this one-sidedness be cured if we should all espouse
 the science of religions as our own religion? in answering this
 question i must open again the general relations of the theoretic to
 the active life.
knowledge about a
 thing is not the thing itself. you remember what al-ghazzali told us
 in the lecture on mysticism,—that to understand the causes of
 drunkenness, as a physician understands them, is not to be drunk. a
 science might come to understand everything about the causes and
 elements of religion, and might even [pg ] decide which elements were qualified, by their
 general harmony with other branches of knowledge, to be considered
 true; and yet the best man at this science might be the man who found
 it hardest to be personally devout. tout
 savoir c'est tout pardonner. the name of renan would
 doubtless occur to many persons as an example of the way in which
 breadth of knowledge may make one only a dilettante in possibilities,
 and blunt the acuteness of one's living faith. if
 religion be a function by which either god's cause or man's cause is
 to be really advanced, then he who lives the life of it, however
 narrowly, is a better servant than he who merely knows about it,
 however much. knowledge about life is one thing; effective occupation
 of a place in life, with its dynamic currents passing through your
 being, is another.
for this reason,
 the science of religions may not be an equivalent for living
 religion; and if we turn to the inner difficulties of such a science,
 we see that a point comes when she must drop the purely theoretic
 attitude, and either let her knots remain uncut, or have them cut by
 active faith. to see this, suppose that we have our science of
 religions constituted as a matter of fact. suppose that she has
 assimilated all the necessary historical material and distilled out
 of it as its essence the same conclusions which i myself a few
 moments ago pronounced. suppose that she agrees that religion,
 wherever it is an active thing, involves a belief in ideal presences,
 and a belief that in our prayerful communion with them, work is
 done, and something real comes to pass. she has now to exert her
 critical activity, and to decide how far, in the light of other
 sciences and in that of general philosophy, such beliefs can be
 considered true.[pg ]
dogmatically to
 decide this is an impossible task. not only are the other sciences
 and the philosophy still far from being completed, but in their
 present state we find them full of conflicts. the sciences of nature
 know nothing of spiritual presences, and on the whole hold no
 practical commerce whatever with the idealistic conceptions towards
 which general philosophy inclines. the scientist, so-called, is,
 during his scientific hours at least, so materialistic that one may
 well say that on the whole the influence of science goes against the
 notion that religion should be recognized at all. and this antipathy
 to religion finds an echo within the very science of religions
 itself. the cultivator of this science has to become acquainted with
 so many groveling and horrible superstitions that a presumption
 easily arises in his mind that any belief that is religious probably
 is false. in the “prayerful communion”
 of savages with such mumbo-jumbos of deities as they acknowledge, it
 is hard for us to see what genuine spiritual work—even though it were
 work relative only to their dark savage obligations—can possibly be
 done.
the consequence is
 that the conclusions of the science of religions are as likely to be
 adverse as they are to be favorable to the claim that the essence of
 religion is true. there is a notion in the air about us that religion
 is probably only an anachronism, a case of “survival,” an atavistic relapse into a mode of
 thought which humanity in its more enlightened examples has outgrown;
 and this notion our religious anthropologists at present do little to
 counteract.
this view is so
 widespread at the present day that i must consider it with some
 explicitness before i pass to my own conclusions. let me call it the
 “survival theory,” for brevity's
 sake.[pg
the pivot round
 which the religious life, as we have traced it, revolves, is the
 interest of the individual in his private personal destiny. religion,
 in short, is a monumental chapter in the history of human egotism.
 the gods believed in—whether by crude savages or by men disciplined
 intellectually—agree with each other in recognizing personal calls.
 religious thought is carried on in terms of personality, this being,
 in the world of religion, the one fundamental fact. to-day, quite as
 much as at any previous age, the religious individual tells you that
 the divine meets him on the basis of his personal concerns.
science, on the
 other hand, has ended by utterly repudiating the personal point of
 view. she catalogues her elements and records her laws indifferent as
 to what purpose may be shown forth by them, and constructs her
 theories quite careless of their bearing on human anxieties and
 fates. though the scientist may individually nourish a religion, and
 be a theist in his irresponsible hours, the days are over when it
 could be said that for science herself the heavens declare the glory
 of god and the firmament showeth his handiwork. our solar system,
 with its harmonies, is seen now as but one passing case of a certain
 sort of moving equilibrium in the heavens, realized by a local
 accident in an appalling wilderness of worlds where no life can
 exist. in a span of time which as a cosmic interval will count but as
 an hour, it will have ceased to be. the darwinian notion of chance
 production, and subsequent destruction, speedy or deferred, applies
 to the largest as well as to the smallest facts. it is impossible, in
 the present temper of the scientific imagination, to find in the
 driftings of the cosmic atoms, whether they work on the universal or
 on the particular scale, anything but a kind of aimless weather,
 doing and [pg
 undoing, achieving no proper history, and leaving no result. nature
 has no one distinguishable ultimate tendency with which it is
 possible to feel a sympathy. in the vast rhythm of her processes, as
 the scientific mind now follows them, she appears to cancel herself.
 the books of natural theology which satisfied the intellects of our
 grandfathers seem to us quite grotesque,
 representing, [pg
 ] as
 they did, a god who conformed the largest things of nature to the
 paltriest of our private wants. the [pg ] god whom science recognizes must be a god of
 universal laws exclusively, a god who does a wholesale, not a retail
 business. he cannot accommodate his processes to the [pg ] convenience of individuals. the bubbles
 on the foam which coats a stormy sea are floating episodes, made and
 unmade by the forces of the wind and water. our private selves are
 like those bubbles,—epiphenomena, as clifford, i believe, ingeniously
 called them; their destinies weigh nothing and determine nothing in
 the world's irremediable currents of events.
you see how
 natural it is, from this point of view, to treat religion as a mere
 survival, for religion does in fact perpetuate the traditions of the
 most primeval thought. to coerce the spiritual powers, or to square
 them and get them on our side, was, during enormous tracts of time,
 the one great object in our dealings with the natural world. for our
 ancestors, dreams, hallucinations, revelations, and cock-and-bull
 stories were inextricably mixed with facts. up to a comparatively
 recent date such distinctions as those between what has been verified
 and what is only conjectured, between the impersonal and the personal
 aspects of existence, were hardly suspected or conceived. whatever
 you imagined in a lively manner, whatever you thought fit to be true,
 you affirmed confidently; and whatever you affirmed, your comrades
 believed. truth was what had not yet been contradicted, most things
 were taken into the mind from the point of view of their human
 suggestiveness, and the attention confined itself exclusively to the
 æsthetic and dramatic aspects of events.[pg ]
how indeed could
 it be otherwise? the extraordinary value, for explanation and
 prevision, of those mathematical [pg ] and mechanical modes of conception which
 science uses, was a result that could not possibly have been expected
 in advance. weight, movement, velocity, direction, position, what
 thin, pallid, uninteresting ideas! how could the richer animistic
 aspects of nature, the peculiarities and oddities that make phenomena
 picturesquely striking or expressive, fail to have been first singled
 out and followed by philosophy as the more promising avenue to the
 knowledge of nature's life? well, it is still in these richer
 animistic and dramatic aspects that religion delights [pg ] to dwell. it is the terror and beauty of
 phenomena, the “promise” of the dawn
 and of the rainbow, the “voice” of the
 thunder, the “gentleness” of the
 summer rain, the “sublimity” of the
 stars, and not the physical laws which these things follow, by which
 the religious mind still continues to be most impressed; and just as
 of yore, the devout man tells you that in the solitude of his room or
 of the fields he still feels the divine presence, that inflowings of
 help come in reply to his prayers, and that sacrifices to this unseen
 reality fill him with security and peace.
pure anachronism!
 says the survival-theory;—anachronism for which
 deanthropomorphization of the imagination is the remedy required. the
 less we mix the private with the cosmic, the more we dwell in
 universal and impersonal terms, the truer heirs of science we
 become.
in spite of the
 appeal which this impersonality of the scientific attitude makes to a
 certain magnanimity of temper, i believe it to be shallow, and i can
 now state my reason in comparatively few words. that reason is that,
 so long as we deal with the cosmic and the general, we deal only with
 the symbols of reality, but as soon as we deal with private and personal
 phenomena as such, we deal with realities in the completest sense of
 the term. i think i can easily make clear what i mean by
 these words.
the world of our
 experience consists at all times of two parts, an objective and a
 subjective part, of which the former may be incalculably more
 extensive than the latter, and yet the latter can never be omitted or
 suppressed. the objective part is the sum total of whatsoever at any
 given time we may be thinking of, the [pg ] subjective part is the inner “state” in which the thinking comes to pass. what
 we think of may be enormous,—the cosmic times and spaces, for
 example,—whereas the inner state may be the most fugitive and paltry
 activity of mind. yet the cosmic objects, so far as the experience
 yields them, are but ideal pictures of something whose existence we
 do not inwardly possess but only point at outwardly, while the inner
 state is our very experience itself; its reality and that of our
 experience are one. a conscious field plus its
 object as felt or thought of plus an attitude towards the object
 plus the sense of a self to whom the
 attitude belongs—such a concrete bit of personal experience may be a
 small bit, but it is a solid bit as long as it lasts; not hollow, not
 a mere abstract element of experience, such as the “object” is when taken all alone. it is a
 full fact, even though it be an
 insignificant fact; it is of the kind to
 which all realities whatsoever must belong; the motor currents of the
 world run through the like of it; it is on the line connecting real
 events with real events. that unsharable feeling which each one of us
 has of the pinch of his individual destiny as he privately feels it
 rolling out on fortune's wheel may be disparaged for its egotism, may
 be sneered at as unscientific, but it is the one thing that fills up
 the measure of our concrete actuality, and any would-be existent that
 should lack such a feeling, or its analogue, would be a piece of
 reality only half made up.
if this be true,
 it is absurd for science to say that the egotistic elements of
 experience should be suppressed. the axis of reality runs solely
 through the egotistic [pg
 places,—they are strung upon it like so many beads. to describe the
 world with all the various feelings of the individual pinch of
 destiny, all the various spiritual attitudes, left out from the
 description—they being as describable as anything else—would be
 something like offering a printed bill of fare as the equivalent for
 a solid meal. religion makes no such blunder. the individual's
 religion may be egotistic, and those private realities which it keeps
 in touch with may be narrow enough; but at any rate it always remains
 infinitely less hollow and abstract, as far as it goes, than a
 science which prides itself on taking no account of anything private
 at all.
a bill of fare
 with one real raisin on it instead of the word “raisin,” with one real egg instead of the word
 “egg,” might be an inadequate meal,
 but it would at least be a commencement of reality. the contention of
 the survival-theory that we ought to stick to non-personal elements
 exclusively seems like saying that we ought to be satisfied forever
 with reading the naked bill of fare. i think, therefore, that however
 particular questions connected with our individual destinies may be
 answered, it is only by acknowledging them as genuine questions, and
 living in the sphere of thought which they open up, that we become
 profound. but to live thus is to be religious; so i unhesitatingly
 repudiate the survival-theory of religion, as being founded on an
 egregious mistake. it does not follow, because our ancestors made so
 many errors of fact and mixed them with their religion, that we
 should therefore leave off being religious at all. by
 being religious we establish ourselves in [pg ] possession of ultimate reality at the only
 points at which reality is given us to guard. our responsible concern
 is with our private destiny, after all.
you see now why i
 have been so individualistic throughout these lectures, and why i
 have seemed so bent on rehabilitating the element of feeling in
 religion and subordinating its intellectual part. individuality is
 founded in feeling; and the recesses of feeling, the darker, blinder
 strata of character, are the only places in the world in which we
 catch real fact in the making, and [pg ] directly perceive how events happen, and how
 work is actually done.
 compared with this world of living individualized feelings, the world
 of generalized objects which the intellect contemplates is without
 solidity or life. as in stereoscopic or kinetoscopic pictures seen
 outside the instrument, the third dimension, the movement, the vital
 element, are not there. we get a beautiful picture of an express
 train supposed to be moving, but where in the picture, as i have
 heard a friend say, is the energy or the fifty miles an hour?[pg ]
let us agree,
 then, that religion, occupying herself with personal destinies and
 keeping thus in contact with the only absolute realities which we
 know, must necessarily play an eternal part in human history. the
 next thing to decide is what she reveals about those destinies, or
 whether indeed she reveals anything distinct enough to be considered
 a general message to mankind. we have done as you see, with our
 preliminaries, and our final summing up can now begin.
i am well aware
 that after all the palpitating documents which i have quoted, and all
 the perspectives of emotion-inspiring institution and belief that my
 previous lectures have opened, the dry analysis to which i now
 advance may appear to many of you like an anti-climax, a tapering-off
 and flattening out of the subject, instead of a crescendo of interest
 and result. i said awhile ago that the religious attitude of
 protestants appears poverty-stricken to the catholic imagination.
 still more poverty-stricken, i fear, may my final summing up of the
 subject appear at first to some of you. on which account i pray you
 now to bear this point in mind, that in the present part of it i am
 expressly trying to reduce religion to its lowest admissible terms,
 to that minimum, free from individualistic excrescences, which all
 religions contain as their nucleus, and on which it may be hoped that
 all religious persons may agree. that [pg ] established, we should have a result which
 might be small, but would at least be solid; and on it and round it
 the ruddier additional beliefs on which the different individuals
 make their venture might be grafted, and flourish as richly as you
 please. i shall add my own over-belief (which will be, i confess, of
 a somewhat pallid kind, as befits a critical philosopher), and you
 will, i hope, also add your over-beliefs, and we shall soon be in the
 varied world of concrete religious constructions once more. for the
 moment, let me dryly pursue the analytic part of the task.
both thought and
 feeling are determinants of conduct, and the same conduct may be
 determined either by feeling or by thought. when we survey the whole
 field of religion, we find a great variety in the thoughts that have
 prevailed there; but the feelings on the one hand and the conduct on
 the other are almost always the same, for stoic, christian, and
 buddhist saints are practically indistinguishable in their lives. the
 theories which religion generates, being thus variable, are
 secondary; and if you wish to grasp her essence, you must look to the
 feelings and the conduct as being the more constant elements. it is
 between these two elements that the short circuit exists on which she
 carries on her principal business, while the ideas and symbols and
 other institutions form loop-lines which may be perfections and
 improvements, and may even some day all be united into one harmonious
 system, but which are not to be regarded as organs with an
 indispensable function, necessary at all times for religious life to
 go on. this seems to me the first conclusion which we are entitled to
 draw from the phenomena we have passed in review.
the next step is
 to characterize the feelings. to what psychological order do they
 belong?[pg
the resultant
 outcome of them is in any case what kant calls a “sthenic” affection, an excitement of the
 cheerful, expansive, “dynamogenic”
 order which, like any tonic, freshens our vital powers. in almost
 every lecture, but especially in the lectures on conversion and on
 saintliness, we have seen how this emotion overcomes temperamental
 melancholy and imparts endurance to the subject, or a zest, or a
 meaning, or an enchantment and glory to the common objects of
 life. the
 name of “faith-state,” by which
 professor leuba designates it, is a good one. it is a
 biological as well as a psychological condition, and tolstoy is
 absolutely accurate in classing faith among the forces by which men
 live. the
 total absence of it, anhedonia, means
 collapse.
the faith-state
 may hold a very minimum of intellectual content. we saw examples of
 this in those sudden raptures of the divine presence, or in such
 mystical seizures as dr. bucke described. it may
 be a mere vague enthusiasm, half spiritual, half vital, a courage,
 and a feeling that great and wondrous things are in the air.[pg ]
when, however, a
 positive intellectual content is associated with a faith-state, it
 gets invincibly stamped in upon belief, and
 this explains the passionate loyalty of religious persons everywhere
 to the minutest details of their so widely differing creeds. taking
 creeds and faith-state together, as forming “religions,” and treating these as purely
 subjective phenomena, without regard to the question of their
 “truth,” we are obliged, on account of
 their extraordinary influence upon action and endurance, to class
 them amongst the most important biological functions of mankind.
 their stimulant and anæsthetic effect is so great that professor
 leuba, in a recent article, goes so
 far as to say that so long as men can use their
 god, they care very little who he is, or even whether he is at all.
 “the truth of the matter can be put,”
 says leuba, “in this way: god is not known, he
 is not understood; he is used—sometimes as meat-purveyor,
 sometimes as moral support, sometimes as friend, sometimes as an
 object of love. if he proves himself useful, the religious
 [pg ] consciousness asks for no more
 than that. does god really exist? how does he exist? what is he? are
 so many irrelevant questions. not god, but life, more life, a larger,
 richer, more satisfying life, is, in the last analysis, the end of
 religion. the love of life, at any and every level of development, is
 the religious impulse.”
at this purely
 subjective rating, therefore, religion must be considered vindicated
 in a certain way from the attacks of her critics. it would seem that
 she cannot be a mere anachronism and survival, but must exert a
 permanent function, whether she be with or without intellectual
 content, and whether, if she have any, it be true or false.
we must next pass
 beyond the point of view of merely subjective utility, and make
 inquiry into the intellectual content itself.
first, is there,
 under all the discrepancies of the creeds, a common nucleus to which
 they bear their testimony unanimously?
and second, ought
 we to consider the testimony true?
i will take up the
 first question first, and answer it immediately in the affirmative.
 the warring gods and [pg
 formulas of the various religions do indeed cancel each other, but
 there is a certain uniform deliverance in which religions all appear
 to meet. it consists of two parts:—
. an uneasiness;
 and
. its
 solution.
. the uneasiness,
 reduced to its simplest terms, is a sense that there is something wrong about
 us as we naturally stand.
. the solution is
 a sense that we are saved from the wrongness by
 making proper connection with the higher powers.
in those more
 developed minds which alone we are studying, the wrongness takes a
 moral character, and the salvation takes a mystical tinge. i think we
 shall keep well within the limits of what is common to all such minds
 if we formulate the essence of their religious experience in terms
 like these:—
the individual, so
 far as he suffers from his wrongness and criticises it, is to that
 extent consciously beyond it, and in at least possible touch with
 something higher, if anything higher exist. along with the wrong part
 there is thus a better part of him, even though it may be but a most
 helpless germ. with which part he should identify his real being is
 by no means obvious at this stage; but when stage  (the stage of
 solution or salvation) arrives, the man
 identifies his real being with the germinal higher part of himself;
 and does so in the following way. he becomes conscious
 that this higher part is conterminous and continuous with a
more of the same quality, which is operative in the
 universe outside of him, and which he can keep in working touch with,
 and in a fashion get on board of and save himself when all his lower
 being has gone to pieces in the wreck.[pg ]
it seems to me
 that all the phenomena are accurately describable in these very
 simple general terms. they
 allow for the divided self and the struggle; they involve the change
 of personal centre and the surrender of the lower self; they express
 the appearance of exteriority of the helping power and yet account
 for our sense of union with it; and
 they fully justify our feelings of security and joy. there is
 probably no autobiographic document, among all those which i have
 quoted, to which the description will not well apply. one need only
 add such specific details as will adapt it to various theologies and
 various personal temperaments, and one will then have the various
 experiences reconstructed in their individual forms.
so far, however,
 as this analysis goes, the experiences are only psychological
 phenomena. they possess, it is true, enormous biological worth.
 spiritual strength really increases in the subject when he has them,
 a new life opens for him, and they seem to him a place of conflux
 where the forces of two universes meet; and yet this may be nothing
 but his subjective way of feeling things, a mood of his own fancy, in
 spite of the effects produced. i now turn to my second question: what
 is the objective “truth” of their
 content?
the part of the
 content concerning which the question [pg ] of truth most pertinently arises is that
 “more of the same
 quality” with which our own higher self appears in the
 experience to come into harmonious working relation. is such a
 “more” merely our own notion, or does
 it really exist? if so, in what shape does it exist? does it act, as
 well as exist? and in what form should we conceive of that
 “union” with it of which religious
 geniuses are so convinced?
it is in answering
 these questions that the various theologies perform their theoretic
 work, and that their divergencies most come to light. they all agree
 that the “more” really exists; though
 some of them hold it to exist in the shape of a personal god or gods,
 while others are satisfied to conceive it as a stream of ideal
 tendency embedded in the eternal structure of the world. they all
 agree, moreover, that it acts as well as exists, and that something
 really is effected for the better when you throw your life into its
 hands. it is when they treat of the experience of “union” with it that their speculative differences
 appear most clearly. over this point pantheism and theism, nature and
 second birth, works and grace and karma, immortality and
 reincarnation, rationalism and mysticism, carry on inveterate
 disputes.
at the end of my
 lecture on philosophy i held
 out the notion that an impartial science of religions might sift out
 from the midst of their discrepancies a common body of doctrine which
 she might also formulate in terms to which physical science need not
 object. this, i said, she might adopt as her own reconciling
 hypothesis, and recommend it for general belief. i also said that in
 my last lecture i should have to try my own hand at framing such an
 hypothesis.
the time has now
 come for this attempt. who says [pg ] “hypothesis”
 renounces the ambition to be coercive in his arguments. the most i
 can do is, accordingly, to offer something that may fit the facts so
 easily that your scientific logic will find no plausible pretext for
 vetoing your impulse to welcome it as true.
the “more,” as we called it, and the meaning of our
 “union” with it, form the nucleus of
 our inquiry. into what definite description can these words be
 translated, and for what definite facts do they stand? it would never
 do for us to place ourselves offhand at the position of a particular
 theology, the christian theology, for example, and proceed
 immediately to define the “more” as
 jehovah, and the “union” as his
 imputation to us of the righteousness of christ. that would be unfair
 to other religions, and, from our present standpoint at least, would
 be an over-belief.
we must begin by
 using less particularized terms; and, since one of the duties of the
 science of religions is to keep religion in connection with the rest
 of science, we shall do well to seek first of all a way of describing
 the “more,” which psychologists may
 also recognize as real. the subconscious self is nowadays a
 well-accredited psychological entity; and i believe that in it we
 have exactly the mediating term required. apart from all religious
 considerations, there is actually and literally more life in our
 total soul than we are at any time aware of. the exploration of the
 transmarginal field has hardly yet been seriously undertaken, but
 what mr. myers said in  in his essay on the subliminal
 consciousness is
 [pg ] as true as when it was first
 written: “each of us is in reality an abiding
 psychical entity far more extensive than he knows—an individuality
 which can never express itself completely through any corporeal
 manifestation. the self manifests through the organism; but there is
 always some part of the self unmanifested; and always, as it seems,
 some power of organic expression in abeyance or
 reserve.” much of
 the content of this larger background against which our conscious
 being stands out in relief is insignificant. imperfect memories,
 silly jingles, inhibitive timidities, “dissolutive” phenomena of various sorts, as myers
 calls them, enter into it for a large part. but in it many of the
 performances of genius seem also to have their origin; and in our
 study of conversion, of mystical experiences, and of prayer, we have
 seen how striking a part invasions from this region play in the
 religious life.
let me then
 propose, as an hypothesis, that whatever it may be on its farther
 side, the “more” with which in
 religious experience we feel ourselves connected is on its hither
 side the subconscious continuation of our conscious life. starting
 thus with a recognized psychological fact as our basis, we seem to
 preserve a contact with “science”
 which the ordinary theologian lacks. at the same time the
 theologian's contention that the religious man is moved by an
 external power is vindicated, for it is one of the peculiarities of
 invasions from the [pg
 subconscious region to take on objective appearances, and to suggest
 to the subject an external control. in the religious life the control
 is felt as “higher”; but since on our
 hypothesis it is primarily the higher faculties of our own hidden
 mind which are controlling, the sense of union with the power beyond
 us is a sense of something, not merely apparently, but literally
 true.
this doorway into
 the subject seems to me the best one for a science of religions, for
 it mediates between a number of different points of view. yet it is
 only a doorway, and difficulties present themselves as soon as we
 step through it, and ask how far our transmarginal consciousness
 carries us if we follow it on its remoter side. here the over-beliefs
 begin: here mysticism and the conversion-rapture and vedantism and
 transcendental idealism bring in their monistic interpretations and
 tell us that the finite self rejoins the absolute self, for it was
 always one with god and identical with the soul of the world. here
 the prophets of all the different religions [pg ] come with their visions, voices, raptures, and
 other openings, supposed by each to authenticate his own peculiar
 faith.
those of us who
 are not personally favored with such specific revelations must stand
 outside of them altogether and, for the present at least, decide
 that, since they corroborate incompatible theological doctrines, they
 neutralize one another and leave no fixed result. if we follow any
 one of them, or if we follow philosophical theory and embrace
 monistic pantheism on non-mystical grounds, we do so in the exercise
 of our individual freedom, and build out our religion in the way most
 congruous with our personal susceptibilities. among these
 susceptibilities intellectual ones play a decisive part. although the
 religious question is primarily a question of life, of living or not
 living in the higher union which opens itself to us as a gift, yet
 the spiritual excitement in which the gift appears a real one will
 often fail to be aroused in an individual until certain particular
 intellectual beliefs or ideas which, as we say, come home to him, are
 touched. these
 ideas will thus be essential to [pg ] that individual's religion;—which is as much as
 to say that over-beliefs in various directions are absolutely
 indispensable, and that we should treat them with tenderness and
 tolerance so long as they are not intolerant themselves. as i have
 elsewhere written, the most interesting and valuable things about a
 man are usually his over-beliefs.
disregarding the
 over-beliefs, and confining ourselves to what is common and generic,
 we have in the fact that the conscious person is continuous
 with a wider self through which saving experiences
 come, a
 positive content of religious experience which, it seems to me,
 is
 literally and objectively true as far as it goes. if i
 now proceed to state my own hypothesis about the farther limits of
 this extension of our personality, i shall be offering my own
 over-belief—though i know it will appear a sorry under-belief to some
 of you—for which i can only bespeak the same indulgence which in a
 converse case i should accord to yours.
the further limits
 of our being plunge, it seems to me, into an altogether other
 dimension of existence from the sensible and merely “understandable” world. name it the mystical
 region, or the supernatural region, whichever you [pg ] choose. so far as our ideal impulses
 originate in this region (and most of them do originate in it, for we
 find them possessing us in a way for which we cannot articulately
 account), we belong to it in a more intimate sense than that in which
 we belong to the visible world, for we belong in the most intimate
 sense wherever our ideals belong. yet the unseen region in question
 is not merely ideal, for it produces effects in this world. when we
 commune with it, work is actually done upon our finite personality,
 for we are turned into new men, and consequences in the way of
 conduct follow in the natural world upon our regenerative
 change. but
 that which produces effects within another reality must be termed a
 reality itself, so i feel as if we had no philosophic excuse for
 calling the unseen or mystical world unreal.
god is the natural
 appellation, for us christians at least, for the supreme reality, so
 i will call this higher part of the universe by the name of
 god. we and
 god [pg ] have business with
 each other; and in opening ourselves to his influence our deepest
 destiny is fulfilled. the universe, at those parts of it which our
 personal being constitutes, takes a turn genuinely for the worse or
 for the better in proportion as each one of us fulfills or evades
 god's demands. as far as this goes i probably have you with me, for i
 only translate into schematic language what i may call the
 instinctive belief of mankind: god is real since he produces real
 effects.
the real effects
 in question, so far as i have as yet admitted them, are exerted on
 the personal centres of energy of the various subjects, but the
 spontaneous faith of most of the subjects is that they embrace a
 wider sphere than this. most religious men believe (or “know,” if they be mystical) that not only they
 themselves, but the whole universe of beings to whom the god is
 present, are secure in his parental hands. there is a sense, a
 dimension, they are sure, in which we are all
 saved, in spite of the gates of hell and all adverse terrestrial
 appearances. god's existence is the guarantee of an ideal order that
 shall be permanently preserved. this world may indeed, as science
 assures us, some day burn up or freeze; but if it is part of his
 order, the old ideals are sure to be brought elsewhere to fruition,
 so that where god is, tragedy is only provisional and partial, and
 shipwreck and dissolution are not the absolutely final things. only
 when this farther step of faith concerning god is taken, and remote
 objective consequences are predicted, does religion, as it seems to
 me, get wholly free from the first immediate subjective experience,
 and bring a real hypothesis into play. a good
 hypothesis in science must have [pg ] other properties than those of the phenomenon
 it is immediately invoked to explain, otherwise it is not prolific
 enough. god, meaning only what enters into the religious man's
 experience of union, falls short of being an hypothesis of this more
 useful order. he needs to enter into wider cosmic relations in order
 to justify the subject's absolute confidence and peace.
that the god with
 whom, starting from the hither side of our own extra-marginal self,
 we come at its remoter margin into commerce should be the absolute
 world-ruler, is of course a very considerable over-belief.
 over-belief as it is, though, it is an article of almost every one's
 religion. most of us pretend in some way to prop it upon our
 philosophy, but the philosophy itself is really propped upon this
 faith. what is this but to say that religion, in her fullest exercise
 of function, is not a mere illumination of facts already elsewhere
 given, not a mere passion, like love, which views things in a rosier
 light. it is indeed that, as we have seen abundantly. but it is
 something more, namely, a postulator of new facts as
 well. the world interpreted religiously is not the materialistic
 world over again, with an altered expression; it must have, over and
 above the altered expression, a natural constitution different at
 some point from that which a materialistic world would have. it must
 be such that different events can be expected in it, different
 conduct must be required.
this thoroughly
 “pragmatic” view of religion has
 usually been taken as a matter of course by common men. they have
 interpolated divine miracles into the field of nature, they have
 built a heaven out beyond the grave. it is only transcendentalist
 metaphysicians who think that, without adding any concrete details to
 nature, or subtracting any, but by simply calling it the expression
 of absolute spirit, you make it more divine just as it
 stands.[pg
i believe the
 pragmatic way of taking religion to be the deeper way. it gives it
 body as well as soul, it makes it claim, as everything real must
 claim, some characteristic realm of fact as its very own. what the
 more characteristically divine facts are, apart from the actual
 inflow of energy in the faith-state and the prayer-state, i know not.
 but the over-belief on which i am ready to make my personal venture
 is that they exist. the whole drift of my education goes to persuade
 me that the world of our present consciousness is only one out of
 many worlds of consciousness that exist, and that those other worlds
 must contain experiences which have a meaning for our life also; and
 that although in the main their experiences and those of this world
 keep discrete, yet the two become continuous at certain points, and
 higher energies filter in. by being faithful in my poor measure to
 this over-belief, i seem to myself to keep more sane and true. i
 can, of course, put myself into the
 sectarian scientist's attitude, and imagine vividly that the world of
 sensations and of scientific laws and objects may be all. but
 whenever i do this, i hear that inward monitor of which w. k.
 clifford once wrote, whispering the word “bosh!” humbug is humbug, even though it bear the
 scientific name, and the total expression of human experience, as i
 view it objectively, invincibly urges me beyond the narrow
 “scientific” bounds. assuredly, the
 real world is of a different temperament,—more intricately built than
 physical science allows. so my objective and my subjective conscience
 both hold me to the over-belief which i express. who knows whether
 the faithfulness of individuals here below to their own poor
 over-beliefs may not actually help god in turn to be more effectively
 faithful to his own greater tasks?
[pg ]
postscript.
in writing my
 concluding lecture i had to aim so much at simplification that i fear
 that my general philosophic position received so scant a statement as
 hardly to be intelligible to some of my readers. i therefore add this
 epilogue, which must also be so brief as possibly to remedy but
 little the defect. in a later work i may be enabled to state my
 position more amply and consequently more clearly.
originality cannot
 be expected in a field like this, where all the attitudes and tempers
 that are possible have been exhibited in literature long ago, and
 where any new writer can immediately be classed under a familiar
 head. if one should make a division of all thinkers into naturalists
 and supernaturalists, i should undoubtedly have to go, along with
 most philosophers, into the supernaturalist branch. but there is a
 crasser and a more refined supernaturalism, and it is to the refined
 division that most philosophers at the present day belong. if not
 regular transcendental idealists, they at least obey the kantian
 direction enough to bar out ideal entities from interfering causally
 in the course of phenomenal events. refined supernaturalism is
 universalistic supernaturalism; for the “crasser” variety “piecemeal” supernaturalism would perhaps be the
 better name. it went with that older theology which to-day is
 supposed to reign only among uneducated people, or to be found among
 the few belated professors of the dualisms which kant is thought to
 have displaced. it admits miracles [pg ] and providential leadings, and finds no
 intellectual difficulty in mixing the ideal and the real worlds
 together by interpolating influences from the ideal region among the
 forces that causally determine the real world's details. in this the
 refined supernaturalists think that it muddles disparate dimensions
 of existence. for them the world of the ideal has no efficient
 causality, and never bursts into the world of phenomena at particular
 points. the ideal world, for them, is not a world of facts, but only
 of the meaning of facts; it is a point of view for judging facts. it
 appertains to a different “-ology,”
 and inhabits a different dimension of being altogether from that in
 which existential propositions obtain. it cannot get down upon the
 flat level of experience and interpolate itself piecemeal between
 distinct portions of nature, as those who believe, for example, in
 divine aid coming in response to prayer, are bound to think it
 must.
notwithstanding my
 own inability to accept either popular christianity or scholastic
 theism, i suppose that my belief that in communion with the ideal new
 force comes into the world, and new departures are made here below,
 subjects me to being classed among the supernaturalists of the
 piecemeal or crasser type. universalistic supernaturalism surrenders,
 it seems to me, too easily to naturalism. it takes the facts of
 physical science at their face-value, and leaves the laws of life
 just as naturalism finds them, with no hope of remedy, in case their
 fruits are bad. it confines itself to sentiments about life as a
 whole, sentiments which may be admiring and adoring, but which need
 not be so, as the existence of systematic pessimism proves. in this
 universalistic way of taking the ideal world, the essence of
 practical religion seems to me to evaporate. both instinctively and
 for logical reasons, i find it hard to [pg ] believe that principles can exist which make no
 difference in facts. but all
 facts are particular facts, and the whole interest of the question of
 god's existence seems to me to lie in the consequences for
 particulars which that existence may be expected to entail. that no
 concrete particular of experience should alter its complexion in
 consequence of a god being there seems to me an incredible
 proposition, and yet it is the thesis to which (implicitly at any
 rate) refined supernaturalism seems to cling. it is only with
 experience en bloc, it says, that the
 absolute maintains relations. it condescends to no transactions of
 detail.
i am ignorant of
 buddhism and speak under correction, and merely in order the better
 to describe my general point of view; but as i apprehend the
 buddhistic doctrine of karma, i agree in principle with that. all
 supernaturalists admit that facts are under the judgment of higher
 law; but for buddhism as i interpret it, and for religion generally
 so far as it remains unweakened by transcendentalistic metaphysics,
 the word “judgment” here means no such
 bare academic verdict or platonic appreciation as it means in
 vedantic or modern absolutist systems; it carries, on the contrary,
 execution with it, is in [pg ]rebus as well as post rem, and operates
 “causally” as partial factor in the
 total fact. the universe becomes a gnosticism pure
 and simple on any other terms. but this view that judgment and
 execution go together is that of the crasser supernaturalist way of
 thinking, so the present volume must on the whole be classed with the
 other expressions of that creed.
i state the matter
 thus bluntly, because the current of thought in academic circles runs
 against me, and i feel like a man who must set his back against an
 open door quickly if he does not wish to see it closed and locked. in
 spite of its being so shocking to the reigning intellectual tastes, i
 believe that a candid consideration of piecemeal supernaturalism and
 a complete discussion of all its metaphysical bearings will show it
 to be the hypothesis by which the largest number of legitimate
 requirements are met. that of course would be a program for other
 books than this; what i now say sufficiently indicates to the
 philosophic reader the place where i belong.
if asked just
 where the differences in fact which are due to god's existence come
 in, i should have to say that in general i have no hypothesis to
 offer beyond what the phenomenon of “prayerful communion,” especially when certain
 kinds of incursion from the subconscious region take part in it,
 immediately suggests. the appearance is that in this phenomenon
 something ideal, which in one sense is part of ourselves and in
 another sense is not ourselves, actually exerts an influence, raises
 our centre of personal energy, and produces regenerative effects
 unattainable in other ways. if, then, there be a wider world of being
 than that of our every-day consciousness, if in it there be forces
 whose effects on us are intermittent, if [pg ] one facilitating condition of the effects be
 the openness of the “subliminal” door,
 we have the elements of a theory to which the phenomena of religious
 life lend plausibility. i am so impressed by the importance of these
 phenomena that i adopt the hypothesis which they so naturally
 suggest. at these places at least, i say, it would seem as though
 transmundane energies, god, if you will, produced immediate effects
 within the natural world to which the rest of our experience
 belongs.
the difference in
 natural “fact” which most of us would
 assign as the first difference which the existence of a god ought to
 make would, i imagine, be personal immortality. religion, in fact,
 for the great majority of our own race means
 immortality, and nothing else. god is the producer of immortality;
 and whoever has doubts of immortality is written down as an atheist
 without farther trial. i have said nothing in my lectures about
 immortality or the belief therein, for to me it seems a secondary
 point. if our ideals are only cared for in “eternity,” i do not see why we might not be
 willing to resign their care to other hands than ours. yet i
 sympathize with the urgent impulse to be present ourselves, and in
 the conflict of impulses, both of them so vague yet both of them
 noble, i know not how to decide. it seems to me that it is eminently
 a case for facts to testify. facts, i think, are yet lacking to prove
 “spirit-return,” though i have the
 highest respect for the patient labors of messrs. myers, hodgson, and
 hyslop, and am somewhat impressed by their favorable conclusions. i
 consequently leave the matter open, with this brief word to save the
 reader from a possible perplexity as to why immortality got no
 mention in the body of this book.
the ideal power
 with which we feel ourselves in connection, the “god” of ordinary men, is, both by ordinary
 [pg ] men and by philosophers,
 endowed with certain of those metaphysical attributes which in the
 lecture on philosophy i treated with such disrespect. he is assumed
 as a matter of course to be “one and
 only” and to be “infinite”; and
 the notion of many finite gods is one which hardly any one thinks it
 worth while to consider, and still less to uphold. nevertheless, in
 the interests of intellectual clearness, i feel bound to say that
 religious experience, as we have studied it, cannot be cited as
 unequivocally supporting the infinitist belief. the only thing that
 it unequivocally testifies to is that we can experience union with
 something larger than ourselves and
 in that union find our greatest peace. philosophy, with its passion
 for unity, and mysticism with its monoideistic bent, both
 “pass to the limit” and identify the
 something with a unique god who is the all-inclusive soul of the
 world. popular opinion, respectful to their authority, follows the
 example which they set.
meanwhile the
 practical needs and experiences of religion seem to me sufficiently
 met by the belief that beyond each man and in a fashion continuous
 with him there exists a larger power which is friendly to him and to
 his ideals. all that the facts require is that the power should be
 both other and larger than our conscious selves. anything larger will
 do, if only it be large enough to trust for the next step. it need
 not be infinite, it need not be solitary. it might conceivably even
 be only a larger and more godlike self, of which the present self
 would then be but the mutilated expression, and the universe might
 conceivably be a collection of such selves, of different degrees of
 inclusiveness, with no absolute unity realized in it at all. thus
 would a sort of [pg
 polytheism return upon us—a polytheism which i do not on this
 occasion defend, for my only aim at present is to keep the testimony
 of religious experience clearly within its proper bounds. [compare p.
  above.]
upholders of the
 monistic view will say to such a polytheism (which, by the way, has
 always been the real religion of common people, and is so still
 to-day) that unless there be one all-inclusive god, our guarantee of
 security is left imperfect. in the absolute, and in the absolute
 only, all is saved. if there be different
 gods, each caring for his part, some portion of some of us might not
 be covered with divine protection, and our religious consolation
 would thus fail to be complete. it goes back to what was said on
 pages -, about the
 possibility of there being portions of the universe that may
 irretrievably be lost. common sense is less sweeping in its demands
 than philosophy or mysticism have been wont to be, and can suffer the
 notion of this world being partly saved and partly lost. the ordinary
 moralistic state of mind makes the salvation of the world conditional
 upon the success with which each unit does its part. partial and
 conditional salvation is in fact a most familiar notion when taken in
 the abstract, the only difficulty being to determine the details.
 some men are even disinterested enough to be willing to be in the
 unsaved remnant as far as their persons go, if only they can be
 persuaded that their cause will prevail—all of us are willing,
 whenever our activity-excitement rises sufficiently high. i think, in
 fact, that a final philosophy of religion will have to consider the
 pluralistic hypothesis more seriously than it has hitherto been
 willing to consider it. for practical life at any rate, the
 chance of salvation is enough. no
 fact in human nature is more characteristic than its willingness to
 live on a chance. the existence of the chance makes [pg ] the difference, as edmund gurney says,
 between a life of which the keynote is resignation and a life of
 which the keynote is hope. but all
 these statements are unsatisfactory from their brevity, and i can
 only say that i hope to return to the same questions in another
 book.
[pg ]
index.
 absolute, oneness with the, .
 abstractness of religious objects, .
achilles, .
ackermann, madame,
 adaptation to environment, of things, ;
 of saints, -.
 æsthetic elements in religions, .
 alacoque, , , .
 alcohol, .
al-ghazzali, .
ali, .
alleine, .
alline, , .
 alternations of personality, .
alvarez de paz, .
amiel, .
 anæsthesia, .
 anæsthetic revelation, -.
angelus silesius,
 anger, , .
“anhedonia,” .
 aristocratic type, .
aristotle, .
 ars, le curé d', .
 asceticism, , -, -.
 aseity, god's, , .
 atman, .
 attributes of god, ;
 their æsthetic use, .
augustine, saint,
aurelius, see marcus.
 automatic writing, , .
 automatisms, , , -.
baldwin, ,
bashkirtseff, .
beecher, .
behmen, see boehme.
 belief, due to non-rationalistic impulses, .
besant, mrs., ,
 bhagavad-gita, .
blavatsky, madam,
blood, .
blumhardt, .
boehme, , ,
booth, .
bougaud, .
bourget, .
bourignon, .
bowne, .
brainerd, ,
bray, , ,
brooks, .
brownell, .
bucke, .
 buddhism, , , .
 buddhist mysticism, .
bullen, .
bunyan, , .
butterworth, .
caird, edward, .
caird, j., on feeling in
 religion, ;
 on absolute self, ;
 he does not prove, but reaffirms, religion's dicta, .
call, .
carlyle, ,
carpenter, .
 catharine, saint, of genoa, .
 catholicism and protestantism compared, , , ,
 causality of god, , .
 cause, .
cennick, .
 centres of personal energy, , , .
 cerebration, unconscious, .
 chance, .
channing, ,
chapman, .
 character, cause of its alterations, ;
 scheme of its differences of type, , .
 causes of its diversity, ;
 balance of, .
 charity, , , , .
 chastity, .
 chiefs of tribes, .
 christian science, .
 christ's atonement, , .
 churches, , .
clark, .
clissold, .
coe, .
 conduct, perfect, .
 confession, .
 consciousness, fields of, ;
 subliminal, .
[pg ]
 consistency, .
 conversion, to avarice, .
 conversion, fletcher's, ;
 tolstoy's, ;
 bunyan's, ;
 in general, lectures ix and x, passim;
 bradley's, ;
 compared with natural moral growth, ;
 hadley's, ;
 two types of,  ff.;
 brainerd's, ;
 alline's, ;
 oxford graduate's, ;
 ratisbonne's, ;
 instantaneous, ;
 is it a natural phenomenon? ;
 subliminal action involved, in sudden cases, , ;
 fruits of, ;
 its momentousness, ;
 may be supernatural, ;
 its concomitants:
 sense of higher control, ,
 happiness, ,
 automatisms, ,
 luminous phenomena, ;
 its degree of permanence, .
 cosmic consciousness, .
 counter-conversion, .
 courage, , .
 crankiness, see psychopathy.
crichton-browne,
 criminal character, .
 criteria of value of spiritual affections, .
crump, .
 cure of bad habits, .
daudet, .
 death, , .
derham, .
 design, argument from, ,  ff.
 devoutness, .
dionysius areopagiticus,
 disease, , .
 disorder in contents of world, .
 divided self, lecture viii, passim;
 cases of:
 saint augustine, ,
 h. alline, .
 divine, the, .
 dog, .
 dogmatism, , .
dowie, .
dresser, h. w., ,
 drink, .
 drummer, .
drummond, .
 drunkenness, , , .
“dryness,” .
dumas, .
 dyes, on clothing, .
 earnestness, .
 ecclesiastical spirit, the, , .
eckhart, .
eddy, .
edwards, jonathan,
edwards, mrs. j.,
 effects of religious states, .
 effeminacy, .
 ego of apperception, .
ellis, havelock,
elwood, .
emerson, ,
 emotion, as alterer of life's value, ;
 of the character, ,  ff., .
 empirical method, ,  ff., .
 enemies, love your, , .
 energy, personal, ;
 mystical states increase it, .
 environment, , .
 epictetus, .
 epicureans, .
 equanimity, .
 ether, mystical effects of, .
 evil, ignored by healthy-mindedness, , , ;
 due to things or to the self, ;
 its reality, .
 evolutionist optimism, .
 excesses of piety, .
 excitement, its effects, , , , .
 experience, religious, the essence of, .
 extravagances of piety, , .
 extreme cases, why we take them, .
 failure, .
 faith, , .
 faith-state, .
 fanaticism,  ff.
 fear, , , , , .
 feeling deeper than intellect in religion, .
fielding, .
finney, , .
fletcher, ,
flournoy, ,
 flower, .
foster, , .
fox, george, ,
francis, saint,
 d'assisi, .
francis, saint, de
 sales, .
fraser, .
 fruits, of conversion, ;
 of religion, ;
 of saintliness, .
fuller, .
gamond, .
gardiner, .
 genius and insanity, .
 geniuses, see religious leaders.
 gentleman, character of the, , .
gertrude, saint,
“gifts,”
 glory of god, .
[pg ]
god, ;
 sense of his presence, -, ,  ff.;
 historic changes in idea of him, ,  ff.,
 mind-curer's idea of him, ;
 his honor, ;
 described by negatives, ;
 his attributes, scholastic proof of, ;
 the metaphysical ones are for us meaningless, ;
 the moral ones are ill-deduced, ;
 he is not a mere inference, ;
 is used, not known, ;
 his existence must make a difference among phenomena, ,
 his relation to the subconscious region, , ;
 his tasks, ;
 may be finite and plural, .
goddard, .
goerres, .
goethe, .
gough, .
gourdon, .
“grace,”
 the operation of, ;
 the state of, .
gratry, , ,
 greeks, their pessimism, , .
 guidance, .
gurney, .
guyon, , .
hadley, , .
hale, .
hamon, .
 happiness, -, , , .
harnack, .
 healthy-mindedness, lectures iv and v, passim;
 its philosophy of evil, ;
 compared with morbid-mindedness, , .
 heart, softening of, .
hegel, , ,
helmont, van, .
 heroism, , , note.
 heterogeneous personality, , .
 higher criticism, .
hilty, , ,
hodgson, r., .
homer, .
hugo, .
 hypocrisy, .
 hypothesis, what make a useful one, .
hyslop, .
ignatius loyola,
 illness, .
“imitation of
 christ,” the, .
 immortality, .
 impulses, .
 individuality, .
 inhibitions,  ff.
 insane melancholy and religion, .
 insanity and genius, ;
 and happiness, .
 institutional religion, .
 intellect a secondary force in religion, , .
 intellectual weakness of some saints, .
 intolerance, .
 irascibility, .
jesus, harnack on,
job, , .
john, saint, of the
 cross, , , .
johnston, .
jonquil, .
jordan, .
jouffroy, ,
 judgments, existential and spiritual, .
kant, , .
 karma, .
kellner, .
 kindliness, see charity.
kingsley, .
lagneau, .
 leaders, see religious leaders.
 leaders, of tribes, .
lejeune, ,
lessing, .
leuba, , ,
 life, its significance, .
 life, the subconscious, , .
locker-lampson, .
 logic, hegelian, .
 louis, saint, of gonzaga, .
 love, see charity.
 love, cases of falling out of, .
 love of god, .
 love your enemies, , .
lowell, .
 loyalty, to god, .
lutfullah, .
luther, , ,
 lutheran self-despair, , .
 luxury, .
lycaon, .
 lyre, .
 mahomet, .
 see mohammed.
marcus aurelius,
margaret mary, see
 alacoque.
 margin of consciousness, .
marshall, .
martineau, .
mather, .
maudsley, .
 meaning of life, .
 medical criticism of religion, .
[pg ]
 medical materialism,  ff.
 melancholy, , ;
 lectures v and vi, passim;
 cases of, , , , , .
 melting moods, .
 method of judging value of religion, , .
 methodism, , .
meysenbug, .
 militarism, -.
 military type of character, .
mill, .
 mind-cure, its sources and history, -;
 its opinion of fear, ;
 cases of, -, , ;
 its message, ;
 its methods, -;
 it uses verification, -;
 its philosophy of evil, .
 miraculous character of conversion, .
mohammed, ,
molinos, .
moltke, von, ,
 monasteries, .
 monism, .
 morbidness compared with healthy-mindedness, .
 see, also, melancholy.
 mormon revelations, .
 mortification, see asceticism.
muir, .
mulford, .
müller, .
murisier, .
myers, , ,
 mystic states, their effects, , .
 mystical experiences, .
 mysticism, lectures xvi and xvii, passim;
 its marks, ;
 its theoretic results, , , ;
 it cannot warrant truth, ;
 its results, ;
 its relation to the sense of union, .
 mystical region of experience, .
 natural theology, .
 naturalism, , .
 nature, scientific view of, .
 negative accounts of deity, .
nelson, , .
nettleton, .
newman, f. w., .
newman, j. h., on
 dogmatic theology, , ;
 his type of imagination, .
nietzsche, ,
 nitrous oxide, its mystical effects, .
 no-function, -, , , .
 non-resistance, , , .
 obedience, .
obermann, .
o'connell, .
 omit, .
“once-born” type, , ,
 oneness with god, see union.
 optimism, systematic, ;
 and evolutionism, ;
 it may be shallow, .
 orderliness of world, .
 organism determines all mental states whatsoever, .
 origin of mental states no criterion of their value,  ff.
 orison, .
 over-beliefs, ;
 the author's, .
 over-soul, .
 oxford, graduate of, , .
 pagan feeling, .
 pantheism, , .
parker, .
pascal, .
paton, .
paul, saint, ,
peek, .
peirce, .
 penny, .
perreyve, .
 persecutions, , .
 personality, explained away by science, , ;
 heterogeneous, ;
 alterations of, ,  ff.;
 is reality, . see character.
peter, saint, of
 alcantara, .
philo, .
 philosophy, lecture xviii, passim;
 must coerce assent, ;
 scholastic, ;
 idealistic, ;
 unable to give a theoretic warrant to faith, ;
 its true office in religion, .
 photisms, .
 piety,  ff.
 pluralism, .
 polytheism, , .
 poverty, , .
“pragmatism,” , , -.
 prayer, ;
 its definition, ;
 its essence, ;
 petitional, ;
 its effects, -, .
“presence,” sense of, -.
 presence of god, -, ,  ff.,
 presence of god, the practice of, .
 primitive human thought, .
pringle-pattison,
 prophets, the hebrew, .
 protestant theology, .
 protestantism and catholicism, , , ,
 providential leading, .
 psychopathy and religion,  ff.
[pg ]
puffer, .
 purity, , , .
 quakers, , .
ramakrishna, ,
 rationalism, , ;
 its authority overthrown by mysticism, .
ratisbonne, ,
 reality of unseen objects, lecture iii, passim.
récéjac, ,
“recollection,” , .
 redemption, .
 reformation of character, .
 regeneration, see conversion;
 by relaxation, .
reid, .
 relaxation, salvation by, .
 see surrender.
 religion, to be tested by fruits, not by origin,  ff., ;
 its definition, , ;
 is solemn, ;
 compared with stoicism, ;
 its unique function, ;
 abstractness of its objects, ;
 differs according to temperament, , , ,
 and ought to differ, ;
 considered to be a “survival,” , , ;
 its relations to melancholy, ;
 worldly passions may combine with it, ;
 its essential characters, , ;
 its relation to prayer, -;
 asserts a fact, not a theory, ;
 its truth, ;
 more than science, it holds by concrete reality, ;
 attempts to evaporate it into philosophy, ;
 it is concerned with personal destinies, , ;
 with feeling and conduct, ;
 is a sthenic affection, ;
 is for life, not for knowledge, ;
 its essential contents, ;
 it postulates issues of fact, .
 religious emotion, .
 religious leaders, often nervously unstable,  ff., ;
 their loneliness, .
“religious
 sentiment,” .
renan, .
 renunciations, .
 repentance, .
 resignation, .
 revelation, the anæsthetic, -.
 revelations, see automatisms.
 revelations, in mormon church, .
 revivalism, .
ribet, .
ribot, , .
rodriguez, ,
royce, .
rutherford, mark,
sabatier, a., .
 sacrifice, , .
saint-pierre, .
sainte-beuve, ,
 saintliness, sainte-beuve on, ;
 its characteristics, , ;
 criticism of,  ff.
 saintly conduct, -.
 saints, dislike of natural man for, .
 salvation, .
sandays, .
satan, in picture,
scheffler, .
 scholastic arguments for god, .
 science, ignores personality and teleology, ;
 her “facts,” , .
“science of
 religions,” , , , -.
 scientific conceptions, their late adoption, .
 second-birth, , , .
seeley, .
 self of the world, .
 self-despair, , , .
 self-surrender, , .
sénancour, .
seth, .
 sexual temptation, .
 sexuality as cause of religion, , .
“shrew,”
 sickness, .
 sick souls, lectures v and vi, passim.
sighele, .
 sin, .
 sinners, christ died for, .
 skepticism,  ff.
skobeleff, .
smith, joseph, .
 softening of the heart, .
 solemnity, , .
 soul, .
 soul, strength of, .
spencer, ,
spinoza, ,
 spiritism, .
 spirit-return, .
 spiritual judgments, .
 spiritual states, tests of their value, .
starbuck, ,
stevenson, ,
 stoicism, -, .
 strange appearance of world, .
 strength of soul, .
 subconscious action in conversion, , .
 subconscious life, , , , , ,
 subconscious self, as intermediary between the self and god,
[pg ]
 subliminal, see subconscious.
 sufis, , .
 suggestion, , .
 suicide, .
 supernaturalism its two kinds, ;
 criticism of universalistic, .
 supernatural world, .
 surrender, salvation by, , , .
 survival-theory of religion, , , .
suso, , .
swinburne, .
symonds, ,
 sympathetic magic, .
 sympathy, see charity.
 systems, philosophic, .
 taine, .
taylor, .
 tenderness, see charity.
tennyson, ,
teresa, saint, ,
 theologia germanica, .
 theologians, systematic, .
“theopathy,” .
thoreau, .
 threshold, .
 tiger, , .
 tobacco, , .
tolstoy, ,
towianski, .
 tragedy of life, .
 tranquillity, .
 transcendentalism criticised, .
 transcendentalists, .
trevor, .
trine, , .
 truth of religion, how to be tested, ;
 what it is, ;
 mystical perception of, , .
“twice-born,” type, , ,
tyndall, .
“unconscious
 cerebration,” .
 unification of self, , .
“union morale,”
 union with god, , , , ,  ff.
 see lectures on conversion, passim.
 unity of universe, .
 unreality, sense of, .
 unseen realities, lecture iii, passim.
 upanishads, .
upham, .
 utopias, .
vacherot, .
 value of spiritual affections, how tested, .
vambéry, .
 vedantism, , , , .
 veracity, ,  ff.
vivekananda, .
voltaire, .
voysey, .
 war, -.
 wealth-worship, .
weaver, .
wesley, .
 wesleyan self-despair, , .
whitefield, .
whitman, ,
wolff, , .
wood, henry, ,
 world, soul of the, .
 worry, , .
 yes-function, -, , .
 yoga, .
young, .
footnotes
as with many
 ideas that float in the air of one's time, this notion shrinks
 from dogmatic general statement and expresses itself only
 partially and by innuendo. it seems to me that few conceptions
 are less instructive than this re-interpretation of religion as
 perverted sexuality. it reminds one, so crudely is it often
 employed, of the famous catholic taunt, that the reformation may
 be best understood by remembering that its fons et origo was luther's
 wish to marry a nun:—the effects are infinitely wider than the
 alleged causes, and for the most part opposite in nature. it is
 true that in the vast collection of religious phenomena, some are
 undisguisedly amatory—e.g., sex-deities and obscene rites in
 polytheism, and ecstatic feelings of union with the saviour in a
 few christian mystics. but then why not equally call religion an
 aberration of the digestive function, and prove one's point by
 the worship of bacchus and ceres, or by the ecstatic feelings of
 some other saints about the eucharist? religious language clothes
 itself in such poor symbols as our life affords, and the whole
 organism gives overtones of comment whenever the mind is strongly
 stirred to expression. language drawn from eating and drinking is
 probably as common in religious literature as is language drawn
 from the sexual life. we “hunger and
 thirst” after righteousness; we “find the lord a sweet savor;” we “taste and see that he is good.” “spiritual milk for american babes, drawn from the
 breasts of both testaments,” is a sub-title of the once
 famous new england primer, and christian devotional literature
 indeed quite floats in milk, thought of from the point of view,
 not of the mother, but of the greedy babe.
saint françois
 de sales, for instance, thus describes the “orison of quietude”: “in this state the soul is like a little child still
 at the breast, whose mother, to caress him whilst he is still in
 her arms, makes her milk distill into his mouth without his even
 moving his lips. so it is here.... our lord desires that our will
 should be satisfied with sucking the milk which his majesty pours
 into our mouth, and that we should relish the sweetness without
 even knowing that it cometh from the lord.” and again:
 “consider the little infants, united and
 joined to the breasts of their nursing mothers, you will see that
 from time to time they press themselves closer by little starts
 to which the pleasure of sucking prompts them. even so, during
 its orison, the heart united to its god oftentimes makes attempts
 at closer union by movements during which it presses closer upon
 the divine sweetness.” chemin de la perfection, ch. xxxi.;
 amour de dieu, vii. ch. i.
in fact, one
 might almost as well interpret religion as a perversion of the
 respiratory function. the bible is full of the language of
 respiratory oppression: “hide not thine
 ear at my breathing; my groaning is not hid from thee; my heart
 panteth, my strength faileth me; my bones are hot with my roaring
 all the night long; as the hart panteth after the water-brooks,
 so my soul panteth after thee, o my god.” god's breath in
 man is the title of the chief work of our best
 known american mystic (thomas lake harris); and in certain
 non-christian countries the foundation of all religious
 discipline consists in regulation of the inspiration and
 expiration.
these
 arguments are as good as much of the reasoning one hears in favor
 of the sexual theory. but the champions of the latter will then
 say that their chief argument has no analogue elsewhere. the two
 main phenomena of religion, namely, melancholy and conversion,
 they will say, are essentially phenomena of adolescence, and
 therefore synchronous with the development of sexual life. to
 which the retort again is easy. even were the asserted synchrony
 unrestrictedly true as a fact (which it is not), it is not only
 the sexual life, but the entire higher mental life which awakens
 during adolescence. one might then as well set up the thesis that
 the interest in mechanics, physics, chemistry, logic, philosophy,
 and sociology, which springs up during adolescent years along
 with that in poetry and religion, is also a perversion of the
 sexual instinct:—but that would be too absurd. moreover, if the
 argument from synchrony is to decide, what is to be done with the
 fact that the religious age par
 excellence would seem to be old age, when the
 uproar of the sexual life is past?
the plain
 truth is that to interpret religion one must in the end look at
 the immediate content of the religious consciousness. the moment
 one does this, one sees how wholly disconnected it is in the main
 from the content of the sexual consciousness. everything about
 the two things differs, objects, moods, faculties concerned, and
 acts impelled to. any general assimilation is simply
 impossible: what we find most often is complete hostility and
 contrast. if now the defenders of the sex-theory say that this
 makes no difference to their thesis; that without the chemical
 contributions which the sex-organs make to the blood, the brain
 would not be nourished so as to carry on religious activities,
 this final proposition may be true or not true; but at any rate
 it has become profoundly uninstructive: we can deduce no
 consequences from it which help us to interpret religion's
 meaning or value. in this sense the religious life depends just
 as much upon the spleen, the pancreas, and the kidneys as on the
 sexual apparatus, and the whole theory has lost its point in
 evaporating into a vague general assertion of the dependence,
 somehow, of the mind upon the
 body.
for a first-rate example of
 medical-materialist reasoning, see an article on “les variétés du type dévot,” by dr.
 binet-sanglé, in the revue de l'hypnotisme, xiv. .
j. f. nisbet: the insanity
 of genius, d ed., london, , pp. xvi, xxiv.
max nordau, in his bulky
 book entitled degeneration.
h. maudsley: natural
 causes and supernatural seemings, , pp. , .
autobiography, ch. xxviii.
superior intellect, as professor bain
 has admirably shown, seems to consist in nothing so much as in a
 large development of the faculty of association by similarity.
i may refer to a criticism of the
 insanity theory of genius in the psychological review, ii. 
i can do no better here than refer my
 readers to the extended and admirable remarks on the futility of
 all these definitions of religion, in an article by professor
 leuba, published in the monist for january, , after my own text
 was written.
miscellanies, , p. 
 (abridged).
lectures and biographical sketches,
 , p. .
feuilles détachées, pp. -
 (abridged).
op. cit., pp. , .
book v., ch. x. (abridged).
book v., ch. ix. (abridged).
chaps. x., xi. (abridged): winkworth's
 translation.
book iv., § .
benham's translation: book iii.,
 chaps. xv., lix. compare mary moody emerson: “let me be a blot on this fair world, the obscurest,
 the loneliest sufferer, with one proviso,—that i know it is his
 agency. i will love him though he shed frost and darkness on every
 way of mine.” r. w. emerson: lectures
 and biographical sketches, p. .
once more, there are plenty of men,
 constitutionally sombre men, in whose religious life this
 rapturousness is lacking. they are religious in the wider sense;
 yet in this acutest of all senses they are not so, and it is
 religion in the acutest sense that i wish, without disputing about
 words, to study first, so as to get at its typical differentia.
the new spirit, p. .
i owe this allegorical illustration to
 my lamented colleague and friend, charles carroll everett.
example: “i
 have had much comfort lately in meditating on the passages which
 show the personality of the holy ghost, and his distinctness from
 the father and the son. it is a subject that requires searching
 into to find out, but, when realized, gives one so much more true
 and lively a sense of the fullness of the godhead, and its work in
 us and to us, than when only thinking of the spirit in its effect
 on us.” augustus hare: memorials,
 i. , maria hare to lucy h. hare.
symposium, jowett, , i. .
example: “nature is always so interesting, under whatever aspect
 she shows herself, that when it rains, i seem to see a beautiful
 woman weeping. she appears the more beautiful, the more afflicted
 she is.” b. de st. pierre.
journal of the s. p. r., february,
 , p. .
e. gurney: phantasms of
 the living, i. .
pensées d'un solitaire, p. .
letters of lowell, i. .
i borrow it, with professor flournoy's
 permission, from his rich collection of psychological
 documents.
mark rutherford's deliverance, london,
 , pp. , .
in his book (too little read, i fear),
 natural religion, d edition, boston, , pp. , .
c. hilty: glück, dritter
 theil, , p. .
the soul; its sorrows and its
 aspirations, d edition, , pp. , .
i once heard a lady describe the
 pleasure it gave her to think that she “could always cuddle up to god.”
john weiss: life of
 theodore parker, i. , .
starbuck: psychology of
 religion, pp. , .
“i know not to what physical laws philosophers will
 some day refer the feelings of melancholy. for myself, i find
 that they are the most voluptuous of all sensations,”
 writes saint pierre, and accordingly he devotes a series of
 sections of his work on nature to the plaisirs de la ruine,
 plaisirs des tombeaux, ruines de la nature, plaisirs de la
 solitude—each of them more optimistic than the last.
this finding
 of a luxury in woe is very common during adolescence. the
 truth-telling marie bashkirtseff expresses it well:—
“in this depression and dreadful uninterrupted
 suffering, i don't condemn life. on the contrary, i like it and
 find it good. can you believe it? i find everything good and
 pleasant, even my tears, my grief. i enjoy weeping, i enjoy my
 despair. i enjoy being exasperated and sad. i feel as if these
 were so many diversions, and i love life in spite of them all. i
 want to live on. it would be cruel to have me die when i am so
 accommodating. i cry, i grieve, and at the same time i am
 pleased—no, not exactly that—i know not how to express it. but
 everything in life pleases me. i find everything agreeable, and
 in the very midst of my prayers for happiness, i find myself
 happy at being miserable. it is not i who undergo all this—my
 body weeps and cries; but something inside of me which is above
 me is glad of it all.” journal de marie bashkirtseff, i.
r. m. bucke: cosmic
 consciousness, pp. -, abridged.
i refer to the conservator, edited by
 horace traubel, and published monthly at philadelphia.
song of myself, .
iliad, xxi., e. myers's
 translation.
“god is afraid
 of me!” remarked such a titanic-optimistic friend in my
 presence one morning when he was feeling particularly hearty and
 cannibalistic. the defiance of the phrase showed that a christian
 education in humility still rankled in his breast.
“as i go on in
 this life, day by day, i become more of a bewildered child; i
 cannot get used to this world, to procreation, to heredity, to
 sight, to hearing; the commonest things are a burthen. the prim,
 obliterated, polite surface of life, and the broad, bawdy, and
 orgiastic—or mænadic—foundations, form a spectacle to which no
 habit reconciles me.” r. l. stevenson: letters,
 ii. .
“cautionary
 verses for children”: this title of a much used work,
 published early in the nineteenth century, shows how far the muse
 of evangelical protestantism in england, with her mind fixed on the
 idea of danger, had at last drifted away from the original gospel
 freedom. mind-cure might be briefly called a reaction against all
 that religion of chronic anxiety which marked the earlier part of
 our century in the evangelical circles of england and america.
i refer to mr. horatio w. dresser and
 mr. henry wood, especially the former. mr. dresser's works are
 published by g. p. putnam's sons, new york and london; mr. wood's
 by lee & shepard, boston.
lest my own testimony be suspected, i
 will quote another reporter, dr. h. h. goddard, of clark
 university, whose thesis on “the effects of
 mind on body as evidenced by faith cures” is published in
 the american journal of psychology for  (vol. x.). this critic,
 after a wide study of the facts, concludes that the cures by
 mind-cure exist, but are in no respect different from those now
 officially recognized in medicine as cures by suggestion; and the
 end of his essay contains an interesting physiological speculation
 as to the way in which the suggestive ideas may work (p.  of the
 reprint). as regards the general phenomenon of mental cure itself,
 dr. goddard writes: “in spite of the severe
 criticism we have made of reports of cure, there still remains a
 vast amount of material, showing a powerful influence of the mind
 in disease. many cases are of diseases that have been diagnosed and
 treated by the best physicians of the country, or which prominent
 hospitals have tried their hand at curing, but without success.
 people of culture and education have been treated by this method
 with satisfactory results. diseases of long standing have been
 ameliorated, and even cured.... we have traced the mental element
 through primitive medicine and folk-medicine of to-day, patent
 medicine, and witchcraft. we are convinced that it is impossible to
 account for the existence of these practices, if they did not cure
 disease, and that if they cured disease, it must have been the
 mental element that was effective. the same argument applies to
 those modern schools of mental therapeutics—divine healing and
 christian science. it is hardly conceivable that the large body of
 intelligent people who comprise the body known distinctively as
 mental scientists should continue to exist if the whole thing were
 a delusion. it is not a thing of a day; it is not confined to a
 few; it is not local. it is true that many failures are recorded,
 but that only adds to the argument. there must be many and striking
 successes to counterbalance the failures, otherwise the failures
 would have ended the delusion.... christian science, divine
 healing, or mental science do not, and never can in the very nature
 of things, cure all diseases; nevertheless, the practical
 applications of the general principles of the broadest mental
 science will tend to prevent disease.... we do find sufficient
 evidence to convince us that the proper reform in mental attitude
 would relieve many a sufferer of ills that the ordinary physician
 cannot touch; would even delay the approach of death to many a
 victim beyond the power of absolute cure, and the faithful
 adherence to a truer philosophy of life will keep many a man well,
 and give the doctor time to devote to alleviating ills that are
 unpreventable” (pp. ,  of reprint).
horace fletcher: happiness
 as found in forethought minus fearthought, menticulture
 series, ii. chicago and new york, stone, , pp. -,
 abridged.
h. w. dresser: voices of
 freedom, new york, , p. .
henry wood: ideal
 suggestion through mental photography, boston, , p. .
whether it differs so much from
 christ's own notion is for the exegetists to decide. according to
 harnack, jesus felt about evil and disease much as our mind-curers
 do. “what is the answer which jesus sends
 to john the baptist?” asks harnack, and says it is this:
 “ ‘the blind see,
 and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the
 dead rise up, and the gospel is preached to the poor.’ that
 is the ‘coming of the kingdom,’ or
 rather in these saving works the kingdom is already there. by the
 overcoming and removal of misery, of need, of sickness, by these
 actual effects john is to see that the new time has arrived. the
 casting out of devils is only a part of this work of redemption,
 but jesus
 points to that as the sense and seal of his mission.
 thus to the wretched, sick, and poor did he address himself, but
 not as a moralist, and without a trace of sentimentalism. he never
 makes groups and departments of the ills; he never spends time in
 asking whether the sick one ‘deserves’ to be cured; and it never occurs to
 him to sympathize with the pain or the death. he nowhere says that
 sickness is a beneficent infliction, and that evil has a healthy
 use. no, he calls sickness sickness and health health. all evil,
 all wretchedness, is for him something dreadful; it is of the great
 kingdom of satan; but he feels the power of the saviour within him.
 he knows that advance is possible only when weakness is overcome,
 when sickness is made well.” das wesen des christenthums,
 , p. .
r. w. trine: in tune with
 the infinite, th thousand, n. y., . i have strung scattered
 passages together.
the cairds,
 for example. in edward caird's glasgow
 lectures of - passages like this abound:—
“the declaration made in the beginning of the
 ministry of jesus that ‘the time is
 fulfilled, and the kingdom of heaven is at hand,’ passes
 with scarce a break into the announcement that ‘the kingdom of god is among you’; and the
 importance of this announcement is asserted to be such that it
 makes, so to speak, a difference in
 kind between the greatest saints and prophets who
 lived under the previous reign of division, and ‘the least in the kingdom of heaven.’ the
 highest ideal is brought close to men and declared to be within
 their reach, they are called on to be ‘perfect as their father in heaven is
 perfect.’ the sense of alienation and distance from god
 which had grown upon the pious in israel just in proportion as
 they had learned to look upon him as no mere national divinity,
 but as a god of justice who would punish israel for its sin as
 certainly as edom or moab, is declared to be no longer in place;
 and the typical form of christian prayer points to the abolition
 of the contrast between this world and the next which through all
 the history of the jews had continually been growing wider:
 ‘as in heaven, so on earth.’ the
 sense of the division of man from god, as a finite being from the
 infinite, as weak and sinful from the omnipotent goodness, is not
 indeed lost; but it can no longer overpower the consciousness of
 oneness. the terms ‘son’ and
 ‘father’ at once state the
 opposition and mark its limit. they show that it is not an
 absolute opposition, but one which presupposes an indestructible
 principle of unity, that can and must become a principle of
 reconciliation.” the evolution of religion, ii. pp. ,
it remains to be seen whether the
 school of mr. dresser, which assumes more and more the form of
 mind-cure experience and academic philosophy mutually impregnating
 each other, will score the practical triumphs of the less critical
 and rational sects.
the theistic explanation is by divine
 grace, which creates a new nature within one the moment the old
 nature is sincerely given up. the pantheistic explanation (which is
 that of most mind-curers) is by the merging of the narrower private
 self into the wider or greater self, the spirit of the universe
 (which is your own “subconscious”
 self), the moment the isolating barriers of mistrust and anxiety
 are removed. the medico-materialistic explanation is that simpler
 cerebral processes act more freely where they are left to act
 automatically by the shunting-out of physiologically (though in
 this instance not spiritually) “higher” ones which, seeking to regulate, only
 succeed in inhibiting results.—whether this third explanation
 might, in a psycho-physical account of the universe, be combined
 with either of the others may be left an open question here.
within the
 churches a disposition has always prevailed to regard sickness as
 a visitation; something sent by god for our good, either as
 chastisement, as warning, or as opportunity for exercising
 virtue, and, in the catholic church, of earning “merit.” “illness,” says a good catholic writer
 (p. lejeune: introd. à la
 vie mystique, , p. ), “is the most
 excellent of corporeal mortifications, the mortification which
 one has not one's self chosen, which is imposed directly by god,
 and is the direct expression of his will. ‘if other mortifications are of silver,’ mgr.
 gay says, ‘this one is of gold; since
 although it comes of ourselves, coming as it does of original
 sin, still on its greater side, as coming (like all that happens)
 from the providence of god, it is of divine manufacture. and how
 just are its blows! and how efficacious it is!... i do not
 hesitate to say that patience in a long illness is
 mortification's very masterpiece, and consequently the triumph of
 mortified souls.’ ” according to this view, disease
 should in any case be submissively accepted, and it might under
 certain circumstances even be blasphemous to wish it away.
of course
 there have been exceptions to this, and cures by special miracle
 have at all times been recognized within the church's pale,
 almost all the great saints having more or less performed them.
 it was one of the heresies of edward irving, to maintain them
 still to be possible. an extremely pure faculty of healing after
 confession and conversion on the patient's part, and prayer on
 the priest's, was quite spontaneously developed in the german
 pastor, joh. christoph blumhardt, in the early forties and
 exerted during nearly thirty years. blumhardt's life by zündel
 (th edition, zurich, ) gives in chapters ix., x., xi., and
 xvii. a pretty full account of his healing activity, which he
 invariably ascribed to direct divine interposition. blumhardt was
 a singularly pure, simple, and non-fanatical character, and in
 this part of his work followed no previous model. in chicago
 to-day we have the case of dr. j. a. dowie, a scottish baptist
 preacher, whose weekly “leaves of
 healing” were in the year of grace  in their sixth
 volume, and who, although he denounces the cures wrought in other
 sects as “diabolical counterfeits”
 of his own exclusively “divine
 healing,” must on the whole be counted into the mind-cure
 movement. in mind-cure circles the fundamental article of faith
 is that disease should never be accepted. it is wholly of the
 pit. god wants us to be absolutely healthy, and we should not
 tolerate ourselves on any lower terms.
edwards, from whose book on the
 revival in new england i quote these words, dissuades from such a
 use of prayer, but it is easy to see that he enjoys making his
 thrust at the cold dead church members.
h. w. dresser: voices of
 freedom, .
dresser: living by the
 spirit, .
dresser: voices of
 freedom, .
trine: in tune with the
 infinite, p. .
trine: p. .
quoted by lejeune: introd. à la vie
 mystique, , p. .
henry wood: ideal
 suggestion through mental photography, pp. ,  (abridged).
see appendix to this lecture for two
 other cases furnished me by friends.
whether the various spheres or systems
 are ever to fuse integrally into one absolute conception, as most
 philosophers assume that they must, and how, if so, that conception
 may best be reached, are questions that only the future can answer.
 what is certain now is the fact of lines of disparate conception,
 each corresponding to some part of the world's truth, each verified
 in some degree, each leaving out some part of real experience.
tract on god, man, and happiness, book
 ii. ch. x.
commentary on galatians, philadelphia,
 , pp. - (abridged).
molinos: spiritual guide,
 book ii., chaps. xvii., xviii. (abridged).
i say this in spite of the monistic
 utterances of many mind-cure writers; for these utterances are
 really inconsistent with their attitude towards disease, and can
 easily be shown not to be logically involved in the experiences of
 union with a higher presence with which they connect themselves.
 the higher presence, namely, need not be the absolute whole of
 things, it is quite sufficient for the life of religious experience
 to regard it as a part, if only it be the most ideal part.
cf. j.
 milsand: luther et le serf-arbitre, ,
 passim.
he adds with characteristic
 healthy-mindedness: “our business is to
 continue to fail in good spirits.”
the god of many men is little more
 than their court of appeal against the damnatory judgment passed on
 their failures by the opinion of this world. to our own
 consciousness there is usually a residuum of worth left over after
 our sins and errors have been told off—our capacity of
 acknowledging and regretting them is the germ of a better self
 in posse at least. but the world
 deals with us in actu and not
 in posse: and of this hidden
 germ, not to be guessed at from without, it never takes account.
 then we turn to the all-knower, who knows our bad, but knows this
 good in us also, and who is just. we cast ourselves with our
 repentance on his mercy: only by an all-knower can we finally be
 judged. so the need of a god very definitely emerges from this sort
 of experience of life.
e.g., iliad, xvii. : “nothing then is more wretched anywhere than man of all
 that breathes and creeps upon this earth.”
e.g.,
 theognis, -: “best of all for all
 things upon earth is it not to be born nor to behold the
 splendors of the sun; next best to traverse as soon as possible
 the gates of hades.” see also the almost identical passage
 in œdipus in colonus, .—the anthology is full of pessimistic
 utterances: “naked came i upon the earth,
 naked i go below the ground—why then do i vainly toil when i see
 the end naked before me?”—“how did
 i come to be? whence am i? wherefore did i come? to pass away.
 how can i learn aught when naught i know? being naught i came to
 life: once more shall i be what i was. nothing and nothingness is
 the whole race of mortals.”—“for
 death we are all cherished and fattened like a herd of hogs that
 is wantonly butchered.”
the difference
 between greek pessimism and the oriental and modern variety is
 that the greeks had not made the discovery that the pathetic mood
 may be idealized, and figure as a higher form of sensibility.
 their spirit was still too essentially masculine for pessimism to
 be elaborated or lengthily dwelt on in their classic literature.
 they would have despised a life set wholly in a minor key, and
 summoned it to keep within the proper bounds of lachrymosity. the
 discovery that the enduring emphasis, so far as this world goes,
 may be laid on its pain and failure, was reserved for races more
 complex, and (so to speak) more feminine than the hellenes had
 attained to being in the classic period. but all the same was the
 outlook of those hellenes blackly pessimistic.
for instance, on the very day on which
 i write this page, the post brings me some aphorisms from a
 worldly-wise old friend in heidelberg which may serve as a good
 contemporaneous expression of epicureanism: “by the word ‘happiness’
 every human being understands something different. it is a phantom
 pursued only by weaker minds. the wise man is satisfied with the
 more modest but much more definite term contentment. what education should
 chiefly aim at is to save us from a discontented life. health is
 one favoring condition, but by no means an indispensable one, of
 contentment. woman's heart and love are a shrewd device of nature,
 a trap which she sets for the average man, to force him into
 working. but the wise man will always prefer work chosen by
 himself.”
ribot: psychologie des
 sentiments, p. .
 gratry: souvenirs de ma jeunesse, , pp.
 -, abridged. some persons are affected with anhedonia
 permanently, or at any rate with a loss of the usual appetite for
 life. the annals of suicide supply such examples as the
 following:—
an uneducated
 domestic servant, aged nineteen, poisons herself, and leaves two
 letters expressing her motive for the act. to her parents she
 writes:—
“life is sweet perhaps to some, but i prefer what is
 sweeter than life, and that is death. so good-by forever, my dear
 parents. it is nobody's fault, but a strong desire of my own
 which i have longed to fulfill for three or four years. i have
 always had a hope that some day i might have an opportunity of
 fulfilling it, and now it has come.... it is a wonder i have put
 this off so long, but i thought perhaps i should cheer up a bit
 and put all thought out of my head.” to her brother she
 writes: “good-by forever, my own dearest
 brother. by the time you get this i shall be gone forever. i
 know, dear love, there is no forgiveness for what i am going to
 do.... i am tired of living, so am willing to die.... life may be
 sweet to some, but death to me is sweeter.” s. a. k.
 strahan: suicide and insanity, d edition, london,
 , p. .
roubinovitch et toulouse:
 la mélancolie, , p. , abridged.
i cull these examples from the work of
 dumas: la tristesse et la joie, .
my extracts are from the french
 translation by “zonia.” in
 abridging i have taken the liberty of transposing one passage.
grace abounding to the chief of
 sinners: i have printed a number of detached passages
 continuously.
the life and journal of the rev. mr.
 henry alline, boston, , pp. , . i owe my acquaintance with
 this book to my colleague, dr. benjamin rand.
compare bunyan: “there was i struck into a very great trembling,
 insomuch that at some times i could, for days together, feel my
 very body, as well as my mind, to shake and totter under the sense
 of the dreadful judgment of god, that should fall on those that
 have sinned that most fearful and unpardonable sin. i felt also
 such clogging and heat at my stomach, by reason of this my terror,
 that i was, especially at some times, as if my breast-bone would
 have split asunder.... thus did i wind, and twine, and shrink,
 under the burden that was upon me; which burden also did so oppress
 me that i could neither stand, nor go, nor lie, either at rest or
 quiet.”
for another case of fear equally
 sudden, see henry james: society the
 redeemed form of man, boston, , pp.  ff.
example: “it
 was about eleven o'clock at night ... but i strolled on still with
 the people.... suddenly upon the left side of our road, a crackling
 was heard among the bushes; all of us were alarmed, and in an
 instant a tiger, rushing out of the jungle, pounced upon the one of
 the party that was foremost, and carried him off in the twinkling
 of an eye. the rush of the animal, and the crush of the poor
 victim's bones in his mouth, and his last cry of distress,
 ‘ho hai!’ involuntarily reëchoed by
 all of us, was over in three seconds; and then i know not what
 happened till i returned to my senses, when i found myself and
 companions lying down on the ground as if prepared to be devoured
 by our enemy, the sovereign of the forest. i find my pen incapable
 of describing the terror of that dreadful moment. our limbs
 stiffened, our power of speech ceased, and our hearts beat
 violently, and only a whisper of the same ‘ho hai!’ was heard from us. in this state we
 crept on all fours for some distance back, and then ran for life
 with the speed of an arab horse for about half an hour, and
 fortunately happened to come to a small village.... after this
 every one of us was attacked with fever, attended with shivering,
 in which deplorable state we remained till
 morning.”—autobiography of lutfullah, a mohammedan
 gentleman, leipzig, , p. .
e.g., “our
 young people are diseased with the theological problems of original
 sin, origin of evil, predestination, and the like. these never
 presented a practical difficulty to any man—never darkened across
 any man's road, who did not go out of his way to seek them. these
 are the soul's mumps, and measles, and whooping-coughs,”
 etc. emerson: “spiritual laws.”
notes sur la vie, p. .
see, for example, f. paulhan, in his
 book les caractères, , who contrasts les equilibrés, les
 unifiés, with les inquiets, les contrariants, les incohérents, les
 emiettés, as so many diverse psychic types.
annie besant: an
 autobiography, p. .
smith baker, in journal of
 nervous and mental diseases, september, .
louis gourdon (essai sur
 la conversion de saint augustine, paris, fischbacher, ) has
 shown by an analysis of augustine's writings immediately after the
 date of his conversion (a. d. ) that the
 account he gives in the confessions is premature. the crisis in the
 garden marked a definitive conversion from his former life, but it
 was to the neo-platonic spiritualism and only a halfway stage
 toward christianity. the latter he appears not fully and radically
 to have embraced until four years more had passed.
confessions, book viii., chaps. v.,
 vii., xi., abridged.
th.
 jouffroy: nouveaux mélanges philosophiques, me
 édition, p. . i add two other cases of counter-conversion
 dating from a certain moment. the first is from professor
 starbuck's manuscript collection, and the narrator is a
 woman.
“away down in the bottom of my heart, i believe i was
 always more or less skeptical about ‘god;’ skepticism grew as an undercurrent, all
 through my early youth, but it was controlled and covered by the
 emotional elements in my religious growth. when i was sixteen i
 joined the church and was asked if i loved god. i replied
 ‘yes,’ as was customary and
 expected. but instantly with a flash something spoke within me,
 ‘no, you do not.’ i was haunted
 for a long time with shame and remorse for my falsehood and for
 my wickedness in not loving god, mingled with fear that there
 might be an avenging god who would punish me in some terrible
 way.... at nineteen, i had an attack of tonsilitis. before i had
 quite recovered, i heard told a story of a brute who had kicked
 his wife downstairs, and then continued the operation until she
 became insensible. i felt the horror of the thing keenly.
 instantly this thought flashed through my mind: ‘i have no use for a god who permits such
 things.’ this experience was followed by months of stoical
 indifference to the god of my previous life, mingled with
 feelings of positive dislike and a somewhat proud defiance of
 him. i still thought there might be a god. if so he would
 probably damn me, but i should have to stand it. i felt very
 little fear and no desire to propitiate him. i have never had any
 personal relations with him since this painful
 experience.”
the second
 case exemplifies how small an additional stimulus will overthrow
 the mind into a new state of equilibrium when the process of
 preparation and incubation has proceeded far enough. it is like
 the proverbial last straw added to the camel's burden, or that
 touch of a needle which makes the salt in a supersaturated fluid
 suddenly begin to crystallize out.
tolstoy
 writes: “s., a frank and intelligent man,
 told me as follows how he ceased to believe:—
“he was twenty-six years old when one day on a
 hunting expedition, the time for sleep having come, he set
 himself to pray according to the custom he had held from
 childhood.
“his brother, who was hunting with him, lay upon the
 hay and looked at him. when s. had finished his prayer and was
 turning to sleep, the brother said, ‘do
 you still keep up that thing?’ nothing more was said. but
 since that day, now more than thirty years ago, s. has never
 prayed again; he never takes communion, and does not go to
 church. all this, not because he became acquainted with
 convictions of his brother which he then and there adopted; not
 because he made any new resolution in his soul, but merely
 because the words spoken by his brother were like the light push
 of a finger against a leaning wall already about to tumble by its
 own weight. these words but showed him that the place wherein he
 supposed religion dwelt in him had long been empty, and that the
 sentences he uttered, the crosses and bows which he made during
 his prayer, were actions with no inner sense. having once seized
 their absurdity, he could no longer keep them up.” my
 confession, p. .
op. cit.,
 letter iii., abridged.
i subjoin an
 additional document which has come into my possession, and which
 represents in a vivid way what is probably a very frequent sort
 of conversion, if the opposite of “falling in love,” falling out of love, may be
 so termed. falling in love also conforms frequently to this type,
 a latent process of unconscious preparation often preceding a
 sudden awakening to the fact that the mischief is irretrievably
 done. the free and easy tone in this narrative gives it a
 sincerity that speaks for itself.
“for two years of this time i went through a very bad
 experience, which almost drove me mad. i had fallen violently in
 love with a girl who, young as she was, had a spirit of coquetry
 like a cat. as i look back on her now, i hate her, and wonder how
 i could ever have fallen so low as to be worked upon to such an
 extent by her attractions. nevertheless, i fell into a regular
 fever, could think of nothing else; whenever i was alone, i
 pictured her attractions, and spent most of the time when i
 should have been working, in recalling our previous interviews,
 and imagining future conversations. she was very pretty, good
 humored, and jolly to the last degree, and intensely pleased with
 my admiration. would give me no decided answer yes or no, and the
 queer thing about it was that whilst pursuing her for her hand, i
 secretly knew all along that she was unfit to be a wife for me,
 and that she never would say yes. although for a year we took our
 meals at the same boarding-house, so that i saw her continually
 and familiarly, our closer relations had to be largely on the
 sly, and this fact, together with my jealousy of another one of
 her male admirers, and my own conscience despising me for my
 uncontrollable weakness, made me so nervous and sleepless that i
 really thought i should become insane. i understand well those
 young men murdering their sweethearts, which appear so often in
 the papers. nevertheless i did love her passionately, and in some
 ways she did deserve it.
“the queer thing was the sudden and unexpected way in
 which it all stopped. i was going to my work after breakfast one
 morning, thinking as usual of her and of my misery, when, just as
 if some outside power laid hold of me, i found myself turning
 round and almost running to my room, where i immediately got out
 all the relics of her which i possessed, including some hair, all
 her notes and letters, and ambrotypes on glass. the former i made
 a fire of, the latter i actually crushed beneath my heel, in a
 sort of fierce joy of revenge and punishment. i now loathed and
 despised her altogether, and as for myself i felt as if a load of
 disease had suddenly been removed from me. that was the end. i
 never spoke to her or wrote to her again in all the subsequent
 years, and i have never had a single moment of loving thought
 towards one who for so many months entirely filled my heart. in
 fact, i have always rather hated her memory, though now i can see
 that i had gone unnecessarily far in that direction. at any rate,
 from that happy morning onward i regained possession of my own
 proper soul, and have never since fallen into any similar
 trap.”
this seems to
 me an unusually clear example of two different levels of
 personality, inconsistent in their dictates, yet so well balanced
 against each other as for a long time to fill the life with
 discord and dissatisfaction. at last, not gradually, but in a
 sudden crisis, the unstable equilibrium is resolved, and this
 happens so unexpectedly that it is as if, to use the writer's
 words, “some outside power laid
 hold.”
professor
 starbuck gives an analogous case, and a converse case of hatred
 suddenly turning into love, in his psychology of religion, p.
 . compare the other highly curious instances which he gives on
 pp. -, of sudden non-religious alterations of habit or
 character. he seems right in conceiving all such sudden changes
 as results of special cerebral functions unconsciously developing
 until they are ready to play a controlling part, when they make
 irruption into the conscious life. when we treat of sudden
 “conversion,” i shall make as much
 use as i can of this hypothesis of subconscious incubation.
h. fletcher: menticulture,
 or the a-b-c of true living, new york and chicago, , pp. -,
 abridged.
i have considerably abridged tolstoy's
 words in my translation.
in my quotations from bunyan i have
 omitted certain intervening portions of the text.
a sketch of the life of stephen h.
 bradley, from the age of five to twenty-four years, including his
 remarkable experience of the power of the holy spirit on the second
 evening of november, . madison, connecticut, .
jouffroy is an example: “down this slope it was that my intelligence had
 glided, and little by little it had got far from its first faith.
 but this melancholy revolution had not taken place in the broad
 daylight of my consciousness; too many scruples, too many guides
 and sacred affections had made it dreadful to me, so that i was far
 from avowing to myself the progress it had made. it had gone on in
 silence, by an involuntary elaboration of which i was not the
 accomplice; and although i had in reality long ceased to be a
 christian, yet, in the innocence of my intention, i should have
 shuddered to suspect it, and thought it calumny had i been accused
 of such a falling away.” then follows jouffroy's account of
 his counter-conversion, quoted above on p. .
one hardly needs examples; but for
 love, see p. , note;
 for fear, p. ; for
 remorse, see othello after the murder; for anger, see lear after
 cordelia's first speech to him; for resolve, see p.  (j. foster case). here is a
 pathological case in which guilt was the feeling that
 suddenly exploded: “one night i was seized
 on entering bed with a rigor, such as swedenborg describes as
 coming over him with a sense of holiness, but over me with a sense
 of guilt. during that whole night i
 lay under the influence of the rigor, and from its inception i felt
 that i was under the curse of god. i have never done one act of
 duty in my life—sins against god and man, beginning as far as my
 memory goes back—a wildcat in human shape.”
e. d. starbuck: the
 psychology of religion, pp. , .
no one understands this better than
 jonathan edwards understood it already. conversion narratives of
 the more commonplace sort must always be taken with the allowances
 which he suggests: “a rule received and
 established by common consent has a very great, though to many
 persons an insensible influence in forming their notions of the
 process of their own experience. i know very well how they proceed
 as to this matter, for i have had frequent opportunities of
 observing their conduct. very often their experience at first
 appears like a confused chaos, but then those parts are selected
 which bear the nearest resemblance to such particular steps as are
 insisted on; and these are dwelt upon in their thoughts, and spoken
 of from time to time, till they grow more and more conspicuous in
 their view, and other parts which are neglected grow more and more
 obscure. thus what they have experienced is insensibly strained, so
 as to bring it to an exact conformity to the scheme already
 established in their minds. and it becomes natural also for
 ministers, who have to deal with those who insist upon distinctness
 and clearness of method, to do so too.” treatise on
 religious affections.
studies in the psychology of religious
 phenomena, american journal of psychology, vii.  ().
i have abridged mr. hadley's account.
 for other conversions of drunkards, see his pamphlet, rescue
 mission work, published at the old jerry m'auley water street
 mission, new york city. a striking collection of cases also appears
 in the appendix to professor leuba's article.
a restaurant waiter served
 provisionally as gough's “saviour.”
 general booth, the founder of the salvation army, considers that
 the first vital step in saving outcasts consists in making them
 feel that some decent human being cares enough for them to take an
 interest in the question whether they are to rise or sink.
the crisis of apathetic melancholy—no
 use in life—into which j. s. mill records that he fell, and from
 which he emerged by the reading of marmontel's memoirs (heaven save
 the mark!) and wordsworth's poetry, is another intellectual and
 general metaphysical case. see mill's autobiography, new york,
 , pp. , .
starbuck, in addition to “escape from sin,” discriminates “spiritual illumination” as a distinct type of
 conversion experience. psychology of religion, p. .
psychology of religion, p. .
psychology of religion, p. .
 compare, also, pp. - and .
for instance, c. g. finney italicizes
 the volitional element: “just at this point
 the whole question of gospel salvation opened to my mind in a
 manner most marvelous to me at the time. i think i then saw, as
 clearly as i ever have in my life, the reality and fullness of the
 atonement of christ. gospel salvation seemed to me to be an offer
 of something to be accepted, and all that was necessary on my part
 was to get my own consent to give up my sins and accept christ.
 after this distinct revelation had stood for some little time
 before my mind, the question seemed to be put, ‘will you accept it now, to-day?’ i replied,
 ‘yes; i will accept it to-day, or i will die in the
 attempt!’ ” he then went into the woods,
 where he describes his struggles. he could not pray, his heart was
 hardened in its pride. “i then reproached
 myself for having promised to give my heart to god before i left
 the woods. when i came to try, i found i could not.... my inward
 soul hung back, and there was no going out of my heart to god. the
 thought was pressing me, of the rashness of my promise that i would
 give my heart to god that day, or die in the attempt. it seemed to
 me as if that was binding on my soul; and yet i was going to break
 my vow. a great sinking and discouragement came over me, and i felt
 almost too weak to stand upon my knees. just at this moment i again
 thought i heard some one approach me, and i opened my eyes to see
 whether it were so. but right there the revelation of my pride of
 heart, as the great difficulty that stood in the way, was
 distinctly shown to me. an overwhelming sense of my wickedness in
 being ashamed to have a human being see me on my knees before god
 took such powerful possession of me, that i cried at the top of
 my voice, and exclaimed that i would not leave that place if all
 the men on earth and all the devils in hell surrounded
 me. ‘what!’ i said,
 ‘such a degraded sinner as i am, on my
 knees confessing my sins to the great and holy god; and ashamed to
 have any human being, and a sinner like myself, find me on my knees
 endeavoring to make my peace with my offended god!’ the sin
 appeared awful, infinite. it broke me down before the lord.”
 memoirs, pp. -, abridged.
starbuck: op. cit., pp.
extracts from the journal of mr. john
 nelson, london, no date, p. .
starbuck, p. .
starbuck, p. .
starbuck, p. .
edward's and dwight's life of brainerd,
 new haven, , pp. -, abridged.
describing the whole phenomenon as a
 change of equilibrium, we might say that the movement of new
 psychic energies towards the personal centre and the recession of
 old ones towards the margin (or the rising of some objects above,
 and the sinking of others below the conscious threshold) were only
 two ways of describing an indivisible event. doubtless this is
 often absolutely true, and starbuck is right when he says that
 “self-surrender” and “new determination,” though seeming at first
 sight to be such different experiences, are “really the same thing. self-surrender sees the change
 in terms of the old self; determination sees it in terms of the
 new.” op. cit., p. .
a. a. bonar: nettleton and
 his labors, edinburgh, , p. .
charles g. finney: memoirs
 written by himself, , pp. , .
life and journals, boston, , pp.
 -, abridged.
my quotations are made from an italian
 translation of this letter in the biografia del sig. m. a.
 ratisbonne, ferrara, , which i have to thank monsignore d.
 o'connell of rome for bringing to my notice. i abridge the
 original.
published in the international
 scientific series.
the reader will here please notice
 that in my exclusive reliance in the last lecture on the
 subconscious “incubation” of motives
 deposited by a growing experience, i followed the method of
 employing accepted principles of explanation as far as one can. the
 subliminal region, whatever else it may be, is at any rate a place
 now admitted by psychologists to exist for the accumulation of
 vestiges of sensible experience (whether inattentively or
 attentively registered), and for their elaboration according to
 ordinary psychological or logical laws into results that end by
 attaining such a “tension” that they
 may at times enter consciousness with something like a burst. it
 thus is “scientific” to interpret
 all otherwise unaccountable invasive alterations of consciousness
 as results of the tension of subliminal memories reaching the
 bursting-point. but candor obliges me to confess that there are
 occasional bursts into consciousness of results of which it is not
 easy to demonstrate any prolonged subconscious incubation. some of
 the cases i used to illustrate the sense of presence of the unseen
 in lecture iii were
 of this order (compare pages , ,
 , ); and we shall see other experiences of
 the kind when we come to the subject of mysticism. the case of mr.
 bradley, that of m. ratisbonne, possibly that of colonel gardiner,
 possibly that of saint paul, might not be so easily explained in
 this simple way. the result, then, would have to be ascribed either
 to a merely physiological nerve storm, a “discharging lesion” like that of epilepsy; or,
 in case it were useful and rational, as in the two latter cases
 named, to some more mystical or theological hypothesis. i make this
 remark in order that the reader may realize that the subject is
 really complex. but i shall keep myself as far as possible at
 present to the more “scientific”
 view; and only as the plot thickens in subsequent lectures shall i
 consider the question of its absolute sufficiency as an explanation
 of all the facts. that subconscious incubation explains a great
 number of them, there can be no doubt.
edwards says elsewhere: “i am bold to say that the work of god in the
 conversion of one soul, considered together with the source,
 foundation, and purchase of it, and also the benefit, end, and
 eternal issue of it, is a more glorious work of god than the
 creation of the whole material universe.”
emerson writes: “when we see a soul whose acts are regal, graceful, and
 pleasant as roses, we must thank god that such things can be and
 are, and not turn sourly on the angel and say: crump is a better
 man, with his grunting resistance to all his native devils.”
 true enough. yet crump may really be the better crump,
 for his inner discords and second birth; and your once-born
 “regal” character, though indeed
 always better than poor crump, may fall far short of what he
 individually might be had he only some crump-like capacity for
 compunction over his own peculiar diabolisms, graceful and pleasant
 and invariably gentlemanly as these may be.
in his book, the spiritual life, new
 york, .
op. cit., p. .
op. cit., p. .
i piece together a quotation made by
 w. monod, in his book la vie, and a letter printed in the work:
 adolphe monod: i., souvenirs de sa vie, , p. .
commentary on galatians, ch. iii.
 verse , and ch. ii. verse , abridged.
in some
 conversions, both steps are distinct; in this one, for
 example:—
“whilst i was reading the evangelical treatise, i was
 soon struck by an expression: ‘the
 finished work of christ.’ ‘why,’ i asked of myself, ‘does the author use these terms? why does he not say
 “the atoning work”?’ then
 these words, ‘it is finished,’
 presented themselves to my mind. ‘what is
 it that is finished?’ i asked, and in an instant my mind
 replied: ‘a perfect expiation for sin;
 entire satisfaction has been given; the debt has been paid by the
 substitute. christ has died for our sins; not for ours only, but
 for those of all men. if, then, the entire work is finished, all
 the debt paid, what remains for me to do?’ in another
 instant the light was shed through my mind by the holy ghost, and
 the joyous conviction was given me that nothing more was to be
 done, save to fall on my knees, to accept this saviour and his
 love, to praise god forever.” autobiography of hudson
 taylor. i translate back into english from the french translation
 of challand (geneva, no date), the original not being
 accessible.
tolstoy's case was a good comment on
 those words. there was almost no theology in his conversion. his
 faith-state was the sense come back that life was infinite in its
 moral significance.
american journal of psychology, vii.
 -, abridged.
above, p. .
dwight: life of edwards,
 new york, , p. , abridged.
w. f. bourne: the king's
 son, a memoir of billy bray, london, hamilton, adams & co.,
 , p. .
consult william b.
 sprague: lectures on revivals of religion, new york,
 , in the long appendix to which the opinions of a large number
 of ministers are given.
memoirs, p. .
these reports
 of sensorial photism shade off into what are evidently only
 metaphorical accounts of the sense of new spiritual illumination,
 as, for instance, in brainerd's statement: “as i was walking in a thick grove, unspeakable glory
 seemed to open to the apprehension of my soul. i do not mean any
 external brightness, for i saw no such thing, nor any imagination
 of a body of light in the third heavens, or anything of that
 nature, but it was a new inward apprehension or view that i had
 of god.”
in a case like
 this next one from starbuck's manuscript collection, the lighting
 up of the darkness is probably also metaphorical:—
“one sunday night, i resolved that when i got home to
 the ranch where i was working, i would offer myself with my
 faculties and all to god to be used only by and for him.... it
 was raining and the roads were muddy; but this desire grew so
 strong that i kneeled down by the side of the road and told god
 all about it, intending then to get up and go on. such a thing as
 any special answer to my prayer never entered my mind, having
 been converted by faith, but still being most undoubtedly saved.
 well, while i was praying, i remember holding out my hands to god
 and telling him they should work for him, my feet walk for him,
 my tongue speak for him, etc., etc., if he would only use me as
 his instrument and give me a satisfying experience—when suddenly
 the darkness of the night seemed lit up—i felt, realized, knew,
 that god heard and answered my prayer. deep happiness came over
 me; i felt i was accepted into the inner circle of god's loved
 ones.”
in the
 following case also the flash of light is metaphorical:—
“a prayer meeting had been called for at close of
 evening service. the minister supposed me impressed by his
 discourse (a mistake—he was dull). he came and, placing his hand
 upon my shoulder, said: ‘do you not want
 to give your heart to god?’ i replied in the affirmative.
 then said he, ‘come to the front
 seat.’ they sang and prayed and talked with me. i
 experienced nothing but unaccountable wretchedness. they declared
 that the reason why i did not ‘obtain
 peace’ was because i was not willing to give up all to
 god. after about two hours the minister said we would go home. as
 usual, on retiring, i prayed. in great distress, i at this time
 simply said, ‘lord, i have done all i
 can, i leave the whole matter with thee.’ immediately,
 like a flash of light, there came to me a great peace, and i
 arose and went into my parents' bedroom and said, ‘i do feel so wonderfully happy.’ this i
 regard as the hour of conversion. it was the hour in which i
 became assured of divine acceptance and favor. so far as my life
 was concerned, it made little immediate change.”
i add in a
 note a few more records:—
“one morning, being in deep distress, fearing every
 moment i should drop into hell, i was constrained to cry in
 earnest for mercy, and the lord came to my relief, and delivered
 my soul from the burden and guilt of sin. my whole frame was in a
 tremor from head to foot, and my soul enjoyed sweet peace. the
 pleasure i then felt was indescribable. the happiness lasted
 about three days, during which time i never spoke to any person
 about my feelings.” autobiography of dan
 young, edited by w. p.
 strickland, new york, .
“in an instant there rose up in me such a sense of
 god's taking care of those who put their trust in him that for an
 hour all the world was crystalline, the heavens were lucid, and i
 sprang to my feet and began to cry and laugh.”
h. w. beecher, quoted by
 leuba.
“my tears of sorrow changed to joy, and i lay there
 praising god in such ecstasy of joy as only the soul who
 experiences it can realize.”—“i
 cannot express how i felt. it was as if i had been in a dark
 dungeon and lifted into the light of the sun. i shouted and i
 sang praise unto him who loved me and washed me from my sins. i
 was forced to retire into a secret place, for the tears did flow,
 and i did not wish my shopmates to see me, and yet i could not
 keep it a secret.”—“i experienced
 joy almost to weeping.”—“i felt my
 face must have shone like that of moses. i had a general feeling
 of buoyancy. it was the greatest joy it was ever my lot to
 experience.”—“i wept and laughed
 alternately. i was as light as if walking on air. i felt as if i
 had gained greater peace and happiness than i had ever expected
 to experience.” starbuck's
 correspondents.
psychology of religion, pp. ,
sainte-beuve: port-royal,
 vol. i. pp.  and , abridged.
“ ‘love would not be love,’ says bourget,
 ‘unless it could carry one to
 crime.’ and so one may say that no passion would be a
 veritable passion unless it could carry one to crime.”
 (sighele: psychologie des
 sectes, p. .) in other words, great passions annul the ordinary
 inhibitions set by “conscience.” and
 conversely, of all the criminal human beings, the false, cowardly,
 sensual, or cruel persons who actually live, there is perhaps not
 one whose criminal impulse may not be at some moment overpowered by
 the presence of some other emotion to which his character is also
 potentially liable, provided that other emotion be only made
 intense enough. fear is usually the most available emotion for this
 result in this particular class of persons. it stands for
 conscience, and may here be classed appropriately as a “higher affection.” if we are soon to die, or if
 we believe a day of judgment to be near at hand, how quickly do we
 put our moral house in order—we do not see how sin can evermore
 exert temptation over us! old-fashioned hell-fire christianity well
 knew how to extract from fear its full equivalent in the way of
 fruits for repentance, and its full conversion value.
example: benjamin constant was often
 marveled at as an extraordinary instance of superior intelligence
 with inferior character. he writes (journal, paris, , p. ),
 “i am tossed and dragged about by my
 miserable weakness. never was anything so ridiculous as my
 indecision. now marriage, now solitude; now germany, now france,
 hesitation upon hesitation, and all because at bottom i am
 unable to
 give up anything.” he can't “get mad” at any of his alternatives; and the
 career of a man beset by such an all-round amiability is
 hopeless.
the great thing which the higher
 excitabilities give is courage; and the addition or
 subtraction of a certain amount of this quality makes a different
 man, a different life. various excitements let the courage loose.
 trustful hope will do it; inspiring example will do it; love will
 do it; wrath will do it. in some people it is natively so high that
 the mere touch of danger does it, though danger is for most men the
 great inhibitor of action. “love of
 adventure” becomes in such persons a ruling passion.
 “i believe,” says general skobeleff,
 “that my bravery is simply the passion and
 at the same time the contempt of danger. the risk of life fills me
 with an exaggerated rapture. the fewer there are to share it, the
 more i like it. the participation of my body in the event is
 required to furnish me an adequate excitement. everything
 intellectual appears to me to be reflex; but a meeting of man to
 man, a duel, a danger into which i can throw myself headforemost,
 attracts me, moves me, intoxicates me. i am crazy for it, i love
 it, i adore it. i run after danger as one runs after women; i wish
 it never to stop. were it always the same, it would always bring me
 a new pleasure. when i throw myself into an adventure in which i
 hope to find it, my heart palpitates with the uncertainty; i could
 wish at once to have it appear and yet to delay. a sort of painful
 and delicious shiver shakes me; my entire nature runs to meet the
 peril with an impetus that my will would in vain try to
 resist.” (juliette adam: le général
 skobeleff, nouvelle revue, , abridged.) skobeleff seems to have
 been a cruel egoist; but the disinterested garibaldi, if one may
 judge by his “memorie,” lived in an
 unflagging emotion of similar danger-seeking excitement.
see the case on p. , above, where the writer describes his
 experiences of communion with the divine as consisting “merely in the temporary obliteration of the
 conventionalities which usually cover my
 life.”
above, p. . “the only radical
 remedy i know for dipsomania is religiomania,” is a saying i
 have heard quoted from some medical man.
doddridge's life of colonel james
 gardiner, london religious tract society, pp. -.
here, for
 example, is a case, from starbuck's book, in which a “sensory automatism” brought about quickly
 what prayers and resolves had been unable to effect. the subject
 is a woman. she writes:—
“when i was about forty i tried to quit smoking, but
 the desire was on me, and had me in its power. i cried and prayed
 and promised god to quit, but could not. i had smoked for fifteen
 years. when i was fifty-three, as i sat by the fire one day
 smoking, a voice came to me. i did not hear it with my ears, but
 more as a dream or sort of double think. it said, ‘louisa, lay down smoking.’ at once i replied,
 ‘will you take the desire away?’
 but it only kept saying: ‘louisa, lay
 down smoking.’ then i got up, laid my pipe on the
 mantel-shelf, and never smoked again or had any desire to. the
 desire was gone as though i had never known it or touched
 tobacco. the sight of others smoking and the smell of smoke never
 gave me the least wish to touch it again.” the psychology
 of religion, p. .
professor
 starbuck expresses the radical destruction of old influences
 physiologically, as a cutting off of the connection between
 higher and lower cerebral centres. “this
 condition,” he says, “in which the
 association-centres connected with the spiritual life are cut off
 from the lower, is often reflected in the way correspondents
 describe their experiences.... for example: ‘temptations from without still assail me, but there
 is nothing within to respond to
 them.’ the ego [here] is wholly identified with the higher
 centres, whose quality of feeling is that of withinness. another
 of the respondents says: ‘since then,
 although satan tempts me, there is as it were a wall of brass
 around me, so that his darts cannot touch
 me.’ ”—unquestionably, functional exclusions of
 this sort must occur in the cerebral organ. but on the side
 accessible to introspection, their causal condition is nothing
 but the degree of spiritual excitement, getting at last so high
 and strong as to be sovereign; and it must be frankly confessed
 that we do not know just why or how such sovereignty comes about
 in one person and not in another. we can only give our
 imagination a certain delusive help by mechanical analogies.
if we should
 conceive, for example, that the human mind, with its different
 possibilities of equilibrium, might be like a many-sided solid
 with different surfaces on which it could lie flat, we might
 liken mental revolutions to the spatial revolutions of such a
 body. as it is pried up, say by a lever, from a position in which
 it lies on surface a, for instance, it will linger for a time
 unstably halfway up, and if the lever cease to urge it, it will
 tumble back or “relapse” under the
 continued pull of gravity. but if at last it rotate far enough
 for its centre of gravity to pass beyond surface a altogether,
 the body will fall over, on surface b, say, and abide there
 permanently. the pulls of gravity towards a have vanished, and
 may now be disregarded. the polyhedron has become immune against
 farther attraction from their direction.
in this figure
 of speech the lever may correspond to the emotional influences
 making for a new life, and the initial pull of gravity to the
 ancient drawbacks and inhibitions. so long as the emotional
 influence fails to reach a certain pitch of efficacy, the changes
 it produces are unstable, and the man relapses into his original
 attitude. but when a certain intensity is attained by the new
 emotion, a critical point is passed, and there then ensues an
 irreversible revolution, equivalent to the production of a new
 nature.
i use this word in spite of a certain
 flavor of “sanctimoniousness” which
 sometimes clings to it, because no other word suggests as well the
 exact combination of affections which the text goes on to
 describe.
“it will be
 found,” says dr. w. r. inge (in his
 lectures on christian mysticism, london, , p. ),
 “that men of preëminent saintliness agree
 very closely in what they tell us. they tell us that they have
 arrived at an unshakable conviction, not based on inference but on
 immediate experience, that god is a spirit with whom the human
 spirit can hold intercourse; that in him meet all that they can
 imagine of goodness, truth, and beauty; that they can see his
 footprints everywhere in nature, and feel his presence within them
 as the very life of their life, so that in proportion as they come
 to themselves they come to him. they tell us what separates us from
 him and from happiness is, first, self-seeking in all its forms;
 and, secondly, sensuality in all its forms; that these are the ways
 of darkness and death, which hide from us the face of god; while
 the path of the just is like a shining light, which shineth more
 and more unto the perfect day.”
the
 “enthusiasm of humanity” may lead
 to a life which coalesces in many respects with that of christian
 saintliness. take the following rules proposed to members of the
 union pour l'action morale, in the bulletin de l'union, april
 -, . see, also, revue bleue, august , .
“we would make known in our own persons the
 usefulness of rule, of discipline, of resignation and
 renunciation; we would teach the necessary perpetuity of
 suffering, and explain the creative part which it plays. we would
 wage war upon false optimism; on the base hope of happiness
 coming to us ready made; on the notion of a salvation by
 knowledge alone, or by material civilization alone, vain symbol
 as this is of civilization, precarious external arrangement,
 ill-fitted to replace the intimate union and consent of souls. we
 would wage war also on bad morals, whether in public or in
 private life; on luxury, fastidiousness, and over-refinement; on
 all that tends to increase the painful, immoral, and anti-social
 multiplication of our wants; on all that excites envy and dislike
 in the soul of the common people, and confirms the notion that
 the chief end of life is freedom to enjoy. we would preach by our
 example the respect of superiors and equals, the respect of all
 men; affectionate simplicity in our relations with inferiors and
 insignificant persons; indulgence where our own claims only are
 concerned, but firmness in our demands where they relate to
 duties towards others or towards the public.
“for the common people are what we help them to
 become; their vices are our vices, gazed upon, envied, and
 imitated; and if they come back with all their weight upon us, it
 is but just.”
above, pp.  ff.
h. thoreau: walden,
 riverside edition, p. , abridged.
c. h. hilty: glück, vol.
 i. p. .
the mystery of pain and death, london,
 , p. .
compare madame guyon: “it was my practice to arise at midnight for purposes
 of devotion.... it seemed to me that god came at the precise time
 and woke me from sleep in order that i might enjoy him. when i was
 out of health or greatly fatigued, he did not awake me, but at such
 times i felt, even in my sleep, a singular possession of god. he
 loved me so much that he seemed to pervade my being, at a time when
 i could be only imperfectly conscious of his presence. my sleep is
 sometimes broken,—a sort of half sleep; but my soul seems to be
 awake enough to know god, when it is hardly capable of knowing
 anything else.” t. c. upham: the life and
 religious experiences of madame de la mothe guyon, new york, ,
 vol. i. p. .
i have considerably abridged the words
 of the original, which is given in edwards's narrative of the
 revival in new england.
bougaud: hist. de la
 bienheureuse marguerite marie, , p. .
paris, .
page .
page .
op. cit., p. .
the barrier between men and animals
 also. we read of towianski, an eminent polish patriot and mystic,
 that “one day one of his friends met him in
 the rain, caressing a big dog which was jumping upon him and
 covering him horribly with mud. on being asked why he permitted the
 animal thus to dirty his clothes, towianski replied: ‘this dog, whom i am now meeting for the first time,
 has shown a great fellow-feeling for me, and a great joy in my
 recognition and acceptance of his greetings. were i to drive him
 off, i should wound his feelings and do him a moral injury. it
 would be an offense not only to him, but to all the spirits of the
 other world who are on the same level with him. the damage which he
 does to my coat is as nothing in comparison with the wrong which i
 should inflict upon him, in case i were to remain indifferent to
 the manifestations of his friendship. we ought,’ he added,
 ‘both to lighten the condition of animals,
 whenever we can, and at the same time to facilitate in ourselves
 that union of the world of all spirits, which the sacrifice of
 christ has made possible.’ ” andré towianski,
 traduction de l'italien, turin,  (privately printed). i owe my
 knowledge of this book and of towianski to my friend professor w.
 lutoslawski, author of “plato's
 logic.”
j. patterson's life of
 richard weaver, pp. -, abridged.
as where the future buddha, incarnated
 as a hare, jumps into the fire to cook himself for a meal for a
 beggar—having previously shaken himself three times, so that none
 of the insects in his fur should perish with him.
bulletin de l'union pour l'action
 morale, september, .
b. pascal: prières pour
 les maladies, §§ xiii., xiv., abridged.
from thomas c.
 upham's life and religious opinions and experiences
 of madame de la mothe guyon, new york, , ii. , i. , ,
 abridged.
op. cit., london, , p. .
claparède et goty: deux héroines de la
 foi, paris, , p. .
compare these three different
 statements of it: a. p. call: as a matter of
 course, boston, ; h. w. dresser: living by
 the spirit, new york and london, ; h. w.
 smith: the christian's secret of a happy life,
 published by the willard tract repository, and now in thousands of
 hands.
t. c. upham: life of
 madame catharine adorna, d ed., new york, , pp. ,
the history of thomas
 elwood, written by himself, london, , pp.
memoirs of w.e. channing, boston,
 , i. .
l. tyerman: the life and
 times of the rev. john wesley, i. .
a. mounin: le curé d'ars,
 vie de m. j. b. m. vianney, , p. , abridged.
b. wendell: cotton mather,
 new york, no date, p. .
that of the earlier jesuit,
 rodriguez, which has been
 translated into all languages, is one of the best known. a
 convenient modern manual, very well put together, is l'ascétique
 chrétienne, by m. j. ribet, paris,
 poussielgue, nouvelle édition, .
saint jean de la croix,
 vie et œuvres, paris, , ii. , , abridged.
“insects,” i.e. lice, were an unfailing token of
 mediæval sainthood. we read of francis of assisi's sheepskin that
 “often a companion of the saint would take
 it to the fire to clean and dispediculate it, doing so, as he
 said, because the seraphic father himself was no enemy of
 pedocchi, but on the contrary kept
 them on him (le portava adosso), and held it for an honor and a
 glory to wear these celestial pearls in his habit.” quoted
 by p. sabatier: speculum
 perfectionis, etc., paris, , p. , note.
the life of the blessed henry
 suso, by himself, translated by t. f.
 knox, london, , pp. -, abridged.
bougaud: hist. de la
 bienheureuse marguerite marie, paris, , pp. , . compare,
 also, pp. , .
lejeune: introduction à la
 vie mystique, , p. . the holocaust simile goes back at least
 as far as ignatius loyola.
alfonso rodriguez, s. j.:
 pratique de la perfection chrétienne, part iii., treatise v., ch.
 x.
letters li. and cxx. of the collection
 translated into french by bouix, paris, .
bartoli-michel, ii.
rodriguez: op. cit., part
 iii., treatise v., ch. vi.
sainte-beuve: histoire de
 port royal, i. .
rodriguez: op. cit., part
 iii., treatise iii., chaps. vi., vii.
r. philip: the life and
 times of george whitefield, london, , p. .
edward carpenter: towards
 democracy, p. , abridged.
speculum perfectionis, ed.
 sabatier, paris, , pp. , .
an apology for
 m. antonia bourignon, london, , pp. , , abridged.
another
 example from starbuck's ms. collection:—
“at a meeting held at six the next morning, i heard a
 man relate his experience. he said: the lord asked him if he
 would confess christ among the quarrymen with whom he worked, and
 he said he would. then he asked him if he would give up to be
 used of the lord the four hundred dollars he had laid up, and he
 said he would, and thus the lord saved him. the thought came to
 me at once that i had never made a real consecration either of
 myself or of my property to the lord, but had always tried to
 serve the lord in my way. now the lord asked me if
 i would serve him in his way, and go out alone and
 penniless if he so ordered. the question was pressed home, and i
 must decide: to forsake all and have him, or have all and lose
 him! i soon decided to take him; and the blessed assurance came,
 that he had taken me for his own, and my joy was full. i returned
 home from the meeting with feelings as simple as a child. i
 thought all would be glad to hear of the joy of the lord that
 possessed me, and so i began to tell the simple story. but to my
 great surprise, the pastors (for i attended meetings in three
 churches) opposed the experience and said it was fanaticism, and
 one told the members of his church to shun those that professed
 it, and i soon found that my foes were those of my own
 household.”
j. j. chapman, in the
 political nursery, vol. iv. p. , april, , abridged.
george fox: journal,
 philadelphia, , pp. -, abridged.
christian saints have had their
 specialties of devotion, saint francis to christ's wounds; saint
 anthony of padua to christ's childhood; saint bernard to his
 humanity; saint teresa to saint joseph, etc. the shi-ite
 mohammedans venerate ali, the prophet's son-in-law, instead of
 abu-bekr, his brother-in-law. vambéry describes a dervish whom he
 met in persia, “who had solemnly vowed,
 thirty years before, that he would never employ his organs of
 speech otherwise but in uttering, everlastingly, the name of his
 favorite, ali, ali. he thus wished to
 signify to the world that he was the most devoted partisan of that
 ali who had been dead a thousand years. in his own home, speaking
 with his wife, children, and friends, no other word but
 ‘ali!’ ever passed his lips. if he
 wanted food or drink or anything else, he expressed his wants still
 by repeating ‘ali!’ begging or
 buying at the bazaar, it was always ‘ali!’ treated ill or generously, he would still
 harp on his monotonous ‘ali!’
 latterly his zeal assumed such tremendous proportions that, like a
 madman, he would race, the whole day, up and down the streets of
 the town, throwing his stick high up into the air, and shriek out,
 all the while, at the top of his voice, ‘ali!’ this dervish was venerated by everybody
 as a saint, and received everywhere with the greatest
 distinction.” arminius vambéry, his life
 and adventures, written by himself, london, , p. . on the
 anniversary of the death of hussein, ali's son, the shi-ite moslems
 still make the air resound with cries of his name and ali's.
compare h. c.
 warren: buddhism in translation, cambridge, u. s.,
 , passim.
compare j. l.
 merrick: the life and religion of mohammed, as
 contained in the sheeah traditions of the hyat-ul-kuloob, boston,
 , passim.
bougaud: hist. de la
 bienheureuse marguerite marie, paris, , p. .
bougaud: hist. de la
 bienheureuse marguerite marie, paris, , pp. , .
bougaud: op. cit., p.
examples:
 “suffering from a headache, she sought,
 for the glory of god, to relieve herself by holding certain
 odoriferous substances in her mouth, when the lord appeared to
 her to lean over towards her lovingly, and to find comfort
 himself in these odors. after having gently breathed them in, he
 arose, and said with a gratified air to the saints, as if
 contented with what he had done: ‘see the
 new present which my betrothed has given me!’
“one day, at chapel, she heard supernaturally sung
 the words, ‘sanctus, sanctus,
 sanctus.’ the son of god leaning towards her
 like a sweet lover, and giving to her soul the softest kiss, said
 to her at the second sanctus: ‘in this
 sanctus addressed to my
 person, receive with this kiss all the sanctity of my divinity
 and of my humanity, and let it be to thee a sufficient
 preparation for approaching the communion table.’ and the
 next following sunday, while she was thanking god for this favor,
 behold the son of god, more beauteous than thousands of angels,
 takes her in his arms as if he were proud of her, and presents
 her to god the father, in that perfection of sanctity with which
 he had dowered her. and the father took such delight in this soul
 thus presented by his only son, that, as if unable longer to
 restrain himself, he gave her, and the holy ghost gave her also,
 the sanctity attributed to each by his own sanctus—and thus she remained
 endowed with the plenary fullness of the blessing of sanctity, bestowed on her by
 omnipotence, by wisdom, and by love.” révélations de
 sainte gertrude, paris, , i. , .
furneaux jordan: character
 in birth and parentage, first edition. later editions change the
 nomenclature.
as to this distinction, see the
 admirably practical account in j. m.
 baldwin's little book, the story of the mind,
on this subject i refer to the work of
 murisier (les maladies du sentiment religieux, paris,
 ), who makes inner unification the mainspring of the whole
 religious life. but all strongly ideal interests,
 religious or irreligious, unify the mind and tend to subordinate
 everything to themselves. one would infer from m. murisier's pages
 that this formal condition was peculiarly characteristic of
 religion, and that one might in comparison almost neglect material
 content, in studying the latter. i trust that the present work will
 convince the reader that religion has plenty of material content
 which is characteristic, and which is more important by far than
 any general psychological form. in spite of this criticism, i find
 m. murisier's book highly instructive.
example: “at
 the first beginning of the servitor's [suso's] interior life, after
 he had purified his soul properly by confession, he marked out for
 himself, in thought, three circles, within which he shut himself
 up, as in a spiritual intrenchment. the first circle was his cell,
 his chapel, and the choir. when he was within this circle, he
 seemed to himself in complete security. the second circle was the
 whole monastery as far as the outer gate. the third and outermost
 circle was the gate itself, and here it was necessary for him to
 stand well upon his guard. when he went outside these circles, it
 seemed to him that he was in the plight of some wild animal which
 is outside its hole, and surrounded by the hunt, and therefore in
 need of all its cunning and watchfulness.” the life of the
 blessed henry suso, by himself, translated by knox, london, , p.
vie des premières religieuses
 dominicaines de la congrégation de st. dominique, à nancy; nancy,
 , p. .
meschler's life of saint
 louis of gonzaga, french translation by lebréquier, ; p.
