 understanding that knows it. thus the tremendous petitio principii reveals itself
 unexpectedly; for suddenly the last link is seen to be the
 starting-point, the chain a circle, and the materialist is like
 baron münchausen who, when swimming in water on horseback, drew the
 horse into the air with his legs, [pg ] and himself also by his cue. the fundamental
 absurdity of materialism is that it starts from the objective, and takes as the
 ultimate ground of explanation something objective, whether it be matter in
 the abstract, simply as it is thought, or after it has taken
 form, is empirically given—that is to say, is substance, the chemical element
 with its primary relations. some such thing it takes, as existing
 absolutely and in itself, in order that it may evolve organic
 nature and finally the knowing subject from it, and explain them
 adequately by means of it; whereas in truth all that is objective
 is already determined as such in manifold ways by the knowing
 subject through its forms of knowing, and presupposes them; and
 consequently it entirely disappears if we think the subject away.
 thus materialism is the attempt to explain what is immediately
 given us by what is given us indirectly. all that is objective,
 extended, active—that is to say, all that is material—is regarded
 by materialism as affording so solid a basis for its explanation,
 that a reduction of everything to this can leave nothing to be
 desired (especially if in ultimate analysis this reduction should
 resolve itself into action and reaction). but we have shown that
 all this is given indirectly and in the highest degree determined,
 and is therefore merely a relatively present object, for it has
 passed through the machinery and manufactory of the brain, and has
 thus come under the forms of space, time and causality, by means of
 which it is first presented to us as extended in space and ever
 active in time. from such an indirectly given object, materialism
 seeks to explain what is immediately given, the idea (in which
 alone the object that materialism starts with exists), and finally
 even the will from which all those fundamental forces, that
 manifest themselves, under the guidance of causes, and therefore
 according to law, are in truth to be explained. to the assertion
 that thought is a modification of matter we may always, with equal
 right, oppose the contrary assertion that all [pg ] matter is merely the modification of
 the knowing subject, as its idea. yet the aim and ideal of all
 natural science is at bottom a consistent materialism. the
 recognition here of the obvious impossibility of such a system
 establishes another truth which will appear in the course of our
 exposition, the truth that all science properly so called, by which
 i understand systematic knowledge under the guidance of the
 principle of sufficient reason, can never reach its final goal, nor
 give a complete and adequate explanation: for it is not concerned
 with the inmost nature of the world, it cannot get beyond the idea;
 indeed, it really teaches nothing more than the relation of one
 idea to another.
every science
 must start from two principal data. one of these is always the
 principle of sufficient reason in some form or another, as organon;
 the other is its special object as problem. thus, for example,
 geometry has space as problem, and the ground of existence in space
 as organon. arithmetic has time as problem, and the ground of
 existence in time as organon. logic has the combination of concepts
 as such as problem, and the ground of knowledge as organon. history
 has the past acts of men treated as a whole as problem, and the law
 of human motives as organon. natural science has matter as problem,
 and the law of causality as organon. its end and aim is therefore,
 by the guidance of causality, to refer all possible states of
 matter to other states, and ultimately to one single state; and
 again to deduce these states from each other, and ultimately from
 one single state. thus two states of matter stand over against each
 other in natural science as extremes: that state in which matter is
 furthest from being the immediate object of the subject, and that
 state in which it is most completely such an immediate object,
 i.e., the most dead and crude
 matter, the primary element, as the one extreme, and the human
 organism as the other. natural science as chemistry seeks for the
 first, as physiology for the second. [pg ] but as yet neither extreme has been reached,
 and it is only in the intermediate ground that something has been
 won. the prospect is indeed somewhat hopeless. the chemists, under
 the presupposition that the qualitative division of matter is not,
 like quantitative division, an endless process, are always trying
 to decrease the number of the elements, of which there are still
 about sixty; and if they were to succeed in reducing them to two,
 they would still try to find the common root of these. for, on the
 one hand, the law of homogeneity leads to the assumption of a
 primary chemical state of matter, which alone belongs to matter as
 such, and precedes all others which are not essentially matter as
 such, but merely contingent forms and qualities. on the other hand,
 we cannot understand how this one state could ever experience a
 chemical change, if there did not exist a second state to affect
 it. thus the same difficulty appears in chemistry which epicurus
 met with in mechanics. for he had to show how the first atom
 departed from the original direction of its motion. indeed this
 contradiction, which develops entirely of itself and can neither be
 escaped nor solved, might quite properly be set up as a chemical
 antinomy. thus an antinomy appears
 in the one extreme of natural science, and a corresponding one will
 appear in the other. there is just as little hope of reaching this
 opposite extreme of natural science, for we see ever more clearly
 that what is chemical can never be referred to what is mechanical,
 nor what is organic to what is chemical or electrical. those who in
 our own day are entering anew on this old, misleading path, will
 soon slink back silent and ashamed, as all their predecessors have
 done before them. we shall consider this more fully in the second
 book. natural science encounters the difficulties which we have
 cursorily mentioned, in its own province. regarded as philosophy,
 it would further be materialism; but this, as we have seen, even at
 its birth, has death in its heart, because it ignores [pg ] the subject and the forms of knowledge,
 which are presupposed, just as much in the case of the crudest
 matter, from which it desires to start, as in that of the organism,
 at which it desires to arrive. for, “no
 object without a subject,” is the principle which renders
 all materialism for ever impossible. suns and planets without an
 eye that sees them, and an understanding that knows them, may
 indeed be spoken of in words, but for the idea, these words are
 absolutely meaningless. on the other hand, the law of causality and
 the treatment and investigation of nature which is based upon it,
 lead us necessarily to the conclusion that, in time, each more
 highly organised state of matter has succeeded a cruder state: so
 that the lower animals existed before men, fishes before land
 animals, plants before fishes, and the unorganised before all that
 is organised; that, consequently, the original mass had to pass
 through a long series of changes before the first eye could be
 opened. and yet, the existence of this whole world remains ever
 dependent upon the first eye that opened, even if it were that of
 an insect. for such an eye is a necessary condition of the
 possibility of knowledge, and the whole world exists only in and
 for knowledge, and without it is not even thinkable. the world is
 entirely idea, and as such demands the knowing subject as the
 supporter of its existence. this long course of time itself, filled
 with innumerable changes, through which matter rose from form to
 form till at last the first percipient creature appeared,—this
 whole time itself is only thinkable in the identity of a
 consciousness whose succession of ideas, whose form of knowing it
 is, and apart from which, it loses all meaning and is nothing at
 all. thus we see, on the one hand, the existence of the whole world
 necessarily dependent upon the first conscious being, however
 undeveloped it may be; on the other hand, this conscious being just
 as necessarily entirely dependent upon a long chain of causes and
 effects which have preceded it, and in which it itself [pg ] appears as a small link. these two
 contradictory points of view, to each of which we are led with the
 same necessity, we might again call an antinomy in our faculty of
 knowledge, and set it up as the counterpart of that which we found
 in the first extreme of natural science. the fourfold antinomy of
 kant will be shown, in the criticism of his philosophy appended to
 this volume, to be a groundless delusion. but the necessary
 contradiction which at last presents itself to us here, finds its
 solution in the fact that, to use kant's phraseology, time, space,
 and causality do not belong to the thing-in-itself, but only to its
 phenomena, of which they are the form; which in my language means
 this: the objective world, the world as idea, is not the only side
 of the world, but merely its outward side; and it has an entirely
 different side—the side of its inmost nature—its kernel—the
 thing-in-itself. this we shall consider in the second book, calling
 it after the most immediate of its objective manifestations—will.
 but the world as idea, with which alone we are here concerned, only
 appears with the opening of the first eye. without this medium of
 knowledge it cannot be, and therefore it was not before it. but
 without that eye, that is to say, outside of knowledge, there was
 also no before, no time. thus time has no beginning, but all
 beginning is in time. since, however, it is the most universal form
 of the knowable, in which all phenomena are united together through
 causality, time, with its infinity of past and future, is present
 in the beginning of knowledge. the phenomenon which fills the first
 present must at once be known as causally bound up with and
 dependent upon a sequence of phenomena which stretches infinitely
 into the past, and this past itself is just as truly conditioned by
 this first present, as conversely the present is by the past.
 accordingly the past out of which the first present arises, is,
 like it, dependent upon the knowing subject, without which it is
 nothing. it necessarily happens, however, that this first
 [pg ] present does not
 manifest itself as the first, that is, as having no past for its
 parent, but as being the beginning of time. it manifests itself
 rather as the consequence of the past, according to the principle
 of existence in time. in the same way, the phenomena which fill
 this first present appear as the effects of earlier phenomena which
 filled the past, in accordance with the law of causality. those who
 like mythological interpretations may take the birth of kronos
 (χρονος), the youngest of the titans, as a symbol of the moment
 here referred to at which time appears, though, indeed it has no
 beginning; for with him, since he ate his father, the crude
 productions of heaven and earth cease, and the races of gods and
 men appear upon the scene.
this explanation
 at which we have arrived by following the most consistent of the
 philosophical systems which start from the object, materialism, has
 brought out clearly the inseparable and reciprocal dependence of
 subject and object, and at the same time the inevitable antithesis
 between them. and this knowledge leads us to seek for the inner
 nature of the world, the thing-in-itself, not in either of the two
 elements of the idea, but in something quite distinct from it, and
 which is not encumbered with such a fundamental and insoluble
 antithesis.
opposed to the
 system we have explained, which starts from the object in order to
 derive the subject from it, is the system which starts from the
 subject and tries to derive the object from it. the first of these
 has been of frequent and common occurrence throughout the history
 of philosophy, but of the second we find only one example, and that
 a very recent one; the “philosophy of
 appearance” of j. g. fichte. in this respect, therefore, it
 must be considered; little real worth or inner meaning as the
 doctrine itself had. it was indeed for the most part merely a
 delusion, but it was delivered with an air of the deepest
 earnestness, with sustained loftiness of [pg ] tone and zealous ardour, and was defended
 with eloquent polemic against weak opponents, so that it was able
 to present a brilliant exterior and seemed to be something. but the
 genuine earnestness which keeps truth always steadfastly before it
 as its goal, and is unaffected by any external influences, was
 entirely wanting to fichte, as it is to all philosophers who, like
 him, concern themselves with questions of the day. in his case,
 indeed, it could not have been otherwise. a man becomes a
 philosopher by reason of a certain perplexity, from which he seeks
 to free himself. this is plato's θαυμαξειν, which he calls a μαλα
 φιλοσοφικον παθος. but what distinguishes the false philosopher
 from the true is this: the perplexity of the latter arises from the
 contemplation of the world itself, while that of the former results
 from some book, some system of philosophy which is before him. now
 fichte belongs to the class of the false philosophers. he was made
 a philosopher by kant's doctrine of the thing-in-itself, and if it
 had not been for this he would probably have pursued entirely
 different ends, with far better results, for he certainly possessed
 remarkable rhetorical talent. if he had only penetrated somewhat
 deeply into the meaning of the book that made him a philosopher,
 “the critique of pure reason,” he
 would have understood that its principal teaching about mind is
 this. the principle of sufficient reason is not, as all scholastic
 philosophy maintains, a veritas
 aeterna—that is to say, it does not possess an
 unconditioned validity before, outside of, and above the world. it
 is relative and conditioned, and valid only in the sphere of
 phenomena, and thus it may appear as the necessary nexus of space
 and time, or as the law of causality, or as the law of the ground
 of knowledge. the inner nature of the world, the thing-in-itself
 can never be found by the guidance of this principle, for all that
 it leads to will be found to be dependent and relative and merely
 phenomenal, not the thing-in-itself. further, it does not concern
 the subject, [pg
 but is only the form of objects, which are therefore not
 things-in-themselves. the subject must exist along with the object,
 and the object along with the subject, so that it is impossible
 that subject and object can stand to each other in a relation of
 reason and consequent. but fichte did not take up the smallest
 fragment of all this. all that interested him about the matter was
 that the system started from the subject. now kant had chosen this
 procedure in order to show the fallacy of the prevalent systems,
 which started from the object, and through which the object had
 come, to be regarded as a thing-in-itself. fichte, however, took
 this departure from the subject for the really important matter,
 and like all imitators, he imagined that in going further than kant
 he was surpassing him. thus he repeated the fallacy with regard to
 the subject, which all the previous dogmatism had perpetrated with
 regard to the object, and which had been the occasion of kant's
 “critique”. fichte then made no
 material change, and the fundamental fallacy, the assumption of a
 relation of reason and consequent between object and subject,
 remained after him as it was before him. the principle of
 sufficient reason possessed as before an unconditioned validity,
 and the only difference was that the thing-in-itself was now placed
 in the subject instead of, as formerly, in the object. the entire
 relativity of both subject and object, which proves that the
 thing-in-itself, or the inner nature of the world, is not to be
 sought in them at all, but outside of them, and outside everything
 else that exists merely relatively, still remained unknown. just as
 if kant had never existed, the principle of sufficient reason is to
 fichte precisely what it was to all the schoolmen, a veritas aeterna. as an eternal
 fate reigned over the gods of old, so these aeternæ veritates, these
 metaphysical, mathematical and metalogical truths, and in the case
 of some, the validity of the moral law also, reigned over the god
 of the schoolmen. these veritates alone were independent
 [pg ] of everything, and
 through their necessity both god and the world existed. according
 to the principle of sufficient reason, as such a veritas aeterna, the ego is
 for fichte the ground of the world, or of the non-ego, the object, which is just
 its consequent, its creation. he has therefore taken good care to
 avoid examining further or limiting the principle of sufficient
 reason. if, however, it is thought i should specify the form of the
 principle of sufficient reason under the guidance of which fichte
 derives the non-ego from the ego, as
 a spider spins its web out of itself, i find that it is the
 principle of sufficient reason of existence in space: for it is
 only as referred to this that some kind of meaning and sense can be
 attached to the laboured deductions of the way in which the
 ego produces and fabricates the
 non-ego from itself, which form
 the content of the most senseless, and consequently the most
 wearisome book that was ever written. this philosophy of fichte,
 otherwise not worth mentioning, is interesting to us only as the
 tardy expression of the converse of the old materialism. for
 materialism was the most consistent system starting from the
 object, as this is the most consistent system starting from the
 subject. materialism overlooked the fact that, with the simplest
 object, it assumed the subject also; and fichte overlooked the fact
 that with the subject (whatever he may call it) he assumed the
 object also, for no subject is thinkable without an object. besides
 this he forgot that all a
 priori deduction, indeed all demonstration in
 general, must rest upon some necessity, and that all necessity is
 based on the principle of sufficient reason, because to be
 necessary, and to follow from given grounds are convertible
 conceptions. but
 the principle of sufficient reason is just the universal form of
 the object as such. thus it is in the object, but is not valid
 before [pg
 and outside of it; it first produces the object and makes it appear
 in conformity with its regulative principle. we see then that the
 system which starts from the subject contains the same fallacy as
 the system, explained above, which starts from the object; it
 begins by assuming what it proposes to deduce, the necessary
 correlative of its starting-point.
the method of
 our own system is toto genere
 distinct from these two opposite misconceptions, for we start
 neither from the object nor from the subject, but from the
 idea, as the first fact of
 consciousness. its first essential, fundamental form is the
 antithesis of subject and object. the form of the object again is
 the principle of sufficient reason in its various forms. each of
 these reigns so absolutely in its own class of ideas that, as we
 have seen, when the special form of the principle of sufficient
 reason which governs any class of ideas is known, the nature of the
 whole class is known also: for the whole class, as idea, is no more
 than this form of the principle of sufficient reason itself; so
 that time itself is nothing but the principle of existence in it,
 i.e., succession; space is
 nothing but the principle of existence in it, i.e.,
 position; matter is nothing but causality; the concept (as will
 appear immediately) is nothing but relation to a ground of
 knowledge. this thorough and consistent relativity of the world as
 idea, both according to its universal form (subject and object),
 and according to the form which is subordinate to this (the
 principle of sufficient reason) warns us, as we said before, to
 seek the inner nature of the world in an aspect of it which is
 quite
 different and quite distinct from the idea; and in the
 next book we shall find this in a fact which is just as immediate
 to every living being as the idea.
but we must
 first consider that class of ideas which belongs to man alone. the
 matter of these is the concept, and the subjective correlative is
 reason, just as the subjective correlative of the ideas we have
 already considered [pg
 was understanding and sensibility, which are also to be attributed
 to all the lower animals.
§ . as from the
 direct light of the sun to the borrowed light of the moon, we pass
 from the immediate idea of perception, which stands by itself and
 is its own warrant, to reflection, to the abstract, discursive
 concepts of the reason, which obtain their whole content from
 knowledge of perception, and in relation to it. as long as we
 continue simply to perceive, all is clear, firm, and certain. there
 are neither questions nor doubts nor errors; we desire to go no
 further, can go no further; we find rest in perceiving, and
 satisfaction in the present. perception suffices for itself, and
 therefore what springs purely from it, and remains true to it, for
 example, a genuine work of art, can never be false, nor can it be
 discredited through the lapse of time, for it does not present an
 opinion but the thing itself. but with abstract knowledge, with
 reason, doubt and error appear in the theoretical, care and sorrow
 in the practical. in the idea of perception, illusion may at
 moments take the place of the real; but in the sphere of abstract
 thought, error may reign for a thousand years, impose its yoke upon
 whole nations, extend to the noblest impulses of humanity, and, by
 the help of its slaves and its dupes, may chain and fetter those
 whom it cannot deceive. it is the enemy against which the wisest
 men of all times have waged unequal war, and only what they have
 won from it has become the possession of mankind. therefore it is
 well to draw attention to it at once, as we already tread the
 ground to which its province belongs. it has often been said that
 we ought to follow truth even although no utility can be seen in
 it, because it may have indirect utility which may appear when it
 is least expected; and i would add to this, that we ought to be
 just as anxious to discover and to root out all error even
 [pg ] when no harm is
 anticipated from it, because its mischief may be very indirect, and
 may suddenly appear when we do not expect it, for all error has
 poison at its heart. if it is mind, if it is knowledge, that makes
 man the lord of creation, there can be no such thing as harmless
 error, still less venerable and holy error. and for the consolation
 of those who in any way and at any time may have devoted strength
 and life to the noble and hard battle against error, i cannot
 refrain from adding that, so long as truth is absent, error will
 have free play, as owls and bats in the night; but sooner would we
 expect to see the owls and the bats drive back the sun in the
 eastern heavens, than that any truth which has once been known and
 distinctly and fully expressed, can ever again be so utterly
 vanquished and overcome that the old error shall once more reign
 undisturbed over its wide kingdom. this is the power of truth; its
 conquest is slow and laborious, but if once the victory be gained
 it can never be wrested back again.
besides the
 ideas we have as yet considered, which, according to their
 construction, could be referred to time, space, and matter, if we
 consider them with reference to the object, or to pure sensibility
 and understanding (i.e., knowledge of causality),
 if we consider them with reference to the subject, another faculty
 of knowledge has appeared in man alone of all earthly creatures, an
 entirely new consciousness, which, with very appropriate and
 significant exactness, is called reflection. for it is in fact
 derived from the knowledge of perception, and is a reflected
 appearance of it. but it has assumed a nature fundamentally
 different. the forms of perception do not affect it, and even the
 principle of sufficient reason which reigns over all objects has an
 entirely different aspect with regard to it. it is just this new,
 more highly endowed, consciousness, this abstract reflex of all
 that belongs to perception in that conception of the reason which
 has nothing to do with perception, that gives to man that
 [pg ] thoughtfulness which
 distinguishes his consciousness so entirely from that of the lower
 animals, and through which his whole behaviour upon earth is so
 different from that of his irrational fellow-creatures. he far
 surpasses them in power and also in suffering. they live in the
 present alone, he lives also in the future and the past. they
 satisfy the needs of the moment, he provides by the most ingenious
 preparations for the future, yea for days that he shall never see.
 they are entirely dependent on the impression of the moment, on the
 effect of the perceptible motive; he is determined by abstract
 conceptions independent of the present. therefore he follows
 predetermined plans, he acts from maxims, without reference to his
 surroundings or the accidental impression of the moment. thus, for
 example, he can make with composure deliberate preparations for his
 own death, he can dissemble past finding out, and can carry his
 secret with him to the grave; lastly, he has an actual choice
 between several motives; for only in the abstract can such motives,
 present together in consciousness, afford the knowledge with regard
 to themselves, that the one excludes the other, and can thus
 measure themselves against each other with reference to their power
 over the will. the motive that overcomes, in that it decides the
 question at issue, is the deliberate determinant of the will, and
 is a sure indication of its character. the brute, on the other
 hand, is determined by the present impression; only the fear of
 present compulsion can constrain its desires, until at last this
 fear has become custom, and as such continues to determine it; this
 is called training. the brute feels and perceives; man, in addition
 to this, thinks and knows:
 both will. the brute expresses its
 feelings and dispositions by gestures and sounds; man communicates
 his thought to others, or, if he wishes, he conceals it, by means
 of speech. speech is the first production, and also the necessary
 organ of his reason. therefore in greek and italian, speech and
 [pg ] reason are expressed
 by the same word; ὁ λογος, il
 discorso. vernunft is derived from
 vernehmen, which is not a
 synonym for the verb to hear, but signifies the consciousness of
 the meaning of thoughts communicated in words. it is by the help of
 language alone that reason accomplishes its most important
 achievements,—the united action of several individuals, the planned
 co-operation of many thousands, civilisation, the state; also
 science, the storing up of experience, the uniting of common
 properties in one concept, the communication of truth, the spread
 of error, thoughts and poems, dogmas and superstitions. the brute
 first knows death when it dies, but man draws consciously nearer to
 it every hour that he lives; and this makes life at times a
 questionable good even to him who has not recognised this character
 of constant annihilation in the whole of life. principally on this
 account man has philosophies and religions, though it is uncertain
 whether the qualities we admire most in his conduct, voluntary
 rectitude and nobility of feeling, were ever the fruit of either of
 them. as results which certainly belong only to them, and as
 productions of reason in this sphere, we may refer to the
 marvellous and monstrous opinions of philosophers of various
 schools, and the extraordinary and sometimes cruel customs of the
 priests of different religions.
it is the
 universal opinion of all times and of all nations that these
 manifold and far-reaching achievements spring from a common
 principle, from that peculiar intellectual power which belongs
 distinctively to man and which has been called reason, ὁ λογος, το
 λογιστικον, το λογιμον, ratio. besides this, no one
 finds any difficulty in recognising the manifestations of this
 faculty, and in saying what is rational and what is irrational,
 where reason appears as distinguished from the other faculties and
 qualities of man, or lastly, in pointing out what, on account of
 the want of reason, we must never expect even from the most
 sensible brute. the philosophers [pg ] of all ages may be said to be on the whole at
 one about this general knowledge of reason, and they have also
 given prominence to several very important manifestations of it;
 such as, the control of the emotions and passions, the capacity for
 drawing conclusions and formulating general principles, even such
 as are true prior to all experience, and so forth. still all their
 explanations of the peculiar nature of reason are wavering, not
 clearly defined, discursive, without unity and concentration; now
 laying stress on one manifestation, now on another, and therefore
 often at variance with each other. besides this, many start from
 the opposition between reason and revelation, a distinction which
 is unknown to philosophy, and which only increases confusion. it is
 very remarkable that up till now no philosopher has referred these
 manifold expressions of reason to one simple function which would
 be recognised in them all, from which they would all be explained,
 and which would therefore constitute the real inner nature of
 reason. it is true that the excellent locke in the “essay on the human understanding” (book ii.,
 ch. xi., §§  and ), very rightly refers to general concepts as
 the characteristic which distinguishes man from the brutes, and
 leibnitz quotes this with full approval in the “nouveaux essais sur l'entendement humaine”
 (book ii., ch. xi., §§  and .) but when locke (in book iv., ch.
 xvii., §§  and ) comes to the special explanation of reason he
 entirely loses sight of this simple, primary characteristic, and he
 also falls into a wavering, undetermined, incomplete account of
 mangled and derivative manifestations of it. leibnitz also, in the
 corresponding part of his work, behaves in a similar manner, only
 with more confusion and indistinctness. in the appendix, i have
 fully considered how kant confused and falsified the conception of
 the nature of reason. but whoever will take the trouble to go
 through in this reference the mass of philosophical writing which
 has appeared since [pg
 kant, will find out, that just as the faults of princes must be
 expiated by whole nations, the errors of great minds extend their
 influence over whole generations, and even over centuries; they
 grow and propagate themselves, and finally degenerate into
 monstrosities. all this arises from the fact that, as berkeley
 says, “few men think; yet all will have
 opinions.”
the
 understanding has only one function—immediate knowledge of the
 relation of cause and effect. yet the perception of the real world,
 and all common sense, sagacity, and inventiveness, however
 multifarious their applications may be, are quite clearly seen to
 be nothing more than manifestations of that one function. so also
 the reason has one function; and from it all the manifestations of
 reason we have mentioned, which distinguish the life of man from
 that of the brutes, may easily be explained. the application or the
 non-application of this function is all that is meant by what men
 have everywhere and always called rational and irrational.
§ . concepts
 form a distinct class of ideas, existing only in the mind of man,
 and entirely different from the ideas of perception which we have
 considered up till now. we can therefore never attain to a sensuous
 and, properly speaking, evident knowledge of their nature, but only
 to a knowledge which is abstract and discursive. it would,
 therefore, be absurd to demand that they should be verified in
 experience, if by experience is meant the real external world,
 which consists of ideas of perception, or that they should be
 brought before the eyes or the imagination like objects of
 perception. they can only be thought, not perceived, and only the
 effects which men accomplish through them are properly objects of
 experience. such effects are language, preconceived and planned
 action and science, and all that results from these. [pg ] speech, as an object of outer
 experience, is obviously nothing more than a very complete
 telegraph, which communicates arbitrary signs with the greatest
 rapidity and the finest distinctions of difference. but what do
 these signs mean? how are they interpreted? when some one speaks,
 do we at once translate his words into pictures of the fancy, which
 instantaneously flash upon us, arrange and link themselves
 together, and assume form and colour according to the words that
 are poured forth, and their grammatical inflections? what a tumult
 there would be in our brains while we listened to a speech, or to
 the reading of a book? but what actually happens is not this at
 all. the meaning of a speech is, as a rule, immediately grasped,
 accurately and distinctly taken in, without the imagination being
 brought into play. it is reason which speaks to reason, keeping
 within its own province. it communicates and receives abstract
 conceptions, ideas that cannot be presented in perceptions, which
 are framed once for all, and are relatively few in number, but
 which yet encompass, contain, and represent all the innumerable
 objects of the actual world. this itself is sufficient to prove
 that the lower animals can never learn to speak or comprehend,
 although they have the organs of speech and ideas of perception in
 common with us. but because words represent this perfectly distinct
 class of ideas, whose subjective correlative is reason, they are
 without sense and meaning for the brutes. thus language, like every
 other manifestation which we ascribe to reason, and like everything
 which distinguishes man from the brutes, is to be explained from
 this as its one simple source—conceptions, abstract ideas which
 cannot be presented in perception, but are general, and have no
 individual existence in space and time. only in single cases do we
 pass from the conception to the perception, do we construct images
 as representatives of concepts in
 perception, to which, however, they are never adequate. these cases
 [pg ] are fully discussed
 in the essay on the principle of sufficient reason, § , and
 therefore i shall not repeat my explanation here. it may be
 compared, however, with what is said by hume in the twelfth of his
 “philosophical essays,” p. , and
 by herder in the “metacritik,” pt.
 i. p.  (an otherwise worthless book). the platonic idea, the
 possibility of which depends upon the union of imagination and
 reason, is the principal subject of the third book of this
 work.
although
 concepts are fundamentally different from ideas of perception, they
 stand in a necessary relation to them, without which they would be
 nothing. this relation therefore constitutes the whole nature and
 existence of concepts. reflection is the necessary copy or
 repetition of the originally presented world of perception, but it
 is a special kind of copy in an entirely different material. thus
 concepts may quite properly be called ideas of ideas. the principle
 of sufficient reason has here also a special form. now we have seen
 that the form under which the principle of sufficient reason
 appears in a class of ideas always constitutes and exhausts the
 whole nature of the class, so far as it consists of ideas, so that
 time is throughout succession, and nothing more; space is
 throughout position, and nothing more; matter is throughout
 causation, and nothing more. in the same way the whole nature of
 concepts, or the class of abstract ideas, consists simply in the
 relation which the principle of sufficient reason expresses in
 them; and as this is the relation to the ground of knowledge, the
 whole nature of the abstract idea is simply and solely its relation
 to another idea, which is its ground of knowledge. this, indeed,
 may, in the first instance, be a concept, an abstract idea, and
 this again may have only a similar abstract ground of knowledge;
 but the chain of grounds of knowledge does not extend ad infinitum; it must end at
 last in a concept which has its ground in knowledge of perception;
 for the whole world of reflection [pg ] rests on the world of perception as its
 ground of knowledge. hence the class of abstract ideas is in this
 respect distinguished from other classes; in the latter the
 principle of sufficient reason always demands merely a relation to
 another idea of the same class, but in the case of
 abstract ideas, it at last demands a relation to an idea of
 another class.
those concepts
 which, as has just been pointed out, are not immediately related to
 the world of perception, but only through the medium of one, or it
 may be several other concepts, have been called by preference
 abstracta, and those which have
 their ground immediately in the world of perception have been
 called concreta. but
 this last name is only loosely applicable to the concepts denoted
 by it, for they are always merely abstracta, and not ideas of
 perception. these names, which have originated in a very dim
 consciousness of the distinctions they imply, may yet, with this
 explanation, be retained. as examples of the first kind of
 concepts, i.e., abstracta in the fullest sense,
 we may take “relation,” “virtue,” “investigation,” “beginning,” and so on. as examples of the
 second kind, loosely called concreta, we may take such
 concepts as “man,” “stone,” “horse,”
 &c. if it were not a somewhat too pictorial and therefore
 absurd simile, we might very appropriately call the latter the
 ground floor, and the former the upper stories of the building of
 reflection.
it is not, as is
 commonly supposed, an essential characteristic of a concept that it
 should contain much under it, that is to say, that many ideas of
 perception, or it may be other abstract ideas, should stand to it
 in the relation of its ground of knowledge, i.e.,
 be thought through it. this is merely a derived and secondary
 characteristic, and, as a matter of fact, does not always exist,
 though it must always exist potentially. this characteristic arises
 from the fact that a concept is an [pg ] idea of an idea, i.e.,
 its whole nature consists in its relation to another idea; but as
 it is not this idea itself, which is generally an idea of
 perception and therefore belongs to quite a different class, the
 latter may have temporal, spacial, and other determinations, and in
 general many relations which are not thought along with it in the
 concept. thus we see that several ideas which are different in
 unessential particulars may be thought by means of one concept,
 i.e., may be brought under it.
 yet this power of embracing several things is not an essential but
 merely an accidental characteristic of the concept. there may be
 concepts through which only one real object is thought, but which
 are nevertheless abstract and general, by no means capable of
 presentation individually and as perceptions. such, for example, is
 the conception which any one may have of a particular town which he
 only knows from geography; although only this one town is thought
 under it, it might yet be applied to several towns differing in
 certain respects. we see then that a concept is not general because
 of being abstracted from several objects; but conversely, because
 generality, that is to say, non-determination of the particular,
 belongs to the concept as an abstract idea of the reason, different
 things can be thought by means of the same one.
it follows from
 what has been said that every concept, just because it is abstract
 and incapable of presentation in perception, and is therefore not a
 completely determined idea, has what is called extension or sphere,
 even in the case in which only one real object exists that
 corresponds to it. now we always find that the sphere of one
 concept has something in common with the sphere of other concepts.
 that is to say, part of what is thought under one concept is the
 same as what is thought under other concepts; and conversely, part
 of what is thought under these concepts is the same as what is
 thought under the first; although, if they are [pg ] really different concepts, each of
 them, or at least one of them, contains something which the other
 does not contain; this is the relation in which every subject
 stands to its predicate. the recognition of this relation is called
 judgment. the representation of these spheres by means of figures
 in space, is an exceedingly happy idea. it first occurred to
 gottfried plouquet, who used squares for the purpose. lambert,
 although later than him, used only lines, which he placed under
 each other. euler carried out the idea completely with circles.
 upon what this complete analogy between the relations of concepts,
 and those of figures in space, ultimately rests, i am unable to
 say. it is, however, a very fortunate circumstance for logic that
 all the relations of concepts, according to their possibility,
 i.e., a
 priori, may be made plain in perception by the use of
 such figures, in the following way:—
(.) the spheres
 of two concepts coincide: for example the concept of necessity and
 the concept of following from given grounds, in the same way the
 concepts of ruminantia and bisulca (ruminating and
 cloven-hoofed animals), also those of vertebrate and red-blooded
 animals (although there might be some doubt about this on account
 of the annelida): they are convertible concepts. such concepts are
 represented by a single circle which stands for either of them.
(.) the sphere
 of one concept includes that of the other.
[pg ]
(.) a sphere
 includes two or more spheres which exclude each other and fill
 it.
(.) two spheres
 include each a part of the other.
(.) two spheres
 lie in a third, but do not fill it.
this last case
 applies to all concepts whose spheres have nothing immediately in
 common, for there is always a third sphere, often a much wider one,
 which includes both.
to these cases
 all combinations of concepts may be referred, and from them the
 entire doctrine of the judgment, its conversion, contraposition,
 equipollence, disjunction (this according to the third figure) may
 be deduced. [pg
 from these also may be derived the properties of the judgment, upon
 which kant based his pretended categories of the understanding,
 with the exception however of the hypothetical form, which is not a
 combination of concepts, but of judgments. a full account is given
 in the appendix of “modality,” and
 indeed of every property of judgments on which the categories are
 founded.
with regard to
 the possible combinations of concepts which we have given, it has
 only further to be remarked that they may also be combined with
 each other in many ways. for example, the fourth figure with the
 second. only if one sphere, which partly or wholly contains
 another, is itself contained in a third sphere, do these together
 exemplify the syllogism in the first figure, i.e.,
 that combination of judgments, by means of which it is known that a
 concept which is partly or wholly contained in another concept, is
 also contained in a third concept, which again contains the first:
 and also, conversely, the negation; the pictorial representation of
 which can, of course, only be two connected spheres which do not
 lie within a third sphere. if many spheres are brought together in
 this way we get a long train of syllogisms. this schematism of
 concepts, which has already been fairly well explained in more than
 one textbook, may be used as the foundation of the doctrine of the
 judgment, and indeed of the whole syllogistic theory, and in this
 way the treatment of both becomes very easy and simple. because,
 through it, all syllogistic rules may be seen in their origin, and
 may be deduced and explained. it is not necessary, however, to load
 the memory with these rules, as logic is never of practical use,
 but has only a theoretical interest for philosophy. for although it
 may be said that logic is related to rational thinking as
 thorough-bass is to music, or less exactly, as ethics is to virtue,
 or æsthetics to art; we must yet remember that no one ever became
 an artist by the study of æsthetics; that a noble character was
 never [pg ] formed by the study
 of ethics; that long before rameau, men composed correctly and
 beautifully, and that we do not need to know thorough-bass in order
 to detect discords: and just as little do we need to know logic in
 order to avoid being misled by fallacies. yet it must be conceded
 that thorough-bass is of the greatest use in the practice of
 musical composition, although it may not be necessary for the
 understanding of it; and indeed æsthetics and even ethics, though
 in a much less degree, and for the most part negatively, may be of
 some use in practice, so that we cannot deny them all practical
 worth, but of logic even this much cannot be conceded. it is
 nothing more than the knowledge in the abstract of what every one
 knows in the concrete. therefore we call in the aid of logical
 rules, just as little to enable us to construct a correct argument
 as to prevent us from consenting to a false one, and the most
 learned logician lays aside the rules of logic altogether in his
 actual thought. this may be explained in the following way. every
 science is a system of general and therefore abstract truths, laws,
 and rules with reference to a special class of objects. the
 individual case coming under these laws is determined in accordance
 with this general knowledge, which is valid once for all; because
 such application of the general principle is far easier than the
 exhaustive investigation of the particular case; for the general
 abstract knowledge which has once been obtained is always more
 within our reach than the empirical investigation of the particular
 case. with logic, however, it is just the other way. it is the
 general knowledge of the mode of procedure of the reason expressed
 in the form of rules. it is reached by the introspection of reason,
 and by abstraction from all content. but this mode of procedure is
 necessary and essential to reason, so that it will never depart
 from it if left to itself. it is, therefore, easier and surer to
 let it proceed itself according to its nature in each particular
 case, than to [pg
 present to it the knowledge abstracted from this procedure in the
 form of a foreign and externally given law. it is easier, because,
 while in the case of all other sciences, the general rule is more
 within our reach than the investigation of the particular case
 taken by itself; with the use of reason, on the contrary, its
 necessary procedure in a given case is always more within our reach
 than the general rule abstracted from it; for that which thinks in
 us is reason itself. it is surer, because a mistake may more easily
 occur in such abstract knowledge, or in its application, than that
 a process of reason should take place which would run contrary to
 its essence and nature. hence arises the remarkable fact, that
 while in other sciences the particular case is always proved by the
 rule, in logic, on the contrary, the rule must always be proved
 from the particular case; and even the most practised logician, if
 he remark that in some particular case he concludes otherwise than
 the rule prescribes, will always expect to find a mistake in the
 rule rather than in his own conclusion. to desire to make practical
 use of logic means, therefore, to desire to derive with unspeakable
 trouble, from general rules, that which is immediately known with
 the greatest certainty in the particular case. it is just as if a
 man were to consult mechanics as to the motion of his body, and
 physiology as to his digestion; and whoever has learnt logic for
 practical purposes is like him who would teach a beaver to make its
 own dam. logic is, therefore, without practical utility; but it
 must nevertheless be retained, because it has philosophical
 interest as the special knowledge of the organisation and action of
 reason. it is rightly regarded as a definite, self-subsisting,
 self-contained, complete, and thoroughly safe discipline; to be
 treated scientifically for itself alone and independently of
 everything else, and therefore to be studied at the universities.
 but it has its real value, in relation to philosophy as a whole, in
 the inquiry into the nature of knowledge, and indeed of
 [pg ] rational and
 abstract knowledge. therefore the exposition of logic should not
 have so much the form of a practical science, should not contain
 merely naked arbitrary rules for the correct formation of the
 judgment, the syllogism, &c., but should rather be directed to
 the knowledge of the nature of reason and the concept, and to the
 detailed investigation of the principle of sufficient reason of
 knowing. for logic is only a paraphrase of this principle, and,
 more exactly, only of that exemplification of it in which the
 ground that gives truth to the judgment is neither empirical nor
 metaphysical, but logical or metalogical. besides the principle of
 sufficient reason of knowing, it is necessary to take account of
 the three remaining fundamental laws of thought, or judgments of
 metalogical truth, so nearly related to it; and out of these the
 whole science of reason grows. the nature of thought proper, that
 is to say, of the judgment and the syllogism, must be exhibited in
 the combination of the spheres of concepts, according to the
 analogy of the special schema, in the way shown above; and from all
 this the rules of the judgment and the syllogism are to be deduced
 by construction. the only practical use we can make of logic is in
 a debate, when we can convict our antagonist of his intentional
 fallacies, rather than of his actual mistakes, by giving them their
 technical names. by thus throwing into the background the practical
 aim of logic, and bringing out its connection with the whole scheme
 of philosophy as one of its chapters, we do not think that we shall
 make the study of it less prevalent than it is just now. for at the
 present day every one who does not wish to remain uncultured, and
 to be numbered with the ignorant and incompetent multitude, must
 study speculative philosophy. for the nineteenth century is a
 philosophical age, though by this we do not mean either that it has
 philosophy, or that philosophy governs it, but rather that it is
 ripe for philosophy, and, therefore, stands in need of it. this is
 a sign of a high [pg
 degree of civilisation, and indeed, is a definite stage in the
 culture of the ages.
though logic is
 of so little practical use, it cannot be denied that it was
 invented for practical purposes. it appears to me to have
 originated in the following way:—as the love of debating developed
 among the eleatics, the megarics, and the sophists, and by degrees
 became almost a passion, the confusion in which nearly every debate
 ended must have made them feel the necessity of a method of
 procedure as a guide; and for this a scientific dialectic had to be
 sought. the first thing which would have to be observed would be
 that both the disputing parties should always be agreed on some one
 proposition, to which the disputed points might be referred. the
 beginning of the methodical procedure consisted in this, that the
 propositions admitted on both sides were formally stated to be so,
 and placed at the head of the inquiry. but these propositions were
 at first concerned only with the material of the inquiry. it was
 soon observed that in the process of going back to the truth
 admitted on both sides, and of deducing their assertions from it,
 each party followed certain forms and laws about which, without any
 express agreement, there was no difference of opinion. and from
 this it became evident that these must constitute the peculiar and
 natural procedure of reason itself, the form of investigation.
 although this was not exposed to any doubt or difference of
 opinion, some pedantically systematic philosopher hit upon the idea
 that it would look well, and be the completion of the method of
 dialectic, if this formal part of all discussion, this regular
 procedure of reason itself, were to be expressed in abstract
 propositions, just like the substantial propositions admitted on
 both sides, and placed at the beginning of every investigation, as
 the fixed canon of debate to which reference and appeal must always
 be made. in this [pg
 way what had formerly been followed only by tacit agreement, and
 instinctively, would be consciously recognised and formally
 expressed. by degrees, more or less perfect expressions were found
 for the fundamental principles of logic, such as the principles of
 contradiction, sufficient reason, excluded middle, the dictum de omni et nullo, as well
 as the special rules of the syllogism, as for example, ex meris particularibus aut negativis nihil
 sequitur, a rationato ad rationem non valet
 consequentia, and so on. that all this was only
 brought about slowly, and with great pains, and up till the time of
 aristotle remained very incomplete, is evident from the awkward and
 tedious way in which logical truths are brought out in many of the
 platonic dialogues, and still more from what sextus empiricus tells
 us of the controversies of the megarics, about the easiest and
 simplest logical rules, and the laborious way in which they were
 brought into a definite form (sext. emp. adv. math. l. , p. ).
 but aristotle collected, arranged, and corrected all that had been
 discovered before his time, and brought it to an incomparably
 greater state of perfection. if we thus observe how the course of
 greek culture had prepared the way for, and led up to the work of
 aristotle, we shall be little inclined to believe the assertion of
 the persian author, quoted by sir william jones with much approval,
 that kallisthenes found a complete system of logic among the
 indians, and sent it to his uncle aristotle (asiatic researches,
 vol. iv. p. ). it is easy to understand that in the dreary
 middle ages the aristotelian logic would be very acceptable to the
 controversial spirit of the schoolmen, which, in the absence of all
 real knowledge, spent its energy upon mere formulas and words, and
 that it would be eagerly adopted even in its mutilated arabian
 form, and presently established as the centre of all knowledge.
 though its authority has since declined, yet up to our own time
 logic has retained the credit of a self-contained, practical, and
 highly important [pg
 science. indeed, in our own day, the kantian philosophy, the
 foundation-stone of which is taken from logic, has excited a new
 interest in it; which, in this respect, at any rate, that is, as
 the means of the knowledge of the nature of reason, it
 deserves.
correct and
 accurate conclusions may be arrived at if we carefully observe the
 relation of the spheres of concepts, and only conclude that one
 sphere is contained in a third sphere, when we have clearly seen
 that this first sphere is contained in a second, which in its turn
 is contained in the third. on the other hand, the art of sophistry
 lies in casting only a superficial glance at the relations of the
 spheres of the concepts, and then manipulating these relations to
 suit our purposes, generally in the following way:—when the sphere
 of an observed concept lies partly within that of another concept,
 and partly within a third altogether different sphere, we treat it
 as if it lay entirely within the one or the other, as may suit our
 purpose. for example, in speaking of passion, we may subsume it
 under the concept of the greatest force, the mightiest agency in
 the world, or under the concept of the irrational, and this again
 under the concept of impotency or weakness. we may then repeat the
 process, and start anew with each concept to which the argument
 leads us. a concept has almost always several others, which
 partially come under it, and each of these contains part of the
 sphere of the first, but also includes in its own sphere something
 more, which is not in the first. but we draw attention only to that
 one of these latter concepts, under which we wish to subsume the
 first, and let the others remain unobserved, or keep them
 concealed. on the possession of this skill depends the whole art of
 sophistry and all finer fallacies; for logical fallacies such as
 mentiens, velatus, cornatus, &c., are clearly
 too clumsy for actual use. i am not aware that hitherto any one has
 traced the nature of all sophistry and persuasion back to this last
 [pg ] possible ground of
 its existence, and referred it to the peculiar character of
 concepts, i.e., to the procedure of reason
 itself. therefore, as my exposition has led me to it, though it is
 very easily understood, i will illustrate it in the following table
 by means of a schema. this table is intended to show how the
 spheres of concepts overlap each other at many points, and so leave
 room for a passage from each concept to whichever one we please of
 several other concepts. i hope, however, that no one will be led by
 this table to attach more importance to this little explanation,
 which i have merely given in passing, than ought to belong to it,
 from the nature of the subject. i have chosen as an illustration
 the concept of travelling. its sphere partially includes four
 others, to any of which the sophist may pass at will; these again
 partly include other spheres, several of them two or more at once,
 and through these the sophist takes whichever way he chooses,
 always as if it were the only way, till at last he reaches, in good
 or evil, whatever end he may have in view. in passing from one
 sphere to another, it is only necessary always to follow the
 direction from the centre (the given chief concept) to the
 circumference, and never to reverse this process. such a piece of
 sophistry may be either an unbroken speech, or it may assume the
 strict syllogistic form, according to what is the weak side of the
 hearer. most scientific arguments, and especially philosophical
 demonstrations, are at bottom not much more than this, for how else
 would it be possible, that so much, in different ages, has not only
 been falsely apprehended (for error itself has a different source),
 but demonstrated and proved, and has yet afterwards been found to
 be fundamentally wrong, for example, the leibnitz-wolfian
 philosophy, ptolemaic astronomy, stahl's chemistry, newton's theory
 of colours, &c. &c.
§ . through
 all this, the question presses ever more upon us, how certainty is to be attained, how
 judgments [pg ]are to be
 established, what constitutes rational
 knowledge, (wissen), and science, which we rank with
 language and deliberate action as the third great benefit conferred
 by reason.
reason is
 feminine in nature; it can only give after it has received. of
 itself it has nothing but the empty forms of its operation. there
 is no absolutely pure rational knowledge except the four principles
 to which i have attributed metalogical truth; the principles of
 identity, contradiction, excluded middle, and sufficient reason of
 knowledge. for even the rest of logic is not absolutely pure
 rational knowledge. it presupposes the relations and the
 combinations of the spheres of concepts. but concepts in general
 only exist after experience of ideas of perception, and as their
 whole nature consists in their relation to these, it is clear that
 they presuppose them. no special content, however, is presupposed,
 but merely the existence of a content generally, and so logic as a
 whole may fairly pass for pure rational science. in all other
 sciences reason has received its content from ideas of perception;
 in mathematics from the relations of space and time, presented in
 intuition or perception prior to all experience; in pure natural
 science, that is, in what we know of the course of nature prior to
 any experience, the content of the science proceeds from the pure
 understanding, i.e., from the a priori knowledge of the law of
 causality and its connection with those pure intuitions or
 perceptions of space and time. in all other sciences everything
 that is not derived from the sources we have just referred to
 belongs to experience. speaking generally, to know
 rationally (wissen) means to have in the
 power of the mind, and capable of being reproduced at will, such
 judgments as have their sufficient ground of knowledge in something
 outside themselves, i.e., are true. thus only
 abstract cognition is rational knowledge (wissen), which is therefore the
 result of reason, so that we cannot accurately say of the lower
 animals that they rationally [pg ]know (wissen) anything, although they
 have apprehension of what is presented in perception, and memory of
 this, and consequently imagination, which is further proved by the
 circumstance that they dream. we attribute consciousness to them,
 and therefore although the word (bewusstsein) is derived from the
 verb to know rationally (wissen), the conception of
 consciousness corresponds generally with that of idea of whatever
 kind it may be. thus we attribute life to plants, but not
 consciousness. rational knowledge (wissen) is therefore abstract
 consciousness, the permanent possession in concepts of the reason,
 of what has become known in another way.
§ . in this
 regard the direct opposite of rational knowledge is feeling, and
 therefore we must insert the explanation of feeling here. the
 concept which the word feeling denotes has merely a negative
 content, which is this, that something which is present in
 consciousness, is not a concept, is not abstract
 rational knowledge. except this, whatever it may be, it
 comes under the concept of feeling. thus the immeasurably
 wide sphere of the concept of feeling includes the most different
 kinds of objects, and no one can ever understand how they come
 together until he has recognised that they all agree in this
 negative respect, that they are not abstract
 concepts. for the most diverse and even antagonistic
 elements lie quietly side by side in this concept; for example,
 religious feeling, feeling of sensual pleasure, moral feeling,
 bodily feeling, as touch, pain, sense of colour, of sounds and
 their harmonies and discords, feeling of hate, of disgust, of
 self-satisfaction, of honour, of disgrace, of right, of wrong,
 sense of truth, æsthetic feeling, feeling of power, weakness,
 health, friendship, love, &c. &c. there is absolutely
 nothing in common among them except the negative quality that they
 are not abstract rational knowledge. but this diversity becomes
 more striking when the apprehension of space relations presented
 a priori in perception, and also
 the [pg ] knowledge of the
 pure understanding is brought under this concept, and when we say
 of all knowledge and all truth, of which we are first conscious
 only intuitively, and have not yet formulated in abstract concepts,
 we feel it. i should like, for the
 sake of illustration, to give some examples of this taken from
 recent books, as they are striking proofs of my theory. i remember
 reading in the introduction to a german translation of euclid, that
 we ought to make beginners in geometry draw the figures before
 proceeding to demonstrate, for in this way they would already feel
 geometrical truth before the demonstration brought them complete
 knowledge. in the same way schleiermacher speaks in his
 “critique of ethics” of logical and
 mathematical feeling (p. ), and also of the feeling of the
 sameness or difference of two formulas (p. ). again tennemann in
 his “history of philosophy” (vol.
 i., p. ) says, “one felt
 that the fallacies were not right, but could not point out the
 mistakes.” now, so long as we do not regard this concept
 “feeling” from the right
 point of view, and do not recognise that one negative
 characteristic which alone is essential to it, it must constantly
 give occasion for misunderstanding and controversy, on account of
 the excessive wideness of its sphere, and its entirely negative and
 very limited content which is determined in a purely one-sided
 manner. since then we have in german the nearly synonymous word
 empfindung (sensation), it would
 be convenient to make use of it for bodily feeling, as a
 sub-species. this concept “feeling,”
 which is quite out of proportion to all others, doubtless
 originated in the following manner. all concepts, and concepts
 alone, are denoted by words; they exist only for the reason, and
 proceed from it. with concepts, therefore, we are already at a
 one-sided point of view; but from such a point of view what is near
 appears distinct and is set down as positive, what is farther off
 becomes mixed up and is soon regarded as merely [pg ] negative. thus each nation calls all
 others foreign: to the greek all others are barbarians; to the
 englishman all that is not england or english is continent or
 continental; to the believer all others are heretics, or heathens;
 to the noble all others are roturiers; to the student all
 others are philistines, and so forth. now, reason itself, strange
 as it may seem, is guilty of the same one-sidedness, indeed one
 might say of the same crude ignorance arising from vanity, for it
 classes under the one concept, “feeling,” every
 modification of consciousness which does not immediately belong to
 its own mode of apprehension, that is to say, which is not an abstract
 concept. it has had to pay the penalty of this hitherto
 in misunderstanding and confusion in its own province, because its
 own procedure had not become clear to it through thorough
 self-knowledge, for a special faculty of feeling has been set up,
 and new theories of it are constructed.
§ . rational
 knowledge (wissen) is then all abstract
 knowledge,—that is, the knowledge which is peculiar to the reason
 as distinguished from the understanding. its contradictory opposite
 has just been explained to be the concept “feeling.” now, as reason only reproduces, for
 knowledge, what has been received in another way, it does not
 actually extend our knowledge, but only gives it another form. it
 enables us to know in the abstract and generally, what first became
 known in sense-perception, in the concrete. but this is much more
 important than it appears at first sight when so expressed. for it
 depends entirely upon the fact that knowledge has become rational
 or abstract knowledge (wissen), that it can be safely
 preserved, that it is communicable and susceptible of certain and
 wide-reaching application to practice. knowledge in the form of
 sense-perception is valid only of the particular case, extends only
 to what is nearest, and ends with it, for sensibility and
 understanding can only comprehend one object at a time. every
 [pg ] enduring, arranged,
 and planned activity must therefore proceed from principles,—that
 is, from abstract knowledge, and it must be conducted in accordance
 with them. thus, for example, the knowledge of the relation of
 cause and effect arrived at by the understanding, is in itself far
 completer, deeper and more exhaustive than anything that can be
 thought about it in the abstract; the understanding alone knows in
 perception directly and completely the nature of the effect of a
 lever, of a pulley, or a cog-wheel, the stability of an arch, and
 so forth. but on account of the peculiarity of the knowledge of
 perception just referred to, that it only extends to what is
 immediately present, the mere understanding can never enable us to
 construct machines and buildings. here reason must come in; it must
 substitute abstract concepts for ideas of perception, and take them
 as the guide of action; and if they are right, the anticipated
 result will happen. in the same way we have perfect knowledge in
 pure perception of the nature and constitution of the parabola,
 hyperbola, and spiral; but if we are to make trustworthy
 application of this knowledge to the real, it must first become
 abstract knowledge, and by this it certainly loses its character of
 intuition or perception, but on the other hand it gains the
 certainty and preciseness of abstract knowledge. the differential
 calculus does not really extend our knowledge of the curve, it
 contains nothing that was not already in the mere pure perception
 of the curve; but it alters the kind of knowledge, it changes the
 intuitive into an abstract knowledge, which is so valuable for
 application. but here we must refer to another peculiarity of our
 faculty of knowledge, which could not be observed until the
 distinction between the knowledge of the senses and understanding
 and abstract knowledge had been made quite clear. it is this, that
 relations of space cannot as such be directly translated into
 abstract knowledge, but only temporal quantities,—that is, numbers,
 are suitable for this. [pg
 numbers alone can be expressed in abstract concepts which
 accurately correspond to them, not spacial quantities. the concept
 “thousand” is just as different from
 the concept “ten,” as both these
 temporal quantities are in perception. we think of a thousand as a
 distinct multiple of ten, into which we can resolve it at pleasure
 for perception in time,—that is to say, we can count it. but
 between the abstract concept of a mile and that of a foot, apart
 from any concrete perception of either, and without the help of
 number, there is no accurate distinction corresponding to the
 quantities themselves. in both we only think of a spacial quantity
 in general, and if they must be completely distinguished we are
 compelled either to call in the assistance of intuition or
 perception in space, which would be a departure from abstract
 knowledge, or we must think the difference in numbers. if then we wish to have
 abstract knowledge of space-relations we must first translate them
 into time-relations,—that is, into numbers; therefore only
 arithmetic, and not geometry, is the universal science of quantity,
 and geometry must be translated into arithmetic if it is to be
 communicable, accurately precise and applicable in practice. it is
 true that a space-relation as such may also be thought in the
 abstract; for example, “the sine increases
 as the angle,” but if the quantity of this relation is to be
 given, it requires number for its expression. this necessity, that
 if we wish to have abstract knowledge of space-relations
 (i.e., rational knowledge, not
 mere intuition or perception), space with its three dimensions must
 be translated into time which has only one dimension, this
 necessity it is, which makes mathematics so difficult. this becomes
 very clear if we compare the perception of curves with their
 analytical calculation, or the table of logarithms of the
 trigonometrical functions with the perception of the changing
 relations of the parts of a triangle, which are expressed by them.
 what vast mazes of figures, what laborious calculations
 [pg ] it would require to
 express in the abstract what perception here apprehends at a glance
 completely and with perfect accuracy, namely, how the co-sine
 diminishes as the sine increases, how the co-sine of one angle is
 the sine of another, the inverse relation of the increase and
 decrease of the two angles, and so forth. how time, we might say,
 must complain, that with its one dimension it should be compelled
 to express the three dimensions of space! yet this is necessary if
 we wish to possess, for application, an expression, in abstract
 concepts, of space-relations. they could not be translated directly
 into abstract concepts, but only through the medium of the pure
 temporal quantity, number, which alone is directly related to
 abstract knowledge. yet it is worthy of remark, that as space
 adapts itself so well to perception, and by means of its three
 dimensions, even its complicated relations are easily apprehended,
 while it eludes the grasp of abstract knowledge; time, on the
 contrary, passes easily into abstract knowledge, but gives very
 little to perception. our perceptions of numbers in their proper
 element, mere time, without the help of space, scarcely extends as
 far as ten, and beyond that we have only abstract concepts of
 numbers, no knowledge of them which can be presented in perception.
 on the other hand, we connect with every numeral, and with all
 algebraical symbols, accurately defined abstract concepts.
we may further
 remark here that some minds only find full satisfaction in what is
 known through perception. what they seek is the reason and
 consequent of being in space, sensuously expressed; a demonstration
 after the manner of euclid, or an arithmetical solution of spacial
 problems, does not please them. other minds, on the contrary, seek
 merely the abstract concepts which are needful for applying and
 communicating knowledge. they have patience and memory for abstract
 principles, formulas, demonstrations in long trains of reasoning,
 and calculations, in which the symbols represent the most
 [pg ] complicated
 abstractions. the latter seek preciseness, the former sensible
 perception. the difference is characteristic.
the greatest
 value of rational or abstract knowledge is that it can be
 communicated and permanently retained. it is principally on this
 account that it is so inestimably important for practice. any one
 may have a direct perceptive knowledge through the understanding
 alone, of the causal connection, of the changes and motions of
 natural bodies, and he may find entire satisfaction in it; but he
 cannot communicate this knowledge to others until it has been made
 permanent for thought in concepts. knowledge of the first kind is
 even sufficient for practice, if a man puts his knowledge into
 practice himself, in an action which can be accomplished while the
 perception is still vivid; but it is not sufficient if the help of
 others is required, or even if the action is his own but must be
 carried out at different times, and therefore requires a
 pre-conceived plan. thus, for example, a practised billiard-player
 may have a perfect knowledge of the laws of the impact of elastic
 bodies upon each other, merely in the understanding, merely for
 direct perception; and for him it is quite sufficient; but on the
 other hand it is only the man who has studied the science of
 mechanics, who has, properly speaking, a rational knowledge of
 these laws, that is, a knowledge of them in the abstract. such
 knowledge of the understanding in perception is sufficient even for
 the construction of machines, when the inventor of the machine
 executes the work himself; as we often see in the case of talented
 workmen, who have no scientific knowledge. but whenever a number of
 men, and their united action taking place at different times, is
 required for the completion of a mechanical work, of a machine, or
 a building, then he who conducts it must have thought out the plan
 in the abstract, and such co-operative activity is only possible
 through the assistance of reason. it is, however, remarkable that
 in [pg ] the first kind of
 activity, in which we have supposed that one man alone, in an
 uninterrupted course of action, accomplishes something, abstract
 knowledge, the application of reason or reflection, may often be a
 hindrance to him; for example, in the case of billiard-playing, of
 fighting, of tuning an instrument, or in the case of singing. here
 perceptive knowledge must directly guide action; its passage
 through reflection makes it uncertain, for it divides the attention
 and confuses the man. thus savages and untaught men, who are little
 accustomed to think, perform certain physical exercises, fight with
 beasts, shoot with bows and arrows and the like, with a certainty
 and rapidity which the reflecting european never attains to, just
 because his deliberation makes him hesitate and delay. for he
 tries, for example, to hit the right position or the right point of
 time, by finding out the mean between two false extremes; while the
 savage hits it directly without thinking of the false courses open
 to him. in the same way it is of no use to me to know in the
 abstract the exact angle, in degrees and minutes, at which i must
 apply a razor, if i do not know it intuitively, that is, if i have
 not got it in my touch. the knowledge of physiognomy also, is
 interfered with by the application of reason. this knowledge must
 be gained directly through the understanding. we say that the
 expression, the meaning of the features, can only be felt,
 that is, it cannot be put into abstract concepts. every man has his
 direct intuitive method of physiognomy and pathognomy, yet one man
 understands more clearly than another these signatura rerum. but an abstract
 science of physiognomy to be taught and learned is not possible;
 for the distinctions of difference are here so fine that concepts
 cannot reach them; therefore abstract knowledge is related to them
 as a mosaic is to a painting by a van der werft or a denner. in
 mosaics, however fine they may be, the limits of the stones are
 always there, and therefore no continuous passage from [pg ] one colour to another is possible, and
 this is also the case with regard to concepts, with their rigidity
 and sharp delineation; however finely we may divide them by exact
 definition, they are still incapable of reaching the finer
 modifications of the perceptible, and this is just what happens in
 the example we have taken, knowledge of physiognomy.
this quality of
 concepts by which they resemble the stones of a mosaic, and on
 account of which perception always remains their asymptote, is also
 the reason why nothing good is produced in art by their means. if
 the singer or the virtuoso attempts to guide his execution by
 reflection he remains silent. and this is equally true of the
 composer, the painter, and the poet. the concept always remains
 unfruitful in art; it can only direct the technical part of it, its
 sphere is science. we shall consider more fully in the third book,
 why all true art proceeds from sensuous knowledge, never from the
 concept. indeed, with regard to behaviour also, and personal
 agreeableness in society, the concept has only a negative value in
 restraining the grosser manifestations of egotism and brutality; so
 that a polished manner is its commendable production. but all that
 is attractive, gracious, charming in behaviour, all
 affectionateness and friendliness, must not proceed from the
 concepts, for if it does, “we feel
 intention, and are put out of tune.” all dissimulation is
 the work of reflection; but it cannot be maintained constantly and
 without interruption: “nemo [pg ]potest
 personam diu ferre fictum,” says seneca in his
 book de clementia;
 and so it is generally found out and loses its effect. reason is
 needed in the full stress of life, where quick conclusions, bold
 action, rapid and sure comprehension are required, but it may
 easily spoil all if it gains the upper hand, and by perplexing
 hinders the intuitive, direct discovery, and grasp of the right by
 simple understanding, and thus induces irresolution.
lastly, virtue
 and holiness do not proceed from reflection, but from the inner
 depths of the will, and its relation to knowledge. the exposition
 of this belongs to another part of our work; this, however, i may
 remark here, that the dogmas relating to ethics may be the same in
 the reason of whole nations, but the action of every individual
 different; and the converse also holds good; action, we say, is
 guided by feelings,—that is, simply not by
 concepts, but as a matter of fact by the ethical character. dogmas
 occupy the idle reason; but action in the end pursues its own
 course independently of them, generally not according to abstract
 rules, but according to unspoken maxims, the expression of which is
 the whole man himself. therefore, however different the religious
 dogmas of nations may be, yet in the case of all of them, a good
 action is accompanied by unspeakable satisfaction, and a bad action
 by endless remorse. no mockery can shake the former; no priest's
 absolution can deliver from the latter. notwithstanding this, we
 must allow, that for the pursuit of a virtuous life, the
 application of reason is needful; only it is not its source, but
 has the subordinate function of preserving resolutions which have
 been made, of providing maxims to withstand the weakness of the
 moment, and give consistency to action. it plays the same part
 ultimately in art also, where it has just as little to do with the
 essential matter, but assists in carrying it out, for genius is not
 always at call, and yet the work must be completed in all its parts
 and rounded off to a whole.[pg ]
§ . all these
 discussions of the advantages and disadvantages of the application
 of reason are intended to show, that although abstract rational
 knowledge is the reflex of ideas of perception, and is founded on
 them, it is by no means in such entire congruity with them that it
 could everywhere take their place: indeed it never corresponds to
 them quite accurately. and thus, as we have seen, many human
 actions can only be performed by the help of reason and
 deliberation, and yet there are some which are better performed
 without its assistance. this very incongruity of sensuous and
 abstract knowledge, on account of which the latter always merely
 approximates to the former, as mosaic approximates to painting, is
 the cause of a very remarkable phenomenon which, like reason
 itself, is peculiar to human nature, and of which the explanations
 that have ever anew been attempted, are insufficient: i mean
 laughter. on account of the source
 of this phenomenon, we cannot avoid giving the explanation of it
 here, though it again interrupts the course of our work to do so.
 the cause of laughter in every case is simply the sudden perception
 of the incongruity between a concept and the real objects which
 have been thought through it in some relation, and laughter itself
 is just the expression of this incongruity. it often occurs in this
 way: two or more real objects are thought through one
 concept, and the identity of the concept is transferred to the
 objects; it then becomes strikingly apparent from the entire
 difference of the objects in other respects, that the concept was
 only applicable to them from a one-sided point of view. it occurs
 just as often, however, that the incongruity between a single real
 object and the concept under which, from one point of view, it has
 rightly been subsumed, is suddenly felt. now the more correct the
 subsumption of such objects under a concept may be from one point
 of view, and the greater and more glaring their incongruity with
 it, from another point of view, the greater is [pg ] the ludicrous effect which is produced
 by this contrast. all laughter then is occasioned by a paradox, and
 therefore by unexpected subsumption, whether this is expressed in
 words or in actions. this, briefly stated, is the true explanation
 of the ludicrous.
i shall not
 pause here to relate anecdotes as examples to illustrate my theory;
 for it is so simple and comprehensible that it does not require
 them, and everything ludicrous which the reader may remember is
 equally valuable as a proof of it. but the theory is confirmed and
 illustrated by distinguishing two species into which the ludicrous
 is divided, and which result from the theory. either, we have
 previously known two or more very different real objects, ideas of
 sense-perception, and have intentionally identified them through
 the unity of a concept which comprehends them both; this species of
 the ludicrous is called wit. or, conversely, the concept
 is first present in knowledge, and we pass from it to reality, and
 to operation upon it, to action: objects which in other respects
 are fundamentally different, but which are all thought in that one
 concept, are now regarded and treated in the same way, till, to the
 surprise and astonishment of the person acting, the great
 difference of their other aspects appears: this species of the
 ludicrous is called folly. therefore everything
 ludicrous is either a flash of wit or a foolish action, according
 as the procedure has been from the discrepancy of the objects to
 the identity of the concept, or the converse; the former always
 intentional, the latter always unintentional, and from without. to
 seem to reverse the starting-point, and to conceal wit with the
 mask of folly, is the art of the jester and the clown. being quite
 aware of the diversity of the objects, the jester unites them, with
 secret wit, under one concept, and then starting from this concept
 he receives from the subsequently discovered diversity of the
 objects the surprise which he himself prepared. it follows from
 this short but [pg
 sufficient theory of the ludicrous, that, if we set aside the last
 case, that of the jester, wit must always show itself in words,
 folly generally in actions, though also in words, when it only
 expresses an intention and does not actually carry it out, or when
 it shows itself merely in judgments and opinions.
pedantry is a form of folly. it
 arises in this way: a man lacks confidence in his own
 understanding, and, therefore, does not wish to trust to it, to
 recognise what is right directly in the particular case. he,
 therefore, puts it entirely under the control of the reason, and
 seeks to be guided by reason in everything; that is to say, he
 tries always to proceed from general concepts, rules, and maxims,
 and to confine himself strictly to them in life, in art, and even
 in moral conduct. hence that clinging to the form, to the manner,
 to the expression and word which is characteristic of pedantry, and
 which with it takes the place of the real nature of the matter. the
 incongruity then between the concept and reality soon shows itself
 here, and it becomes evident that the former never condescends to
 the particular case, and that with its generality and rigid
 definiteness it can never accurately apply to the fine distinctions
 of difference and innumerable modifications of the actual.
 therefore, the pedant, with his general maxims, almost always
 misses the mark in life, shows himself to be foolish, awkward,
 useless. in art, in which the concept is unfruitful, he produces
 lifeless, stiff, abortive mannerisms. even with regard to ethics,
 the purpose to act rightly or nobly cannot always be carried out in
 accordance with abstract maxims; for in many cases the excessively
 nice distinctions in the nature of the circumstances necessitate a
 choice of the right proceeding directly from the character; for the
 application of mere abstract maxims sometimes gives false results,
 because the maxims only half apply; and sometimes cannot be carried
 out, because they are foreign to the [pg ] individual character of the actor, and this
 never allows itself to be entirely discovered; therefore,
 inconsistencies arise. since then kant makes it a condition of the
 moral worth of an action, that it shall proceed from pure rational
 abstract maxims, without any inclination or momentary emotion, we
 cannot entirely absolve him from the reproach of encouraging moral
 pedantry. this reproach is the significance of schiller's epigram,
 entitled “scruples of conscience.”
 when we speak, especially in connection with politics, of
 doctrinaires, theorists, savants, and so forth, we mean pedants,
 that is, persons who know the things well in the abstract, but not
 in the concrete. abstraction consists in thinking away the less
 general predicates; but it is precisely upon these that so much
 depends in practice.
to complete our
 theory it remains for us to mention a spurious kind of wit, the
 play upon words, the calembourg, the pun, to which
 may be added the equivocation, the double
 entendre, the chief use of which is the expression of
 what is obscene. just as the witticism brings two very different
 real objects under one concept, the pun brings two different
 concepts, by the assistance of accident, under one word. the same
 contrast appears, only familiar and more superficial, because it
 does not spring from the nature of things, but merely from the
 accident of nomenclature. in the case of the witticism the identity
 is in the concept, the difference in the reality, but in the case
 of the pun the difference is in the concepts and the identity in
 the reality, for the terminology is here the reality. it would only
 be a somewhat far-fetched comparison if we were to say that the pun
 is related to the witticism as the parabola (sic) of the upper inverted cone
 to that of the lower. the misunderstanding of the word or the
 quid pro quo is the
 unintentional pun, and is related to it exactly as folly is to wit.
 thus the deaf man often affords occasion for laughter, just as much
 as the fool, and inferior writers [pg ] of comedy often use the former for the latter
 to raise a laugh.
i have treated
 laughter here only from the psychical side; with regard to the
 physical side, i refer to what is said on the subject in the
 “parerga,” vol. ii. ch. vi., §
§ . by means
 of these various discussions it is hoped that both the difference
 and the relation between the process of knowledge that belongs to
 the reason, rational knowledge, the concept on the one hand, and
 the direct knowledge in purely sensuous, mathematical intuition or
 perception, and apprehension by the understanding on the other
 hand, has been clearly brought out. this remarkable relation of our
 kinds of knowledge led us almost inevitably to give, in passing,
 explanations of feeling and of laughter, but from all this we now
 turn back to the further consideration of science as the third
 great benefit which reason confers on man, the other two being
 speech and deliberate action. the general discussion of science
 which now devolves upon us, will be concerned partly with its form,
 partly with the foundation of its judgments, and lastly with its
 content.
we have seen
 that, with the exception of the basis of pure logic, rational
 knowledge in general has not its source in the reason itself; but
 having been otherwise obtained as knowledge of perception, it is
 stored up in the reason, for through reason it has entirely changed
 its character, and has become abstract knowledge. all rational
 knowledge, that is, knowledge that has been raised to consciousness
 in the abstract, is related to science strictly so called, as a
 fragment to the whole. every one has gained a rational knowledge of
 many different things through experience, through consideration of
 the individual objects presented to him, but only he who sets
 himself the task of acquiring a complete knowledge in the abstract
 of a particular class of objects, strives after science. this class
 can only be marked off [pg
 by means of a concept; therefore, at the beginning of every science
 there stands a concept, and by means of it the class of objects
 concerning which this science promises a complete knowledge in the
 abstract, is separated in thought from the whole world of things.
 for example, the concept of space-relations, or of the action of
 unorganised bodies upon each other, or of the nature of plants, or
 of animals, or of the successive changes of the surface of the
 globe, or of the changes of the human race as a whole, or of the
 construction of a language, and so forth. if science sought to
 obtain the knowledge of its object, by investigating each
 individual thing that is thought through the concept, till by
 degrees it had learned the whole, no human memory would be equal to
 the task, and no certainty of completeness would be obtainable.
 therefore, it makes use of that property of concept-spheres
 explained above, that they include each other, and it concerns
 itself mainly with the wider spheres which lie within the concept
 of its object in general. when the relations of these spheres to
 each other have been determined, all that is thought in them is
 also generally determined, and can now be more and more accurately
 determined by the separation of smaller and smaller
 concept-spheres. in this way it is possible for a science to
 comprehend its object completely. this path which it follows to
 knowledge, the path from the general to the particular,
 distinguishes it from ordinary rational knowledge; therefore,
 systematic form is an essential and characteristic feature of
 science. the combination of the most general concept-spheres of
 every science, that is, the knowledge of its first principles, is
 the indispensable condition of mastering it; how far we advance
 from these to the more special propositions is a matter of choice,
 and does not increase the thoroughness but only the extent of our
 knowledge of the science. the number of the first principles to
 which all the rest are subordinated, varies greatly in the
 different sciences, [pg
 so that in some there is more subordination, in others more
 co-ordination; and in this respect, the former make greater claims
 upon the judgment, the latter upon the memory. it was known to the
 schoolmen, that,
 as the syllogism requires two premises, no science can proceed from
 a single first principle which cannot be the subject of further
 deduction, but must have several, at least two. the specially
 classifying sciences: zoology, botany, and also physics and
 chemistry, inasmuch as they refer all inorganic action to a few
 fundamental forces, have most subordination; history, on the other
 hand, has really none at all; for the general in it consists merely
 in the survey of the principal periods, from which, however, the
 particular events cannot be deduced, and are only subordinated to
 them according to time, but according to the concept are
 co-ordinate with them. therefore, history, strictly speaking, is
 certainly rational knowledge, but is not science. in mathematics,
 according to euclid's treatment, the axioms alone are
 indemonstrable first principles, and all demonstrations are in
 gradation strictly subordinated to them. but this method of
 treatment is not essential to mathematics, and in fact each
 proposition introduces quite a new space construction, which in
 itself is independent of those which precede it, and indeed can be
 completely comprehended from itself, quite independently of them,
 in the pure intuition or perception of space, in which the most
 complicated construction is just as directly evident as the axiom;
 but of this more fully hereafter. meanwhile every mathematical
 proposition remains always a universal truth, which is valid for
 innumerable particular cases; and a graduated process from the
 simple to the complicated propositions which are to be deduced from
 them, is also essential to mathematics; therefore, in every respect
 mathematics is a science. the completeness of a science as such,
 that is, in respect of form, consists in there being as much
 subordination and as little [pg ] co-ordination of the principles as possible.
 scientific talent in general is, therefore, the faculty of
 subordinating the concept-spheres according to their different
 determinations, so that, as plato repeatedly counsels, a science
 shall not be constituted by a general concept and an indefinite
 multiplicity immediately under it, but that knowledge shall descend
 by degrees from the general to the particular, through intermediate
 concepts and divisions, according to closer and closer definitions.
 in kantian language this is called satisfying equally the law of
 homogeneity and that of specification. it arises from this peculiar
 nature of scientific completeness, that the aim of science is not
 greater certainty—for certainty may be possessed in just as high a
 degree by the most disconnected particular knowledge—but its aim is
 rather the facilitating of rational knowledge by means of its form,
 and the possibility of the completeness of rational knowledge which
 this form affords. it is therefore a very prevalent but perverted
 opinion that the scientific character of knowledge consists in its
 greater certainty, and just as false is the conclusion following
 from this, that, strictly speaking, the only sciences are
 mathematics and logic, because only in them, on account of their
 purely a priori
 character, is there unassailable certainty of knowledge. this
 advantage cannot be denied them, but it gives them no special claim
 to be regarded as sciences; for the special characteristic of
 science does not lie in certainty but in the systematic form of
 knowledge, based on the gradual descent from the general to the
 particular. the process of knowledge from the general to the
 particular, which is peculiar to the sciences, involves the
 necessity that in the sciences much should be established by
 deduction from preceding propositions, that is to say, by
 demonstration; and this has given rise to the old mistake that only
 what has been demonstrated is absolutely true, and that every truth
 requires a demonstration; whereas, on the contrary, every
 demonstration [pg
 requires an undemonstrated truth, which ultimately supports it, or
 it may be, its own demonstration. therefore a directly established
 truth is as much to be preferred to a truth established by
 demonstration as water from the spring is to water from the
 aqueduct. perception, partly pure a
 priori, as it forms the basis of mathematics, partly
 empirical a posteriori,
 as it forms the basis of all the other sciences, is the source of
 all truth and the foundation of all science. (logic alone is to be
 excepted, which is not founded upon perception but yet upon
 direct knowledge by the reason of
 its own laws.) not the demonstrated judgments nor their
 demonstrations, but judgments which are created directly out of
 perception, and founded upon it rather than on any demonstrations,
 are to science what the sun is to the world; for all light proceeds
 from them, and lighted by their light the others give light also.
 to establish the truth of such primary judgments directly from
 perception, to raise such strongholds of science from the
 innumerable multitude of real objects, that is the work of the
 faculty
 of judgment, which consists in the power of rightly and
 accurately carrying over into abstract consciousness what is known
 in perception, and judgment is consequently the mediator between
 understanding and reason. only extraordinary and exceptional
 strength of judgment in the individual can actually advance
 science; but every one who is possessed of a healthy reason is able
 to deduce propositions from propositions, to demonstrate, to draw
 conclusions. to lay down and make permanent for reflection, in
 suitable concepts, what is known through perception, so that, on
 the one hand, what is common to many real objects is thought
 through one concept, and, on the other
 hand, their points of difference are each thought through one
 concept, so that the different shall be known and thought as
 different in spite of a partial agreement, and the identical shall
 be known and thought as identical in spite of a partial difference,
 all in accordance with the end and intention which in each case
 [pg ] is in view; all this
 is done by the faculty of judgment. deficiency in
 judgment is silliness. the silly man fails to
 grasp, now the partial or relative difference of concepts which in
 one aspect are identical, now the identity of concepts which are
 relatively or partially different. to this explanation of the
 faculty of judgment, moreover, kant's division of it into
 reflecting and subsuming judgment may be applied, according as it
 passes from the perceived objects to the concepts, or from the
 latter to the former; in both cases always mediating between
 empirical knowledge of the understanding and the reflective
 knowledge of the reason. there can be no truth which could be
 brought out by means of syllogisms alone; and the necessity of
 establishing truth by means of syllogisms is merely relative,
 indeed subjective. since all demonstration is syllogistic, in the
 case of a new truth we must first seek, not for a demonstration,
 but for direct evidence, and only in the absence of such evidence
 is a demonstration to be temporarily made use of. no science is
 susceptible of demonstration throughout any more than a building
 can stand in the air; all its demonstrations must ultimately rest
 upon what is perceived, and consequently cannot be demonstrated,
 for the whole world of reflection rests upon and is rooted in the
 world of perception. all primal, that is, original, evidence is a perception, as the word itself
 indicates. therefore it is either empirical or founded upon the
 perception a priori of the
 conditions of possible experience. in both cases it affords only
 immanent, not transcendent knowledge. every concept has its worth
 and its existence only in its relation, sometimes very indirect, to
 an idea of perception; what is true of the concepts is also true of
 the judgments constructed out of them, and of all science.
 therefore it must in some way be possible to know directly without
 demonstrations or syllogisms every truth that is arrived at through
 syllogisms and communicated by demonstrations. this is most
 difficult in the [pg
 case of certain complicated mathematical propositions at which we
 only arrive by chains of syllogisms; for example, the calculation
 of the chords and tangents to all arcs by deduction from the
 proposition of pythagoras. but even such a truth as this cannot
 essentially and solely rest upon abstract principles, and the
 space-relations which lie at its foundation also must be capable of
 being so presented a
 priori in pure intuition or perception that the truth
 of their abstract expression is directly established. but of
 mathematical demonstration we shall speak more fully shortly.
it is true we
 often hear men speak in a lofty strain of sciences which rest
 entirely upon correct conclusions drawn from sure premises, and
 which are consequently unassailable. but through pure logical
 reasoning, however true the premises may be, we shall never receive
 more than an articulate expression and exposition of what lies
 already complete in the premises; thus we shall only explicitly expound what was
 already implicitly understood. the
 esteemed sciences referred to are, however, specially the
 mathematical sciences, particularly astronomy. but the certainty of
 astronomy arises from the fact that it has for its basis the
 intuition or perception of space, which is given a priori, and is therefore
 infallible. all space-relations, however, follow from each other
 with a necessity (ground of being) which affords a priori certainty, and they can
 therefore be safely deduced from each other. to these mathematical
 properties we have only to add one force of nature, gravity, which
 acts precisely in relation to the masses and the square of the
 distance; and, lastly, the law of inertia, which follows from the
 law of causality and is therefore true a
 priori, and with it the empirical datum of the motion
 impressed, once for all, upon each of these masses. this is the
 whole material of astronomy, which both by its simplicity and its
 certainty leads to definite results, which are highly interesting
 on account of the [pg
 vastness and importance of the objects. for example, if i know the
 mass of a planet and the distance of its satellite from it, i can
 tell with certainty the period of the revolution of the latter
 according to kepler's second law. but the ground of this law is,
 that with this distance only this velocity will both chain the
 satellite to the planet and prevent it from falling into it. thus
 it is only upon such a geometrical basis, that is, by means of an
 intuition or perception a
 priori, and also under the application of a law of
 nature, that much can be arrived at by means of syllogisms, for
 here they are merely like bridges from one
 sensuous apprehension to others; but it is not so with mere pure
 syllogistic reasoning in the exclusively logical method. the source
 of the first fundamental truths of astronomy is, however, properly
 induction, that is, the comprehension of what is given in many
 perceptions in one true and directly founded judgment. from this,
 hypotheses are afterwards constructed, and their confirmation by
 experience, as induction approaching to completeness, affords the
 proof of the first judgment. for example, the apparent motion of
 the planets is known empirically; after many false hypotheses with
 regard to the spacial connection of this motion (planetary course)
 the right one was at last found, then the laws which it obeyed (the
 laws of kepler), and, lastly, the cause of these laws (universal
 gravitation), and the empirically known agreement of all observed
 cases with the whole of the hypotheses, and with their
 consequences, that is to say, induction, established them with
 complete certainty. the invention of the hypotheses was the work of
 the judgment, which rightly comprehended the given facts and
 expressed them accordingly; but induction, that is, a multitude of
 perceptions, confirmed their truth. but their truth could also be
 known directly, and by a single empirical perception, if we could
 pass freely through space and had telescopic eyes. therefore, here
 also syllogisms are not [pg
 the essential and only source of knowledge, but really only a
 makeshift.
as a third
 example taken from a different sphere we may mention that the
 so-called metaphysical truths, that is, such truths as those to
 which kant assigns the position of the metaphysical first
 principles of natural science, do not owe their evidence to
 demonstration. what is a
 priori certain we know directly; as the form of all
 knowledge, it is known to us with the most complete necessity. for
 example, that matter is permanent, that is, can neither come into
 being nor pass away, we know directly as negative truth; for our
 pure intuition or perception of space and time gives the
 possibility of motion; in the law of causality the understanding
 affords us the possibility of change of form and quality, but we
 lack powers of the imagination for conceiving the coming into being
 or passing away of matter. therefore that truth has at all times
 been evident to all men everywhere, nor has it ever been seriously
 doubted; and this could not be the case if it had no other ground
 of knowledge than the abstruse and exceedingly subtle proof of
 kant. but besides this, i have found kant's proof to be false (as
 is explained in the appendix), and have shown above that the
 permanence of matter is to be deduced, not from the share which
 time has in the possibility of experience, but from the share which
 belongs to space. the true foundation of all truths which in this
 sense are called metaphysical, that is, abstract expressions of the
 necessary and universal forms of knowledge, cannot itself lie in
 abstract principles; but only in the immediate consciousness of the
 forms of the idea communicating itself in apodictic assertions
 a priori, and fearing no
 refutation. but if we yet desire to give a proof of them, it can
 only consist in showing that what is to be proved is contained in
 some truth about which there is no doubt, either as a part of it or
 as a presupposition. thus, for example, i have shown that all
 empirical perception implies the [pg ] application of the law of causality, the
 knowledge of which is hence a condition of all experience, and
 therefore cannot be first given and conditioned through experience
 as hume thought. demonstrations in general are not so much for
 those who wish to learn as for those who wish to dispute. such
 persons stubbornly deny directly established insight; now only the
 truth can be consistent in all directions, and therefore we must
 show such persons that they admit under one
 form and indirectly, what they deny under another form and
 directly; that is, the logically necessary connection between what
 is denied and what is admitted.
it is also a
 consequence of the scientific form, the subordination of everything
 particular under a general, and so on always to what is more
 general, that the truth of many propositions is only logically
 proved,—that is, through their dependence upon other propositions,
 through syllogisms, which at the same time appear as proofs. but we
 must never forget that this whole form of science is merely a means
 of rendering knowledge more easy, not a means to greater certainty.
 it is easier to discover the nature of an animal, by means of the
 species to which it belongs, and so on through the genus, family,
 order, and class, than to examine on every occasion the animal
 presented to us: but the truth of all propositions arrived at
 syllogistically is always conditioned by and ultimately dependent
 upon some truth which rests not upon reasoning but upon perception.
 if this perception were always as much within our reach as a
 deduction through syllogisms, then it would be in every respect
 preferable. for every deduction from concepts is exposed to great
 danger of error, on account of the fact we have considered above,
 that so many spheres lie partly within each other, and that their
 content is often vague or uncertain. this is illustrated by a
 multitude of demonstrations of false doctrines and sophisms of
 every kind. syllogisms are indeed perfectly certain as regards
 form, but they are [pg
 very uncertain on account of their matter, the concepts. for, on
 the one hand, the spheres of these are not sufficiently sharply
 defined, and, on the other hand, they intersect each other in so
 many ways that one sphere is in part contained in many others, and
 we may pass at will from it to one or another of these, and from
 this sphere again to others, as we have already shown. or, in other
 words, the minor term and also the middle can always be
 subordinated to different concepts, from which we may choose at
 will the major and the middle, and the nature of the conclusion
 depends on this choice. consequently immediate evidence is always
 much to be preferred to reasoned truth, and the latter is only to
 be accepted when the former is too remote, and not when it is as
 near or indeed nearer than the latter. accordingly we saw above
 that, as a matter of fact, in the case of logic, in which the
 immediate knowledge in each individual case lies nearer to hand
 than deduced scientific knowledge, we always conduct our thought
 according to our immediate knowledge of the laws of thought, and
 leave logic unused.
§ . if now
 with our conviction that perception is the primary source of all
 evidence, and that only direct or indirect connection with it is
 absolute truth; and further, that the shortest way to this is
 always the surest, as every interposition of concepts means
 exposure to many deceptions; if, i say, we now turn with this
 conviction to mathematics, as it was established as a science by
 euclid, and has remained as a whole to our own day, we cannot help
 regarding the method it adopts, as strange and indeed perverted. we
 ask that every logical proof shall be traced back to an origin in
 perception; but mathematics, on the contrary, is at great pains
 deliberately to throw away the evidence of perception which is
 peculiar to it, and always at hand, that it may substitute for it a
 logical demonstration. this must seem to us [pg ] like the action of a man who cuts off
 his legs in order to go on crutches, or like that of the prince in
 the “triumph der
 empfindsamkeit” who flees from the beautiful
 reality of nature, to delight in a stage scene that imitates it. i
 must here refer to what i have said in the sixth chapter of the
 essay on the principle of sufficient reason, and take for granted
 that it is fresh and present in the memory of the reader; so that i
 may link my observations on to it without explaining again the
 difference between the mere ground of knowledge of a mathematical
 truth, which can be given logically, and the ground of being, which
 is the immediate connection of the parts of space and time, known
 only in perception. it is only insight into the ground of being
 that secures satisfaction and thorough knowledge. the mere ground
 of knowledge must always remain superficial; it can afford us
 indeed rational knowledge that a thing is as it is, but it
 cannot tell why it is so. euclid chose the
 latter way to the obvious detriment of the science. for just at the
 beginning, for example, when he ought to show once for all how in a
 triangle the angles and sides reciprocally determine each other,
 and stand to each other in the relation of reason and consequent,
 in accordance with the form which the principle of sufficient
 reason has in pure space, and which there, as in every other
 sphere, always affords the necessity that a thing is as it is,
 because something quite different from it, is as it is; instead of
 in this way giving a thorough insight into the nature of the
 triangle, he sets up certain disconnected arbitrarily chosen
 propositions concerning the triangle, and gives a logical ground of
 knowledge of them, through a laborious logical demonstration, based
 upon the principle of contradiction. instead of an exhaustive
 knowledge of these space-relations we therefore receive merely
 certain results of them, imparted to us at pleasure, and in fact we
 are very much in the position of a man to whom the different
 effects of an ingenious [pg
 machine are shown, but from whom its inner connection and
 construction are withheld. we are compelled by the principle of
 contradiction to admit that what euclid demonstrates is true, but
 we do not comprehend why it is so. we have therefore
 almost the same uncomfortable feeling that we experience after a
 juggling trick, and, in fact, most of euclid's demonstrations are
 remarkably like such feats. the truth almost always enters by the
 back door, for it manifests itself per accidens through some
 contingent circumstance. often a reductio ad absurdum shuts all
 the doors one after another, until only one is left through which
 we are therefore compelled to enter. often, as in the proposition
 of pythagoras, lines are drawn, we don't know why, and it
 afterwards appears that they were traps which close unexpectedly
 and take prisoner the assent of the astonished learner, who must
 now admit what remains wholly inconceivable in its inner
 connection, so much so, that he may study the whole of euclid
 through and through without gaining a real insight into the laws of
 space-relations, but instead of them he only learns by heart
 certain results which follow from them. this specially empirical
 and unscientific knowledge is like that of the doctor who knows
 both the disease and the cure for it, but does not know the
 connection between them. but all this is the necessary consequence
 if we capriciously reject the special kind of proof and evidence of
 one species of knowledge, and forcibly introduce in its stead a
 kind which is quite foreign to its nature. however, in other
 respects the manner in which this has been accomplished by euclid
 deserves all the praise which has been bestowed on him through so
 many centuries, and which has been carried so far that his method
 of treating mathematics has been set up as the pattern of all
 scientific exposition. men tried indeed to model all the sciences
 after it, but later they gave up the attempt without quite knowing
 why. yet in our eyes this method of euclid in mathematics
 [pg ] can appear only as a
 very brilliant piece of perversity. but when a great error in life
 or in science has been intentionally and methodically carried out
 with universal applause, it is always possible to discover its
 source in the philosophy which prevailed at the time. the eleatics
 first brought out the difference, and indeed often the conflict,
 that exists between what is perceived, φαινομενον, and
 what is thought, νουμενον, and used it in many ways in their
 philosophical epigrams, and also in sophisms. they were followed
 later by the megarics, the dialecticians, the sophists, the
 new-academy, and the sceptics; these drew attention to the
 illusion, that is to say, to the deception of the senses, or rather
 of the understanding which transforms the data of the senses into
 perception, and which often causes us to see things to which the
 reason unhesitatingly denies reality; for example, a stick broken
 in water, and such like. it came to be known that sense-perception
 was not to be trusted unconditionally, and it was therefore hastily
 concluded that only rational, logical thought could establish
 truth; although plato (in the parmenides), the megarics, pyrrho,
 and the new-academy, showed by examples (in the manner which was
 afterwards adopted by sextus empiricus) how syllogisms and concepts
 were also sometimes misleading, and indeed produced paralogisms and
 sophisms which arise much more easily and are far harder to explain
 than the illusion of sense-perception. however, this rationalism,
 which arose in opposition to empiricism, kept the upper hand, and
 euclid constructed the science of mathematics in accordance with
 it. he was compelled by necessity to found the axioms upon evidence
 of perception (φαινομενον), but all the rest he based upon
 reasoning (νουμενον). his method reigned supreme through all the
 succeeding centuries, and it could not but do so as long as pure
 intuition or perception, a
 priori, [pg
 was not distinguished from empirical perception. certain passages
 from the works of proclus, the commentator of euclid, which kepler
 translated into latin in his book, “de
 harmonia mundi,” seem to show that he fully recognised this
 distinction. but proclus did not attach enough importance to the
 matter; he merely mentioned it by the way, so that he remained
 unnoticed and accomplished nothing. therefore, not till two
 thousand years later will the doctrine of kant, which is destined
 to make such great changes in all the knowledge, thought, and
 action of european nations, produce this change in mathematics
 also. for it is only after we have learned from this great man that
 the intuitions or perceptions of space and time are quite different
 from empirical perceptions, entirely independent of any impression
 of the senses, conditioning it, not conditioned by it, i.e.,
 are a priori, and
 therefore are not exposed to the illusions of sense; only after we
 have learned this, i say, can we comprehend that euclid's logical
 method of treating mathematics is a useless precaution, a crutch
 for sound legs, that it is like a wanderer who during the night
 mistakes a bright, firm road for water, and carefully avoiding it,
 toils over the broken ground beside it, content to keep from point
 to point along the edge of the supposed water. only now can we
 affirm with certainty that what presents itself to us as necessary
 in the perception of a figure, does not come from the figure on the
 paper, which is perhaps very defectively drawn, nor from the
 abstract concept under which we think it, but immediately from the
 form of all knowledge of which we are conscious a priori. this is always the
 principle of sufficient reason; here as the form of perception,
 i.e., space, it is the principle
 of the ground of being, the evidence and validity of which is,
 however, just as great and as immediate as that of the principle of
 the ground of knowing, i.e., logical certainty. thus we
 need not and ought not to leave the peculiar province of
 mathematics [pg
 in order to put our trust only in logical proof, and seek to
 authenticate mathematics in a sphere which is quite foreign to it,
 that of concepts. if we confine ourselves to the ground peculiar to
 mathematics, we gain the great advantage that in it the rational
 knowledge that something is, is one with the
 knowledge why it is so, whereas the method
 of euclid entirely separates these two, and lets us know only the
 first, not the second. aristotle says admirably in the analyt.,
 post. i. : “ακριβεστερα δ᾽ επιστημη
 χωρις του ὁτι, της του διοτι” (subtilior autem et praestantior ea est
 scientia, quâ quod aliquid sit, et cur sit una simulque intelligimus non
 separatim quod, et cur sit). in physics we are only
 satisfied when the knowledge that a thing is as it is is combined
 with the knowledge why it is so. to know that the mercury in the
 torricellian tube stands thirty inches high is not really rational
 knowledge if we do not know that it is sustained at this height by
 the counterbalancing weight of the atmosphere. shall we then be
 satisfied in mathematics with the qualitas occulta of the circle
 that the segments of any two intersecting chords always contain
 equal rectangles? that it is so euclid certainly demonstrates in
 the th prop. of the third book; why it
 is so remains doubtful. in the same way the proposition of
 pythagoras teaches us a qualitas occulta of the
 right-angled triangle; the stilted and indeed fallacious
 demonstration of euclid forsakes us at the why,
 and a simple figure, which we already know, and which is present to
 us, gives at a glance far more insight into the matter, and firm
 inner conviction of that necessity, and of the dependence of that
 quality upon the right angle:—
[pg
in the case of
 unequal catheti also, and indeed generally in the case of every
 possible geometrical truth, it is quite possible to obtain such a
 conviction based on perception, because these truths were always
 discovered by such an empirically known necessity, and their
 demonstration was only thought out afterwards in addition. thus we
 only require an analysis of the process of thought in the first
 discovery of a geometrical truth in order to know its necessity
 empirically. it is the analytical method in general that i wish for
 the exposition of mathematics, instead of the synthetical method
 which euclid made use of. yet this would have very great, though
 not insuperable, difficulties in the case of complicated
 mathematical truths. here and there in germany men are beginning to
 alter the exposition of mathematics, and to proceed more in this
 analytical way. the greatest effort in this direction has been made
 by herr kosack, teacher of mathematics and physics in the gymnasium
 at nordhausen, who added a thorough attempt to teach geometry
 according to my principles to the programme of the school
 examination on the th of april .
in order to
 improve the method of mathematics, it is especially necessary to
 overcome the prejudice that demonstrated truth has any superiority
 over what is known through perception, or that logical truth
 founded upon the principle of contradiction has any superiority
 over metaphysical truth, which is immediately evident, and to which
 belongs the pure intuition or perception of space.
that which is
 most certain, and yet always inexplicable, is what is involved in
 the principle of sufficient reason, for this principle, in its
 different aspects, expresses the universal form of all our ideas
 and knowledge. all explanation consists of reduction to it,
 exemplification in the particular case of the connection of ideas
 expressed generally through it. it is thus the principle of all
 explanation, and therefore it is neither susceptible of an
 explanation itself, nor does it stand in need of it; for
 [pg ] every explanation
 presupposes it, and only obtains meaning through it. now, none of
 its forms are superior to the rest; it is equally certain and
 incapable of demonstration as the principle of the ground of being,
 or of change, or of action, or of knowing. the relation of reason
 and consequent is a necessity in all its forms, and indeed it is,
 in general, the source of the concept of necessity, for necessity
 has no other meaning. if the reason is given there is no other
 necessity than that of the consequent, and there is no reason that
 does not involve the necessity of the consequent. just as surely
 then as the consequent expressed in the conclusion follows from the
 ground of knowledge given in the premises, does the ground of being
 in space determine its consequent in space: if i know through
 perception the relation of these two, this certainty is just as
 great as any logical certainty. but every geometrical proposition
 is just as good an expression of such a relation as one of the
 twelve axioms; it is a metaphysical truth, and as such, just as
 certain as the principle of contradiction itself, which is a
 metalogical truth, and the common foundation of all logical
 demonstration. whoever denies the necessity, exhibited for
 intuition or perception, of the space-relations expressed in any
 proposition, may just as well deny the axioms, or that the
 conclusion follows from the premises, or, indeed, he may as well
 deny the principle of contradiction itself, for all these relations
 are equally undemonstrable, immediately evident and known
 a priori. for any one to wish to
 derive the necessity of space-relations, known in intuition or
 perception, from the principle of contradiction by means of a
 logical demonstration is just the same as for the feudal superior
 of an estate to wish to hold it as the vassal of another. yet this
 is what euclid has done. his axioms only, he is compelled to leave
 resting upon immediate evidence; all the geometrical truths which
 follow are demonstrated logically, that is to say, from
 [pg ] the agreement of the
 assumptions made in the proposition with the axioms which are
 presupposed, or with some earlier proposition; or from the
 contradiction between the opposite of the proposition and the
 assumptions made in it, or the axioms, or earlier propositions, or
 even itself. but the axioms themselves have no more immediate
 evidence than any other geometrical problem, but only more
 simplicity on account of their smaller content.
when a criminal
 is examined, a procès-verbal is made of his
 statement in order that we may judge of its truth from its
 consistency. but this is only a makeshift, and we are not satisfied
 with it if it is possible to investigate the truth of each of his
 answers for itself; especially as he might lie consistently from
 the beginning. but euclid investigated space according to this
 first method. he set about it, indeed, under the correct assumption
 that nature must everywhere be consistent, and that therefore it
 must also be so in space, its fundamental form. since then the
 parts of space stand to each other in a relation of reason and
 consequent, no single property of space can be different from what
 it is without being in contradiction with all the others. but this
 is a very troublesome, unsatisfactory, and roundabout way to
 follow. it prefers indirect knowledge to direct, which is just as
 certain, and it separates the knowledge that a thing is from the
 knowledge why it is, to the great disadvantage of the science; and
 lastly, it entirely withholds from the beginner insight into the
 laws of space, and indeed renders him unaccustomed to the special
 investigation of the ground and inner connection of things,
 inclining him to be satisfied with a mere historical knowledge that
 a thing is as it is. the exercise of acuteness which this method is
 unceasingly extolled as affording consists merely in this, that the
 pupil practises drawing conclusions, i.e.,
 he practises applying the principle of contradiction, but specially
 he exerts his memory to retain all those data whose agreement is to
 be tested. [pg
 moreover, it is worth noticing that this method of proof was
 applied only to geometry and not to arithmetic. in arithmetic the
 truth is really allowed to come home to us through perception
 alone, which in it consists simply in counting. as the perception
 of numbers is in time alone, and therefore cannot
 be represented by a sensuous schema like the geometrical figure,
 the suspicion that perception is merely empirical, and possibly
 illusive, disappeared in arithmetic, and the introduction of the
 logical method of proof into geometry was entirely due to this
 suspicion. as time has only one dimension, counting is the only
 arithmetical operation, to which all others may be reduced; and yet
 counting is just intuition or perception a
 priori, to which there is no hesitation in appealing
 here, and through which alone everything else, every sum and every
 equation, is ultimately proved. we prove, for example, not that (
 +  ×  - )/ = ; but we refer to the pure perception in time,
 counting thus makes each individual problem an axiom. instead of
 the demonstrations that fill geometry, the whole content of
 arithmetic and algebra is thus simply a method of abbreviating
 counting. we mentioned above that our immediate perception of
 numbers in time extends only to about ten. beyond this an abstract
 concept of the numbers, fixed by a word, must take the place of the
 perception; which does not therefore actually occur any longer, but
 is only indicated in a thoroughly definite manner. yet even so, by
 the important assistance of the system of figures which enables us
 to represent all larger numbers by the same small ones, intuitive
 or perceptive evidence of every sum is made possible, even where we
 make such use of abstraction that not only the numbers, but
 indefinite quantities and whole operations are thought only in the
 abstract and indicated as so thought, as [sqrt](r^b) so that we do
 not perform them, but merely symbolise them.
we might
 establish truth in geometry also, through [pg ] pure a
 priori perception, with the same right and certainty
 as in arithmetic. it is in fact always this necessity, known
 through perception in accordance with the principle of sufficient
 reason of being, which gives to geometry its principal evidence,
 and upon which in the consciousness of every one, the certainty of
 its propositions rests. the stilted logical demonstration is always
 foreign to the matter, and is generally soon forgotten, without
 weakening our conviction. it might indeed be dispensed with
 altogether without diminishing the evidence of geometry, for this
 is always quite independent of such demonstration, which never
 proves anything we are not convinced of already, through another
 kind of knowledge. so far then it is like a cowardly soldier, who
 adds a wound to an enemy slain by another, and then boasts that he
 slew him himself.
after all this
 we hope there will be no doubt that the evidence of mathematics,
 which has become the pattern and symbol of all evidence, rests
 essentially not upon demonstration, but upon immediate perception,
 which is thus here, as everywhere else, the ultimate ground and
 source of truth. yet the perception which lies at the basis of
 mathematics has a great advantage over all other perception, and
 therefore over empirical perception. it is a
 priori, and therefore independent of experience,
 which is always given only in successive parts; therefore
 everything is equally near to it, and we can start either from the
 reason or from the consequent, as we please. now this makes it
 absolutely reliable, [pg
 for in it the consequent is known from the reason, and this is the
 only kind of knowledge that has necessity; for example, the
 equality of the sides is known as established by the equality of
 the angles. all empirical perception, on the other hand, and the
 greater part of experience, proceeds conversely from the consequent
 to the reason, and this kind of knowledge is not infallible, for
 necessity only attaches to the consequent on account of the reason
 being given, and no necessity attaches to the knowledge of the
 reason from the consequent, for the same consequent may follow from
 different reasons. the latter kind of knowledge is simply
 induction, i.e., from many consequents
 which point to one reason, the reason is accepted as certain; but
 as the cases can never be all before us, the truth here is not
 unconditionally certain. but all knowledge through
 sense-perception, and the great bulk of experience, has only this
 kind of truth. the affection of one of the senses induces the
 understanding to infer a cause of the effect, but, as a conclusion
 from the consequent to the reason is never certain, illusion, which
 is deception of the senses, is possible, and indeed often occurs,
 as was pointed out above. only when several of the senses, or it
 may be all the five, receive impressions which point to the same
 cause, the possibility of illusion is reduced to a minimum; but yet
 it still exists, for there are cases, for example, the case of
 counterfeit money, in which all the senses are deceived. all
 empirical knowledge, and consequently the whole of natural science,
 is in the same position, except only the pure, or as kant calls it,
 metaphysical part of it. here also the causes are known from the
 effects, consequently all natural philosophy rests upon hypotheses,
 which are often false, and must then gradually give place to more
 correct ones. only in the case of purposely arranged experiments,
 knowledge proceeds from the cause to the effect, that is, it
 follows the method that affords certainty; but these experiments
 [pg ] themselves are
 undertaken in consequence of hypotheses. therefore, no branch of
 natural science, such as physics, or astronomy, or physiology could
 be discovered all at once, as was the case with mathematics and
 logic, but required and requires the collected and compared
 experiences of many centuries. in the first place, repeated
 confirmation in experience brings the induction, upon which the
 hypothesis rests, so near completeness that in practice it takes
 the place of certainty, and is regarded as diminishing the value of
 the hypothesis, its source, just as little as the
 incommensurability of straight and curved lines diminishes the
 value of the application of geometry, or that perfect exactness of
 the logarithm, which is not attainable, diminishes the value of
 arithmetic. for as the logarithm, or the squaring of the circle,
 approaches infinitely near to correctness through infinite
 fractions, so, through manifold experience, the induction,
 i.e., the knowledge of the cause
 from the effects, approaches, not infinitely indeed, but yet so
 near mathematical evidence, i.e., knowledge of the effects
 from the cause, that the possibility of mistake is small enough to
 be neglected, but yet the possibility exists; for example, a
 conclusion from an indefinite number of cases to all cases,
 i.e., to the unknown ground on
 which all depend, is an induction. what conclusion of this kind
 seems more certain than that all men have the heart on the left
 side? yet there are extremely rare and quite isolated exceptions of
 men who have the heart upon the right side. sense-perception and
 empirical science have, therefore, the same kind of evidence. the
 advantage which mathematics, pure natural science, and logic have
 over them, as a priori
 knowledge, rests merely upon this, that the formal element in
 knowledge upon which all that is a
 priori is based, is given as a whole and at once, and
 therefore in it we can always proceed from the cause to the effect,
 while in the former kind of knowledge we are generally obliged to
 proceed from the effect to the [pg ] cause. in other respects, the law of
 causality, or the principle of sufficient reason of change, which
 guides empirical knowledge, is in itself just as certain as the
 other forms of the principle of sufficient reason which are
 followed by the a priori
 sciences referred to above. logical demonstrations from concepts or
 syllogisms have the advantage of proceeding from the reason to the
 consequent, just as much as knowledge through perception
 a priori, and therefore in
 themselves, i.e., according to their form,
 they are infallible. this has greatly assisted to bring
 demonstration in general into such esteem. but this infallibility
 is merely relative; the demonstration merely subsumes under the
 first principles of the science, and it is these which contain the
 whole material truth of science, and they must not themselves be
 demonstrated, but must be founded on perception. in the few
 a priori sciences we have named
 above, this perception is pure, but everywhere else it is
 empirical, and is only raised to universality through induction.
 if, then, in the empirical sciences also, the particular is proved
 from the general, yet the general, on the other hand, has received
 its truth from the particular; it is only a store of collected
 material, not a self-constituted foundation.
so much for the
 foundation of truth. of the source and possibility of error many
 explanations have been tried since plato's metaphorical solution of
 the dove-cot where the wrong pigeons are caught, &c.
 (theætetus, p. , et seq.) kant's vague,
 indefinite explanation of the source of error by means of the
 diagram of diagonal motion, will be found in the “critique of pure reason,” p.  of the first
 edition, and p.  of the fifth. as truth is the relation of a
 judgment to its ground of knowledge, it is always a problem how the
 person judging can believe that he has such a ground of knowledge
 and yet not have it; that is to say, how error, the deception of
 reason, is possible. i find this possibility quite analogous to
 that of illusion, or the deception of the understanding,
 [pg ] which has been
 explained above. my opinion is (and this is what gives this
 explanation its proper place here) that every error is an
 inference from the consequent to the reason, which
 indeed is valid when we know that the consequent has that reason
 and can have no other; but otherwise is not valid. the person who
 falls into error, either attributes to a consequent a reason which
 it cannot have, in which case he shows actual deficiency of
 understanding, i.e., deficiency in the capacity
 for immediate knowledge of the connection between the cause and the
 effect, or, as more frequently happens, he attributes to the effect
 a cause which is possible, but he adds to the major proposition of
 the syllogism, in which he infers the cause from the effect, that
 this effect always results only from this
 cause. now he could only be assured of this by a complete
 induction, which, however, he assumes without having made it. this
 “always” is therefore too wide a
 concept, and instead of it he ought to have used “sometimes” or “generally.” the conclusion would then be
 problematical, and therefore not erroneous. that the man who errs
 should proceed in this way is due either to haste, or to
 insufficient knowledge of what is possible, on account of which he
 does not know the necessity of the induction that ought to be made.
 error then is quite analogous to illusion. both are inferences from
 the effect to the cause; the illusion brought about always in
 accordance with the law of causality, and by the understanding
 alone, thus directly, in perception itself; the error in accordance
 with all the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, and by
 the reason, thus in thought itself; yet most commonly in accordance
 with the law of causality, as will appear from the three following
 examples, which may be taken as types or representatives of the
 three kinds of error. (.) the illusion of the senses (deception of
 the understanding) induces error (deception of the reason); for
 example, if one mistakes a painting for an alto-relief, and
 actually [pg
 takes it for such; the error results from a conclusion from the
 following major premise: “if dark grey
 passes regularly through all shades to white; the cause is
 always the light, which strikes
 differently upon projections and depressions, ergo—.” (.) “if there is no money in my safe, the cause is
 always that my servant has got a
 key for it: ergo—.”
 (.) “if a ray of sunlight, broken through
 a prism, i.e., bent up or down, appears
 as a coloured band instead of round and white as before, the cause
 must always be that light consists of homogeneous rays, differently
 coloured and refrangible to different degrees, which, when forced
 asunder on account of the difference of their refrangibility, give
 an elongated and variously-coloured spectrum: ergo—bibamus!”—it must be
 possible to trace every error to such a conclusion, drawn from a
 major premise which is often only falsely generalised,
 hypothetical, and founded on the assumption that some particular
 cause is that of a certain effect. only certain mistakes in
 counting are to be excepted, and they are not really errors, but
 merely mistakes. the operation prescribed by the concepts of the
 numbers has not been carried out in pure intuition or perception,
 in counting, but some other operation instead of it.
as regards the
 content of the sciences generally,
 it is, in fact, always the relation of the phenomena of the world
 to each other, according to the principle of sufficient reason,
 under the guidance of the why, which has validity and
 meaning only through this principle. explanation is the establishment
 of this relation. therefore explanation can never go further than
 to show two ideas standing to each other in the relation peculiar
 to that form of the principle of sufficient reason which reigns in
 the class to which they belong. if this is done we cannot further
 be asked the question, why: for the relation proved is
 that one which absolutely cannot be imagined as other than it is,
 i.e., it is the form of all
 knowledge. therefore we do not ask why  +  = ; or why the
 equality of the [pg
 angles of a triangle determines the equality of the sides; or why
 its effect follows any given cause; or why the truth of the
 conclusion is evident from the truth of the premises. every
 explanation which does not ultimately lead to a relation of which
 no “why” can further be demanded,
 stops at an accepted qualitas
 occulta; but this is the character of every original
 force of nature. every explanation in natural science must
 ultimately end with such a qualitas
 occulta, and thus with complete obscurity. it must
 leave the inner nature of a stone just as much unexplained as that
 of a human being; it can give as little account of the weight, the
 cohesion, the chemical qualities, &c., of the former, as of the
 knowing and acting of the latter. thus, for example, weight is a
 qualitas occulta, for it can be
 thought away, and does not proceed as a necessity from the form of
 knowledge; which, on the contrary, is not the case with the law of
 inertia, for it follows from the law of causality, and is therefore
 sufficiently explained if it is referred to that law. there are two
 things which are altogether inexplicable,—that is to say, do not
 ultimately lead to the relation which the principle of sufficient
 reason expresses. these are, first, the principle of sufficient
 reason itself in all its four forms, because it is the principle of
 all explanation, which has meaning only in relation to it;
 secondly, that to which this principle does not extend, but which
 is the original source of all phenomena; the thing-in-itself, the
 knowledge of which is not subject to the principle of sufficient
 reason. we must be content for the present not to understand this
 thing-in-itself, for it can only be made intelligible by means of
 the following book, in which we shall resume this consideration of
 the possible achievements of the sciences. but at the point at
 which natural science, and indeed every science, leaves things,
 because not only its explanation of them, but even the principle of
 this explanation, the principle of sufficient reason, does not
 extend beyond this point; there philosophy [pg ] takes them up and treats them after its own
 method, which is quite distinct from the method of science. in my
 essay on the principle of sufficient reason, § , i have shown how
 in the different sciences the chief guiding clue is one or other
 form of that principle; and, in fact, perhaps the most appropriate
 classification of the sciences might be based upon this
 circumstance. every explanation arrived at by the help of this clue
 is, as we have said, merely relative; it explains things in
 relation to each other, but something which indeed is presupposed
 is always left unexplained. in mathematics, for example, this is
 space and time; in mechanics, physics, and chemistry it is matter,
 qualities, original forces and laws of nature; in botany and
 zoology it is the difference of species, and life itself; in
 history it is the human race with all its properties of thought and
 will: in all it is that form of the principle of sufficient reason
 which is respectively applicable. it is peculiar to philosophy that it presupposes
 nothing as known, but treats everything as equally external and a
 problem; not merely the relations of phenomena, but also the
 phenomena themselves, and even the principle of sufficient reason
 to which the other sciences are content to refer everything. in
 philosophy nothing would be gained by such a reference, as one
 member of the series is just as external to it as another; and,
 moreover, that kind of connection is just as much a problem for
 philosophy as what is joined together by it, and the latter again
 is just as much a problem after its combination has been explained
 as before it. for, as we have said, just what the sciences
 presuppose and lay down as the basis and the limits of their
 explanation, is precisely and peculiarly the problem of philosophy,
 which may therefore be said to begin where science ends. it cannot
 be founded upon demonstrations, for they lead from known principles
 to unknown, but everything is equally unknown and external to
 philosophy. there can be no principle in consequence of which the
 world with [pg
 all its phenomena first came into existence, and therefore it is
 not possible to construct, as spinoza wished, a philosophy which
 demonstrates ex firmis
 principiis. philosophy is the most general rational
 knowledge, the first principles of which cannot therefore be
 derived from another principle still more general. the principle of
 contradiction establishes merely the agreement of concepts, but
 does not itself produce concepts. the principle of sufficient
 reason explains the connections of phenomena, but not the phenomena
 themselves; therefore philosophy cannot proceed upon these
 principles to seek a causa
 efficiens or a causa finalis of the whole
 world. my philosophy, at least, does not by any means seek to know
 whence or wherefore the world exists, but
 merely what the world is. but the
 why is here subordinated to the
 what, for it already belongs to
 the world, as it arises and has meaning and validity only through
 the form of its phenomena, the principle of sufficient reason. we
 might indeed say that every one knows what the world is without
 help, for he is himself that subject of knowledge of which the
 world is the idea; and so far this would be true. but that
 knowledge is empirical, is in the concrete; the task of philosophy
 is to reproduce this in the abstract to raise to permanent rational
 knowledge the successive changing perceptions, and in general, all
 that is contained under the wide concept of feeling and merely
 negatively defined as not abstract, distinct, rational knowledge.
 it must therefore consist of a statement in the abstract, of the
 nature of the whole world, of the whole, and of all the parts. in
 order then that it may not lose itself in the endless multitude of
 particular judgments, it must make use of abstraction and think
 everything individual in the universal, and its differences also in
 the universal. it must therefore partly separate and partly unite,
 in order to present to rational knowledge the whole manifold of the
 world generally, according to its nature, comprehended in a few
 abstract concepts. [pg
 through these concepts, in which it fixes the nature of the world,
 the whole individual must be known as well as the universal, the
 knowledge of both therefore must be bound together to the minutest
 point. therefore the capacity for philosophy consists just in that
 in which plato placed it, the knowledge of the one in the many, and
 the many in the one. philosophy will therefore be a sum-total of
 general judgments, whose ground of knowledge is immediately the
 world itself in its entirety, without excepting anything; thus all
 that is to be found in human consciousness; it will be a complete
 recapitulation, as it were, a reflection, of the world in abstract
 concepts, which is only possible by the union of the
 essentially identical in one concept and the relegation of
 the different to another. this task was already prescribed to
 philosophy by bacon of verulam when he said: ea
 demum vera est philosophia, quae mundi ipsius voces fidelissime
 reddit, et veluti dictante mundo conscripta est, et nihil aliud
 est, quam ejusdem simulacrum et
 reflectio, neque addit quidquam
 de proprio, sed tantum iterat et resonat (de augm.
 scient., l. , c. ). but we take this in a wider sense than bacon
 could then conceive.
the agreement
 which all the sides and parts of the world have with each other,
 just because they belong to a whole, must also be found in this
 abstract copy of it. therefore the judgments in this sum-total
 could to a certain extent be deduced from each other, and indeed
 always reciprocally so deduced. yet to make the first judgment
 possible, they must all be present, and thus implied as prior to it
 in the knowledge of the world in the concrete, especially as all
 direct proof is more certain than indirect proof; their harmony
 with each other by virtue of which they come together into the
 unity of one thought, and which arises from
 the harmony and unity of the world of perception itself, which is
 their common ground of knowledge, is not therefore to be made use
 of to establish them, as that which is prior to them, [pg ] but is only added as a confirmation of
 their truth. this problem itself can only become quite clear in
 being solved.
§ . after this
 full consideration of reason as a special faculty of knowledge
 belonging to man alone, and the results and phenomena peculiar to
 human nature brought about by it, it still remains for me to speak
 of reason, so far as it is the guide of human action, and in this
 respect may be called practical. but what there is to
 say upon this point has found its place elsewhere in the appendix
 to this work, where i controvert the existence of the so-called
 practical reason of kant, which he (certainly very conveniently)
 explained as the immediate source of virtue, and as the seat of an
 absolute (i.e., fallen from heaven)
 imperative. the detailed and thorough refutation of this kantian
 principle of morality i have given later in the “fundamental problems of ethics.” there remains,
 therefore, but little for me to say here about the actual influence
 of reason, in the true sense of the word, upon action. at the
 commencement of our treatment of reason we remarked, in general
 terms, how much the action and behaviour of men differs from that
 of brutes, and that this difference is to be regarded as entirely
 due to the presence of abstract concepts in consciousness. the
 influence of these upon our whole existence is so penetrating and
 significant that, on account of them, we are related to the lower
 animals very much as those animals that see are related to those
 that have no eyes (certain larvae, worms, and zoophytes). animals
 without eyes know only by touch what is immediately present to them
 in space, what comes into contact with them; those which see, on
 the contrary, know a wide circle of near and distant objects. in
 the same way the absence of reason confines the lower animals to
 the ideas of perception, i.e., the real objects which are
 immediately present to them in time; we, on the contrary, on
 account [pg
 of knowledge in the abstract, comprehend not only the narrow actual
 present, but also the whole past and future, and the wide sphere of
 the possible; we view life freely on all its sides, and go far
 beyond the present and the actual. thus what the eye is in space
 and for sensuous knowledge, reason is, to a certain extent, in time
 and for inner knowledge. but as the visibility of objects has its
 worth and meaning only in the fact that it informs us of their
 tangibility, so the whole worth of abstract knowledge always
 consists in its relation to what is perceived. therefore men
 naturally attach far more worth to immediate and perceived
 knowledge than to abstract concepts, to that which is merely
 thought; they place empirical knowledge before logical. but this is
 not the opinion of men who live more in words than in deeds, who
 have seen more on paper and in books than in actual life, and who
 in their greatest degeneracy become pedants and lovers of the mere
 letter. thus only is it conceivable that leibnitz and wolf and all
 their successors could go so far astray as to explain knowledge of
 perception, after the example of duns scotus, as merely confused
 abstract knowledge! to the honour of spinoza, i must mention that
 his truer sense led him, on the contrary, to explain all general
 concepts as having arisen from the confusion of that which was
 known in perception (eth. ii., prop. , schol. ). it is also a
 result of perverted opinion that in mathematics the evidence proper
 to it was rejected, and logical evidence alone accepted; that
 everything in general which was not abstract knowledge was
 comprehended under the wide name of feeling, and consequently was
 little valued; and lastly that the kantian ethics regarded the good
 will which immediately asserts itself upon knowledge of the
 circumstances, and guides to right and good action as mere feeling
 and emotion, and consequently as worthless and without merit, and
 would [pg ] only recognise
 actions which proceed from abstract maxims as having moral
 worth.
the many-sided
 view of life as a whole which man, as distinguished from the lower
 animals, possesses through reason, may be compared to a
 geometrical, colourless, abstract, reduced plan of his actual life.
 he, therefore, stands to the lower animals as the navigator who, by
 means of chart, compass, and quadrant, knows accurately his course
 and his position at any time upon the sea, stands to the uneducated
 sailors who see only the waves and the heavens. thus it is worth
 noticing, and indeed wonderful, how, besides his life in the
 concrete, man always lives another life in the abstract. in the
 former he is given as a prey to all the storms of actual life, and
 to the influence of the present; he must struggle, suffer, and die
 like the brute. but his life in the abstract, as it lies before his
 rational consciousness, is the still reflection of the former, and
 of the world in which he lives; it is just that reduced chart or
 plan to which we have referred. here in the sphere of quiet
 deliberation, what completely possessed him and moved him intensely
 before, appears to him cold, colourless, and for the moment
 external to him; he is merely the spectator, the observer. in
 respect of this withdrawal into reflection he may be compared to an
 actor who has played his part in one scene, and who takes his place
 among the audience till it is time for him to go upon the stage
 again, and quietly looks on at whatever may happen, even though it
 be the preparation for his own death (in the piece), but afterwards
 he again goes on the stage and acts and suffers as he must. from
 this double life proceeds that quietness peculiar to human beings,
 so very different from the thoughtlessness of the brutes, and with
 which, in accordance with previous reflection, or a formed
 determination, or a recognised necessity, a man suffers or
 accomplishes in cold blood, what is of the utmost and often
 terrible importance to him; suicide, execution, the [pg ] duel, enterprises of every kind fraught
 with danger to life, and, in general, things against which his
 whole animal nature rebels. under such circumstances we see to what
 an extent reason has mastered the animal nature, and we say to the
 strong: σιδηρειον νυ τοι ἡτορ! (ferreum certe tibi cor), il. ,
 . here we can say truly that reason manifests itself
 practically, and thus wherever action is guided by reason, where
 the motives are abstract concepts, wherever we are not determined
 by particular ideas of perception, nor by the impression of the
 moment which guides the brutes, there practical
 reason shows itself. but i have fully explained in the
 appendix, and illustrated by examples, that this is entirely
 different from and unrelated to the ethical worth of actions; that
 rational action and virtuous action are two entirely different
 things; that reason may just as well find itself in connection with
 great evil as with great good, and by its assistance may give great
 power to the one as well as to the other; that it is equally ready
 and valuable for the methodical and consistent carrying out of the
 noble and of the bad intention, of the wise as of the foolish
 maxim; which all results from the constitution of its nature, which
 is feminine, receptive, retentive, and not spontaneous; all this i
 have shown in detail in the appendix, and illustrated by examples.
 what is said there would have been placed here, but on account of
 my polemic against kant's pretended practical reason i have been
 obliged to relegate it to the appendix, to which i therefore
 refer.
the ideal
 explained in the stoical philosophy is the most
 complete development of practical reason in the true and
 genuine sense of the word; it is the highest summit to which man
 can attain by the mere use of his reason, and in it his difference
 from the brutes shows itself most distinctly. for the ethics of
 stoicism are originally and essentially, not a doctrine of virtue,
 but merely a guide to a rational life, the end and aim of which is
 happiness through peace of mind. virtuous conduct appears in it
 [pg ] as it were merely by
 accident, as the means, not as the end. therefore the ethical
 theory of stoicism is in its whole nature and point of view
 fundamentally different from the ethical systems which lay stress
 directly upon virtue, such as the doctrines of the vedas, of plato,
 of christianity, and of kant. the aim of stoical ethics is
 happiness: τελος το ευδαι μονειν (virtutes omnes finem habere
 beatitudinem) it is called in the account of the stoa
 by stobæus (ecl., l. ii. c. , p. , and also p. ). yet the
 ethics of stoicism teach that happiness can only be attained with
 certainty through inward peace and quietness of spirit (αταραξια),
 and that this again can only be reached through virtue; this is the
 whole meaning of the saying that virtue is the highest good. but if
 indeed by degrees the end is lost sight of in the means, and virtue
 is inculcated in a way which discloses an interest entirely
 different from that of one's own happiness, for it contradicts this
 too distinctly; this is just one of those inconsistencies by means
 of which, in every system, the immediately known, or, as it is
 called, felt truth leads us back to the right way in defiance of
 syllogistic reasoning; as, for example, we see clearly in the
 ethical teaching of spinoza, which deduces a pure doctrine of
 virtue from the egoistical suum utile
 quærere by means of palpable sophisms. according to
 this, as i conceive the spirit of the stoical ethics, their source
 lies in the question whether the great prerogative of man, reason,
 which, by means of planned action and its results, relieves life
 and its burdens so much, might not also be capable of freeing him
 at once, directly, i.e., through mere knowledge,
 completely, or nearly so, of the sorrows and miseries of every kind
 of which his life is full. they held that it was not in keeping
 with the prerogative of reason that the nature given with it, which
 by means of it comprehends and contemplates an infinity of things
 and circumstances, should yet, through the present, and the
 accidents that can be contained in the few years of a life that is
 short, [pg
 fleeting, and uncertain, be exposed to such intense pain, to such
 great anxiety and suffering, as arise from the tempestuous strain
 of the desires and the antipathies; and they believed that the due
 application of reason must raise men above them, and can make them
 invulnerable. therefore antisthenes says: δει κτασθαι νουν, η
 βροχον (aut mentem parandam, aut
 laqueum. plut. de stoic. repugn., c. ),
 i.e., life is so full of
 troubles and vexations, that one must either rise above it by means
 of corrected thoughts, or leave it. it was seen that want and
 suffering did not directly and of necessity spring from not having,
 but from desiring to have and not having; that therefore this
 desire to have is the necessary condition under which alone it
 becomes a privation not to have and begets pain. ου πενια λυπην
 εργαζεται, αλλα επιθυμια (non paupertas
 dolorem efficit, sed cupiditas), epict., fragm. .
 men learned also from experience that it is only the hope of what
 is claimed that begets and nourishes the wish; therefore neither
 the many unavoidable evils which are common to all, nor
 unattainable blessings, disquiet or trouble us, but only the
 trifling more or less of those things which we can avoid or attain;
 indeed, not only what is absolutely unavoidable or unattainable,
 but also what is merely relatively so, leaves us quite undisturbed;
 therefore the ills that have once become joined to our
 individuality, or the good things that must of necessity always be
 denied us, are treated with indifference, in accordance with the
 peculiarity of human nature that every wish soon dies and can no
 more beget pain if it is not nourished by hope. it followed from
 all this that happiness always depends upon the proportion between
 our claims and what we receive. it is all one whether the
 quantities thus related be great or small, and the proportion can
 be established just as well by diminishing the amount of the first
 as by increasing the amount of the second; and in the same way it
 also follows that all suffering proceeds from the want of
 proportion [pg
 between what we demand and expect and what we get. now this want of
 proportion obviously lies only in knowledge, and it could be
 entirely abolished through fuller insight.
 therefore chrysippus says: δει ζῃν κατ᾽ εμπειριαν των φυσει
 συμβαινοντων (stob. ecl., l. ii. c. , p. ), that is, one ought
 to live with a due knowledge of the transitory nature of the things
 of the world. for as often as a man loses self-command, or is
 struck down by a misfortune, or grows angry, or becomes
 faint-hearted, he shows that he finds things different from what he
 expected, consequently that he was caught in error, and did not
 know the world and life, did not know that the will of the
 individual is crossed at every step by the chance of inanimate
 nature and the antagonism of aims and the wickedness of other
 individuals: he has therefore either not made use of his reason in
 order to arrive at a general knowledge of this characteristic of
 life, or he lacks judgment, in that he does not recognise in the
 particular what he knows in general, and is therefore surprised by
 it and loses his self-command. thus
 also every keen pleasure is an error and an illusion, for no
 attained wish can give lasting satisfaction; and, moreover, every
 possession and every happiness is but lent by chance for an
 uncertain time, and may therefore be demanded back the next hour.
 all pain rests on the passing away of such an illusion; thus both
 arise from defective knowledge; the wise man therefore holds
 himself equally aloof from joy and sorrow, and no event disturbs
 his αταραξια.
in accordance
 with this spirit and aim of the stoa, epictetus began and ended
 with the doctrine as the kernel [pg ] of his philosophy, that we should consider
 well and distinguish what depends upon us and what does not, and
 therefore entirely avoid counting upon the latter, whereby we shall
 certainly remain free from all pain, sorrow, and anxiety. but that
 which alone is dependent upon us is the will; and here a transition
 gradually takes place to a doctrine of virtue, for it is observed
 that as the outer world, which is independent of us, determines
 good and bad fortune, so inner contentment with ourselves, or the
 absence of it, proceeds from the will. but it was then asked
 whether we ought to apply the words bonum and malum to the two former or to
 the two latter? this was indeed arbitrary and a matter of choice,
 and did not make any real difference, but yet the stoics disputed
 everlastingly with the peripatetics and epicureans about it, and
 amused themselves with the inadmissible comparison of two entirely
 incommensurable quantities, and the antithetical, paradoxical
 judgments which proceeded from them, and which they flung at each
 other. the paradoxa of cicero afford us an
 interesting collection of these from the stoical side.
zeno, the
 founder, seems originally to have followed a somewhat different
 path. the starting-point with him was that for the attainment of
 the highest good, i.e., blessedness and spiritual
 peace, one must live in harmony with oneself (ὁμολογουμενους ξῃν;
 δ᾽ εστι καθ᾽ ἑνα λογον και συμφωνον ξῃν.—consonanter vivere: hoc est secundum unam
 rationem et concordem sibi vivere. stob. ecl. eth. l.
 ii., c. , p. . also: αρετην διαθεσιν ειναι ψυχης συμφωνον ἑαυτῃ
 περι ὁλον τον βιον. virtutem esse animi
 affectiomem secum per totam vitam consentientem,
 ibid., p. .) now this was
 only possible for a man if he determined himself entirely
 rationally, according to concepts, not according to changing
 impressions and moods; since, however, only the maxims of our
 conduct, not the consequences nor the outward circumstances, are in
 our power, in order to be always consistent we must set
 [pg ] before us as our aim
 only the maxims and not the consequences and circumstances, and
 thus again a doctrine of virtue is introduced.
but the ethical
 principle of zeno—to live in harmony with oneself—appeared even to
 his immediate successors to be too formal and empty. they therefore
 gave it material content by the addition—“to live in harmony with nature” (ὁμολογουμενως
 τῃ φυσει ζῃν), which, as stobæus mentions in another place, was
 first added by kleanthes, and extended the matter very much on
 account of the wide sphere of the concept and the vagueness of the
 expression. for kleanthes meant the whole of nature in general,
 while chrysippus meant human nature in particular (diog. laert., ,
 ). it followed that what alone was adapted to the latter was
 virtue, just as the satisfaction of animal desires was adapted to
 animal natures; and thus ethics had again to be forcibly united to
 a doctrine of virtue, and in some way or other established through
 physics. for the stoics always aimed at unity of principle, as for
 them god and the world were not dissevered.
the ethical
 system of stoicism, regarded as a whole, is in fact a very valuable
 and estimable attempt to use the great prerogative of man, reason,
 for an important and salutary end; to raise him above the suffering
 and pain to which all life is exposed, by means of a maxim—
“qua
 ratione queas traducere leniter œvum:
ne te semper inops
 agitet vexetque cupido,
ne pavor et rerum
 mediocriter utilium spes,”
and thus to make
 him partake, in the highest degree, of the dignity which belongs to
 him as a rational being, as distinguished from the brutes; a
 dignity of which, in this sense at any rate, we can speak, though
 not in any other. it is a consequence of my view of the ethical
 system of stoicism that it must be explained at the part of my work
 at which i consider what [pg
 reason is and what it can do. but although it may to a certain
 extent be possible to attain that end through the application of
 reason, and through a purely rational system of ethics, and
 although experience shows that the happiest men are those purely
 rational characters commonly called practical philosophers,—and
 rightly so, because just as the true, that is, the theoretical
 philosopher carries life into the concept, they carry the concept
 into life,—yet it is far from the case that perfection can be
 attained in this way, and that the reason, rightly used, can really
 free us from the burden and sorrow of life, and lead us to
 happiness. rather, there lies an absolute contradiction in wishing
 to live without suffering, and this contradiction is also implied
 in the commonly used expression, “blessed
 life.” this will become perfectly clear to whoever
 comprehends the whole of the following exposition. in this purely
 rational system of ethics the contradiction reveals itself thus,
 the stoic is obliged in his doctrine of the way to the blessed life
 (for that is what his ethical system always remains) to insert a
 recommendation of suicide (as among the magnificent ornaments and
 apparel of eastern despots there is always a costly vial of poison)
 for the case in which the sufferings of the body, which cannot be
 philosophised away by any principles or syllogistic reasonings, are
 paramount and incurable; thus its one aim, blessedness, is rendered
 vain, and nothing remains as a mode of escape from suffering except
 death; in such a case then death must be voluntarily accepted, just
 as we would take any other medicine. here then a marked antagonism
 is brought out between the ethical system of stoicism and all those
 systems referred to above which make virtue in itself directly, and
 accompanied by the most grievous sorrows, their aim, and will not
 allow a man to end his life in order to escape from suffering. not
 one of them, however, was able to give the true reason for the
 rejection of suicide, but they laboriously collected illusory
 explanations from all sides: the true [pg ] reason will appear in the fourth book in the
 course of the development of our system. but the antagonism
 referred to reveals and establishes the essential difference in
 fundamental principle between stoicism, which is just a special
 form of endæmonism, and those doctrines we have mentioned, although
 both are often at one in their results, and are apparently related.
 and the inner contradiction referred to above, with which the
 ethical system of stoicism is affected even in its fundamental
 thought, shows itself further in the circumstance that its ideal,
 the stoic philosopher, as the system itself represents him, could
 never obtain life or inner poetic truth, but remains a wooden,
 stiff lay-figure of which nothing can be made. he cannot himself
 make use of his wisdom, and his perfect peace, contentment, and
 blessedness directly contradict the nature of man, and preclude us
 from forming any concrete idea of him. when compared with him, how
 entirely different appear the overcomers of the world, and
 voluntary hermits that indian philosophy presents to us, and has
 actually produced; or indeed, the holy man of christianity, that
 excellent form full of deep life, of the greatest poetic truth, and
 the highest significance, which stands before us in perfect virtue,
 holiness, and sublimity, yet in a state of supreme suffering.
[pg ]
second book. the world as
 will.
first aspect. the objectification of
 the will.
nos habitat, non tartara, sed
 nec sidera coeli:
spiritus, in nobis qui viget,
 illa facit.
[pg ]
§ . in the
 first book we considered the idea merely as such, that is, only
 according to its general form. it is true that as far as the
 abstract idea, the concept, is concerned, we obtained a knowledge
 of it in respect of its content also, because it has content and
 meaning only in relation to the idea of perception, without which
 it would be worthless and empty. accordingly, directing our
 attention exclusively to the idea of perception, we shall now
 endeavour to arrive at a knowledge of its content, its more exact
 definition, and the forms which it presents to us. and it will
 specially interest us to find an explanation of its peculiar
 significance, that significance which is otherwise merely felt, but
 on account of which it is that these pictures do not pass by us
 entirely strange and meaningless, as they must otherwise do, but
 speak to us directly, are understood, and obtain an interest which
 concerns our whole nature.
we direct our
 attention to mathematics, natural science, and philosophy, for each
 of these holds out the hope that it will afford us a part of the
 explanation we desire. now, taking philosophy first, we find that
 it is like a monster with many heads, each of which speaks a
 different language. they are not, indeed, all at variance on the
 point we are here considering, the significance of the idea of
 perception. for, with the exception of the sceptics and the
 idealists, the others, for the most part, speak very much in the
 same way of an object which constitutes the
 basis of the idea, and which is
 indeed different in its whole being and nature from the idea, but
 yet is in all [pg
 points as like it as one egg is to another. but this does not help
 us, for we are quite unable to distinguish such an object from the
 idea; we find that they are one and the same; for every object
 always and for ever presupposes a subject, and therefore remains
 idea, so that we recognised objectivity as belonging to the most
 universal form of the idea, which is the division into subject and
 object. further, the principle of sufficient reason, which is
 referred to in support of this doctrine, is for us merely the form
 of the idea, the orderly combination of one idea with another, but
 not the combination of the whole finite or infinite series of ideas
 with something which is not idea at all, and which cannot therefore
 be presented in perception. of the sceptics and idealists we spoke
 above, in examining the controversy about the reality of the outer
 world.
if we turn to
 mathematics to look for the fuller knowledge we desire of the idea
 of perception, which we have, as yet, only understood generally,
 merely in its form, we find that mathematics only treats of these
 ideas so far as they fill time and space, that is, so far as they
 are quantities. it will tell us with the greatest accuracy the
 how-many and the how-much; but as this is always merely relative,
 that is to say, merely a comparison of one idea with others, and a
 comparison only in the one respect of quantity, this also is not
 the information we are principally in search of.
lastly, if we
 turn to the wide province of natural science, which is divided into
 many fields, we may, in the first place, make a general division of
 it into two parts. it is either the description of forms, which i
 call morphology, or the explanation of
 changes, which i call etiology. the first treats of the
 permanent forms, the second of the changing matter, according to
 the laws of its transition from one form to another. the first is
 the whole extent of what is generally called natural history. it
 teaches us, especially in the sciences of [pg ] botany and zoology, the various permanent,
 organised, and therefore definitely determined forms in the
 constant change of individuals; and these forms constitute a great
 part of the content of the idea of perception. in natural history
 they are classified, separated, united, arranged according to
 natural and artificial systems, and brought under concepts which
 make a general view and knowledge of the whole of them possible.
 further, an infinitely fine analogy both in the whole and in the
 parts of these forms, and running through them all (unité de plan), is established,
 and thus they may be compared to innumerable variations on a theme
 which is not given. the passage of matter into these forms, that is
 to say, the origin of individuals, is not a special part of natural
 science, for every individual springs from its like by generation,
 which is everywhere equally mysterious, and has as yet evaded
 definite knowledge. the little that is known on the subject finds
 its place in physiology, which belongs to that part of natural
 science i have called etiology. mineralogy also, especially where
 it becomes geology, inclines towards etiology, though it
 principally belongs to morphology. etiology proper comprehends all
 those branches of natural science in which the chief concern is the
 knowledge of cause and effect. the sciences teach how, according to
 an invariable rule, one condition of matter is necessarily followed
 by a certain other condition; how one change necessarily conditions
 and brings about a certain other change; this sort of teaching is
 called explanation. the principal
 sciences in this department are mechanics, physics, chemistry, and
 physiology.
if, however, we
 surrender ourselves to its teaching, we soon become convinced that
 etiology cannot afford us the information we chiefly desire, any
 more than morphology. the latter presents to us innumerable and
 infinitely varied forms, which are yet related by an unmistakable
 family likeness. these are for us ideas, and when only treated in
 this way, they remain always strange to us, [pg ] and stand before us like hieroglyphics
 which we do not understand. etiology, on the other hand, teaches us
 that, according to the law of cause and effect, this particular
 condition of matter brings about that other particular condition,
 and thus it has explained it and performed its part. however, it
 really does nothing more than indicate the orderly arrangement
 according to which the states of matter appear in space and time,
 and teach in all cases what phenomenon must necessarily appear at a
 particular time in a particular place. it thus determines the
 position of phenomena in time and space, according to a law whose
 special content is derived from experience, but whose universal
 form and necessity is yet known to us independently of experience.
 but it affords us absolutely no information about the inner nature
 of any one of these phenomena: this is called a force of
 nature, and it lies outside the province of causal
 explanation, which calls the constant uniformity with which
 manifestations of such a force appear whenever their known
 conditions are present, a law of nature. but this law of
 nature, these conditions, and this appearance in a particular place
 at a particular time, are all that it knows or ever can know. the
 force itself which manifests itself, the inner nature of the
 phenomena which appear in accordance with these laws, remains
 always a secret to it, something entirely strange and unknown in
 the case of the simplest as well as of the most complex phenomena.
 for although as yet etiology has most completely achieved its aim
 in mechanics, and least completely in physiology, still the force
 on account of which a stone falls to the ground or one body repels
 another is, in its inner nature, not less strange and mysterious
 than that which produces the movements and the growth of an animal.
 the science of mechanics presupposes matter, weight,
 impenetrability, the possibility of communicating motion by impact,
 inertia and so forth as ultimate facts, calls them forces of
 nature, and their necessary and [pg ] orderly appearance under certain conditions a
 law of nature. only after this does its explanation begin, and it
 consists in indicating truly and with mathematical exactness, how,
 where and when each force manifests itself, and in referring every
 phenomenon which presents itself to the operation of one of these
 forces. physics, chemistry, and physiology proceed in the same way
 in their province, only they presuppose more and accomplish less.
 consequently the most complete etiological explanation of the whole
 of nature can never be more than an enumeration of forces which
 cannot be explained, and a reliable statement of the rule according
 to which phenomena appear in time and space, succeed, and make way
 for each other. but the inner nature of the forces which thus
 appear remains unexplained by such an explanation, which must
 confine itself to phenomena and their arrangement, because the law
 which it follows does not extend further. in this respect it may be
 compared to a section of a piece of marble which shows many veins
 beside each other, but does not allow us to trace the course of the
 veins from the interior of the marble to its surface. or, if i may
 use an absurd but more striking comparison, the philosophical
 investigator must always have the same feeling towards the complete
 etiology of the whole of nature, as a man who, without knowing how,
 has been brought into a company quite unknown to him, each member
 of which in turn presents another to him as his friend and cousin,
 and therefore as quite well known, and yet the man himself, while
 at each introduction he expresses himself gratified, has always the
 question on his lips: “but how the deuce do
 i stand to the whole company?”
thus we see
 that, with regard to those phenomena which we know only as our
 ideas, etiology can never give us the desired information that
 shall carry us beyond this point. for, after all its explanations,
 they still remain quite strange to us, as mere ideas whose
 significance [pg
 we do not understand. the causal connection merely gives us the
 rule and the relative order of their appearance in space and time,
 but affords us no further knowledge of that which so appears.
 moreover, the law of causality itself has only validity for ideas,
 for objects of a definite class, and it has meaning only in so far
 as it presupposes them. thus, like these objects themselves, it
 always exists only in relation to a subject, that is,
 conditionally; and so it is known just as well if we start from the
 subject, i.e., a
 priori, as if we start from the object, i.e.,
 a posteriori. kant indeed has
 taught us this.
but what now
 impels us to inquiry is just that we are not satisfied with knowing
 that we have ideas, that they are such and such, and that they are
 connected according to certain laws, the general expression of
 which is the principle of sufficient reason. we wish to know the
 significance of these ideas; we ask whether this world is merely
 idea; in which case it would pass by us like an empty dream or a
 baseless vision, not worth our notice; or whether it is also
 something else, something more than idea, and if so, what. thus
 much is certain, that this something we seek for must be completely
 and in its whole nature different from the idea; that the forms and
 laws of the idea must therefore be completely foreign to it;
 further, that we cannot arrive at it from the idea under the
 guidance of the laws which merely combine objects, ideas, among
 themselves, and which are the forms of the principle of sufficient
 reason.
thus we see
 already that we can never arrive at the real nature of things from
 without. however much we investigate, we can never reach anything
 but images and names. we are like a man who goes round a castle
 seeking in vain for an entrance, and sometimes sketching the
 façades. and yet this is the method that has been followed by all
 philosophers before me.
§ . in fact,
 the meaning for which we seek of that [pg ] world which is present to us only as our
 idea, or the transition from the world as mere idea of the knowing
 subject to whatever it may be besides this, would never be found if
 the investigator himself were nothing more than the pure knowing
 subject (a winged cherub without a body). but he is himself rooted
 in that world; he finds himself in it as an individual, that is to say, his
 knowledge, which is the necessary supporter of the whole world as
 idea, is yet always given through the medium of a body, whose
 affections are, as we have shown, the starting-point for the
 understanding in the perception of that world. his body is, for the
 pure knowing subject, an idea like every other idea, an object
 among objects. its movements and actions are so far known to him in
 precisely the same way as the changes of all other perceived
 objects, and would be just as strange and incomprehensible to him
 if their meaning were not explained for him in an entirely
 different way. otherwise he would see his actions follow upon given
 motives with the constancy of a law of nature, just as the changes
 of other objects follow upon causes, stimuli, or motives. but he
 would not understand the influence of the motives any more than the
 connection between every other effect which he sees and its cause.
 he would then call the inner nature of these manifestations and
 actions of his body which he did not understand a force, a quality,
 or a character, as he pleased, but he would have no further insight
 into it. but all this is not the case; indeed the answer to the
 riddle is given to the subject of knowledge who appears as an
 individual, and the answer is will. this and this alone gives
 him the key to his own existence, reveals to him the significance,
 shows him the inner mechanism of his being, of his action, of his
 movements. the body is given in two entirely different ways to the
 subject of knowledge, who becomes an individual only through his
 identity with it. it is given as an idea in intelligent perception,
 as an object among objects and [pg ] subject to the laws of objects. and it is
 also given in quite a different way as that which is immediately
 known to every one, and is signified by the word will.
 every true act of his will is also at once and without exception a
 movement of his body. the act of will and the movement of the body
 are not two different things objectively known, which the bond of
 causality unites; they do not stand in the relation of cause and
 effect; they are one and the same, but they are given in entirely
 different ways,—immediately, and again in perception for the
 understanding. the action of the body is nothing but the act of the
 will objectified, i.e., passed into perception. it
 will appear later that this is true of every movement of the body,
 not merely those which follow upon motives, but also involuntary
 movements which follow upon mere stimuli, and, indeed, that the
 whole body is nothing but objectified will, i.e.,
 will become idea. all this will be proved and made quite clear in
 the course of this work. in one respect, therefore, i shall call
 the body the objectivity of will; as in the
 previous book, and in the essay on the principle of sufficient
 reason, in accordance with the one-sided point of view
 intentionally adopted there (that of the idea), i called it
 the
 immediate object. thus in a certain sense we may also
 say that will is the knowledge a
 priori of the body, and the body is the knowledge
 a posteriori of the will.
 resolutions of the will which relate to the future are merely
 deliberations of the reason about what we shall will at a
 particular time, not real acts of will. only the carrying out of
 the resolve stamps it as will, for till then it is never more than
 an intention that may be changed, and that exists only in the
 reason in abstracto.
 it is only in reflection that to will and to act are different; in
 reality they are one. every true, genuine, immediate act of will is
 also, at once and immediately, a visible act of the body. and,
 corresponding to this, every impression upon the body is also, on
 the other hand, at once [pg
 and immediately an impression upon the will. as such it is called
 pain when it is opposed to the will; gratification or pleasure when
 it is in accordance with it. the degrees of both are widely
 different. it is quite wrong, however, to call pain and pleasure
 ideas, for they are by no means ideas, but immediate affections of
 the will in its manifestation, the body; compulsory, instantaneous
 willing or not-willing of the impression which the body sustains.
 there are only a few impressions of the body which do not touch the
 will, and it is through these alone that the body is an immediate
 object of knowledge, for, as perceived by the understanding, it is
 already an indirect object like all others. these impressions are,
 therefore, to be treated directly as mere ideas, and excepted from
 what has been said. the impressions we refer to are the affections
 of the purely objective senses of sight, hearing, and touch, though
 only so far as these organs are affected in the way which is
 specially peculiar to their specific nature. this affection of them
 is so excessively weak an excitement of the heightened and
 specifically modified sensibility of these parts that it does not
 affect the will, but only furnishes the understanding with the data
 out of which the perception arises, undisturbed by any excitement
 of the will. but every stronger or different kind of affection of
 these organs of sense is painful, that is to say, against the will,
 and thus they also belong to its objectivity. weakness of the
 nerves shows itself in this, that the impressions which have only
 such a degree of strength as would usually be sufficient to make
 them data for the understanding reach the higher degree at which
 they influence the will, that is to say, give pain or pleasure,
 though more often pain, which is, however, to some extent deadened
 and inarticulate, so that not only particular tones and strong
 light are painful to us, but there ensues a generally unhealthy and
 hypochondriacal disposition which is not distinctly understood. the
 identity of the body and the will shows itself further,
 [pg ] among other ways, in
 the circumstance that every vehement and excessive movement of the
 will, i.e., every emotion, agitates
 the body and its inner constitution directly, and disturbs the
 course of its vital functions. this is shown in detail in
 “will in nature,” p.  of the
 second edition and p.  of the third.
lastly, the
 knowledge which i have of my will, though it is immediate, cannot
 be separated from that which i have of my body. i know my will, not
 as a whole, not as a unity, not completely, according to its
 nature, but i know it only in its particular acts, and therefore in
 time, which is the form of the phenomenal aspect of my body, as of
 every object. therefore the body is a condition of the knowledge of
 my will. thus, i cannot really imagine this will apart from my
 body. in the essay on the principle of sufficient reason, the will,
 or rather the subject of willing, is treated as a special class of
 ideas or objects. but even there we saw this object become one with
 the subject; that is, we saw it cease to be an object. we there
 called this union the miracle κατ᾽ εξοχην, and the whole of the
 present work is to a certain extent an explanation of this. so far
 as i know my will specially as object, i know it as body. but then
 i am again at the first class of ideas laid down in that essay,
 i.e., real objects. as we
 proceed we shall see always more clearly that these ideas of the
 first class obtain their explanation and solution from those of the
 fourth class given in the essay, which could no longer be properly
 opposed to the subject as object, and that, therefore, we must
 learn to understand the inner nature of the law of causality which
 is valid in the first class, and of all that happens in accordance
 with it from the law of motivation which governs the fourth
 class.
the identity of
 the will and the body, of which we have now given a cursory
 explanation, can only be proved in the manner we have adopted here.
 we have proved this identity for the first time, and shall do so
 more and [pg
 more fully in the course of this work. by “proved” we mean raised from the immediate
 consciousness, from knowledge in the concrete to abstract knowledge
 of the reason, or carried over into abstract knowledge. on the
 other hand, from its very nature it can never be demonstrated, that
 is, deduced as indirect knowledge from some other more direct
 knowledge, just because it is itself the most direct knowledge; and
 if we do not apprehend it and stick to it as such, we shall expect
 in vain to receive it again in some indirect way as derivative
 knowledge. it is knowledge of quite a special kind, whose truth
 cannot therefore properly be brought under any of the four rubrics
 under which i have classified all truth in the essay on the
 principle of sufficient reason, § , the logical, the empirical,
 the metaphysical, and the metalogical, for it is not, like all
 these, the relation of an abstract idea to another idea, or to the
 necessary form of perceptive or of abstract ideation, but it is the
 relation of a judgment to the connection which an idea of
 perception, the body, has to that which is not an idea at all, but
 something toto genere
 different, will. i should like therefore to distinguish this from
 all other truth, and call it κατ᾽ εξοχην philosophical
 truth. we can turn the expression of this truth in
 different ways and say: my body and my will are one;—or, what as an
 idea of perception i call my body, i call my will, so far as i am
 conscious of it in an entirely different way which cannot be
 compared to any other;—or, my body is the objectivity of my will;—or, my
 body considered apart from the fact that it is my idea is still my
 will, and so forth.
§ . in the
 first book we were reluctantly driven to explain the human body as
 merely idea of the subject which knows it, like all the other
 objects of this world of perception. but it has now become clear
 that what enables us consciously to distinguish our own body from
 all other objects which in other respects are precisely the
 [pg ] same, is that our
 body appears in consciousness in quite another way toto genere different from idea,
 and this we denote by the word will;
 and that it is just this double knowledge which we have of our own
 body that affords us information about it, about its action and
 movement following on motives, and also about what it experiences
 by means of external impressions; in a word, about what it is, not
 as idea, but as more than idea; that is to say, what it is
 in
 itself. none of this information have we got directly
 with regard to the nature, action, and experience of other real
 objects.
it is just
 because of this special relation to one body that the knowing
 subject is an individual. for regarded apart from this relation,
 his body is for him only an idea like all other ideas. but the
 relation through which the knowing subject is an individual, is just on that
 account a relation which subsists only between him and one
 particular idea of all those which he has. therefore he is
 conscious of this one idea, not merely as an idea,
 but in quite a different way as a will. if, however, he abstracts
 from that special relation, from that twofold and completely
 heterogeneous knowledge of what is one and the same, then that
 one, the body, is an idea like all
 other ideas. therefore, in order to understand the matter, the
 individual who knows must either assume that what distinguishes
 that one idea from others is merely the fact that his knowledge
 stands in this double relation to it alone; that insight in two
 ways at the same time is open to him only in the case of this one
 object of perception, and that this is to be explained not by the
 difference of this object from all others, but only by the
 difference between the relation of his knowledge to this one
 object, and its relation to all other objects. or else he must
 assume that this object is essentially different from all others;
 that it alone of all objects is at once both will and idea, while
 the rest are only ideas, i.e., only phantoms. thus he
 must assume that his body is the only real individual in
 [pg ] the world,
 i.e., the only phenomenon of
 will and the only immediate object of the subject. that other
 objects, considered merely as ideas, are like his body, that is,
 like it, fill space (which itself can only be present as idea), and
 also, like it, are causally active in space, is indeed demonstrably
 certain from the law of causality which is a
 priori valid for ideas, and which admits of no effect
 without a cause; but apart from the fact that we can only reason
 from an effect to a cause generally, and not to a similar cause, we
 are still in the sphere of mere ideas, in which alone the law of
 causality is valid, and beyond which it can never take us. but
 whether the objects known to the individual only as ideas are yet,
 like his own body, manifestations of a will, is, as was said in the
 first book, the proper meaning of the question as to the reality of
 the external world. to deny this is theoretical
 egoism, which on that account regards all phenomena
 that are outside its own will as phantoms, just as in a practical
 reference exactly the same thing is done by practical egoism. for
 in it a man regards and treats himself alone as a person, and all
 other persons as mere phantoms. theoretical egoism can never be
 demonstrably refuted, yet in philosophy it has never been used
 otherwise than as a sceptical sophism, i.e., a
 pretence. as a serious conviction, on the other hand, it could only
 be found in a madhouse, and as such it stands in need of a cure
 rather than a refutation. we do not therefore combat it any further
 in this regard, but treat it as merely the last stronghold of
 scepticism, which is always polemical. thus our knowledge, which is
 always bound to individuality and is limited by this circumstance,
 brings with it the necessity that each of us can only be one,
 while, on the other hand, each of us can know
 all; and it is this limitation that creates the need
 for philosophy. we therefore who, for this very reason, are
 striving to extend the limits of our knowledge through philosophy,
 will treat this sceptical argument of theoretical egoism
 [pg ] which meets us, as
 an army would treat a small frontier fortress. the fortress cannot
 indeed be taken, but the garrison can never sally forth from it,
 and therefore we pass it by without danger, and are not afraid to
 have it in our rear.
the double
 knowledge which each of us has of the nature and activity of his
 own body, and which is given in two completely different ways, has
 now been clearly brought out. we shall accordingly make further use
 of it as a key to the nature of every phenomenon in nature, and
 shall judge of all objects which are not our own bodies, and are
 consequently not given to our consciousness in a double way but
 only as ideas, according to the analogy of our own bodies, and
 shall therefore assume that as in one aspect they are idea, just
 like our bodies, and in this respect are analogous to them, so in
 another aspect, what remains of objects when we set aside their
 existence as idea of the subject, must in its inner nature be the
 same as that in us which we call will.
 for what other kind of existence or reality should we attribute to
 the rest of the material world? whence should we take the elements
 out of which we construct such a world? besides will and idea
 nothing is known to us or thinkable. if we wish to attribute the
 greatest known reality to the material world which exists
 immediately only in our idea, we give it the reality which our own
 body has for each of us; for that is the most real thing for every
 one. but if we now analyse the reality of this body and its
 actions, beyond the fact that it is idea, we find nothing in it
 except the will; with this its reality is exhausted. therefore we
 can nowhere find another kind of reality which we can attribute to
 the material world. thus if we hold that the material world is
 something more than merely our idea, we must say that besides being
 idea, that is, in itself and according to its inmost nature, it is
 that which we find immediately in ourselves as will. i
 say according to its inmost nature; but we must first come
 [pg ] to know more
 accurately this real nature of the will, in order that we may be
 able to distinguish from it what does not belong to itself, but to
 its manifestation, which has many grades. such, for example, is the
 circumstance of its being accompanied by knowledge, and the
 determination by motives which is conditioned by this knowledge. as
 we shall see farther on, this does not belong to the real nature of
 will, but merely to its distinct manifestation as an animal or a
 human being. if, therefore, i say,—the force which attracts a stone
 to the earth is according to its nature, in itself, and apart from
 all idea, will, i shall not be supposed to express in this
 proposition the insane opinion that the stone moves itself in
 accordance with a known motive, merely because this is the way in
 which will appears in man. we
 shall now proceed more clearly and in detail to prove, establish,
 and develop to its full extent what as yet has only been
 provisionally and generally explained.
§ . as we have
 said, the will proclaims itself primarily in the voluntary
 movements of our own body, as the inmost nature of this body, as
 that which it is besides being object of perception, idea. for
 these voluntary movements are nothing else than the visible aspect
 of the individual acts of will, with which they are directly
 coincident and identical, and only distinguished through the form
 of knowledge into which they have passed, and in which alone they
 can be known, the form of idea.
but these acts
 of will have always a ground or reason outside themselves in
 motives. yet these motives never determine more than what i will at
 this time, in this
[pg ] place, and under
 these circumstances, not
 that i will in general, or
 what i will in general, that is,
 the maxims which characterise my volition generally. therefore the
 inner nature of my volition cannot be explained from these motives;
 but they merely determine its manifestation at a given point of
 time: they are merely the occasion of my will showing itself; but
 the will itself lies outside the province of the law of motivation,
 which determines nothing but its appearance at each point of time.
 it is only under the presupposition of my empirical character that
 the motive is a sufficient ground of explanation of my action. but
 if i abstract from my character, and then ask, why, in general, i
 will this and not that, no answer is possible, because it is only
 the manifestation of the will that is subject to the principle of
 sufficient reason, and not the will itself, which in this respect
 is to be called groundless. at this point i
 presuppose kant's doctrine of the empirical and intelligible
 character, and also my own treatment of the subject in “the fundamental problems of ethics,” pp. ,
 , and , et seq., of first edition (p.
 , et
 seq., of second edition). i shall also have to speak
 more fully on the question in the fourth book. for the present, i
 have only to draw attention to this, that the fact of one
 manifestation being established through another, as here the deed
 through the motive, does not at all conflict with the fact that its
 real nature is will, which itself has no ground;
 for as the principle of sufficient reason in all its aspects is
 only the form of knowledge, its validity extends only to the idea,
 to the phenomena, to the visibility of the will, but not to the
 will itself, which becomes visible.
if now every
 action of my body is the manifestation of an act of will in which
 my will itself in general, and as a whole, thus my character,
 expresses itself under given motives, manifestation of the will
 must be the inevitable condition and presupposition of every
 action. for the fact of its manifestation cannot depend upon
 something [pg
 which does not exist directly and only through it, which
 consequently is for it merely accidental, and through which its
 manifestation itself would be merely accidental. now that condition
 is just the whole body itself. thus the body itself must be
 manifestation of the will, and it must be related to my will as a
 whole, that is, to my intelligible character, whose phenomenal
 appearance in time is my empirical character, as the particular
 action of the body is related to the particular act of the will.
 the whole body, then, must be simply my will become visible, must
 be my will itself, so far as this is object of perception, an idea
 of the first class. it has already been advanced in confirmation of
 this that every impression upon my body also affects my will at
 once and immediately, and in this respect is called pain or
 pleasure, or, in its lower degrees, agreeable or disagreeable
 sensation; and also, conversely, that every violent movement of the
 will, every emotion or passion, convulses the body and disturbs the
 course of its functions. indeed we can also give an etiological
 account, though a very incomplete one, of the origin of my body,
 and a somewhat better account of its development and conservation,
 and this is the substance of physiology. but physiology merely
 explains its theme in precisely the same way as motives explain
 action. thus the physiological explanation of the functions of the
 body detracts just as little from the philosophical truth that the
 whole existence of this body and the sum total of its functions are
 merely the objectification of that will which appears in its
 outward actions in accordance with a motive, as the establishment
 of the individual action through the motive and the necessary
 sequence of the action from the motive conflicts with the fact that
 action in general, and according to its nature, is only the
 manifestation of a will which itself has no ground. if, however,
 physiology tries to refer even these outward actions, the immediate
 voluntary movements, to causes in the organism,—for example, if it
 [pg ] explains the
 movement of the muscles as resulting from the presence of fluids
 (“like the contraction of a cord when it is
 wet,” says reil in his “archiv für
 physiologie,” vol. vi. p. ), even supposing it really
 could give a thorough explanation of this kind, yet this would
 never invalidate the immediately certain truth that every voluntary
 motion (functiones
 animales) is the manifestation of an act of will.
 now, just as little can the physiological explanation of vegetative
 life (functiones naturales
 vitales), however far it may advance, ever invalidate
 the truth that the whole animal life which thus develops itself is
 the manifestation of will. in general, then, as we have shown
 above, no etiological explanation can ever give us more than the
 necessarily determined position in time and space of a particular
 manifestation, its necessary appearance there, according to a fixed
 law; but the inner nature of everything that appears in this way
 remains wholly inexplicable, and is presupposed by every
 etiological explanation, and merely indicated by the names, force,
 or law of nature, or, if we are speaking of action, character or
 will. thus, although every particular action, under the
 presupposition of the definite character, necessarily follows from
 the given motive, and although growth, the process of nourishment,
 and all the changes of the animal body take place according to
 necessarily acting causes (stimuli), yet the whole series of
 actions, and consequently every individual act, and also its
 condition, the whole body itself which accomplishes it, and
 therefore also the process through which and in which it exists,
 are nothing but the manifestation of the will, the becoming
 visible, the objectification of the will.
 upon this rests the perfect suitableness of the human and animal
 body to the human and animal will in general, resembling, though
 far surpassing, the correspondence between an instrument made for a
 purpose and the will of the maker, and on this account appearing as
 design, i.e., the teleological
 explanation of [pg
 the body. the parts of the body must, therefore, completely
 correspond to the principal desires through which the will
 manifests itself; they must be the visible expression of these
 desires. teeth, throat, and bowels are objectified hunger; the
 organs of generation are objectified sexual desire; the grasping
 hand, the hurrying feet, correspond to the more indirect desires of
 the will which they express. as the human form generally
 corresponds to the human will generally, so the individual bodily
 structure corresponds to the individually modified will, the
 character of the individual, and therefore it is throughout and in
 all its parts characteristic and full of expression. it is very
 remarkable that parmenides already gave expression to this in the
 following verses, quoted by aristotle (metaph. iii. ):—
(ut enim cuique
 complexio membrorum flexibilium se habet, ita mens hominibus adest:
 idem namque est, quod sapit, membrorum natura hominibus, et omnibus
 et omni: quod enim plus est, intelligentia est.)
§ . whoever
 has now gained from all these expositions a knowledge in abstracto, and therefore
 clear and certain, of what every one knows directly in concreto, i.e.,
 as feeling, a knowledge that his will is the real inner nature of
 his phenomenal being, which manifests itself to him as idea, both
 in his actions and in their permanent substratum, his body, and
 that his will is that which is most immediate in his consciousness,
 though it has not as such completely passed into the form of idea
 in which object and subject stand over against each other, but
 makes [pg ] itself known to him
 in a direct manner, in which he does not quite clearly distinguish
 subject and object, yet is not known as a whole to the individual
 himself, but only in its particular acts,—whoever, i say, has with
 me gained this conviction will find that of itself it affords him
 the key to the knowledge of the inmost being of the whole of
 nature; for he now transfers it to all those phenomena which are
 not given to him, like his own phenomenal existence, both in direct
 and indirect knowledge, but only in the latter, thus merely
 one-sidedly as idea alone. he will recognise this
 will of which we are speaking not only in those phenomenal
 existences which exactly resemble his own, in men and animals as
 their inmost nature, but the course of reflection will lead him to
 recognise the force which germinates and vegetates in the plant,
 and indeed the force through which the crystal is formed, that by
 which the magnet turns to the north pole, the force whose shock he
 experiences from the contact of two different kinds of metals, the
 force which appears in the elective affinities of matter as
 repulsion and attraction, decomposition and combination, and,
 lastly, even gravitation, which acts so powerfully throughout
 matter, draws the stone to the earth and the earth to the sun,—all
 these, i say, he will recognise as different only in their
 phenomenal existence, but in their inner nature as identical, as
 that which is directly known to him so intimately and so much
 better than anything else, and which in its most distinct
 manifestation is called will. it is this application of
 reflection alone that prevents us from remaining any longer at the
 phenomenon, and leads us to the thing in
 itself. phenomenal existence is idea and nothing more.
 all idea, of whatever kind it may be, all object,
 is phenomenal existence, but the
 will alone is a thing in
 itself. as such, it is throughout not idea, but
 toto genere different from it;
 it is that of which all idea, all object, is the phenomenal
 appearance, the visibility, [pg ] the objectification. it is the inmost nature,
 the kernel, of every particular thing, and also of the whole. it
 appears in every blind force of nature and also in the
 preconsidered action of man; and the great difference between these
 two is merely in the degree of the manifestation, not in the nature
 of what manifests itself.
§ . now, if we
 are to think as an object this thing-in-itself (we wish to retain
 the kantian expression as a standing formula), which, as such, is
 never object, because all object is its mere manifestation, and
 therefore cannot be it itself, we must borrow for it the name and
 concept of an object, of something in some way objectively given,
 consequently of one of its own manifestations. but in order to
 serve as a clue for the understanding, this can be no other than
 the most complete of all its manifestations, i.e.,
 the most distinct, the most developed, and directly enlightened by
 knowledge. now this is the human will. it is, however, well to
 observe that here, at any rate, we only make use of a denominatio a potiori, through
 which, therefore, the concept of will receives a greater extension
 than it has hitherto had. knowledge of the identical in different
 phenomena, and of difference in similar phenomena, is, as plato so
 often remarks, a sine qua non of
 philosophy. but hitherto it was not recognised that every kind of
 active and operating force in nature is essentially identical with
 will, and therefore the multifarious kinds of phenomena were not
 seen to be merely different species of the same genus, but were
 treated as heterogeneous. consequently there could be no word to
 denote the concept of this genus. i therefore name the genus after
 its most important species, the direct knowledge of which lies
 nearer to us and guides us to the indirect knowledge of all other
 species. but whoever is incapable of carrying out the required
 extension of the concept will remain involved in a permanent
 misunderstanding. for by the word will he
 understands only that species of it which has hitherto been
 exclusively [pg
 denoted by it, the will which is guided by knowledge, and whose
 manifestation follows only upon motives, and indeed merely abstract
 motives, and thus takes place under the guidance of the reason.
 this, we have said, is only the most prominent example of the
 manifestation of will. we must now distinctly separate in thought
 the inmost essence of this manifestation which is known to us
 directly, and then transfer it to all the weaker, less distinct
 manifestations of the same nature, and thus we shall accomplish the
 desired extension of the concept of will. from another point of
 view i should be equally misunderstood by any one who should think
 that it is all the same in the end whether we denote this inner
 nature of all phenomena by the word will or
 by any other. this would be the case if the thing-in-itself were
 something whose existence we merely inferred, and thus knew indirectly
 and only in the abstract. then, indeed, we might call it what we
 pleased; the name would stand merely as the symbol of an unknown
 quantity. but the word will, which, like a magic spell,
 discloses to us the inmost being of everything in nature, is by no
 means an unknown quantity, something arrived at only by inference,
 but is fully and immediately comprehended, and is so familiar to us
 that we know and understand what will is far better than anything
 else whatever. the concept of will has hitherto commonly been
 subordinated to that of force, but i reverse the matter entirely,
 and desire that every force in nature should be thought as will. it
 must not be supposed that this is mere verbal quibbling or of no
 consequence; rather, it is of the greatest significance and
 importance. for at the foundation of the concept of force, as of
 all other concepts, there ultimately lies the knowledge in
 sense-perception of the objective world, that is to say, the
 phenomenon, the idea; and the concept is constructed out of this.
 it is an abstraction from the province in which cause and effect
 reign, i.e., from ideas of perception,
 and means just the causal nature of [pg ] causes at the point at which this causal
 nature is no further etiologically explicable, but is the necessary
 presupposition of all etiological explanation. the concept will, on
 the other hand, is of all possible concepts the only one which has
 its source not in the phenomenal, not in
 the mere idea of perception, but comes from within, and proceeds
 from the most immediate consciousness of each of us, in which each
 of us knows his own individuality, according to its nature,
 immediately, apart from all form, even that of subject and object,
 and which at the same time is this individuality, for here the
 subject and the object of knowledge are one. if, therefore, we
 refer the concept of force to that of will,
 we have in fact referred the less known to what is infinitely
 better known; indeed, to the one thing that is really immediately
 and fully known to us, and have very greatly extended our
 knowledge. if, on the contrary, we subsume the concept of will
 under that of force, as has hitherto always been done, we renounce
 the only immediate knowledge which we have of the inner nature of
 the world, for we allow it to disappear in a concept which is
 abstracted from the phenomenal, and with which we can therefore
 never go beyond the phenomenal.
§ . the
 will as a thing in itself is quite
 different from its phenomenal appearance, and entirely free from
 all the forms of the phenomenal, into which it first passes when it
 manifests itself, and which therefore only concern its objectivity, and are foreign to
 the will itself. even the most universal form of all idea, that of
 being object for a subject, does not concern it; still less the
 forms which are subordinate to this and which collectively have
 their common expression in the principle of sufficient reason, to
 which we know that time and space belong, and consequently
 multiplicity also, which exists and is possible only through these.
 in this last regard i shall call time and space the principium individuationis,
 borrowing an expression from the old schoolmen, and i beg to draw
 [pg ] attention to this,
 once for all. for it is only through the medium of time and space
 that what is one and the same, both according to its nature and to
 its concept, yet appears as different, as a multiplicity of
 co-existent and successive phenomena. thus time and space are the
 principium individuationis, the
 subject of so many subtleties and disputes among the schoolmen,
 which may be found collected in suarez (disp. , sect. ).
 according to what has been said, the will as a thing-in-itself lies
 outside the province of the principle of sufficient reason in all
 its forms, and is consequently completely groundless, although all
 its manifestations are entirely subordinated to the principle of
 sufficient reason. further, it is free from all multiplicity, although its
 manifestations in time and space are innumerable. it is itself one,
 though not in the sense in which an object is one, for the unity of
 an object can only be known in opposition to a possible
 multiplicity; nor yet in the sense in which a concept is one, for
 the unity of a concept originates only in abstraction from a
 multiplicity; but it is one as that which lies outside time and
 space, the principium
 individuationis, i.e.,
 the possibility of multiplicity. only when all this has become
 quite clear to us through the subsequent examination of the
 phenomena and different manifestations of the will, shall we fully
 understand the meaning of the kantian doctrine that time, space and
 causality do not belong to the thing-in-itself, but are only forms
 of knowing.
the uncaused
 nature of will has been actually recognised, where it manifests
 itself most distinctly, as the will of man, and this has been
 called free, independent. but on account of the uncaused nature of
 the will itself, the necessity to which its manifestation is
 everywhere subjected has been overlooked, and actions are treated
 as free, which they are not. for every individual action follows
 with strict necessity from the effect of the motive upon the
 character. all necessity is, as we have already [pg ] said, the relation of the consequent to
 the reason, and nothing more. the principle of sufficient reason is
 the universal form of all phenomena, and man in his action must be
 subordinated to it like every other phenomenon. but because in
 self-consciousness the will is known directly and in itself, in
 this consciousness lies also the consciousness of freedom. the fact
 is, however, overlooked that the individual, the person, is not
 will as a thing-in-itself, but is a phenomenon of will, is already
 determined as such, and has come under the form of the phenomenal,
 the principle of sufficient reason. hence arises the strange fact
 that every one believes himself a
 priori to be perfectly free, even in his individual
 actions, and thinks that at every moment he can commence another
 manner of life, which just means that he can become another person.
 but a posteriori,
 through experience, he finds to his astonishment that he is not
 free, but subjected to necessity; that in spite of all his
 resolutions and reflections he does not change his conduct, and
 that from the beginning of his life to the end of it, he must carry
 out the very character which he himself condemns, and as it were
 play the part he has undertaken to the end. i cannot pursue this
 subject further at present, for it belongs, as ethical, to another
 part of this work. in the meantime, i only wish to point out here
 that the phenomenon of the will which in
 itself is uncaused, is yet as such subordinated to the law of
 necessity, that is, the principle of sufficient reason, so that in
 the necessity with which the phenomena of nature follow each other,
 we may find nothing to hinder us from recognising in them the
 manifestations of will.
only those
 changes which have no other ground than a motive, i.e.,
 an idea, have hitherto been regarded as manifestations of will.
 therefore in nature a will has only been attributed to man, or at
 the most to animals; for knowledge, the idea, is of course, as i
 have said elsewhere, the true and exclusive characteristic of
 [pg ] animal life. but
 that the will is also active where no knowledge guides it, we see
 at once in the instinct and the mechanical skill of animals. that
 they have ideas and knowledge is here not to the point, for the end
 towards which they strive as definitely as if it were a known
 motive, is yet entirely unknown to them. therefore in such cases
 their action takes place without motive, is not guided by the idea,
 and shows us first and most distinctly how the will may be active
 entirely without knowledge. the bird of a year old has no idea of
 the eggs for which it builds a nest; the young spider has no idea
 of the prey for which it spins a web; nor has the ant-lion any idea
 of the ants for which he digs a trench for the first time. the
 larva of the stag-beetle makes the hole in the wood, in which it is
 to await its metamorphosis, twice as big if it is going to be a
 male beetle as if it is going to be a female, so that if it is a
 male there may be room for the horns, of which, however, it has no
 idea. in such actions of these creatures the will is clearly
 operative as in their other actions, but it is in blind activity,
 which is indeed accompanied by knowledge but not guided by it. if
 now we have once gained insight into the fact, that idea as motive
 is not a necessary and essential condition of the activity of the
 will, we shall more easily recognise the activity of will where it
 is less apparent. for example, we shall see that the house of the
 snail is no more made by a will which is foreign to the snail
 itself, than the house which we build is produced through another
 will than our own; but we shall recognise in both houses the work
 of a will which objectifies itself in both the phenomena—a will
 which works in us according to motives, but in the snail still
 blindly as formative impulse directed outwards. in us also the same
 will is in many ways only blindly active: in all the functions of
 our body which are not guided by knowledge, in all its vital and
 vegetative processes, [pg
 digestion, circulation, secretion, growth, reproduction. not only
 the actions of the body, but the whole body itself is, as we have
 shown above, phenomenon of the will, objectified will, concrete
 will. all that goes on in it must therefore proceed through will,
 although here this will is not guided by knowledge, but acts
 blindly according to causes, which in this case are called
 stimuli.
i call a
 cause, in the narrowest sense of
 the word, that state of matter, which, while it introduces another
 state with necessity, yet suffers just as great a change itself as
 that which it causes; which is expressed in the rule, “action and reaction are equal.” further, in the
 case of what is properly speaking a cause, the effect increases
 directly in proportion to the cause, and therefore also the
 reaction. so that, if once the mode of operation be known, the
 degree of the effect may be measured and calculated from the degree
 of the intensity of the cause; and conversely the degree of the
 intensity of the cause may be calculated from the degree of the
 effect. such causes, properly so called, operate in all the
 phenomena of mechanics, chemistry, and so forth; in short, in all
 the changes of unorganised bodies. on the other hand, i call a
 stimulus, such a cause as sustains
 no reaction proportional to its effect, and the intensity of which
 does not vary directly in proportion to the intensity of its
 effect, so that the effect cannot be measured by it. on the
 contrary, a small increase of the stimulus may cause a very great
 increase of the effect, or conversely, it may eliminate the
 previous effect altogether, and so forth. all effects upon
 organised bodies as such are of this kind. all properly organic and
 vegetative changes of the animal body must therefore be referred to
 stimuli, not to mere causes. but the stimulus, like every cause and
 motive generally, never determines more than the point of time and
 space at [pg
 which the manifestation of every force is to take place, and does
 not determine the inner nature of the force itself which is
 manifested. this inner nature we know, from our previous
 investigation, is will, to which therefore we ascribe both the
 unconscious and the conscious changes of the body. the stimulus
 holds the mean, forms the transition between the motive, which is
 causality accompanied throughout by knowledge, and the cause in the
 narrowest sense. in particular cases it is sometimes nearer a
 motive, sometimes nearer a cause, but yet it can always be
 distinguished from both. thus, for example, the rising of the sap
 in a plant follows upon stimuli, and cannot be explained from mere
 causes, according to the laws of hydraulics or capillary
 attraction; yet it is certainly assisted by these, and altogether
 approaches very near to a purely causal change. on the other hand,
 the movements of the hedysarum
 gyrans and the mimosa pudica, although still
 following upon mere stimuli, are yet very like movements which
 follow upon motives, and seem almost to wish to make the
 transition. the contraction of the pupils of the eyes as the light
 is increased is due to stimuli, but it passes into movement which
 is due to motive; for it takes place, because too strong lights
 would affect the retina painfully, and to avoid this we contract
 the pupils. the occasion of an erection is a motive, because it is
 an idea, yet it operates with the necessity of a stimulus,
 i.e., it cannot be resisted, but
 we must put the idea away in order to make it cease to affect us.
 this is also the case with disgusting things, which excite the
 desire to vomit. thus we have treated the instinct of animals as an
 actual link, of quite a distinct kind, between movement following
 upon stimuli, and action following upon a known motive. now we
 might be asked to regard breathing as another link of this kind. it
 has been disputed whether it belongs to the voluntary or the
 involuntary movements, that is to say, whether it follows upon
 motive or stimulus, [pg
 and perhaps it may be explained as something which is between the
 two. marshall hall (“on the diseases of the
 nervous system,” §  sq.) explains it as a mixed function,
 for it is partly under the influence of the cerebral (voluntary),
 and partly under that of the spinal (non-voluntary) nerves.
 however, we are finally obliged to number it with the expressions
 of will which result from motives. for other motives, i.e.,
 mere ideas, can determine the will to check it or accelerate it,
 and, as is the case with every other voluntary action, it seems to
 us that we could give up breathing altogether and voluntarily
 suffocate. and in fact we could do so if any other motive
 influenced the will sufficiently strongly to overcome the pressing
 desire for air. according to some accounts diogenes actually put an
 end to his life in this way (diog. laert. vi. ). certain negroes
 also are said to have done this (f. b. osiander “on suicide” [] pp. -). if this be
 true, it affords us a good example of the influence of abstract
 motives, i.e., of the victory of
 distinctively rational over merely animal will. for, that breathing
 is at least partially conditioned by cerebral activity is shown by
 the fact that the primary cause of death from prussic acid is that
 it paralyses the brain, and so, indirectly, restricts the
 breathing; but if the breathing be artificially maintained till the
 stupefaction of the brain has passed away, death will not ensue. we
 may also observe in passing that breathing affords us the most
 obvious example of the fact that motives act with just as much
 necessity as stimuli, or as causes in the narrowest sense of the
 word, and their operation can only be neutralised by antagonistic
 motives, as action is neutralised by re-action. for, in the case of
 breathing, the illusion that we can stop when we like is much
 weaker than in the case of other movements which follow upon
 motives; because in breathing the motive is very powerful, very
 near to us, and its satisfaction is very easy, for the muscles
 which accomplish it are never tired, nothing, [pg ] as a rule, obstructs it, and the whole
 process is supported by the most inveterate habit of the
 individual. and yet all motives act with the same necessity. the
 knowledge that necessity is common to movements following upon
 motives, and those following upon stimuli, makes it easier for us
 to understand that that also which takes place in our bodily
 organism in accordance with stimuli and in obedience to law, is
 yet, according to its inner nature—will, which in all its
 manifestations, though never in itself, is subordinated to the
 principle of sufficient reason, that is, to necessity.
 accordingly, we shall not rest contented with recognising that
 animals, both in their actions and also in their whole existence,
 bodily structure and organisation, are manifestations of will; but
 we shall extend to plants also this immediate knowledge of the
 essential nature of things which is given to us alone. now all the
 movements of plants follow upon stimuli; for the absence of
 knowledge, and the movement following upon motives which is
 conditioned by knowledge, constitutes the only essential difference
 between animals and plants. therefore, what appears for the idea as
 plant life, as mere vegetation, as blindly impelling force, we
 shall claim, according to its inner nature, for will, and recognise
 it as just that which constitutes the basis of our own phenomenal
 being, as it expresses itself in our actions, and also in the whole
 existence of our body itself.
it only remains
 for us to take the final step, the extension of our way of looking
 at things to all those forces which act in nature in accordance
 with universal, unchangeable laws, in conformity with which the
 movements of all those bodies take place, which are wholly without
 organs, and have therefore no susceptibility for stimuli, and have
 no knowledge, which is the necessary condition [pg ] of motives. thus we must also apply the
 key to the understanding of the inner nature of things, which the
 immediate knowledge of our own existence alone can give us, to
 those phenomena of the unorganised world which are most remote from
 us. and if we consider them attentively, if we observe the strong
 and unceasing impulse with which the waters hurry to the ocean, the
 persistency with which the magnet turns ever to the north pole, the
 readiness with which iron flies to the magnet, the eagerness with
 which the electric poles seek to be re-united, and which, just like
 human desire, is increased by obstacles; if we see the crystal
 quickly and suddenly take form with such wonderful regularity of
 construction, which is clearly only a perfectly definite and
 accurately determined impulse in different directions, seized and
 retained by crystallisation; if we observe the choice with which
 bodies repel and attract each other, combine and separate, when
 they are set free in a fluid state, and emancipated from the bonds
 of rigidness; lastly, if we feel directly how a burden which
 hampers our body by its gravitation towards the earth, unceasingly
 presses and strains upon it in pursuit of its one tendency; if we
 observe all this, i say, it will require no great effort of the
 imagination to recognise, even at so great a distance, our own
 nature. that which in us pursues its ends by the light of
 knowledge; but here, in the weakest of its manifestations, only
 strives blindly and dumbly in a one-sided and unchangeable manner,
 must yet in both cases come under the name of will, as it is
 everywhere one and the same—just as the first dim light of dawn
 must share the name of sunlight with the rays of the full mid-day.
 for the name will denotes that which is the
 inner nature of everything in the world, and the one kernel of
 every phenomenon.
yet the
 remoteness, and indeed the appearance of absolute difference
 between the phenomena of unorganised nature and the will which we
 know as the [pg
 inner reality of our own being, arises chiefly from the contrast
 between the completely determined conformity to law of the one
 species of phenomena, and the apparently unfettered freedom of the
 other. for in man, individuality makes itself powerfully felt.
 every one has a character of his own; and therefore the same motive
 has not the same influence over all, and a thousand circumstances
 which exist in the wide sphere of the knowledge of the individual,
 but are unknown to others, modify its effect. therefore action
 cannot be predetermined from the motive alone, for the other factor
 is wanting, the accurate acquaintance with the individual
 character, and with the knowledge which accompanies it. on the
 other hand, the phenomena of the forces of nature illustrate the
 opposite extreme. they act according to universal laws, without
 variation, without individuality in accordance with openly manifest
 circumstances, subject to the most exact predetermination; and the
 same force of nature appears in its million phenomena in precisely
 the same way. in order to explain this point and prove the identity
 of the one indivisible will in all its
 different phenomena, in the weakest as in the strongest, we must
 first of all consider the relation of the will as thing-in-itself
 to its phenomena, that is, the relation of the world as will to the
 world as idea; for this will open to us the best way to a more
 thorough investigation of the whole subject we are considering in
 this second book.
§ . we have
 learnt from the great kant that time, space, and causality, with
 their entire constitution, and the possibility of all their forms,
 are present in our consciousness quite independently of the objects
 which appear in them, and which constitute their content; or, in
 other words, they can be arrived at just as well if we [pg ] start from the subject as if we start
 from the object. therefore, with equal accuracy, we may call them
 either forms of intuition or perception of the subject, or
 qualities of the object as object (with kant, phenomenon),
 i.e., idea.
 we may also regard these forms as the irreducible boundary between
 object and subject. all objects must therefore exist in them, yet
 the subject, independently of the phenomenal object, possesses and
 surveys them completely. but if the objects appearing in these
 forms are not to be empty phantoms, but are to have a meaning, they
 must refer to something, must be the expression of something which
 is not, like themselves, object, idea, a merely relative existence
 for a subject, but which exists without such dependence upon
 something which stands over against it as a condition of its being,
 and independent of the forms of such a thing, i.e.,
 is not
 idea, but a thing-in-itself. consequently it
 may at least be asked: are these ideas, these objects, something
 more than or apart from the fact that they are ideas, objects of
 the subject? and what would they be in this sense? what is that
 other side of them which is toto
 genere different from idea? what is the
 thing-in-itself? the will, we have answered, but
 for the present i set that answer aside.
whatever the
 thing-in-itself may be, kant is right in his conclusion that time,
 space, and causality (which we afterwards found to be forms of the
 principle of sufficient reason, the general expression of the forms
 of the phenomenon) are not its properties, but come to it only
 after, and so far as, it has become idea. that is, they belong only
 to its phenomenal existence, not to itself. for since the subject
 fully understands and constructs them out of itself, independently
 of all object, they must be dependent upon existence as
 idea as such, not upon that which becomes idea. they
 must be the form of the idea as such; but not qualities of that
 which has assumed this form. they must be already given with the
 mere antithesis of subject [pg ] and object (not as concepts but as facts),
 and consequently they must be only the more exact determination of
 the form of knowledge in general, whose most universal
 determination is that antithesis itself. now, that in the
 phenomenon, in the object, which is in its turn conditioned by
 time, space and causality, inasmuch as it can only become idea by
 means of them, namely multiplicity, through co-existence
 and succession, change and permanence through the law of
 causality, matter which can only become idea
 under the presupposition of causality, and lastly, all that becomes
 idea only by means of these,—all this, i say, as a whole, does not
 in reality belong to that which appears, to that which has passed
 into the form of idea, but belongs merely to this form itself. and
 conversely, that in the phenomenon which is not conditioned through
 time, space and causality, and which cannot be referred to them,
 nor explained in accordance with them, is precisely that in which
 the thing manifested, the thing-in-itself, directly reveals itself.
 it follows from this that the most complete capacity for being
 known, that is to say, the greatest clearness, distinctness, and
 susceptibility of exhaustive explanation, will necessarily belong
 to that which pertains to knowledge as
 such, and thus to the form of
 knowledge; but not to that which in itself is not idea, not object,
 but which has become knowledge only through entering these forms;
 in other words, has become idea, object. thus only that which
 depends entirely upon being an object of knowledge, upon existing
 as idea in general and as such (not upon that which
 becomes known, and has only
 become idea), which therefore
 belongs without distinction to everything that is known, and which,
 on that account, is found just as well if we start from the subject
 as if we start from the object,—this alone can afford us without
 reserve a sufficient, exhaustive knowledge, a knowledge which is
 clear to the very foundation. but this consists of nothing but
 those forms of all phenomena of which we are conscious [pg ] a
 priori, and which may be generally expressed as the
 principle of sufficient reason. now, the forms of this principle
 which occur in knowledge of perception (with which alone we are
 here concerned) are time, space, and causality. the whole of pure
 mathematics and pure natural science a
 priori is based entirely upon these. therefore it is
 only in these sciences that knowledge finds no obscurity, does not
 rest upon what is incomprehensible (groundless, i.e.,
 will), upon what cannot be further deduced. it is on this account
 that kant wanted, as we have said, to apply the name science
 specially and even exclusively to these branches of knowledge
 together with logic. but, on the other hand, these branches of
 knowledge show us nothing more than mere connections, relations of
 one idea to another, form devoid of all content. all content which
 they receive, every phenomenon which fills these forms, contains
 something which is no longer completely knowable in its whole
 nature, something which can no longer be entirely explained through
 something else, something then which is groundless, through which
 consequently the knowledge loses its evidence and ceases to be
 completely lucid. this that withholds itself from investigation,
 however, is the thing-in-itself, is that which is essentially not
 idea, not object of knowledge, but has only become knowable by
 entering that form. the form is originally foreign to it, and the
 thing-in-itself can never become entirely one with it, can never be
 referred to mere form, and, since this form is the principle of
 sufficient reason, can never be completely explained. if therefore
 all mathematics affords us an exhaustive knowledge of that which in
 the phenomena is quantity, position, number, in a word, spatial and
 temporal relations; if all etiology gives us a complete account of
 the regular conditions under which phenomena, with all their
 determinations, appear in time and space, but, with it all, teaches
 us nothing more than why in each case this particular phenomenon
 must appear [pg
 just at this time here, and at this place now; it is clear that
 with their assistance we can never penetrate to the inner nature of
 things. there always remains something which no explanation can
 venture to attack, but which it always presupposes; the forces of
 nature, the definite mode of operation of things, the quality and
 character of every phenomenon, that which is without ground, that
 which does not depend upon the form of the phenomenal, the
 principle of sufficient reason, but is something to which this form
 in itself is foreign, something which has yet entered this form,
 and now appears according to its law, a law, however, which only
 determines the appearance, not that which appears, only the how,
 not the what, only the form, not the content. mechanics, physics,
 and chemistry teach the rules and laws according to which the
 forces of impenetrability, gravitation, rigidity, fluidity,
 cohesion, elasticity, heat, light, affinity, magnetism,
 electricity, &c., operate; that is to say, the law, the rule
 which these forces observe whenever they enter time and space. but
 do what we will, the forces themselves remain qualitates occultæ. for it is
 just the thing-in-itself, which, because it is manifested, exhibits
 these phenomena, which are entirely different from itself. in its
 manifestation, indeed, it is completely subordinated to the
 principle of sufficient reason as the form of the idea, but it can
 never itself be referred to this form, and therefore cannot be
 fully explained etiologically, can never be completely fathomed. it
 is certainly perfectly comprehensible so far as it has assumed that
 form, that is, so far as it is phenomenon, but its inner nature is
 not in the least explained by the fact that it can thus be
 comprehended. therefore the more necessity any knowledge carries
 with it, the more there is in it of that which cannot be otherwise
 thought or presented in perception—as, for example,
 space-relations—the clearer and more sufficing then it is, the less
 pure objective content it has, or the less reality, properly so
 called, is [pg
 given in it. and conversely, the more there is in it which must be
 conceived as mere chance, and the more it impresses us as given
 merely empirically, the more proper objectivity and true reality is
 there in such knowledge, and at the same time, the more that is
 inexplicable, that is, that cannot be deduced from anything
 else.
it is true that
 at all times an etiology, unmindful of its real aim, has striven to
 reduce all organised life to chemism or electricity; all chemism,
 that is to say quality, again to mechanism (action determined by
 the shape of the atom), this again sometimes to the object of
 phoronomy, i.e., the combination of time
 and space, which makes motion possible, sometimes to the object of
 mere geometry, i.e., position in space (much in
 the same way as we rightly deduce the diminution of an effect from
 the square of the distance, and the theory of the lever in a purely
 geometrical manner): geometry may finally be reduced to arithmetic,
 which, on account of its one dimension, is of all the forms of the
 principle of sufficient reason, the most intelligible,
 comprehensible, and completely susceptible of investigation. as
 instances of the method generally indicated here, we may refer to
 the atoms of democritus, the vortex of descartes, the mechanical
 physics of lesage, which towards the end of last century tried to
 explain both chemical affinities and gravitation mechanically by
 impact and pressure, as may be seen in detail in “lucrèce neutonien;”
 reil's form and combination as the cause of animal life, also tends
 in this direction. finally, the crude materialism which even now in
 the middle of the nineteenth century has been served up again under
 the ignorant delusion that it is original, belongs distinctly to
 this class. it stupidly denies vital force, and first of all tries
 to explain the phenomena of life from physical and chemical forces,
 and those again from the mechanical effects of the matter,
 position, form, and motion of imagined atoms, and thus [pg ] seeks to reduce all the forces of
 nature to action and reaction as its thing-in-itself. according to
 this teaching, light is the mechanical vibration or undulation of
 an imaginary ether, postulated for this end. this ether, if it
 reaches the eye, beats rapidly upon the retina, and gives us the
 knowledge of colour. thus, for example, four hundred and
 eighty-three billion beats in a second give red, and seven hundred
 and twenty-seven billion beats in a second give violet. upon this
 theory, persons who are colour-blind must be those who are unable
 to count the beats, must they not? such crass, mechanical, clumsy,
 and certainly knotty theories, which remind one of democritus, are
 quite worthy of those who, fifty years after the appearance of
 goethe's doctrine of colour, still believe in newton's homogeneous
 light, and are not ashamed to say so. they will find that what is
 overlooked in the child (democritus) will not be forgiven to the
 man. they might indeed, some day, come to an ignominious end; but
 then every one would slink away and pretend that he never had
 anything to do with them. we shall soon have to speak again of this
 false reduction of the forces of nature to each other; so much for
 the present. supposing this theory were possible, all would
 certainly be explained and established and finally reduced to an
 arithmetical problem, which would then be the holiest thing in the
 temple of wisdom, to which the principle of sufficient reason would
 at last have happily conducted us. but all content of the
 phenomenon would have disappeared, and the mere form would remain.
 the “what appears” would be referred
 to the “how it appears,” and this
 “how” would be what is a priori knowable, therefore
 entirely dependent on the subject, therefore only for the subject,
 therefore, lastly, mere phantom, idea and form of idea, through and
 through: no thing-in-itself could be demanded. supposing, then,
 that this were possible, the whole world would be derived from the
 subject, and in fact, that would be accomplished which [pg ] fichte wanted to seem to
 accomplish by his empty bombast. but it is not possible:
 phantasies, sophisms, castles in the air, have been constructed in
 this way, but science never. the many and multifarious phenomena in
 nature have been successfully referred to particular original
 forces, and as often as this has been done, a real advance has been
 made. several forces and qualities, which were at first regarded as
 different, have been derived from each other, and thus their number
 has been curtailed. (for example, magnetism from electricity.)
 etiology will have reached its goal when it has recognised and
 exhibited as such all the original forces of nature, and
 established their mode of operation, i.e.,
 the law according to which, under the guidance of causality, their
 phenomena appear in time and space, and determine their position
 with regard to each other. but certain original forces will always
 remain over; there will always remain as an insoluble residuum a
 content of phenomena which cannot be referred to their form, and
 thus cannot be explained from something else in accordance with the
 principle of sufficient reason. for in everything in nature there
 is something of which no ground can ever be assigned, of which no
 explanation is possible, and no ulterior cause is to be sought.
 this is the specific nature of its action, i.e.,
 the nature of its existence, its being. of each particular effect
 of the thing a cause may be certainly indicated, from which it
 follows that it must act just at this time and in this place; but
 no cause can ever be found from which it follows that a thing acts
 in general, and precisely in the way it does. if it has no other
 qualities, if it is merely a mote in a sunbeam, it yet exhibits
 this unfathomable something, at least as weight and
 impenetrability. but this, i say, is to the mote what his will is
 to a man; and, like the human will, it is, according to its inner
 nature, not subject to explanation; nay, more—it is in itself
 identical with this will. it is true that a motive may be given for
 every manifestation [pg
 of will, for every act of will at a particular time and in a
 particular place, upon which it must necessarily follow, under the
 presupposition of the character of the man. but no reason can ever
 be given that the man has this character; that he wills at all;
 that, of several motives, just this one and no other, or indeed
 that any motive at all, moves his will. that which in the case of
 man is the unfathomable character which is presupposed in every
 explanation of his actions from motives is, in the case of every
 unorganised body, its definitive quality—the mode of its action,
 the manifestations of which are occasioned by impressions from
 without, while it itself, on the contrary, is determined by nothing
 outside itself, and thus is also inexplicable. its particular
 manifestations, through which alone it becomes visible, are
 subordinated to the principle of sufficient reason; it itself is
 groundless. this was in substance rightly understood by the
 schoolmen, who called it forma
 substantialis. (cf. suarez, disput. metaph., disp.
 xv. sect. .)
it is a greater
 and a commoner error that the phenomena which we best understand
 are those which are of most frequent occurrence, and which are most
 universal and simple; for, on the contrary, these are just the
 phenomena that we are most accustomed to see about us, and to be
 ignorant of. it is just as inexplicable to us that a stone should
 fall to the earth as that an animal should move itself. it has been
 supposed, as we have remarked above, that, starting from the most
 universal forces of nature (gravitation, cohesion,
 impenetrability), it was possible to explain from them the rarer
 forces, which only operate under a combination of circumstances
 (for example, chemical quality, electricity, magnetism), and,
 lastly, from these to understand the organism and the life of
 animals, and even the nature of human knowing and willing. men
 resigned themselves without a word to starting from mere
 qualitates occultæ, the
 elucidation of which was entirely given up, for they intended to
 build [pg ] upon them, not to
 investigate them. such an intention cannot, as we have already
 said, be carried out. but apart from this, such structures would
 always stand in the air. what is the use of explanations which
 ultimately refer us to something which is quite as unknown as the
 problem with which we started? do we in the end understand more of
 the inner nature of these universal natural forces than of the
 inner nature of an animal? is not the one as much a sealed book to
 us as the other? unfathomable because it is without ground, because
 it is the content, that which the phenomenon is, and which can
 never be referred to the form, to the how, to the principle of
 sufficient reason. but we, who have in view not etiology but
 philosophy, that is, not relative but unconditioned knowledge of
 the real nature of the world, take the opposite course, and start
 from that which is immediately and most completely known to us, and
 fully and entirely trusted by us—that which lies nearest to us, in
 order to understand that which is known to us only at a distance,
 one-sidedly and indirectly. from the most powerful, most
 significant, and most distinct phenomenon we seek to arrive at an
 understanding of those that are less complete and weaker. with the
 exception of my own body, all things are known to me only on
 one side, that of the idea. their
 inner nature remains hidden from me and a profound secret, even if
 i know all the causes from which their changes follow. only by
 comparison with that which goes on in me if my body performs an
 action when i am influenced by a motive—only by comparison, i say,
 with what is the inner nature of my own changes determined by
 external reasons, can i obtain insight into the way in which these
 lifeless bodies change under the influence of causes, and so
 understand what is their inner nature. for the knowledge of the
 causes of the manifestation of this inner nature affords me merely
 the rule of its appearance in time and space, and nothing more. i
 can make this comparison because [pg ] my body is the only object of which i know
 not merely the one side, that of the idea, but
 also the other side which is called will. thus, instead of
 believing that i would better understand my own organisation, and
 then my own knowing and willing, and my movements following upon
 motives, if i could only refer them to movements due to electrical,
 chemical, and mechanical causes, i must, seeing that i seek
 philosophy and not etiology, learn to understand from my own
 movements following upon motives the inner nature of the simplest
 and commonest movements of an unorganised body which i see
 following upon causes. i must recognise the inscrutable forces
 which manifest themselves in all natural bodies as identical in
 kind with that which in me is the will, and as differing from it
 only in degree. that is to say, the fourth class of ideas given in
 the essay on the principle of sufficient reason must be the key to
 the knowledge of the inner nature of the first class, and by means
 of the law of motivation i must come to understand the inner
 meaning of the law of causation.
spinoza (epist.
 ) says that if a stone which has been projected through the air
 had consciousness, it would believe that it was moving of its own
 will. i add to this only that the stone would be right. the impulse
 given it is for the stone what the motive is for me, and what in
 the case of the stone appears as cohesion, gravitation, rigidity,
 is in its inner nature the same as that which i recognise in myself
 as will, and what the stone also, if knowledge were given to it,
 would recognise as will. in the passage referred to, spinoza had in
 view the necessity with which the stone flies, and he rightly
 desires to transfer this necessity to that of the particular act of
 will of a person. i, on the other hand, consider the inner being,
 which alone imparts meaning and validity to all real necessity
 (i.e., effect following upon a
 cause) as its presupposition. in the case of men this is called
 character; in the case of a stone it is called quality, but it is
 [pg ] the same in both.
 when it is immediately known it is called will. in the stone it has
 the weakest, and in man the strongest degree of visibility, of
 objectivity. st. augustine recognises, with a true instinct, this
 identity of the tendencies of all things with our own willing, and
 i cannot refrain from quoting his naïve account of the
 matter:—“si
 pecora essemus, carnalem vitam et quod secundum sensum ejusdem est
 amaremus, idque esset sufficiens bonum nostrum, et secundum hoc si
 esset nobis bene, nihil aliud quæreremus. item, si arbores essemus,
 nihil quidem sentientes motu amare possemus: verumtamen id quasi
 appetere videremur, quo feracius essemus, uberiusque fructuosæ. si
 essemus lapides, aut fluctus, aut ventus, aut flamma, vel quid
 ejusmodi, sine ullo quidem sensu atque vita, non tamen nobis
 deesset quasi quidam nostrorum locorum atque ordinis appetitus. nam
 velut amores corporum momenta sunt ponderum, sive deorsum
 gravitate, sive sursum levitate nitantur: ita enim corpus pondere,
 sicut animus amore fertur quocunque fertur”
 (de civ. dei, xi. ).
it ought further
 to be mentioned that euler saw that the inner nature of gravitation
 must ultimately be referred to an “inclination and desire” (thus will) peculiar to
 material bodies (in the th letter to the princess). indeed, it is
 just this that makes him averse to the conception of gravitation as
 it existed for newton, and he is inclined to try a modification of
 it in accordance with the earlier cartesian theory, and so to
 derive gravitation from the impact of an ether upon the bodies, as
 being “more rational and more suitable for
 persons who like clear and intelligible principles.” he
 wishes to banish attraction from physics as a qualitas occulta. this is only
 in keeping with the dead view of nature which prevailed at euler's
 time as the correlative of the immaterial soul. it is only worth
 noticing because of its bearing upon the fundamental truth
 established by me, which even at that time this fine intellect saw
 glimmering in the distance. he hastened to turn in time, and then,
 in his anxiety at [pg
 seeing all the prevalent fundamental views endangered, he sought
 safety in the old and already exploded absurdities.
we know that
 multiplicity in general is
 necessarily conditioned by space and time, and is only thinkable in
 them. in this respect they are called the principium individuationis. but
 we have found that space and time are forms of the principle of
 sufficient reason. in this principle all our knowledge a priori is expressed, but, as
 we showed above, this a
 priori knowledge, as such, only applies to the
 knowableness of things, not to the things themselves, i.e.,
 it is only our form of knowledge, it is not a property of the
 thing-in-itself. the thing-in-itself is, as such, free from all
 forms of knowledge, even the most universal, that of being an
 object for the subject. in other words, the thing-in-itself is
 something altogether different from the idea. if, now, this
 thing-in-itself is the will, as i believe i have
 fully and convincingly proved it to be, then, regarded as such and
 apart from its manifestation, it lies outside time and space, and
 therefore knows no multiplicity, and is consequently one.
 yet, as i have said, it is not one in the sense in which an
 individual or a concept is one, but as something to which the
 condition of the possibility of multiplicity, the principium individuationis, is
 foreign. the multiplicity of things in space and time, which
 collectively constitute the objectification of will, does not
 affect the will itself, which remains indivisible notwithstanding
 it. it is not the case that, in some way or other, a smaller part
 of will is in the stone and a larger part in the man, for the
 relation of part and whole belongs exclusively to space, and has no
 longer any meaning when we go beyond this form of intuition or
 perception. the more and the less have application only to the
 phenomenon of will, that is, its visibility, its objectification.
 of this there is a higher grade in the plant than in the stone; in
 the animal a higher grade than in the plant: indeed, the passage of
 will into visibility, its [pg
 objectification, has grades as innumerable as exist between the
 dimmest twilight and the brightest sunshine, the loudest sound and
 the faintest echo. we shall return later to the consideration of
 these grades of visibility which belong to the objectification of
 the will, to the reflection of its nature. but as the grades of its
 objectification do not directly concern the will itself, still less
 is it concerned by the multiplicity of the phenomena of these
 different grades, i.e., the multitude of
 individuals of each form, or the particular manifestations of each
 force. for this multiplicity is directly conditioned by time and
 space, into which the will itself never enters. the will reveals
 itself as completely and as much in one oak
 as in millions. their number and multiplication in space and time
 has no meaning with regard to it, but only with regard to the
 multiplicity of individuals who know in space and time, and who are
 themselves multiplied and dispersed in these. the multiplicity of
 these individuals itself belongs not to the will, but only to its
 manifestation. we may therefore say that if, per
 impossibile, a single real existence, even the most
 insignificant, were to be entirely annihilated, the whole world
 would necessarily perish with it. the great mystic angelus silesius
 feels this when he says—
“i know
 god cannot live an instant without me,
he must give up the ghost if i should cease
 to be.”
men have tried
 in various ways to bring the immeasurable greatness of the material
 universe nearer to the comprehension of us all, and then they have
 seized the opportunity to make edifying remarks. they have referred
 perhaps to the relative smallness of the earth, and indeed of man;
 or, on the contrary, they have pointed out the greatness of the
 mind of this man who is so insignificant—the mind that can solve,
 comprehend, and even measure the greatness of the universe, and so
 forth. now, all this is very well, but to me, when i consider the
 vastness [pg
 of the world, the most important point is this, that the
 thing-in-itself, whose manifestation is the world—whatever else it
 may be—cannot have its true self spread out and dispersed after
 this fashion in boundless space, but that this endless extension
 belongs only to its manifestation. the thing-in-itself, on the
 contrary, is present entire and undivided in every object of nature
 and in every living being. therefore we lose nothing by standing
 still beside any single individual thing, and true wisdom is not to
 be gained by measuring out the boundless world, or, what would be
 more to the purpose, by actually traversing endless space. it is
 rather to be attained by the thorough investigation of any
 individual thing, for thus we seek to arrive at a full knowledge
 and understanding of its true and peculiar nature.
the subject
 which will therefore be fully considered in the next book, and
 which has, doubtless, already presented itself to the mind of every
 student of plato, is, that these different grades of the
 objectification of will which are manifested in innumerable
 individuals, and exist as their unattained types or as the eternal
 forms of things, not entering themselves into time and space, which
 are the medium of individual things, but remaining fixed, subject
 to no change, always being, never becoming, while the particular
 things arise and pass away, always become and never are,—that these
 grades of
 the objectification of will are, i say, simply
 plato's
 ideas. i make this passing reference to the matter here
 in order that i may be able in future to use the word idea in
 this sense. in my writings, therefore, the word is always to be
 understood in its true and original meaning given to it by plato,
 and has absolutely no reference to those abstract productions of
 dogmatising scholastic reason, which kant has inaptly and
 illegitimately used this word to denote, though plato had already
 appropriated and used it most fitly. by idea, then, i understand
 every definite and fixed grade of the objectification [pg ] of will, so far as it is
 thing-in-itself, and therefore has no multiplicity. these grades
 are related to individual things as their eternal forms or
 prototypes. the shortest and most concise statement of this famous
 platonic doctrine is given us by diogenes laertes (iii. ):
 ὁμοιωματα καθεστωτα”—(“plato ideas in natura velut exemplaria dixit
 subsistere; cetera his esse similia, ad istarum similitudinem
 consistentia”). of kant's misuse of the word i
 take no further notice; what it is needful to say about it will be
 found in the appendix.
§ . the lowest
 grades of the objectification of will are to be found in those most
 universal forces of nature which partly appear in all matter
 without exception, as gravity and impenetrability, and partly have
 shared the given matter among them, so that certain of them reign
 in one species of matter and others in another species,
 constituting its specific difference, as rigidity, fluidity,
 elasticity, electricity, magnetism, chemical properties and
 qualities of every kind. they are in themselves immediate
 manifestations of will, just as much as human action; and as such
 they are groundless, like human character. only their particular
 manifestations are subordinated to the principle of sufficient
 reason, like the particular actions of men. they themselves, on the
 other hand, can never be called either effect or cause, but are the
 prior and presupposed conditions of all causes and effects through
 which their real nature unfolds and reveals itself. it is therefore
 senseless to demand a cause of gravity or electricity, for they are
 original forces. their expressions, indeed, take place in
 accordance with the law of cause and effect, so that every one of
 their particular manifestations has a cause, which is itself again
 just a similar particular manifestation which determines that this
 force must express itself here, must appear in space and time; but
 the force itself is by no means the effect of a cause, nor the
 cause of an [pg
 effect. it is therefore a mistake to say “gravity is the cause of a stone falling;” for
 the cause in this case is rather the nearness of the earth, because
 it attracts the stone. take the earth away and the stone will not
 fall, although gravity remains. the force itself lies quite outside
 the chain of causes and effects, which presupposes time, because it
 only has meaning in relation to it; but the force lies outside
 time. the individual change always has for its cause another change
 just as individual as itself, and not the force of which it is the
 expression. for that which always gives its efficiency to a cause,
 however many times it may appear, is a force of nature. as such, it
 is groundless, i.e., it lies outside the chain
 of causes and outside the province of the principle of sufficient
 reason in general, and is philosophically known as the immediate
 objectivity of will, which is the “in-itself” of the whole of nature; but in
 etiology, which in this reference is physics, it is set down as an
 original force, i.e., a qualitas occulta.
in the higher
 grades of the objectivity of will we see individuality occupy a
 prominent position, especially in the case of man, where it appears
 as the great difference of individual characters, i.e.,
 as complete personality, outwardly expressed in strongly marked
 individual physiognomy, which influences the whole bodily form.
 none of the brutes have this individuality in anything like so high
 a degree, though the higher species of them have a trace of it; but
 the character of the species completely predominates over it, and
 therefore they have little individual physiognomy. the farther down
 we go, the more completely is every trace of the individual
 character lost in the common character of the species, and the
 physiognomy of the species alone remains. we know the physiological
 character of the species, and from that we know exactly what is to
 be expected from the individual; while, on the contrary, in the
 human species every individual has to be studied and fathomed for
 [pg ] himself, which, if
 we wish to forecast his action with some degree of certainty, is,
 on account of the possibility of concealment that first appears
 with reason, a matter of the greatest difficulty. it is probably
 connected with this difference of the human species from all
 others, that the folds and convolutions of the brain, which are
 entirely wanting in birds, and very weakly marked in rodents, are
 even in the case of the higher animals far more symmetrical on both
 sides, and more constantly the same in each individual, than in the
 case of human beings. it is
 further to be regarded as a phenomenon of this peculiar individual
 character which distinguishes men from all the lower animals, that
 in the case of the brutes the sexual instinct seeks its
 satisfaction without observable choice of objects, while in the
 case of man this choice is, in a purely instinctive manner and
 independent of all reflection, carried so far that it rises into a
 powerful passion. while then every man is to be regarded as a
 specially determined and characterised phenomenon of will, and
 indeed to a certain extent as a special idea, in the case of the
 brutes this individual character as a whole is wanting, because
 only the species has a special significance. and the farther we go
 from man, the fainter becomes the trace of this individual
 character, so that plants have no individual qualities left, except
 such as may be fully explained from the favourable or unfavourable
 external influences of soil, climate, and other accidents. finally,
 in the inorganic kingdom of nature all individuality disappears.
 the crystal alone is to be regarded as to a certain extent
 individual. it is a unity of the tendency in definite directions,
 fixed by crystallisation, which makes the trace of this tendency
 permanent. it is at the same time a cumulative repetition of its
 primitive form, bound into unity by an idea, just as the
 [pg ] tree is an aggregate
 of the single germinating fibre which shows itself in every rib of
 the leaves, in every leaf, in every branch; which repeats itself,
 and to some extent makes each of these appear as a separate growth,
 nourishing itself from the greater as a parasite, so that the tree,
 resembling the crystal, is a systematic aggregate of small plants,
 although only the whole is the complete expression of an individual
 idea, i.e., of this particular grade
 of the objectification of will. but the individuals of the same
 species of crystal can have no other difference than such as is
 produced by external accidents; indeed we can make at pleasure
 large or small crystals of every species. the individual, however,
 as such, that is, with traces of an individual character, does not
 exist further in unorganised nature. all its phenomena are
 expressions of general forces of nature, i.e.,
 of those grades of the objectification of will which do not
 objectify themselves (as is the case in organised nature), by means
 of the difference of the individualities which collectively express
 the whole of the idea, but show themselves only in the species, and
 as a whole, without any variation in each particular example of it.
 time, space, multiplicity, and existence conditioned by causes, do
 not belong to the will or to the idea (the grade of the
 objectification of will), but only to their particular phenomena.
 therefore such a force of nature as, for example, gravity or
 electricity, must show itself as such in precisely the same way in
 all its million phenomena, and only external circumstances can
 modify these. this unity of its being in all its phenomena, this
 unchangeable constancy of the appearance of these, whenever, under
 the guidance of causality, the necessary conditions are present, is
 called a law of nature. if such a law is
 once learned from experience, then the phenomenon of that force of
 nature, the character of which is expressed and laid down in it,
 may be accurately forecast and counted upon. but it is just this
 conformity to law of the [pg
 phenomena of the lower grades of the objectification of will which
 gives them such a different aspect from the phenomena of the same
 will in the higher, i.e., the more distinct, grades
 of its objectification, in animals, and in men and their actions,
 where the stronger or weaker influence of the individual character
 and the susceptibility to motives which often remain hidden from
 the spectator, because they lie in knowledge, has had the result
 that the identity of the inner nature of the two kinds of phenomena
 has hitherto been entirely overlooked.
if we start from
 the knowledge of the particular, and not from that of the idea,
 there is something astonishing, and sometimes even terrible, in the
 absolute uniformity of the laws of nature. it might astonish us
 that nature never once forgets her laws; that if, for example, it
 has once been according to a law of nature that where certain
 materials are brought together under given conditions, a chemical
 combination will take place, or gas will be evolved, or they will
 go on fire; if these conditions are fulfilled, whether by our
 interposition or entirely by chance (and in this case the accuracy
 is the more astonishing because unexpected), to-day just as well as
 a thousand years ago, the determined phenomenon will take place at
 once and without delay. we are most vividly impressed with the
 marvellousness of this fact in the case of rare phenomena, which
 only occur under very complex circumstances, but which we are
 previously informed will take place if these conditions are
 fulfilled. for example, when we are told that if certain metals,
 when arranged alternately in fluid with which an acid has been
 mixed, are brought into contact, silver leaf brought between the
 extremities of this combination will suddenly be consumed in a
 green flame; or that under certain conditions the hard diamond
 turns into carbonic acid. it is the ghostly omnipresence of natural
 forces that astonishes us in such [pg ] cases, and we remark here what in the case of
 phenomena which happen daily no longer strikes us, how the
 connection between cause and effect is really as mysterious as that
 which is imagined between a magic formula and a spirit that must
 appear when invoked by it. on the other hand, if we have attained
 to the philosophical knowledge that a force of nature is a definite
 grade of the objectification of will, that is to say, a definite
 grade of that which we recognise as our own inmost nature, and that
 this will, in itself, and distinguished from its phenomena and
 their forms, lies outside time and space, and that, therefore, the
 multiplicity, which is conditioned by time and space, does not
 belong to it, nor directly to the grade of its objectification,
 i.e., the idea, but only to the
 phenomena of the idea; and if we remember that the law of causality
 has significance only in relation to time and space, inasmuch as it
 determines the position of the multitude of phenomena of the
 different ideas in which the will reveals itself, governing the
 order in which they must appear; if, i say, in this knowledge the
 inner meaning of the great doctrine of kant has been fully grasped,
 the doctrine that time, space, and causality do not belong to the
 thing-in-itself, but merely to the phenomenon, that they are only
 the forms of our knowledge, not qualities of things in themselves;
 then we shall understand that this astonishment at the conformity
 to law and accurate operation of a force of nature, this
 astonishment at the complete sameness of all its million phenomena
 and the infallibility of their occurrence, is really like that of a
 child or a savage who looks for the first time through a glass with
 many facets at a flower, and marvels at the complete similarity of
 the innumerable flowers which he sees, and counts the leaves of
 each of them separately.
thus every
 universal, original force of nature is nothing but a low grade of
 the objectification of will, and we call [pg ] every such grade an eternal idea in
 plato's sense. but a law of nature is the relation of
 the idea to the form of its manifestation. this form is time,
 space, and causality, which are necessarily and inseparably
 connected and related to each other. through time and space the
 idea multiplies itself in innumerable phenomena, but the order
 according to which it enters these forms of multiplicity is
 definitely determined by the law of causality; this law is as it
 were the norm of the limit of these phenomena of different ideas,
 in accordance with which time, space, and matter are assigned to
 them. this norm is therefore necessarily related to the identity of
 the aggregate of existing matter, which is the common substratum of
 all those different phenomena. if all these were not directed to
 that common matter in the possession of which they must be divided,
 there would be no need for such a law to decide their claims. they
 might all at once and together fill a boundless space throughout an
 endless time. therefore, because all these phenomena of the eternal
 ideas are directed to one and the same matter, must there be a rule
 for their appearance and disappearance; for if there were not, they
 would not make way for each other. thus the law of causality is
 essentially bound up with that of the permanence of substance; they
 reciprocally derive significance from each other. time and space,
 again, are related to them in the same way. for time is merely the
 possibility of conflicting states of the same matter, and space is
 merely the possibility of the permanence of the same matter under
 all sorts of conflicting states. accordingly, in the preceding book
 we explained matter as the union of space and time, and this union
 shows itself as change of the accidents in the permanence of the
 substance, of which causality or becoming is the universal
 possibility. and accordingly, we said that matter is through and
 through causality. we explained the understanding as the subjective
 correlative of causality, and said matter (and thus the whole
 [pg ] world as idea)
 exists only for the understanding; the understanding is its
 condition, its supporter as its necessary correlative. i repeat all
 this in passing, merely to call to mind what was demonstrated in
 the first book, for it is necessary for the complete understanding
 of these two books that their inner agreement should be observed,
 since what is inseparably united in the actual world as its two
 sides, will and idea, has, in order that we might understand each
 of them more clearly in isolation, been dissevered in these two
 books.
it may not
 perhaps be superfluous to elucidate further by an example how the
 law of causality has meaning only in relation to time and space,
 and the matter which consists in the union of the two. for it
 determines the limits in accordance with which the phenomena of the
 forces of nature divide themselves in the possession of matter,
 while the original forces of nature, as the immediate
 objectification of will, which, as a thing in itself, is not
 subordinated to the principle of sufficient reason, lie outside
 these forms, within which alone all etiological explanation has
 validity and meaning, and just on that account can never lead us to
 the inner reality of nature. for this purpose let us think of some
 kind of machine constructed according to the laws of mechanics.
 iron weights begin the motion by their gravity; copper wheels
 resist by their rigidity, affect and raise each other and the lever
 by their impenetrability, and so on. here gravity, rigidity, and
 impenetrability are original unexplained forces; mechanics only
 gives us the condition under which, and the manner in which, they
 manifest themselves, appear, and govern a definite matter, time,
 and place. if, now, a strong magnet is made to attract the iron of
 the weight, and overcome its gravity, the movement of the machine
 stops, and the matter becomes forthwith the scene of quite a
 different force of nature—magnetism, of which etiology again gives
 no further explanation than the condition under which it appears.
 [pg ] or let us suppose
 that the copper discs of such a machine are laid upon zinc plates,
 and an acid solution introduced between them. at once the same
 matter of the machine has become subject to another original force,
 galvanism, which now governs it according to its own laws, and
 reveals itself in it through its phenomena; and etiology can again
 tell us nothing about this force except the conditions under which,
 and the laws in accordance with which, it manifests itself. let us
 now raise the temperature and add pure acid; the whole machine
 burns; that is to say, once more an entirely different force of
 nature, chemical energy, asserts at this time and in this place
 irresistible claims to this particular matter, and reveals itself
 in it as idea, as a definite grade of the objectification of will.
 the calcined metal thus produced now unites with an acid, and a
 salt is obtained which forms itself into crystals. these are the
 phenomena of another idea, which in itself is again quite
 inexplicable, while the appearance of its phenomena is dependent
 upon certain conditions which etiology can give us. the crystals
 dissolve, mix with other materials, and vegetation springs up from
 them—a new phenomenon of will: and so the same permanent matter may
 be followed ad infinitum,
 to observe how now this and now that natural force obtains a right
 to it and temporarily takes possession of it, in order to appear
 and reveal its own nature. the condition of this right, the point
 of time and space at which it becomes valid, is given by causality,
 but the explanation founded upon this law only extends thus far.
 the force itself is a manifestation of will, and as such is not
 subject to the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, that
 is, it is groundless. it lies outside all time, is omnipresent, and
 seems as it were to wait constantly till the circumstances occur
 under which it can appear and take possession of a definite matter,
 supplanting the forces which have reigned in it till then. all time
 exists only for the phenomena of such a force, [pg ] and is without significance for the
 force itself. through thousands of years chemical forces slumber in
 matter till the contact with the reagents sets them free; then they
 appear; but time exists only for the phenomena, not for the forces
 themselves. for thousands of years galvanism slumbered in copper
 and zinc, and they lay quietly beside silver, which must be
 consumed in flame as soon as all three are brought together under
 the required conditions. even in the organic kingdom we see a dry
 seed preserve the slumbering force through three thousand years,
 and when at last the favourable circumstances occur, grow up as a
 plant.
if by this
 exposition the difference between a force of nature and all its
 phenomena has been made quite distinct; if we have seen clearly
 that the former is the will itself at this particular grade of its
 objectification, but that multiplicity comes to phenomena only
 through time and space, and that the law of causality is nothing
 but the determination of the position of these phenomena in time
 and space; then we shall recognise the complete truth and the deep
 meaning of malebranche's doctrine of occasional causes (causes occasionelles). it is
 well worth [pg
 while comparing this doctrine of his, as he explains it in the
 “recherches de la vérite,”
 both in the rd chapter of the second part of the th book, and in
 the éclaircissements appended to
 this chapter, with this exposition of mine, and observing the
 complete agreement of the two doctrines in the case of such
 different systems of thought. indeed i cannot help admiring how
 malebranche, though thoroughly involved in the positive dogmas
 which his age inevitably forced upon him, yet, in such bonds and
 under such a burden, hit the truth so happily, so correctly, and
 even knew how to combine it with these dogmas, at all events
 verbally.
for the power of
 truth is incredibly great and of unspeakable endurance. we find
 constant traces of it in all, even the most eccentric and absurd
 dogmas, of different times and different lands,—often indeed in
 strange company, curiously mixed up with other things, but still
 recognisable. it is like a plant that germinates under a heap of
 great stones, but still struggles up to the light, working itself
 through with many deviations and windings, disfigured, worn out,
 stunted in its growth,—but yet, to the light.
in any case
 malebranche is right: every natural cause is only an occasional
 cause. it only gives opportunity or occasion for the manifestation
 of the one indivisible will which is the “in-itself” of all things, and whose graduated
 objectification is the whole visible world. only the appearance,
 the becoming visible, in this place, at this time, is brought about
 by the cause and is so far dependent on it, but not the whole of
 the phenomenon, nor its inner nature. this is the will itself, to
 which the principle of sufficient reason has not application, and
 which is therefore groundless. nothing in the world has a
 sufficient cause of its existence generally, but only a cause of
 existence just here and just now. that a stone exhibits now
 gravity, now rigidity, now electricity, now chemical qualities,
 depends upon causes, [pg
 upon impressions upon it from without, and is to be explained from
 these. but these qualities themselves, and thus the whole inner
 nature of the stone which consists in them, and therefore manifests
 itself in all the ways referred to; thus, in general, that the
 stone is such as it is, that it exists generally—all this, i say,
 has no ground, but is the visible appearance of the groundless
 will. every cause is thus an occasional cause. we have found it to
 be so in nature, which is without knowledge, and it is also
 precisely the same when motives and not causes or stimuli determine
 the point at which the phenomena are to appear, that is to say, in
 the actions of animals and human beings. for in both cases it is
 one and the same will which appears; very different in the grades
 of its manifestation, multiplied in the phenomena of these grades,
 and, in respect of these, subordinated to the principle of
 sufficient reason, but in itself free from all this. motives do not
 determine the character of man, but only the phenomena of his
 character, that is, his actions; the outward fashion of his life,
 not its inner meaning and content. these proceed from the character
 which is the immediate manifestation of the will, and is therefore
 groundless. that one man is bad and another good, does not depend
 upon motives or outward influences, such as teaching and preaching,
 and is in this sense quite inexplicable. but whether a bad man
 shows his badness in petty acts of injustice, cowardly tricks, and
 low knavery which he practises in the narrow sphere of his
 circumstances, or whether as a conqueror he oppresses nations,
 throws a world into lamentation, and sheds the blood of millions;
 this is the outward form of his manifestation, that which is
 unessential to it, and depends upon the circumstances in which fate
 has placed him, upon his surroundings, upon external influences,
 upon motives; but his decision upon these motives can never be
 explained from them; it proceeds from the will, of which this man
 is a manifestation. of this we shall [pg ] speak in the fourth book. the manner in which
 the character discloses its qualities is quite analogous to the way
 in which those of every material body in unconscious nature are
 disclosed. water remains water with its intrinsic qualities,
 whether as a still lake it reflects its banks, or leaps in foam
 from the cliffs, or, artificially confined, spouts in a long jet
 into the air. all that depends upon external causes; the one form
 is as natural to it as the other, but it will always show the same
 form in the same circumstances; it is equally ready for any, but in
 every case true to its character, and at all times revealing this
 alone. so will every human character under all circumstances reveal
 itself, but the phenomena which proceed from it will always be in
 accordance with the circumstances.
§ . if, from
 the foregoing consideration of the forces of nature and their
 phenomena, we have come to see clearly how far an explanation from
 causes can go, and where it must stop if it is not to degenerate
 into the vain attempt to reduce the content of all phenomena to
 their mere form, in which case there would ultimately remain
 nothing but form, we shall be able to settle in general terms what
 is to be demanded of etiology as a whole. it must seek out the
 causes of all phenomena in nature, i.e.,
 the circumstances under which they invariably appear. then it must
 refer the multitude of phenomena which have various forms in
 various circumstances to what is active in every phenomenon, and is
 presupposed in the cause,—original forces of nature. it must
 correctly distinguish between a difference of the phenomenon which
 arises from a difference of the force, and one which results merely
 from a difference of the circumstances under which the force
 expresses itself; and with equal care it must guard against taking
 the expressions of one and the same force under different
 circumstances for the manifestations of different forces, and
 conversely against taking for manifestations of one [pg ] and the same force what originally
 belongs to different forces. now this is the direct work of the
 faculty of judgment, and that is why so few men are capable of
 increasing our insight in physics, while all are able to enlarge
 experience. indolence and ignorance make us disposed to appeal too
 soon to original forces. this is exemplified with an exaggeration
 that savours of irony in the entities and quidities of the
 schoolmen. nothing is further from my desire than to favour their
 resuscitation. we have just as little right to appeal to the
 objectification of will, instead of giving a physical explanation,
 as we have to appeal to the creative power of god. for physics
 demands causes, and the will is never a cause. its whole relation
 to the phenomenon is not in accordance with the principle of
 sufficient reason. but that which in itself is the will exists in
 another aspect as idea; that is to say, is phenomenon. as such, it
 obeys the laws which constitute the form of the phenomenon. every
 movement, for example, although it is always a manifestation of
 will, must yet have a cause from which it is to be explained in
 relation to a particular time and space; that is, not in general in
 its inner nature, but as a particular phenomenon. in the case
 of the stone, this is a mechanical cause; in that of the movement
 of a man, it is a motive; but in no case can it be wanting. on the
 other hand, the universal common nature of all phenomena of one
 particular kind, that which must be presupposed if the explanation
 from causes is to have any sense and meaning, is the general force
 of nature, which, in physics, must remain a qualitas occulta, because with
 it the etiological explanation ends and the metaphysical begins.
 but the chain of causes and effects is never broken by an original
 force to which it has been necessary to appeal. it does not run
 back to such a force as if it were its first link, but the nearest
 link, as well as the remotest, presupposes the original force, and
 could otherwise explain nothing. a series of [pg ] causes and effects may be the
 manifestation of the most different kinds of forces, whose
 successive visible appearances are conducted through it, as i have
 illustrated above by the example of a metal machine. but the
 difference of these original forces, which cannot be referred to
 each other, by no means breaks the unity of that chain of causes,
 and the connection between all its links. the etiology and the
 philosophy of nature never do violence to each other, but go hand
 in hand, regarding the same object from different points of view.
 etiology gives an account of the causes which necessarily produce
 the particular phenomenon to be explained. it exhibits, as the
 foundation of all its explanations, the universal forces which are
 active in all these causes and effects. it accurately defines,
 enumerates, and distinguishes these forces, and then indicates all
 the different effects in which each force appears, regulated by the
 difference of the circumstances, always in accordance with its own
 peculiar character, which it discloses in obedience to an
 invariable rule, called a law of nature. when all this has
 been thoroughly accomplished by physics in every particular, it
 will be complete, and its work will be done. there will then remain
 no unknown force in unorganised nature, nor any effect, which has
 not been proved to be the manifestation of one of these forces
 under definite circumstances, in accordance with a law of nature.
 yet a law of nature remains merely the observed rule according to
 which nature invariably proceeds whenever certain definite
 circumstances occur. therefore a law of nature may be defined as a
 fact expressed generally—un fait
 généralisé—and thus a complete enumeration of all the
 laws of nature would only be a complete register of facts. the
 consideration of nature as a whole is thus completed in morphology, which enumerates,
 compares, and arranges all the enduring forms of organised nature.
 of the causes of the appearance of the individual creature it has
 little to say, for in all cases this is procreation (the theory of
 [pg ] which is a separate
 matter), and in rare cases the generatio æquivoca. but to this
 last belongs, strictly speaking, the manner in which all the lower
 grades of the objectification of will, that is to say, physical and
 chemical phenomena, appear as individual, and it is precisely the
 task of etiology to point out the conditions of this appearance.
 philosophy, on the other hand, concerns itself only with the
 universal, in nature as everywhere else. the original forces
 themselves are here its object, and it recognises in them the
 different grades of the objectivity of will, which is the inner
 nature, the “in-itself” of this
 world; and when it regards the world apart from will, it explains
 it as merely the idea of the subject. but if etiology, instead of
 preparing the way for philosophy, and supplying its doctrines with
 practical application by means of instances, supposes that its aim
 is rather to deny the existence of all original forces, except
 perhaps one, the most general, for
 example, impenetrability, which it imagines it thoroughly
 understands, and consequently seeks forcibly to refer all the
 others to it—it forsakes its own province and can only give us
 error instead of truth. the content of nature is supplanted by its
 form, everything is ascribed to the circumstances which work from
 without, and nothing to the inner nature of the thing. now if it
 were possible to succeed by this method, a problem in arithmetic
 would ultimately, as we have already remarked, solve the riddle of
 the universe. but this is the method adopted by those, referred to
 above, who think that all physiological effects ought to be reduced
 to form and combination, this, perhaps, to electricity, and this
 again to chemism, and chemism to mechanism. the mistake of
 descartes, for example, and of all the atomists, was of this last
 description. they referred the movements of the globe to the impact
 of a fluid, and the qualities of matter to the connection and form
 of the atoms, and hence they laboured to explain all the phenomena
 of nature as merely manifestations of impenetrability [pg ] and cohesion. although this has been
 given up, precisely the same error is committed in our own day by
 the electrical, chemical, and mechanical physiologists, who
 obstinately attempt to explain the whole of life and all the
 functions of the organism from “form and
 combination.” in meckel's “archiv
 für physiologie” (, vol. v. p. ) we still find it
 stated that the aim of physiological explanation is the reduction
 of organic life to the universal forces with which physics deals.
 lamarck also, in his “philosophie
 zoologique,” explains life as merely the
 effect of warmth and electricity: le
 calorique et la matière électrique suffisent parfaitement pour
 composer ensemble cette cause essentielle de la vie
 (p. ). according to this, warmth and electricity would be the
 “thing-in-itself,” and the world of
 animals and plants its phenomenal appearance. the absurdity of this
 opinion becomes glaringly apparent at the th and following pages
 of that work. it is well known that all these opinions, that have
 been so often refuted, have reappeared quite recently with renewed
 confidence. if we carefully examine the foundation of these views,
 we shall find that they ultimately involve the presupposition that
 the organism is merely an aggregate of phenomena of physical,
 chemical, and mechanical forces, which have come together here by
 chance, and produced the organism as a freak of nature without
 further significance. the organism of an animal or of a human being
 would therefore be, if considered philosophically, not the
 exhibition of a special idea, that is, not itself immediate
 objectivity of the will at a definite higher grade, but in it would
 appear only those ideas which objectify the will in electricity, in
 chemism, and in mechanism. thus the organism would be as
 fortuitously constructed by the concurrence of these forces as the
 forms of men and beasts in clouds and stalactites, and would
 therefore in itself be no more interesting than they are. however,
 we shall see immediately how far the application of physical and
 chemical modes of explanation [pg ] to the organism may yet, within certain
 limits, be allowable and useful; for i shall explain that the vital
 force certainly avails itself of and uses the forces of unorganised
 nature; yet these forces no more constitute the vital force than a
 hammer and anvil make a blacksmith. therefore even the most simple
 example of plant life can never be explained from these forces by
 any theory of capillary attraction and endosmose, much less animal
 life. the following observations will prepare the way for this
 somewhat difficult discussion.
it follows from
 all that has been said that it is certainly an error on the part of
 natural science to seek to refer the higher grades of the
 objectification of will to the lower; for the failure to recognise,
 or the denial of, original and self-existing forces of nature is
 just as wrong as the groundless assumption of special forces when
 what occurs is merely a peculiar kind of manifestation of what is
 already known. thus kant rightly says that it would be absurd to
 hope for a blade of grass from a newton, that is, from one who
 reduced the blade of grass to the manifestations of physical and
 chemical forces, of which it was the chance product, and therefore
 a mere freak of nature, in which no special idea appeared,
 i.e., the will did not directly
 reveal itself in it in a higher and specific grade, but just as in
 the phenomena of unorganised nature and by chance in this form. the
 schoolmen, who certainly would not have allowed such a doctrine,
 would rightly have said that it was a complete denial of the
 forma substantialis, and a
 degradation of it to the forma
 accidentalis. for the forma substantialis of aristotle
 denotes exactly what i call the grade of the objectification of
 will in a thing. on the other hand, it is not to be overlooked that
 in all ideas, that is, in all forces of unorganised, and all forms
 of organised nature, it is one and the same will that reveals
 itself, that is to say, which enters the form of the idea and
 passes into objectivity. its unity must
 therefore be also recognisable [pg ] through an inner relationship between all its
 phenomena. now this reveals itself in the higher grades of the
 objectification of will, where the whole phenomenon is more
 distinct, thus in the vegetable and animal kingdoms, through the
 universally prevailing analogy of all forms, the fundamental type
 which recurs in all phenomena. this has, therefore, become the
 guiding principle of the admirable zoological system which was
 originated by the french in this century, and it is most completely
 established in comparative anatomy as l'unité de plan, l'uniformité de l'élément
 anatomique. to discover this fundamental type has
 been the chief concern, or at any rate the praiseworthy endeavour,
 of the natural philosophers of the school of schelling, who have in
 this respect considerable merit, although in many cases their hunt
 after analogies in nature degenerated into mere conceits. they
 have, however, rightly shown that that general relationship and
 family likeness exists also in the ideas of unorganised nature; for
 example, between electricity and magnetism, the identity of which
 was afterwards established; between chemical attraction and
 gravitation, and so forth. they specially called attention to the
 fact that polarity, that is, the sundering
 of a force into two qualitatively different and opposed activities
 striving after reunion, which also shows itself for the most part
 in space as a dispersion in opposite directions, is a fundamental
 type of almost all the phenomena of nature, from the magnet and the
 crystal to man himself. yet this knowledge has been current in
 china from the earliest times, in the doctrine of opposition of yin
 and yang. indeed, since all things in the world are the
 objectification of one and the same will, and therefore in their
 inner nature identical, it must not only be the case that there is
 that unmistakable analogy between them, and that in every
 phenomenon the trace, intimation, and plan of the higher phenomenon
 that lies next to it in point of [pg ] development shows itself, but also because
 all these forms belong to the world as idea,
 it is indeed conceivable that even in the most universal forms of
 the idea, in that peculiar framework of the phenomenal world space
 and time, it may be possible to discern and establish the
 fundamental type, intimation, and plan of what fills the forms. it
 seems to have been a dim notion of this that was the origin of the
 cabala and all the mathematical philosophy of the pythagoreans, and
 also of the chinese in y-king. in the school of schelling also, to
 which we have already referred, we find, among their efforts to
 bring to light the similarity among the phenomena of nature,
 several attempts (though rather unfortunate ones) to deduce laws of
 nature from the laws of pure space and time. however, one can never
 tell to what extent a man of genius will realise both
 endeavours.
now, although
 the difference between phenomenon and thing-in-itself is never lost
 sight of, and therefore the identity of the will which objectifies
 itself in all ideas can never (because it has different grades of
 its objectification) be distorted to mean identity of the
 particular ideas themselves in which it appears, so that, for
 example, chemical or electrical attraction can never be reduced to
 the attraction of gravitation, although this inner analogy is
 known, and the former may be regarded as, so to speak, higher
 powers of the latter, just as little does the similarity of the
 construction of all animals warrant us in mixing and identifying
 the species and explaining the more developed as mere variations of
 the less developed; and although, finally, the physiological
 functions are never to be reduced to chemical or physical
 processes, yet, in justification of this procedure, within certain
 limits, we may accept the following observations as highly
 probable.
if several of
 the phenomena of will in the lower grades of its
 objectification—that is, in unorganised nature—come into conflict
 because each of them, under the [pg ] guidance of causality, seeks to possess a
 given portion of matter, there arises from the conflict the
 phenomenon of a higher idea which prevails over all the less
 developed phenomena previously there, yet in such a way that it
 allows the essence of these to continue to exist in a subordinate
 manner, in that it takes up into itself from them something which
 is analogous to them. this process is only intelligible from the
 identity of the will which manifests itself in all the ideas, and
 which is always striving after higher objectification. we thus see,
 for example, in the hardening of the bones, an unmistakable analogy
 to crystallisation, as the force which originally had possession of
 the chalk, although ossification is never to be reduced to
 crystallisation. the analogy shows itself in a weaker degree in the
 flesh becoming firm. the combination of humours in the animal body
 and secretion are also analogous to chemical combination and
 separation. indeed, the laws of chemistry are still strongly
 operative in this case, but subordinated, very much modified, and
 mastered by a higher idea; therefore mere chemical forces outside
 the organism will never afford us such humours; but
“encheiresin naturæ nennt es die
 chemie,
spottet ihrer selbst und weiss nicht
 wie.”
the more
 developed idea resulting from this victory over several lower ideas
 or objectifications of will, gains an entirely new character by
 taking up into itself from every idea over which it has prevailed a
 strengthened analogy. the will objectifies itself in a new, more
 distinct way. it originally appears in generatio æquivoca; afterwards
 in assimilation to the given germ, organic moisture, plant, animal,
 man. thus from the strife of lower phenomena the higher arise,
 swallowing them all up, but yet realising in the higher grade the
 tendency of all the lower. here, then, already the law
 applies—serpens nisi serpentem
 comederit non fit draco.[pg ]
i wish it had
 been possible for me to dispel by clearness of explanation the
 obscurity which clings to the subject of these thoughts; but i see
 very well that the reader's own consideration of the matter must
 materially aid me if i am not to remain uncomprehended or
 misunderstood. according to the view i have expressed, the traces
 of chemical and physical modes of operation will indeed be found in
 the organism, but it can never be explained from them; because it
 is by no means a phenomenon even accidentally brought about through
 the united actions of such forces, but a higher idea which has
 overcome these lower ideas by subduing assimilation; for the
 one will which objectifies itself
 in all ideas always seeks the highest possible objectification, and
 has therefore in this case given up the lower grades of its
 manifestation after a conflict, in order to appear in a higher
 grade, and one so much the more powerful. no victory without
 conflict: since the higher idea or objectification of will can only
 appear through the conquest of the lower, it endures the opposition
 of these lower ideas, which, although brought into subjection,
 still constantly strive to obtain an independent and complete
 expression of their being. the magnet that has attracted a piece of
 iron carries on a perpetual conflict with gravitation, which, as
 the lower objectification of will, has a prior right to the matter
 of the iron; and in this constant battle the magnet indeed grows
 stronger, for the opposition excites it, as it were, to greater
 effort. in the same way every manifestation of the will, including
 that which expresses itself in the human organism, wages a constant
 war against the many physical and chemical forces which, as lower
 ideas, have a prior right to that matter. thus the arm falls which
 for a while, overcoming gravity, we have held stretched out; thus
 the pleasing sensation of health, which proclaims the victory of
 the idea of the self-conscious organism over the physical and
 chemical laws, which originally governed the humours of
 [pg ] the body, is so
 often interrupted, and is indeed always accompanied by greater or
 less discomfort, which arises from the resistance of these forces,
 and on account of which the vegetative part of our life is
 constantly attended by slight pain. thus also digestion weakens all
 the animal functions, because it requires the whole vital force to
 overcome the chemical forces of nature by assimilation. hence also
 in general the burden of physical life, the necessity of sleep,
 and, finally, of death; for at last these subdued forces of nature,
 assisted by circumstances, win back from the organism, wearied even
 by the constant victory, the matter it took from them, and attain
 to an unimpeded expression of their being. we may therefore say
 that every organism expresses the idea of which it is the image,
 only after we have subtracted the part of its force which is
 expended in subduing the lower ideas that strive with it for
 matter. this seems to have been running in the mind of jacob böhm
 when he says somewhere that all the bodies of men and animals, and
 even all plants, are really half dead. according as the subjection
 in the organism of these forces of nature, which express the lower
 grades of the objectification of will, is more or less successful,
 the more or the less completely does it attain to the expression of
 its idea; that is to say, the nearer it is to the ideal
 or the further from it—the ideal of beauty in its
 species.
thus everywhere
 in nature we see strife, conflict, and alternation of victory, and
 in it we shall come to recognise more distinctly that variance with
 itself which is essential to the will. every grade of the
 objectification of will fights for the matter, the space, and the
 time of the others. the permanent matter must constantly change its
 form; for under the guidance of causality, mechanical, physical,
 chemical, and organic phenomena, eagerly striving to appear, wrest
 the matter from each other, for each desires to reveal its own
 idea. this strife may be followed through the whole of nature;
 indeed nature exists only through it: [pg ] ει γαρ μη ην το νεικος εν τοις πραγμασιν, ἑν
 αν ην ἁπαντα, ὡς φησιν εμπεδοκλης; (nam si non inesset in rebus
 contentio, unum omnia essent, ut ait empedocles. aris. metaph., b.
 ). yet this strife itself is only the revelation of that variance
 with itself which is essential to the will. this universal conflict
 becomes most distinctly visible in the animal kingdom. for animals
 have the whole of the vegetable kingdom for their food, and even
 within the animal kingdom every beast is the prey and the food of
 another; that is, the matter in which its idea expresses itself
 must yield itself to the expression of another idea, for each
 animal can only maintain its existence by the constant destruction
 of some other. thus the will to live everywhere preys upon itself,
 and in different forms is its own nourishment, till finally the
 human race, because it subdues all the others, regards nature as a
 manufactory for its use. yet even the human race, as we shall see
 in the fourth book, reveals in itself with most terrible
 distinctness this conflict, this variance with itself of the will,
 and we find homo homini
 lupus. meanwhile we can recognise this strife, this
 subjugation, just as well in the lower grades of the
 objectification of will. many insects (especially ichneumon-flies)
 lay their eggs on the skin, and even in the body of the larvæ of
 other insects, whose slow destruction is the first work of the
 newly hatched brood. the young hydra, which grows like a bud out of
 the old one, and afterwards separates itself from it, fights while
 it is still joined to the old one for the prey that offers itself,
 so that the one snatches it out of the mouth of the other
 (trembley, polypod., ii. p. , and iii. p. ). but the
 bulldog-ant of australia affords us the most extraordinary example
 of this kind; for if it is cut in two, a battle begins between the
 head and the tail. the head seizes the tail with its teeth, and the
 tail defends itself bravely by stinging the head: the battle may
 last for half an hour, until they die or are dragged away by other
 ants. this contest takes place [pg ] every time the experiment is tried. (from a
 letter by howitt in the w. journal, reprinted in galignani's
 messenger, th november .) on the banks of the missouri one
 sometimes sees a mighty oak the stem and branches of which are so
 encircled, fettered, and interlaced by a gigantic wild vine, that
 it withers as if choked. the same thing shows itself in the lowest
 grades; for example, when water and carbon are changed into
 vegetable sap, or vegetables or bread into blood by organic
 assimilation; and so also in every case in which animal secretion
 takes place, along with the restriction of chemical forces to a
 subordinate mode of activity. this also occurs in unorganised
 nature, when, for example, crystals in process of formation meet,
 cross, and mutually disturb each other to such an extent that they
 are unable to assume the pure crystalline form, so that almost
 every cluster of crystals is an image of such a conflict of will at
 this low grade of its objectification; or again, when a magnet
 forces its magnetism upon iron, in order to express its idea in it;
 or when galvanism overcomes chemical affinity, decomposes the
 closest combinations, and so entirely suspends the laws of
 chemistry that the acid of a decomposed salt at the negative pole
 must pass to the positive pole without combining with the alkalies
 through which it goes on its way, or turning red the litmus paper
 that touches it. on a large scale it shows itself in the relation
 between the central body and the planet, for although the planet is
 in absolute dependence, yet it always resists, just like the
 chemical forces in the organism; hence arises the constant tension
 between centripetal and centrifugal force, which keeps the globe in
 motion, and is itself an example of that universal essential
 conflict of the manifestation of will which we are considering. for
 as every body must be regarded as the manifestation of a will, and
 as will necessarily expresses itself as a struggle, the original
 condition of every world that is formed into a globe cannot be
 rest, but motion, a striving forward in boundless space
 [pg ] without rest and
 without end. neither the law of inertia nor that of causality is
 opposed to this: for as, according to the former, matter as such is
 alike indifferent to rest and motion, its original condition may
 just as well be the one as the other, therefore if we first find it
 in motion, we have just as little right to assume that this was
 preceded by a condition of rest, and to inquire into the cause of
 the origin of the motion, as, conversely, if we found it at rest,
 we would have to assume a previous motion and inquire into the
 cause of its suspension. it is, therefore, not needful to seek for
 a first impulse for centrifugal force, for, according to the
 hypothesis of kant and laplace, it is, in the case of the planets,
 the residue of the original rotation of the central body, from
 which the planets have separated themselves as it contracted. but
 to this central body itself motion is essential; it always
 continues its rotation, and at the same time rushes forward in
 endless space, or perhaps circulates round a greater central body
 invisible to us. this view entirely agrees with the conjecture of
 astronomers that there is a central sun, and also with the observed
 advance of our whole solar system, and perhaps of the whole stellar
 system to which our sun belongs. from this we are finally led to
 assume a general advance of fixed stars, together with the central
 sun, and this certainly loses all meaning in boundless space (for
 motion in absolute space cannot be distinguished from rest), and
 becomes, as is already the case from its striving and aimless
 flight, an expression of that nothingness, that failure of all aim,
 which, at the close of this book, we shall be obliged to recognise
 in the striving of will in all its phenomena. thus boundless space
 and endless time must be the most universal and essential forms of
 the collective phenomena of will, which exist for the expression of
 its whole being. lastly, we can recognise that conflict which we
 are considering of all phenomena of will against each other in
 simple matter regarded as such; for the real characteristic
 [pg ] of matter is
 correctly expressed by kant as repulsive and attractive force; so
 that even crude matter has its existence only in the strife of
 conflicting forces. if we abstract from all chemical differences in
 matter, or go so far back in the chain of causes and effects that
 as yet there is no chemical difference, there remains mere
 matter,—the world rounded to a globe, whose life, i.e.,
 objectification of will, is now constituted by the conflict between
 attractive and repulsive forces, the former as gravitation pressing
 from all sides towards the centre, the latter as impenetrability
 always opposing the former either as rigidity or elasticity; and
 this constant pressure and resistance may be regarded as the
 objectivity of will in its very lowest grade, and even there it
 expresses its character.
we should see
 the will express itself here in the lowest grade as blind striving,
 an obscure, inarticulate impulse, far from susceptible of being
 directly known. it is the simplest and the weakest mode of its
 objectification. but it appears as this blind and unconscious
 striving in the whole of unorganised nature, in all those original
 forces of which it is the work of physics and chemistry to discover
 and to study the laws, and each of which manifests itself to us in
 millions of phenomena which are exactly similar and regular, and
 show no trace of individual character, but are mere multiplicity
 through space and time, i.e., through the principium individuationis, as a
 picture is multiplied through the facets of a glass.
from grade to
 grade objectifying itself more distinctly, yet still completely
 without consciousness as an obscure striving force, the will acts
 in the vegetable kingdom also, in which the bond of its phenomena
 consists no longer properly of causes, but of stimuli; and,
 finally, also in the vegetative part of the animal phenomenon, in
 the production and maturing of the animal, and in sustaining its
 inner economy, in which the manifestation of [pg ] will is still always necessarily
 determined by stimuli. the ever-ascending grades of the
 objectification of will bring us at last to the point at which the
 individual that expresses the idea could no longer receive food for
 its assimilation through mere movement following upon stimuli. for
 such a stimulus must be waited for, but the food has now come to be
 of a more special and definite kind, and with the ever-increasing
 multiplicity of the individual phenomena, the crowd and confusion
 has become so great that they interfere with each other, and the
 chance of the individual that is moved merely by stimuli and must
 wait for its food would be too unfavourable. from the point,
 therefore, at which the animal has delivered itself from the egg or
 the womb in which it vegetated without consciousness, its food must
 be sought out and selected. for this purpose movement following
 upon motives, and therefore consciousness, becomes necessary, and
 consequently it appears as an agent, μηχανη, called in at this
 stage of the objectification of will for the conservation of the
 individual and the propagation of the species. it appears
 represented by the brain or a large ganglion, just as every other
 effort or determination of the will which objectifies itself is
 represented by an organ, that is to say, manifests itself for the
 idea as an organ. but
 with this means of assistance, this μηχανη, the world as
 idea comes into existence at a stroke, with all its
 forms, object and subject, time, space, multiplicity, and
 causality. the world now shows its second side. till now mere
 will, it becomes also idea,
 object of the knowing subject. the will, which up to this point
 followed its tendency in the dark with unerring certainty, has at
 this grade kindled for itself a light as a means which became
 necessary for getting rid of the disadvantage which arose from the
 throng and the complicated [pg ] nature of its manifestations, and which would
 have accrued precisely to the most perfect of them. the hitherto
 infallible certainty and regularity with which it worked in
 unorganised and merely vegetative nature, rested upon the fact that
 it alone was active in its original nature, as blind impulse, will,
 without assistance, and also without interruption, from a second
 and entirely different world, the world as idea, which is indeed
 only the image of its own inner being, but is yet of quite another
 nature, and now encroaches on the connected whole of its phenomena.
 hence its infallible certainty comes to an end. animals are already
 exposed to illusion, to deception. they have, however, merely ideas
 of perception, no conceptions, no reflection, and they are
 therefore bound to the present; they cannot have regard for the
 future. it seems as if this knowledge without reason was not in all
 cases sufficient for its end, and at times required, as it were,
 some assistance. for the very remarkable phenomenon presents
 itself, that the blind working of the will and the activity
 enlightened by knowledge encroach in a most astonishing manner upon
 each other's spheres in two kinds of phenomena. in the one case we
 find in the very midst of those actions of animals which are guided
 by perceptive knowledge and its motives one kind of action which is
 accomplished apart from these, and thus through the necessity of
 the blindly acting will. i refer to those mechanical instincts
 which are guided by no motive or knowledge, and which yet have the
 appearance of performing their work from abstract rational motives.
 the other case, which is opposed to this, is that in which, on the
 contrary, the light of knowledge penetrates into the workshop of
 the blindly active will, and illuminates the vegetative functions
 of the human organism. i mean clairvoyance. finally, when the will
 has attained to the highest grade of its objectification, that
 knowledge of the understanding given to brutes to which the senses
 supply the data, out of which there arises mere perception confined
 [pg ] to what is
 immediately present, does not suffice. that complicated,
 many-sided, imaginative being, man, with his many needs, and
 exposed as he is to innumerable dangers, must, in order to exist,
 be lighted by a double knowledge; a higher power, as it were, of
 perceptive knowledge must be given him, and also reason, as the
 faculty of framing abstract conceptions. with this there has
 appeared reflection, surveying the future and the past, and, as a
 consequence, deliberation, care, the power of premeditated action
 independent of the present, and finally, the full and distinct
 consciousness of one's own deliberate volition as such. now if with
 mere knowledge of perception there arose the possibility of
 illusion and deception, by which the previous infallibility of the
 blind striving of will was done away with, so that mechanical and
 other instincts, as expressions of unconscious will, had to lend
 their help in the midst of those that were conscious, with the
 entrance of reason that certainty and infallibility of the
 expressions of will (which at the other extreme in unorganised
 nature appeared as strict conformity to law) is almost entirely
 lost; instinct disappears altogether; deliberation, which is
 supposed to take the place of everything else, begets (as was shown
 in the first book) irresolution and uncertainty; then error becomes
 possible, and in many cases obstructs the adequate objectification
 of the will in action. for although in the character the will has
 already taken its definite and unchangeable bent or direction, in
 accordance with which volition, when occasioned by the presence of
 a motive, invariably takes place, yet error can falsify its
 expressions, for it introduces illusive motives that take the place
 of the real ones which they resemble; as,
 for example, when superstition forces on a man imaginary motives
 which impel him to a course of action directly opposed [pg ] to the way in which the will would
 otherwise express itself in the given circumstances. agamemnon
 slays his daughter; a miser dispenses alms, out of pure egotism, in
 the hope that he will some day receive an hundred-fold; and so
 on.
thus knowledge
 generally, rational as well as merely sensuous, proceeds originally
 from the will itself, belongs to the inner being of the higher
 grades of its objectification as a mere μηχανη, a means of
 supporting the individual and the species, just like any organ of
 the body. originally destined for the service of the will for the
 accomplishment of its aims, it remains almost throughout entirely
 subjected to its service: it is so in all brutes and in almost all
 men. yet we shall see in the third book how in certain individual
 men knowledge can deliver itself from this bondage, throw off its
 yoke, and, free from all the aims of will, exist purely for itself,
 simply as a clear mirror of the world, which is the source of art.
 finally, in the fourth book, we shall see how, if this kind of
 knowledge reacts on the will, it can bring about self-surrender,
 i.e., resignation, which is the
 final goal, and indeed the inmost nature of all virtue and
 holiness, and is deliverance from the world.
§ . we have
 considered the great multiplicity and diversity of the phenomena in
 which the will objectifies itself, and we have seen their endless
 and implacable strife with each other. yet, according to the whole
 discussion up to this point, the will itself, as thing-in-itself,
 is by no means included in that multiplicity and change. the
 diversity of the (platonic) ideas, i.e.,
 grades of objectification, the multitude of individuals in which
 each of these expresses itself, the struggle of forms for
 matter,—all this does not concern it, but is only the manner of its
 objectification, and only through this has an indirect relation to
 it, by virtue of which it belongs to the expression of the nature
 of will for the idea. as the magic-lantern shows many different
 pictures, which [pg
 are all made visible by one and the same light, so in all the
 multifarious phenomena which fill the world together or throng
 after each other as events, only one
 will manifests itself, of which everything is the
 visibility, the objectivity, and which remains unmoved in the midst
 of this change; it alone is thing-in-itself; all objects are
 manifestations, or, to speak the language of kant, phenomena.
 although in man, as (platonic) idea, the will finds its clearest
 and fullest objectification, yet man alone could not express its
 being. in order to manifest the full significance of the will, the
 idea of man would need to appear, not alone and sundered from
 everything else, but accompanied by the whole series of grades,
 down through all the forms of animals, through the vegetable
 kingdom to unorganised nature. all these supplement each other in
 the complete objectification of will; they are as much presupposed
 by the idea of man as the blossoms of a tree presuppose leaves,
 branches, stem, and root; they form a pyramid, of which man is the
 apex. if fond of similes, one might also say that their
 manifestations accompany that of man as necessarily as the full
 daylight is accompanied by all the gradations of twilight, through
 which, little by little, it loses itself in darkness; or one might
 call them the echo of man, and say: animal and plant are the
 descending fifth and third of man, the inorganic kingdom is the
 lower octave. the full truth of this last comparison will only
 become clear to us when, in the following book, we attempt to
 fathom the deep significance of music, and see how a connected,
 progressive melody, made up of high, quick notes, may be regarded
 as in some sense expressing the life and efforts of man connected
 by reflection, while the unconnected complemental notes and the
 slow bass, which make up the harmony necessary to perfect the
 music, represent the rest of the animal kingdom and the whole of
 nature that is without knowledge. but of this in its own place,
 where it will not sound so paradoxical. [pg ] we find, however, that the inner
 necessity of the gradation of its manifestations, which
 is inseparable from the adequate objectification of the will, is
 expressed by an outer necessity in the whole of
 these manifestations themselves, by reason of which man has need of
 the beasts for his support, the beasts in their grades have need of
 each other as well as of plants, which in their turn require the
 ground, water, chemical elements and their combinations, the
 planet, the sun, rotation and motion round the sun, the curve of
 the ellipse, &c., &c. at bottom this results from the fact
 that the will must live on itself, for there exists nothing beside
 it, and it is a hungry will. hence arise eager pursuit, anxiety,
 and suffering.
it is only the
 knowledge of the unity of will as thing-in-itself, in the endless
 diversity and multiplicity of the phenomena, that can afford us the
 true explanation of that wonderful, unmistakable analogy of all the
 productions of nature, that family likeness on account of which we
 may regard them as variations on the same ungiven theme. so in like
 measure, through the distinct and thoroughly comprehended knowledge
 of that harmony, that essential connection of all the parts of the
 world, that necessity of their gradation which we have just been
 considering, we shall obtain a true and sufficient insight into the
 inner nature and meaning of the undeniable teleology of all organised
 productions of nature, which, indeed, we presupposed a priori, when considering and
 investigating them.
this teleology is of a twofold
 description; sometimes an inner teleology, that is, an
 agreement of all the parts of a particular organism, so ordered
 that the sustenance of the individual and the species results from
 it, and therefore presents itself as the end of that disposition or
 arrangement. sometimes, however, there is an outward
 teleology, a relation of unorganised to organised
 nature in general, or of particular parts of organised nature to
 each [pg ] other, which makes
 the maintenance of the whole of organised nature, or of the
 particular animal species, possible, and therefore presents itself
 to our judgment as the means to this end.
inner
 teleology is connected with the scheme of our work in
 the following way. if, in accordance with what has been said, all
 variations of form in nature, and all multiplicity of individuals,
 belong not to the will itself, but merely to its objectivity and
 the form of this objectivity, it necessarily follows that the will
 is indivisible and is present as a whole in every manifestation,
 although the grades of its objectification, the (platonic) ideas,
 are very different from each other. we may, for the sake of
 simplicity, regard these different ideas as in themselves
 individual and simple acts of the will, in which it expresses its
 nature more or less. individuals, however, are again manifestations
 of the ideas, thus of these acts, in time, space, and multiplicity.
 now, in the lowest grades of objectivity, such an act (or an idea)
 retains its unity in the manifestation; while, in order to appear
 in higher grades, it requires a whole series of conditions and
 developments in time, which only collectively express its nature
 completely. thus, for example the idea that reveals itself in any
 general force of nature has always one single expression, although
 it presents itself differently according to the external relations
 that are present: otherwise its identity could not be proved, for
 this is done by abstracting the diversity that arises merely from
 external relations. in the same way the crystal has only one
 manifestation of life, crystallisation, which afterwards has its
 fully adequate and exhaustive expression in the rigid form, the
 corpse of that momentary life. the plant, however, does not express
 the idea, whose phenomenon it is, at once and through a single
 manifestation, but in a succession of developments of its organs in
 time. the animal not only develops its organism in the same manner,
 in a succession of forms which are often very different
 [pg ] (metamorphosis), but
 this form itself, although it is already objectivity of will at
 this grade, does not attain to a full expression of its idea. this
 expression must be completed through the actions of the animal, in
 which its empirical character, common to the whole species,
 manifests itself, and only then does it become the full revelation
 of the idea, a revelation which presupposes the particular organism
 as its first condition. in the case of man, the empirical character
 is peculiar to every individual (indeed, as we shall see in the
 fourth book, even to the extent of supplanting entirely the
 character of the species, through the self-surrender of the whole
 will). that which is known as the empirical character, through the
 necessary development in time, and the division into particular
 actions that is conditioned by it, is, when we abstract from this
 temporal form of the manifestation the intelligible
 character, according to the expression of kant, who
 shows his undying merit especially in establishing this distinction
 and explaining the relation between freedom and necessity,
 i.e., between the will as
 thing-in-itself and its manifestations in time. thus
 the intelligible character coincides with the idea, or, more
 accurately, with the original act of will which reveals itself in
 it. so far then, not only the empirical character of every man, but
 also that of every species of animal and plant, and even of every
 original force of unorganised nature, is to be regarded as the
 manifestation of an intelligible character, that is, of a timeless,
 indivisible act of will. i should like here to draw attention in
 passing to the naïveté with which every plant expresses and lays
 open its whole character in its mere form, reveals its whole being
 and will. this is [pg
 why the physiognomy of plants is so interesting; while in order to
 know an animal in its idea, it is necessary to observe the course
 of its action. as for man, he must be fully investigated and
 tested, for reason makes him capable of a high degree of
 dissimulation. the beast is as much more naïve than the man as the
 plant is more naïve than the beast. in the beast we see the will to
 live more naked, as it were, than in the man, in whom it is clothed
 with so much knowledge, and is, moreover, so veiled through the
 capacity for dissimulation, that it is almost only by chance, and
 here and there, that its true nature becomes apparent. in the plant
 it shows itself quite naked, but also much weaker, as mere blind
 striving for existence without end or aim. for the plant reveals
 its whole being at the first glance, and with complete innocence,
 which does not suffer from the fact that it carries its organs of
 generation exposed to view on its upper surface, though in all
 animals they have been assigned to the most hidden part. this
 innocence of the plant results from its complete want of knowledge.
 guilt does not lie in willing, but in willing with knowledge. every
 plant speaks to us first of all of its home, of the climate, and
 the nature of the ground in which it has grown. therefore, even
 those who have had little practice easily tell whether an exotic
 plant belongs to the tropical or the temperate zone, and whether it
 grows in water, in marshes, on mountain, or on moorland. besides
 this, however, every plant expresses the special will of its
 species, and says something that cannot be uttered in any other
 tongue. but we must now apply what has been said to the
 teleological consideration of the organism, so far as it concerns
 its inner design. if in unorganised nature the idea, which is
 everywhere to be regarded as a single act of will, reveals itself
 also in a single manifestation which is always the same, and thus
 one may say that here the empirical character directly partakes of
 the [pg ] unity of the
 intelligible, coincides, as it were, with it, so that no inner
 design can show itself here; if, on the contrary, all organisms
 express their ideas through a series of successive developments,
 conditioned by a multiplicity of co-existing parts, and thus only
 the sum of the manifestations of the empirical character
 collectively constitute the expression of the intelligible
 character; this necessary co-existence of the parts and succession
 of the stages of development does not destroy the unity of the
 appearing idea, the act of will which expresses itself; nay, rather
 this unity finds its expression in the necessary relation and
 connection of the parts and stages of development with each other,
 in accordance with the law of causality. since it is the will which
 is one, indivisible, and therefore entirely in harmony with itself,
 that reveals itself in the whole idea as in act, its manifestation,
 although broken up into a number of different parts and conditions,
 must yet show this unity again in the thorough agreement of all of
 these. this is effected by a necessary relation and dependence of
 all the parts upon each other, by means of which the unity of the
 idea is re-established in the manifestation. in accordance with
 this, we now recognise these different parts and functions of the
 organism as related to each other reciprocally as means and end,
 but the organism itself as the final end of all. consequently,
 neither the breaking up of the idea, which in itself is simple,
 into the multiplicity of the parts and conditions of the organism,
 on the one hand, nor, on the other hand, the re-establishment of
 its unity through the necessary connection of the parts and
 functions which arises from the fact that they are the cause and
 effect, the means and end, of each other, is peculiar and essential
 to the appearing will as such, to the thing-in-itself, but only to
 its manifestation in space, time, and causality (mere modes of the
 principle of sufficient reason, the form of the phenomenon). they
 belong to the world as [pg
 idea, not to the world as will; they belong to the way in which the
 will becomes object, i.e., idea at this grade of its
 objectivity. every one who has grasped the meaning of this
 discussion—a discussion which is perhaps somewhat difficult—will
 now fully understand the doctrine of kant, which follows from it,
 that both the design of organised and the conformity to law of
 unorganised nature are only introduced by our understanding, and
 therefore both belong only to the phenomenon, not to the
 thing-in-itself. the surprise, which was referred to above, at the
 infallible constancy of the conformity to law of unorganised
 nature, is essentially the same as the surprise that is excited by
 design in organised nature; for in both cases what we wonder at is
 only the sight of the original unity of the idea, which, for the
 phenomenon, has assumed the form of multiplicity and
 diversity.
as regards the
 second kind of teleology, according to the division made above, the
 outer design, which shows itself,
 not in the inner economy of the organisms, but in the support and
 assistance they receive from without, both from unorganised nature
 and from each other; its general explanation is to be found in the
 exposition we have just given. for the whole world, with all its
 phenomena, is the objectivity of the one indivisible will, the
 idea, which is related to all other ideas as harmony is related to
 the single voice. therefore that unity of the will must show itself
 also in the agreement of all its manifestations. but we can very
 much increase the clearness of this insight if we go somewhat more
 closely into the manifestations of that outer teleology and
 agreement of the different parts of nature with each other, an
 inquiry which will also throw some light on the foregoing
 exposition. we shall best attain this end by considering the
 following analogy.
the character of
 each individual man, so far as it is [pg ] thoroughly individual, and not entirely
 included in that of the species, may be regarded as a special idea,
 corresponding to a special act of the objectification of will. this
 act itself would then be his intelligible character, and his
 empirical character would be the manifestation of it. the empirical
 character is entirely determined through the intelligible, which is
 without ground, i.e., as thing-in-itself is not
 subordinated to the principle of sufficient reason (the form of the
 phenomenon). the empirical character must in the course of life
 afford us the express image of the intelligible, and can only
 become what the nature of the latter demands. but this property
 extends only to the essential, not to the unessential in the course
 of life to which it applies. to this unessential belong the
 detailed events and actions which are the material in which the
 empirical character shows itself. these are determined by outward
 circumstances, which present the motives upon which the character
 reacts according to its nature; and as they may be very different,
 the outward form of the manifestation of the empirical character,
 that is, the definite actual or historical form of the course of
 life, will have to accommodate itself to their influence. now this
 form may be very different, although what is essential to the
 manifestation, its content, remains the same. thus, for example it
 is immaterial whether a man plays for nuts or for crowns; but
 whether a man cheats or plays fairly, that is the real matter; the
 latter is determined by the intelligible character, the former by
 outward circumstances. as the same theme may be expressed in a
 hundred different variations, so the same character may be
 expressed in a hundred very different lives. but various as the
 outward influence may be, the empirical character which expresses
 itself in the course of life must yet, whatever form it takes,
 accurately objectify the intelligible character, for the latter
 adapts its objectification to the given material of actual
 circumstances. we have now to assume something analogous to the
 [pg ] influence of outward
 circumstances upon the life that is determined in essential matters
 by the character, if we desire to understand how the will, in the
 original act of its objectification, determines the various ideas
 in which it objectifies itself, that is, the different forms of
 natural existence of every kind, among which it distributes its
 objectification, and which must therefore necessarily have a
 relation to each other in the manifestation. we must assume that
 between all these manifestations of the one
 will there existed a universal and reciprocal adaptation and
 accommodation of themselves to each other, by which, however, as we
 shall soon see more clearly, all time-determination is to be
 excluded, for the idea lies outside time. in accordance with this,
 every manifestation must have adapted itself to the surroundings
 into which it entered, and these again must have adapted themselves
 to it, although it occupied a much later position in time; and we
 see this consensus
 naturæ everywhere. every plant is therefore adapted
 to its soil and climate, every animal to its element and the prey
 that will be its food, and is also in some way protected, to a
 certain extent, against its natural enemy: the eye is adapted to
 the light and its refrangibility, the lungs and the blood to the
 air, the air-bladder of fish to water, the eye of the seal to the
 change of the medium in which it must see, the water-pouch in the
 stomach of the camel to the drought of the african deserts, the
 sail of the nautilus to the wind that is to drive its little bark,
 and so on down to the most special and astonishing outward
 adaptations. we
 must abstract however here from all temporal relations, for these
 can only concern the manifestation of the idea, not the idea
 itself. accordingly this kind of explanation must also be used
 retrospectively, and we must not merely admit that every species
 accommodated itself to the given environment, but also that this
 environment itself, which preceded it in time, had just as much
 regard for the being [pg
 that would some time come into it. for it is one and the same will
 that objectifies itself in the whole world; it knows no time, for
 this form of the principle of sufficient reason does not belong to
 it, nor to its original objectivity, the ideas, but only to the way
 in which these are known by the individuals who themselves are
 transitory, i.e., to the manifestation of
 the ideas. thus, time has no significance for our present
 examination of the manner in which the objectification of the will
 distributes itself among the ideas, and the ideas whose manifestations entered into the
 course of time earlier, according to the law of causality, to which
 as phenomena they are subject, have no advantage over those whose
 manifestation entered later; nay rather, these last are the
 completest objectifications of the will, to which the earlier
 manifestations must adapt themselves just as much as they must
 adapt themselves to the earlier. thus the course of the planets,
 the tendency to the ellipse, the rotation of the earth, the
 division of land and sea, the atmosphere, light, warmth, and all
 such phenomena, which are in nature what bass is in harmony,
 adapted themselves in anticipation of the coming species of living
 creatures of which they were to become the supporter and sustainer.
 in the same way the ground adapted itself to the nutrition of
 plants, plants adapted themselves to the nutrition of animals,
 animals to that of other animals, and conversely they all adapted
 themselves to the nutrition of the ground. all the parts of nature
 correspond to each other, for it is one
 will that appears in them all, but the course of time is quite
 foreign to its original and only adequate
 objectification (this expression will be explained in
 the following book), the ideas. even now, when the species have
 only to sustain themselves, no longer to come into existence, we
 see here and there some such forethought of nature extending to the
 future, and abstracting as it were from the process of time, a
 self-adaptation of what is to what [pg ] is yet to come. the bird builds the nest for
 the young which it does not yet know; the beaver constructs a dam
 the object of which is unknown to it; ants, marmots, and bees lay
 in provision for the winter they have never experienced; the spider
 and the ant-lion make snares, as if with deliberate cunning, for
 future unknown prey; insects deposit their eggs where the coming
 brood finds future nourishment. in the spring-time the female
 flower of the diœcian valisneria unwinds the spirals of its stalk,
 by which till now it was held at the bottom of the water, and thus
 rises to the surface. just then the male flower, which grows on a
 short stalk from the bottom, breaks away, and so, at the sacrifice
 of its life, reaches the surface, where it swims about in search of
 the female. the latter is fructified, and then draws itself down
 again to the bottom by contracting its spirals, and there the fruit
 grows. i must
 again refer here to the larva of the male stag-beetle, which makes
 the hole in the wood for its metamorphosis as big again as the
 female does, in order to have room for its future horns. the
 instinct of animals in general gives us the best illustration of
 what remains of teleology in nature. for as instinct is an action,
 like that which is guided by the conception of an end, and yet is
 entirely without this; so all construction of nature resembles that
 which is guided by the conception of an end, and yet is entirely
 without it. for in the outer as in the inner teleology of nature,
 what we are obliged to think as means and end is, in every case,
 the
 manifestation of the unity of the one will so thoroughly agreeing
 with itself, which has assumed multiplicity in space
 and time for our manner of knowing.
the reciprocal
 adaptation and self-accommodation of phenomena that springs from
 this unity cannot, however, annul the inner contradiction which
 appears in the universal conflict of nature described above, and
 which [pg ] is essential to the
 will. that harmony goes only so far as to render possible the
 duration of the world and the different kinds of existences in it,
 which without it would long since have perished. therefore it only
 extends to the continuance of the species, and the general
 conditions of life, but not to that of the individual. if, then, by
 reason of that harmony and accommodation, the species
 in organised nature and the universal forces in unorganised
 nature continue to exist beside each other, and indeed support each
 other reciprocally, on the other hand, the inner contradiction of
 the will which objectifies itself in all these ideas shows itself
 in the ceaseless internecine war of the individuals of these species, and
 in the constant struggle of the manifestations of these natural
 forces with each other, as we pointed out above. the scene and the
 object of this conflict is matter, which they try to wrest from
 each other, and also space and time, the combination of which
 through the form of causality is, in fact, matter, as was explained
 in the first book.
§ . i here
 conclude the second principal division of my exposition, in the
 hope that, so far as is possible in the case of an entirely new
 thought, which cannot be quite free from traces of the
 individuality in which it originated, i have succeeded in conveying
 to the reader the complete certainty that this world in which we
 live and have our being is in its whole nature through and through
 will, and at the same time through
 and through idea: that this idea, as such,
 already presupposes a form, object and subject, is therefore
 relative; and if we ask what remains if we take away this form, and
 all those forms which are subordinate to it, and which express the
 principle of sufficient reason, the answer must be that as
 something toto genere
 different from idea, this can be nothing but will,
 which is thus properly the thing-in-itself. every one finds
 that he himself is this will, in which the real nature of the world
 consists, and he also [pg
 finds that he is the knowing subject, whose idea the whole world
 is, the world which exists only in relation to his consciousness,
 as its necessary supporter. every one is thus himself in a double
 aspect the whole world, the microcosm; finds both sides whole and
 complete in himself. and what he thus recognises as his own real
 being also exhausts the being of the whole world—the macrocosm;
 thus the world, like man, is through and through will,
 and through and through idea, and nothing more than this.
 so we see the philosophy of thales, which concerned the macrocosm,
 unite at this point with that of socrates, which dealt with the
 microcosm, for the object of both is found to be the same. but all
 the knowledge that has been communicated in the two first books
 will gain greater completeness, and consequently greater certainty,
 from the two following books, in which i hope that several
 questions that have more or less distinctly arisen in the course of
 our work will also be sufficiently answered.
in the meantime
 one such question may be more
 particularly considered, for it can only properly arise so long as
 one has not fully penetrated the meaning of the foregoing
 exposition, and may so far serve as an illustration of it. it is
 this: every will is a will towards something, has an object, an end
 of its willing; what then is the final end, or towards what is that
 will striving that is exhibited to us as the being-in-itself of the
 world? this question rests, like so many others, upon the confusion
 of the thing-in-itself with the manifestation. the principle of
 sufficient reason, of which the law of motivation is also a form,
 extends only to the latter, not to the former. it is only of
 phenomena, of individual things, that a ground can be given, never
 of the will itself, nor of the idea in which it adequately
 objectifies itself. so then of every particular movement or change
 of any kind in nature, a cause is to be sought, that is, a
 condition that of necessity produced it, but never of the
 [pg ] natural force itself
 which is revealed in this and innumerable similar phenomena; and it
 is therefore simple misunderstanding, arising from want of
 consideration, to ask for a cause of gravity, electricity, and so
 on. only if one had somehow shown that gravity and electricity were
 not original special forces of nature, but only the manifestations
 of a more general force already known, would it be allowable to ask
 for the cause which made this force produce the phenomena of
 gravity or of electricity here. all this has been explained at
 length above. in the same way every particular act of will of a
 knowing individual (which is itself only a manifestation of will as
 the thing-in-itself) has necessarily a motive without which that
 act would never have occurred; but just as material causes contain
 merely the determination that at this time, in this place, and in
 this matter, a manifestation of this or that natural force must
 take place, so the motive determines only the act of will of a
 knowing being, at this time, in this place, and under these
 circumstances, as a particular act, but by no means determines that
 that being wills in general or wills in this manner; this is the
 expression of his intelligible character, which, as will itself,
 the thing-in-itself, is without ground, for it lies outside the
 province of the principle of sufficient reason. therefore every man
 has permanent aims and motives by which he guides his conduct, and
 he can always give an account of his particular actions; but if he
 were asked why he wills at all, or why in general he wills to
 exist, he would have no answer, and the question would indeed seem
 to him meaningless; and this would be just the expression of his
 consciousness that he himself is nothing but will, whose willing
 stands by itself and requires more particular determination by
 motives only in its individual acts at each point of time.
in fact, freedom
 from all aim, from all limits, belongs to the nature of the will,
 which is an endless striving. this was already touched on above in
 the reference to [pg
 centrifugal force. it also discloses itself in its simplest form in
 the lowest grade of the objectification of will, in gravitation,
 which we see constantly exerting itself, though a final goal is
 obviously impossible for it. for if, according to its will, all
 existing matter were collected in one mass, yet within this mass
 gravity, ever striving towards the centre, would still wage war
 with impenetrability as rigidity or elasticity. the tendency of
 matter can therefore only be confined, never completed or appeased.
 but this is precisely the case with all tendencies of all phenomena
 of will. every attained end is also the beginning of a new course,
 and so on ad infinitum.
 the plant raises its manifestation from the seed through the stem
 and the leaf to the blossom and the fruit, which again is the
 beginning of a new seed, a new individual, that runs through the
 old course, and so on through endless time. such also is the life
 of the animal; procreation is its highest point, and after
 attaining to it, the life of the first individual quickly or slowly
 sinks, while a new life ensures to nature the endurance of the
 species and repeats the same phenomena. indeed, the constant
 renewal of the matter of every organism is also to be regarded as
 merely the manifestation of this continual pressure and change, and
 physiologists are now ceasing to hold that it is the necessary
 reparation of the matter wasted in motion, for the possible wearing
 out of the machine can by no means be equivalent to the support it
 is constantly receiving through nourishment. eternal becoming,
 endless flux, characterises the revelation of the inner nature of
 will. finally, the same thing shows itself in human endeavours and
 desires, which always delude us by presenting their satisfaction as
 the final end of will. as soon as we attain to them they no longer
 appear the same, and therefore they soon grow stale, are forgotten,
 and though not openly disowned, are yet always thrown aside as
 vanished illusions. we are fortunate enough if there [pg ] still remains something to wish for and
 to strive after, that the game may be kept up of constant
 transition from desire to satisfaction, and from satisfaction to a
 new desire, the rapid course of which is called happiness, and the
 slow course sorrow, and does not sink into that stagnation that
 shows itself in fearful ennui that paralyses life, vain yearning
 without a definite object, deadening languor. according to all
 this, when the will is enlightened by knowledge, it always knows
 what it wills now and here, never what it wills in general; every
 particular act of will has its end, the whole will has none; just
 as every particular phenomenon of nature is determined by a
 sufficient cause so far as concerns its appearance in this place at
 this time, but the force which manifests itself in it has no
 general cause, for it belongs to the thing-in-itself, to the
 groundless will. the single example of self-knowledge of the will
 as a whole is the idea as a whole, the whole world of perception.
 it is the objectification, the revelation, the mirror of the will.
 what the will expresses in it will be the subject of our further
 consideration.
[pg ]
third book. the world as
 idea.
second aspect. the idea independent
 of the principle of sufficient reason: the platonic idea: the
 object of art.
[pg ]
§ . in the
 first book the world was explained as mere idea,
 object for a subject. in the second book we considered it from its
 other side, and found that in this aspect it is will,
 which proved to be simply that which this world is besides being
 idea. in accordance with this knowledge we called the world as
 idea, both as a whole and in its parts, the objectification of
 will, which therefore means the will become object,
 i.e., idea. further, we remember
 that this objectification of will was found to have many definite
 grades, in which, with gradually increasing distinctness and
 completeness, the nature of will appears in the idea, that is to
 say, presents itself as object. in these grades we already
 recognised the platonic ideas, for the grades are just the
 determined species, or the original unchanging forms and qualities
 of all natural bodies, both organised and unorganised, and also the
 general forces which reveal themselves according to natural laws.
 these ideas, then, as a whole express themselves in innumerable
 individuals and particulars, and are related to these as archetypes
 to their copies. the multiplicity of such individuals is only
 conceivable through time and space, their appearing and passing
 away through causality, and in all these forms we recognise merely
 the different modes of the principle of sufficient reason, which is
 the ultimate principle of all that is finite, of all individual
 existence, and the universal form of the idea as it appears in the
 knowledge of the individual as such. the platonic idea, on the
 other [pg ] hand, does not come
 under this principle, and has therefore neither multiplicity nor
 change. while the individuals in which it expresses itself are
 innumerable, and unceasingly come into being and pass away, it
 remains unchanged as one and the same, and the principle of
 sufficient reason has for it no meaning. as, however, this is the
 form under which all knowledge of the subject comes, so far as the
 subject knows as an individual, the ideas lie quite
 outside the sphere of its knowledge. if, therefore, the ideas are
 to become objects of knowledge, this can only happen by
 transcending the individuality of the knowing subject. the more
 exact and detailed explanation of this is what will now occupy our
 attention.
§ . first,
 however, the following very essential remark. i hope that in the
 preceding book i have succeeded in producing the conviction that
 what is called in the kantian philosophy the thing-in-itself, and appears there
 as so significant, and yet so obscure and paradoxical a doctrine,
 and especially on account of the manner in which kant introduced it
 as an inference from the caused to the cause, was considered a
 stumbling-stone, and, in fact, the weak side of his
 philosophy,—that this, i say, if it is reached by the entirely
 different way by which we have arrived at it, is nothing but the
 will when the sphere of that
 conception is extended and defined in the way i have shown. i hope,
 further, that after what has been said there will be no hesitation
 in recognising the definite grades of the objectification of the
 will, which is the inner reality of the world, to be what plato
 called the eternal ideas or unchangeable
 forms (ειδῆ); a doctrine which is regarded as the principal, but at
 the same time the most obscure and paradoxical dogma of his system,
 and has been the subject of reflection and controversy of ridicule
 and of reverence to so many and such differently endowed minds in
 the course of many centuries.[pg ]
if now the will
 is for us the thing-in-itself, and the idea is
 the immediate objectivity of that will at a definite grade, we find
 that kant's thing-in-itself, and plato's idea, which to him is the
 only οντως ον, these two great obscure paradoxes of the two
 greatest philosophers of the west are not indeed identical, but yet
 very closely related, and only distinguished by a single
 circumstance. the purport of these two great paradoxes, with all
 inner harmony and relationship, is yet so very different on account
 of the remarkable diversity of the individuality of their authors,
 that they are the best commentary on each other, for they are like
 two entirely different roads that conduct us to the same goal. this
 is easily made clear. what kant says is in substance
 this:—“time, space, and causality are not
 determinations of the thing-in-itself, but belong only to its
 phenomenal existence, for they are nothing but the forms of our
 knowledge. since, however, all multiplicity, and all coming into
 being and passing away, are only possible through time, space, and
 causality, it follows that they also belong only to the phenomenon,
 not to the thing-in-itself. but as our knowledge is conditioned by
 these forms, the whole of experience is only knowledge of the
 phenomenon, not of the thing-in-itself; therefore its laws cannot
 be made valid for the thing-in-itself. this extends even to our own
 ego, and we know it only as
 phenomenon, and not according to what it may be in itself.”
 this is the meaning and content of the doctrine of kant in the
 important respect we are considering. what plato says is
 this:—“the things of this world which our
 senses perceive have no true being; they always become,
 they never are: they have only a relative being; they
 all exist merely in and through their relations to each other;
 their whole being may, therefore, quite as well be called a
 non-being. they are consequently not objects of a true knowledge
 (επιστημη), for such a knowledge can only be of what exists for
 itself, and always in the same way; [pg ] they, on the contrary, are only the objects
 of an opinion based on sensation (δοξα μετ᾽ αισθησεως αλογου). so
 long as we are confined to the perception of these, we are like men
 who sit in a dark cave, bound so fast that they cannot turn their
 heads, and who see nothing but the shadows of real things which
 pass between them and a fire burning behind them, the light of
 which casts the shadows on the wall opposite them; and even of
 themselves and of each other they see only the shadows on the wall.
 their wisdom would thus consist in predicting the order of the
 shadows learned from experience. the real archetypes, on the other
 hand, to which these shadows correspond, the eternal ideas, the
 original forms of all things, can alone be said to have true being
 (οντως ον), because they always are, but never become nor pass
 away. to them belongs no
 multiplicity; for each of them is according to its
 nature only one, for it is the archetype itself, of which all
 particular transitory things of the same kind which are named after
 it are copies or shadows. they have also no coming into
 being nor passing away, for they are truly being, never
 becoming nor vanishing, like their fleeting shadows. (it is
 necessarily presupposed, however, in these two negative
 definitions, that time, space, and causality have no significance
 or validity for these ideas, and that they do not exist in them.)
 of these only can there be true knowledge, for the object of such
 knowledge can only be that which always and in every respect (thus
 in-itself) is; not that which is and again is not, according as we
 look at it.” this is plato's doctrine. it is clear, and
 requires no further proof that the inner meaning of both doctrines
 is entirely the same; that both explain the visible world as a
 manifestation, which in itself is nothing, and which only has
 meaning and a borrowed reality through that which expresses itself
 in it (in the one case the thing-in-itself, in the other the idea).
 to this last, which has true being, all the forms of that
 phenomenal existence, even [pg ] the most universal and essential, are,
 according to both doctrines, entirely foreign. in order to disown
 these forms kant has directly expressed them even in abstract
 terms, and distinctly refused time, space, and causality as mere
 forms of the phenomenon to the thing-in-itself. plato, on the other
 hand, did not attain to the fullest expression, and has only
 distinctly refused these forms to his ideas in that he denies of
 the ideas what is only possible through these forms, multiplicity
 of similar things, coming into being and passing away. though it is
 perhaps superfluous, i should like to illustrate this remarkable
 and important agreement by an example. there stands before us, let
 us suppose, an animal in the full activity of life. plato would
 say, “this animal has no true existence,
 but merely an apparent existence, a constant becoming, a relative
 existence which may just as well be called non-being as being. only
 the idea which expresses itself in that animal is truly
 ‘being,’ or the animal in-itself
 (αυτο το θηριον), which is dependent upon nothing, but is in and
 for itself (καθ᾽ ἑαυτο, αει ὡς αυτως); it has not become, it will
 not end, but always is in the same way (αει ον, και μηδεποτε ουτε
 γυγνομενον ουτε απολλυμενον). if now we recognise its idea in this
 animal, it is all one and of no importance whether we have this
 animal now before us or its progenitor of a thousand years ago,
 whether it is here or in a distant land, whether it presents itself
 in this or that manner, position, or action; whether, lastly, it is
 this or any other individual of the same species; all this is
 nothing, and only concerns the phenomenon; the idea of the animal
 alone has true being, and is the object of real knowledge.”
 so plato; kant would say something of this kind, “this animal is a phenomenon in time, space, and
 causality, which are collectively the conditions a priori of the possibility of
 experience, lying in our faculty of knowledge, not determinations
 of the thing-in-itself. therefore this animal as we perceive it at
 this definite point of time, in [pg ] this particular place, as an individual in
 the connection of experience (i.e., in the chain of causes and
 effects), which has come into being, and will just as necessarily
 pass away, is not a thing-in-itself, but a phenomenon which only
 exists in relation to our knowledge. to know it as what it may be
 in itself, that is to say, independent of all the determinations
 which lie in time, space, and causality, would demand another kind
 of knowledge than that which is possible for us through the senses
 and the understanding.”
in order to
 bring kant's mode of expression nearer the platonic, we might say:
 time, space, and causality are that arrangement of our intellect by
 virtue of which the one being of each kind which alone
 really is, manifests itself to us as a multiplicity of similar
 beings, constantly appearing and disappearing in endless
 succession. the apprehension of things by means of and in
 accordance with this arrangement is immanent knowledge; that, on the
 other hand, which is conscious of the true state of the case, is
 transcendental knowledge. the
 latter is obtained in
 abstracto through the criticism of pure reason, but
 in exceptional cases it may also appear intuitively. this last is
 an addition of my own, which i am endeavouring in this third book
 to explain.
if the doctrine
 of kant had ever been properly understood and grasped, and since
 kant's time that of plato, if men had truly and earnestly reflected
 on the inner meaning and content of the teaching of these two great
 masters, instead of involving themselves in the technicalities of
 the one and writing parodies of the style of the other, they could
 not have failed to discern long ago to what an extent these two
 great philosophers agree, and that the true meaning, the aim of
 both systems, is the same. not only would they have refrained from
 constantly comparing plato to leibnitz, on whom his spirit
 certainly did not rest, or indeed to a [pg ] well-known gentleman who is still
 alive, as if
 they wanted to mock the manes of the great thinker of the past; but
 they would have advanced much farther in general, or rather they
 would not have fallen so disgracefully far behind as they have in
 the last forty years. they would not have let themselves be led by
 the nose, to-day by one vain boaster and to-morrow by another, nor
 would they have opened the nineteenth century, which promised so
 much in germany, with the philosophical farces that were performed
 over the grave of kant (as the ancients sometimes did at the
 funeral obsequies of their dead), and which deservedly called forth
 the derision of other nations, for such things least become the
 earnest and strait-laced german. but so small is the chosen public
 of true philosophers, that even students who understand are but
 scantily brought them by the centuries—εισι δη ναρθηκοφοροι μεν
 πολλοι, βακχοι δε γε παυροι (thyrsigeri quidem multi, baachi vero
 pauci). ἡ ατιμια φιλοσοφιᾳ δια ταυτα προσπεπτωκεν,
 γνησιους (eam ob rem philosophia in
 infamiam incidit, quad non pro dignitate ipsam attingunt: neque
 enim a spuriis, sad a legitimis erat
 attrectanda).—plato.
men followed the
 words,—such words as “a priori ideas,”
“forms of perception and thought existing
 in consciousness independently of experience,” “fundamental conceptions of the pure
 understanding,” &c., &c.,—and asked whether plato's
 ideas, which were also original conceptions, and besides this were
 supposed to be reminiscences of a perception before life of the
 truly real things, were in some way the same as kant's forms of
 perception and thought, which lie a
 priori in our consciousness. on account of some
 slight resemblance in the expression of these two entirely
 different doctrines, the kantian doctrine of the forms which limit
 the knowledge of the individual to the phenomenon, and the platonic
 doctrine [pg
 of ideas, the knowledge of which these very forms expressly deny,
 these so far diametrically opposed doctrines were carefully
 compared, and men deliberated and disputed as to whether they were
 identical, found at last that they were not the same, and concluded
 that plato's doctrine of ideas and kant's “critique of reason” had nothing in common. but
 enough of this.
§ . it follows
 from our consideration of the subject, that, for us, idea and
 thing-in-itself are not entirely one and the same, in spite of the
 inner agreement between kant and plato, and the identity of the aim
 they had before them, or the conception of the world which roused
 them and led them to philosophise. the idea is for us rather the
 direct, and therefore adequate, objectivity of the thing-in-itself,
 which is, however, itself the will—the will as not yet
 objectified, not yet become idea. for the thing-in-itself must,
 even according to kant, be free from all the forms connected with
 knowing as such; and it is merely an error on his part (as is shown
 in the appendix) that he did not count among these forms, before
 all others, that of being object for a subject, for it is the first
 and most universal form of all phenomena, i.e.,
 of all idea; he should therefore have distinctly denied objective
 existence to his thing-in-itself, which would have saved him from a
 great inconsistency that was soon discovered. the platonic idea, on
 the other hand, is necessarily object, something known, an idea,
 and in that respect is different from the thing-in-itself, but in
 that respect only. it has merely laid aside the subordinate forms
 of the phenomenon, all of which we include in the principle of
 sufficient reason, or rather it has not yet assumed them; but it
 has retained the first and most universal form, that of the idea in
 general, the form of being object for a subject. it is the forms
 [pg ] which are
 subordinate to this (whose general expression is the principle of
 sufficient reason) that multiply the idea in particular transitory
 individuals, whose number is a matter of complete indifference to
 the idea. the principle of sufficient reason is thus again the form
 into which the idea enters when it appears in the knowledge of the
 subject as individual. the particular thing that manifests itself
 in accordance with the principle of sufficient reason is thus only
 an indirect objectification of the thing-in-itself (which is the
 will), for between it and the thing-in-itself stands the idea as
 the only direct objectivity of the will, because it has assumed
 none of the special forms of knowledge as such, except that of the
 idea in general, i.e., the form of being object
 for a subject. therefore it alone is the most adequate
 objectivity of the will or thing-in-itself which is
 possible; indeed it is the whole thing-in-itself, only under the
 form of the idea; and here lies the ground of the great agreement
 between plato and kant, although, in strict accuracy, that of which
 they speak is not the same. but the particular things are no really
 adequate objectivity of the will, for in them it is obscured by
 those forms whose general expression is the principle of sufficient
 reason, but which are conditions of the knowledge which belongs to
 the individual as such. if it is allowable to draw conclusions from
 an impossible presupposition, we would, in fact, no longer know
 particular things, nor events, nor change, nor multiplicity, but
 would comprehend only ideas,—only the grades of the objectification
 of that one will, of the thing-in-itself, in pure unclouded
 knowledge. consequently our world would be a nunc stans, if it were not that,
 as knowing subjects, we are also individuals, i.e.,
 our perceptions come to us through the medium of a body, from the
 affections of which they proceed, and which is itself only concrete
 willing, objectivity of the will, and thus is an object among
 objects, and as such comes into the knowing consciousness in the
 only way in [pg
 which an object can, through the forms of the principle of
 sufficient reason, and consequently already presupposes, and
 therefore brings in, time, and all other forms which that principle
 expresses. time is only the broken and piecemeal view which the
 individual being has of the ideas, which are outside time, and
 consequently eternal. therefore plato says time
 is the moving picture of eternity: αιωνος εικων κινητη ὁ
§ . since now,
 as individuals, we have no other knowledge than that which is
 subject to the principle of sufficient reason, and this form of
 knowledge excludes the ideas, it is certain that if it is possible
 for us to raise ourselves from the knowledge of particular things
 to that of the ideas, this can only happen by an alteration taking
 place in the subject which is analogous and corresponds to the
 great change of the whole nature of the object, and by virtue of
 which the subject, so far as it knows an idea, is no more
 individual.
it will be
 remembered from the preceding book that knowledge in general
 belongs to the objectification of will at its higher grades, and
 sensibility, nerves, and brain, just like the other parts of the
 organised being, are the expression of the will at this stage of
 its objectivity, and therefore the idea which appears through them
 is also in the same way bound to the service of will as a means
 (μηχανη) for the attainment of its now complicated (πολυτελεστερα)
 aims for sustaining a being of manifold requirements. thus
 originally and according to its nature, knowledge is completely
 subject to the will, and, like the immediate object, which, by
 means of the application of the law of causality, is its
 starting-point, all knowledge which proceeds in accordance with the
 principle of sufficient reason remains in a closer or more distant
 relation to the will. for the individual finds his body as an
 object among objects, to all of which it is related and connected
 according to the principle [pg ] of sufficient reason. thus all investigations
 of these relations and connections lead back to his body, and
 consequently to his will. since it is the principle of sufficient
 reason which places the objects in this relation to the body, and,
 through it, to the will, the one endeavour of the knowledge which
 is subject to this principle will be to find out the relations in
 which objects are placed to each other through this principle, and
 thus to trace their innumerable connections in space, time, and
 causality. for only through these is the object interesting to the individual,
 i.e., related to the will.
 therefore the knowledge which is subject to the will knows nothing
 further of objects than their relations, knows the objects only so
 far as they exist at this time, in this place, under these
 circumstances, from these causes, and with these effects—in a word,
 as particular things; and if all these relations were to be taken
 away, the objects would also have disappeared for it, because it
 knew nothing more about them. we must not disguise the fact that
 what the sciences consider in things is also in reality nothing
 more than this; their relations, the connections of time and space,
 the causes of natural changes, the resemblance of forms, the
 motives of actions,—thus merely relations. what distinguishes
 science from ordinary knowledge is merely its systematic form, the
 facilitating of knowledge by the comprehension of all particulars
 in the universal, by means of the subordination of concepts, and
 the completeness of knowledge which is thereby attained. all
 relation has itself only a relative existence; for example, all
 being in time is also non-being; for time is only that by means of
 which opposite determinations can belong to the same thing;
 therefore every phenomenon which is in time again is not, for what
 separates its beginning from its end is only time, which is
 essentially a fleeting, inconstant, and relative thing, here called
 duration. but time is the most universal form of all objects of the
 [pg ] knowledge which is
 subject to the will, and the prototype of its other forms.
knowledge now,
 as a rule, remains always subordinate to the service of the will,
 as indeed it originated for this service, and grew, so to speak, to
 the will, as the head to the body. in the case of the brutes this
 subjection of knowledge to the will can never be abolished. in the
 case of men it can be abolished only in exceptional cases, which we
 shall presently consider more closely. this distinction between man
 and brute is outwardly expressed by the difference of the relation
 of the head to the body. in the case of the lower brutes both are
 deformed: in all brutes the head is directed towards the earth,
 where the objects of its will lie; even in the higher species the
 head and the body are still far more one than in the case of man,
 whose head seems freely set upon his body, as if only carried by
 and not serving it. this human excellence is exhibited in the
 highest degree by the apollo of belvedere; the head of the god of
 the muses, with eyes fixed on the far distance, stands so freely on
 his shoulders that it seems wholly delivered from the body, and no
 more subject to its cares.
§ . the
 transition which we have referred to as possible, but yet to be
 regarded as only exceptional, from the common knowledge of
 particular things to the knowledge of the idea, takes place
 suddenly; for knowledge breaks free from the service of the will,
 by the subject ceasing to be merely individual, and thus becoming
 the pure will-less subject of knowledge, which no longer traces
 relations in accordance with the principle of sufficient reason,
 but rests in fixed contemplation of the object presented to it, out
 of its connection with all others, and rises into it.
a full
 explanation is necessary to make this clear, and the reader must
 suspend his surprise for a while, till he has grasped the whole
 thought expressed in this work, and then it will vanish of
 itself.[pg
if, raised by
 the power of the mind, a man relinquishes the common way of looking
 at things, gives up tracing, under the guidance of the forms of the
 principle of sufficient reason, their relations to each other, the
 final goal of which is always a relation to his own will; if he
 thus ceases to consider the where, the when, the why, and the
 whither of things, and looks simply and solely at the what;
 if, further, he does not allow abstract thought, the concepts of
 the reason, to take possession of his consciousness, but, instead
 of all this, gives the whole power of his mind to perception, sinks
 himself entirely in this, and lets his whole consciousness be
 filled with the quiet contemplation of the natural object actually
 present, whether a landscape, a tree, a mountain, a building, or
 whatever it may be; inasmuch as he loses
 himself in this object (to use a pregnant german idiom),
 i.e., forgets even his
 individuality, his will, and only continues to exist as the pure
 subject, the clear mirror of the object, so that it is as if the
 object alone were there, without any one to perceive it, and he can
 no longer separate the perceiver from the perception, but both have
 become one, because the whole consciousness is filled and occupied
 with one single sensuous picture; if thus the object has to such an
 extent passed out of all relation to something outside it, and the
 subject out of all relation to the will, then that which is so
 known is no longer the particular thing as such; but it is the
 idea, the eternal form, the
 immediate objectivity of the will at this grade; and, therefore, he
 who is sunk in this perception is no longer individual, for in such
 perception the individual has lost himself; but he is pure,
 will-less, painless, timeless subject of knowledge. this, which
 in itself is so remarkable (which i well know confirms the saying
 that originated with thomas paine, du
 sublime au ridicule il n'y a qu'un pas), will by
 degrees become clearer and less surprising from what follows. it
 was this that was running in spinoza's mind when he wrote:
 meus æterna est, quatenus res sub æternitatis
 specie [pg
 ]concipit (eth. v. pr. ,
 schol.) in
 such contemplation the particular thing becomes at once the
 idea of its species, and the
 perceiving individual becomes pure subject of knowledge. the
 individual, as such, knows only particular things; the pure subject
 of knowledge knows only ideas. for the individual is the subject of
 knowledge in its relation to a definite particular manifestation of
 will, and in subjection to this. this particular manifestation of
 will is, as such, subordinated to the principle of sufficient
 reason in all its forms; therefore, all knowledge which relates
 itself to it also follows the principle of sufficient reason, and
 no other kind of knowledge is fitted to be of use to the will but
 this, which always consists merely of relations to the object. the
 knowing individual as such, and the particular things known by him,
 are always in some place, at some time, and are links in the chain
 of causes and effects. the pure subject of knowledge and his
 correlative, the idea, have passed out of all these forms of the
 principle of sufficient reason: time, place, the individual that
 knows, and the individual that is known, have for them no meaning.
 when an individual knower has raised himself in the manner
 described to be pure subject of knowledge, and at the same time has
 raised the observed object to the platonic idea, the world as
 idea appears complete and pure, and the full
 objectification of the will takes place, for the platonic idea
 alone is its adequate objectivity. the idea
 includes object and subject in like manner in itself, for they are
 its one form; but in it they are absolutely of equal importance;
 for as the object is here, as elsewhere, simply the idea of the
 subject, the subject, which passes entirely into the perceived
 object has thus become this object itself, for the whole
 consciousness is nothing but its perfectly [pg ] distinct picture. now this consciousness
 constitutes the whole world as idea, for one imagines
 the whole of the platonic ideas, or grades of the objectivity of
 will, in their series passing through it. the particular things of
 all time and space are nothing but ideas multiplied through the
 principle of sufficient reason (the form of the knowledge of the
 individual as such), and thus obscured as regards their pure
 objectivity. when the platonic idea appears, in it subject and
 object are no longer to be distinguished, for the platonic idea,
 the adequate objectivity of will, the true world as idea, arises
 only when the subject and object reciprocally fill and penetrate
 each other completely; and in the same way the knowing and the
 known individuals, as things in themselves, are not to be
 distinguished. for if we look entirely away from the true
 world as
 idea, there remains nothing but the world as
 will. the will is the “in-itself” of the platonic idea, which fully
 objectifies it; it is also the “in-itself” of the particular thing and of the
 individual that knows it, which objectify it incompletely. as will,
 outside the idea and all its forms, it is one and the same in the
 object contemplated and in the individual, who soars aloft in this
 contemplation, and becomes conscious of himself as pure subject.
 these two are, therefore, in themselves not different, for in
 themselves they are will, which here knows itself; and multiplicity
 and difference exist only as the way in which this knowledge comes
 to the will, i.e., only in the phenomenon, on
 account of its form, the principle of sufficient reason.
now the known
 thing, without me as the subject of knowledge, is just as little an
 object, and not mere will, blind effort, as without the object,
 without the idea, i am a knowing subject and not mere blind will.
 this will is in itself, i.e., outside the idea, one and
 the same with mine: only in the world as idea, whose form is always
 at least that of subject and object, we are separated as the known
 and the knowing individual. as [pg ] soon as knowledge, the world as idea, is
 abolished, there remains nothing but mere will, blind effort. that
 it should receive objectivity, become idea, supposes at once both
 subject and object; but that this should be pure, complete, and
 adequate objectivity of the will, supposes the object as platonic
 idea, free from the forms of the principle of sufficient reason,
 and the subject as the pure subject of knowledge, free from
 individuality and subjection to the will.
whoever now,
 has, after the manner referred to, become so absorbed and lost in
 the perception of nature that he only continues to exist as the
 pure knowing subject, becomes in this way directly conscious that,
 as such, he is the condition, that is, the supporter, of the world
 and all objective existence; for this now shows itself as dependent
 upon his existence. thus he draws nature into himself, so that he
 sees it to be merely an accident of his own being. in this sense
 byron says—
“are not
 the mountains, waves, and skies, a part
of me and of my soul, as i of
 them?”
but how shall he
 who feels this, regard himself as absolutely transitory, in
 contrast to imperishable nature? such a man will rather be filled
 with the consciousness, which the upanishad of the veda expresses:
 hæ omnes creaturæ in totum ego sum, et præter
 me aliud ens non est (oupnek'hat, i. ).
§ . in order
 to gain a deeper insight into the nature of the world, it is
 absolutely necessary that we should learn to distinguish the will
 as thing-in-itself from its adequate objectivity, and also the
 different grades in which this appears more and more distinctly and
 fully, i.e., the ideas themselves, from
 the merely phenomenal existence of these ideas in the forms of the
 principle of sufficient reason, the restricted method of knowledge
 of the individual. we shall then agree with plato when he
 [pg ] attributes actual
 being only to the ideas, and allows only an illusive, dream-like
 existence to things in space and time, the real world for the
 individual. then we shall understand how one and the same idea
 reveals itself in so many phenomena, and presents its nature only
 bit by bit to the individual, one side after another. then we shall
 also distinguish the idea itself from the way in which its
 manifestation appears in the observation of the individual, and
 recognise the former as essential and the latter as unessential.
 let us consider this with the help of examples taken from the most
 insignificant things, and also from the greatest. when the clouds
 move, the figures which they form are not essential, but
 indifferent to them; but that as elastic vapour they are pressed
 together, drifted along, spread out, or torn asunder by the force
 of the wind: this is their nature, the essence of the forces which
 objectify themselves in them, the idea; their actual forms are only
 for the individual observer. to the brook that flows over stones,
 the eddies, the waves, the foam-flakes which it forms are
 indifferent and unessential; but that it follows the attraction of
 gravity, and behaves as inelastic, perfectly mobile, formless,
 transparent fluid: this is its nature; this, if known through
 perception, is its idea; these accidental forms are
 only for us so long as we know as individuals. the ice on the
 window-pane forms itself into crystals according to the laws of
 crystallisation, which reveal the essence of the force of nature
 that appears here, exhibit the idea; but the trees and flowers
 which it traces on the pane are unessential, and are only there for
 us. what appears in the clouds, the brook, and the crystal is the
 weakest echo of that will which appears more fully in the plant,
 more fully still in the beast, and most fully in man. but only the
 essential in all these grades of its objectification constitutes
 the idea; on the other hand, its unfolding or development, because
 broken up in the forms of the principle of sufficient reason into a
 multiplicity of many-sided [pg ] phenomena, is unessential to the idea, lies
 merely in the kind of knowledge that belongs to the individual and
 has reality only for this. the same thing necessarily holds good of
 the unfolding of that idea which is the completest objectivity of
 will. therefore, the history of the human race, the throng of
 events, the change of times, the multifarious forms of human life
 in different lands and countries, all this is only the accidental
 form of the manifestation of the idea, does not belong to the idea
 itself, in which alone lies the adequate objectivity of the will,
 but only to the phenomenon which appears in the knowledge of the
 individual, and is just as foreign, unessential, and indifferent to
 the idea itself as the figures which they assume are to the clouds,
 the form of its eddies and foam-flakes to the brook, or its trees
 and flowers to the ice.
to him who has
 thoroughly grasped this, and can distinguish between the will and
 the idea, and between the idea and its manifestation, the events of
 the world will have significance only so far as they are the
 letters out of which we may read the idea of man, but not in and
 for themselves. he will not believe with the vulgar that time may
 produce something actually new and significant; that through it, or
 in it, something absolutely real may attain to existence, or indeed
 that it itself as a whole has beginning and end, plan and
 development, and in some way has for its final aim the highest
 perfection (according to their conception) of the last generation
 of man, whose life is a brief thirty years. therefore he will just
 as little, with homer, people a whole olympus with gods to guide
 the events of time, as, with ossian, he will take the forms of the
 clouds for individual beings; for, as we have said, both have just
 as much meaning as regards the idea which appears in them. in the
 manifold forms of human life and in the unceasing change of events,
 he will regard the idea only as the abiding and essential, in which
 the will to live has its fullest objectivity, [pg ] and which shows its different sides in
 the capacities, the passions, the errors and the excellences of the
 human race; in self-interest, hatred, love, fear, boldness,
 frivolity, stupidity, slyness, wit, genius, and so forth, all of
 which crowding together and combining in thousands of forms
 (individuals), continually create the history of the great and the
 little world, in which it is all the same whether they are set in
 motion by nuts or by crowns. finally, he will find that in the
 world it is the same as in the dramas of gozzi, in all of which the
 same persons appear, with like intention, and with a like fate; the
 motives and incidents are certainly different in each piece, but
 the spirit of the incidents is the same; the actors in one piece
 know nothing of the incidents of another, although they performed
 in it themselves; therefore, after all experience of former pieces,
 pantaloon has become no more agile or generous, tartaglia no more
 conscientious, brighella no more courageous, and columbine no more
 modest.
suppose we were
 allowed for once a clearer glance into the kingdom of the possible,
 and over the whole chain of causes and effects; if the earth-spirit
 appeared and showed us in a picture all the greatest men,
 enlighteners of the world, and heroes, that chance destroyed before
 they were ripe for their work; then the great events that would
 have changed the history of the world and brought in periods of the
 highest culture and enlightenment, but which the blindest chance,
 the most insignificant accident, hindered at the outset; lastly,
 the splendid powers of great men, that would have enriched whole
 ages of the world, but which, either misled by error or passion, or
 compelled by necessity, they squandered uselessly on unworthy or
 unfruitful objects, or even wasted in play. if we saw all this, we
 would shudder and lament at the thought of the lost treasures of
 whole periods of the world. but the earth-spirit would smile and
 say, “the source from which the individuals
 and their powers [pg
 proceed is inexhaustible and unending as time and space; for, like
 these forms of all phenomena, they also are only phenomena,
 visibility of the will. no finite measure can exhaust that infinite
 source; therefore an undiminished eternity is always open for the
 return of any event or work that was nipped in the bud. in this
 world of phenomena true loss is just as little possible as true
 gain. the will alone is; it is the thing in-itself, and the source
 of all these phenomena. its self-knowledge and its assertion or
 denial, which is then decided upon, is the only event
 in-itself.”
§ . history
 follows the thread of events; it is pragmatic so far as it deduces
 them in accordance with the law of motivation, a law that
 determines the self-manifesting will wherever it is enlightened by
 knowledge. at the lowest grades of its objectivity, where it still
 acts without knowledge, natural science, in the form of etiology,
 treats of the laws of the changes of its phenomena, and, in the
 form of morphology, of what is permanent in them. this almost
 endless task is lightened by the aid of concepts, which comprehend
 what is general in order that we may deduce what is particular from
 it. lastly, mathematics treats of the mere forms, time and space,
 in which the ideas, broken up into multiplicity, appear for the
 knowledge of the subject as individual. all these, of which the
 common name is science, proceed according to the principle of
 sufficient reason in its different forms, and their theme is always
 the phenomenon, its laws, connections, and the relations which
 result from them. but what kind of knowledge is concerned with that
 which is outside and independent of all relations, that which alone
 is really essential to the world, the true content of its
 phenomena, that which is subject to no change, and therefore is
 known with equal truth for all time, in a word, the ideas,
 which are the direct and adequate objectivity [pg ] of the thing in-itself, the will? we
 answer, art, the work of genius. it
 repeats or reproduces the eternal ideas grasped through pure
 contemplation, the essential and abiding in all the phenomena of
 the world; and according to what the material is in which it
 reproduces, it is sculpture or painting, poetry or music. its one
 source is the knowledge of ideas; its one aim the communication of
 this knowledge. while science, following the unresting and
 inconstant stream of the fourfold forms of reason and consequent,
 with each end attained sees further, and can never reach a final
 goal nor attain full satisfaction, any more than by running we can
 reach the place where the clouds touch the horizon; art, on the
 contrary, is everywhere at its goal. for it plucks the object of
 its contemplation out of the stream of the world's course, and has
 it isolated before it. and this particular thing, which in that
 stream was a small perishing part, becomes to art the
 representative of the whole, an equivalent of the endless multitude
 in space and time. it therefore pauses at this particular thing;
 the course of time stops; the relations vanish for it; only the
 essential, the idea, is its object. we may, therefore, accurately
 define it as the way of viewing things independent of the
 principle of sufficient reason, in opposition to the
 way of viewing them which proceeds in accordance with that
 principle, and which is the method of experience and of science.
 this last method of considering things may be compared to a line
 infinitely extended in a horizontal direction, and the former to a
 vertical line which cuts it at any point. the method of viewing
 things which proceeds in accordance with the principle of
 sufficient reason is the rational method, and it alone is valid and
 of use in practical life and in science. the method which looks
 away from the content of this principle is the method of genius,
 which is only valid and of use in art. the first is the method of
 aristotle; the second is, on the whole, that of plato. the first is
 like [pg ] the mighty storm,
 that rushes along without beginning and without aim, bending,
 agitating, and carrying away everything before it; the second is
 like the silent sunbeam, that pierces through the storm quite
 unaffected by it. the first is like the innumerable showering drops
 of the waterfall, which, constantly changing, never rest for an
 instant; the second is like the rainbow, quietly resting on this
 raging torrent. only through the pure contemplation described
 above, which ends entirely in the object, can ideas be
 comprehended; and the nature of genius
 consists in pre-eminent capacity for such contemplation. now, as
 this requires that a man should entirely forget himself and the
 relations in which he stands, genius is simply the completest
 objectivity, i.e.,
 the objective tendency of the mind, as opposed to the subjective,
 which is directed to one's own self—in other words, to the will.
 thus genius is the faculty of continuing in the state of pure
 perception, of losing oneself in perception, and of enlisting in
 this service the knowledge which originally existed only for the
 service of the will; that is to say, genius is the power of leaving
 one's own interests, wishes, and aims entirely out of sight, thus
 of entirely renouncing one's own personality for a time, so as to
 remain pure knowing subject, clear vision
 of the world; and this not merely at moments, but for a sufficient
 length of time, and with sufficient consciousness, to enable one to
 reproduce by deliberate art what has thus been apprehended, and
 “to fix in lasting thoughts the wavering
 images that float before the mind.” it is as if, when genius
 appears in an individual, a far larger measure of the power of
 knowledge falls to his lot than is necessary for the service of an
 individual will; and this superfluity of knowledge, being free, now
 becomes subject purified from will, a clear mirror of the inner
 nature of the world. this explains the activity, amounting even to
 disquietude, of men of genius, for the present can seldom satisfy
 them, because it does not fill their consciousness. this gives
 [pg ] them that restless
 aspiration, that unceasing desire for new things, and for the
 contemplation of lofty things, and also that longing that is hardly
 ever satisfied, for men of similar nature and of like stature, to
 whom they might communicate themselves; whilst the common mortal,
 entirely filled and satisfied by the common present, ends in it,
 and finding everywhere his like, enjoys that peculiar satisfaction
 in daily life that is denied to genius.
imagination has
 rightly been recognised as an essential element of genius; it has
 sometimes even been regarded as identical with it; but this is a
 mistake. as the objects of genius are the eternal ideas, the
 permanent, essential forms of the world and all its phenomena, and
 as the knowledge of the idea is necessarily knowledge through
 perception, is not abstract, the knowledge of the genius would be
 limited to the ideas of the objects actually present to his person,
 and dependent upon the chain of circumstances that brought these
 objects to him, if his imagination did not extend his horizon far
 beyond the limits of his actual personal existence, and thus enable
 him to construct the whole out of the little that comes into his
 own actual apperception, and so to let almost all possible scenes
 of life pass before him in his own consciousness. further, the
 actual objects are almost always very imperfect copies of the ideas
 expressed in them; therefore the man of genius requires imagination
 in order to see in things, not that which nature has actually made,
 but that which she endeavoured to make, yet could not because of
 that conflict of her forms among themselves which we referred to in
 the last book. we shall return to this farther on in treating of
 sculpture. the imagination then extends the intellectual horizon of
 the man of genius beyond the objects which actually present
 themselves to him, both as regards quality and quantity. therefore
 extraordinary strength of imagination accompanies, and is indeed a
 necessary condition of genius. but the converse does not hold, for
 strength of imagination [pg
 does not indicate genius; on the contrary, men who have no touch of
 genius may have much imagination. for as it is possible to consider
 a real object in two opposite ways, purely objectively, the way of
 genius grasping its idea, or in the common way, merely in the
 relations in which it stands to other objects and to one's own
 will, in accordance with the principle of sufficient reason, it is
 also possible to perceive an imaginary object in both of these
 ways. regarded in the first way, it is a means to the knowledge of
 the idea, the communication of which is the work of art; in the
 second case, the imaginary object is used to build castles in the
 air congenial to egotism and the individual humour, and which for
 the moment delude and gratify; thus only the relations of the
 phantasies so linked together are known. the man who indulges in
 such an amusement is a dreamer; he will easily mingle those fancies
 that delight his solitude with reality, and so unfit himself for
 real life: perhaps he will write them down, and then we shall have
 the ordinary novel of every description, which entertains those who
 are like him and the public at large, for the readers imagine
 themselves in the place of the hero, and then find the story very
 agreeable.
the common
 mortal, that manufacture of nature which she produces by the
 thousand every day, is, as we have said, not capable, at least not
 continuously so, of observation that in every sense is wholly
 disinterested, as sensuous contemplation, strictly so called, is.
 he can turn his attention to things only so far as they have some
 relation to his will, however indirect it may be. since in this
 respect, which never demands anything but the knowledge of
 relations, the abstract conception of the thing is sufficient, and
 for the most part even better adapted for use; the ordinary man
 does not linger long over the mere perception, does not fix his
 attention long on one object, but in all that is presented to him
 hastily seeks merely the concept under which it is to be brought,
 [pg ] as the lazy man
 seeks a chair, and then it interests him no further. this is why he
 is so soon done with everything, with works of art, objects of
 natural beauty, and indeed everywhere with the truly significant
 contemplation of all the scenes of life. he does not linger; only
 seeks to know his own way in life, together with all that might at
 any time become his way. thus he makes topographical notes in the
 widest sense; over the consideration of life itself as such he
 wastes no time. the man of genius, on the other hand, whose
 excessive power of knowledge frees it at times from the service of
 will, dwells on the consideration of life itself, strives to
 comprehend the idea of each thing, not its relations to other
 things; and in doing this he often forgets to consider his own path
 in life, and therefore for the most part pursues it awkwardly
 enough. while to the ordinary man his faculty of knowledge is a
 lamp to lighten his path, to the man of genius it is the sun which
 reveals the world. this great diversity in their way of looking at
 life soon becomes visible in the outward appearance both of the man
 of genius and of the ordinary mortal. the man in whom genius lives
 and works is easily distinguished by his glance, which is both keen
 and steady, and bears the stamp of perception, of contemplation.
 this is easily seen from the likenesses of the few men of genius
 whom nature has produced here and there among countless millions.
 on the other hand, in the case of an ordinary man, the true object
 of his contemplation, what he is prying into, can be easily seen
 from his glance, if indeed it is not quite stupid and vacant, as is
 generally the case. therefore the expression of genius in a face
 consists in this, that in it a decided predominance of knowledge
 over will is visible, and consequently there also shows itself in
 it a knowledge that is entirely devoid of relation to will,
 i.e., pure
 knowing. on the contrary, in ordinary countenances
 there is a predominant expression of will; and we see that
 knowledge only comes into activity under [pg ] the impulse of will, and thus is directed
 merely by motives.
since the
 knowledge that pertains to genius, or the knowledge of ideas, is
 that knowledge which does not follow the principle of sufficient
 reason, so, on the other hand, the knowledge which does follow that
 principle is that which gives us prudence and rationality in life,
 and which creates the sciences. thus men of genius are affected
 with the deficiencies entailed in the neglect of this latter kind
 of knowledge. yet what i say in this regard is subject to the
 limitation that it only concerns them in so far as and while they
 are actually engaged in that kind of knowledge which is peculiar to
 genius; and this is by no means at every moment of their lives, for
 the great though spontaneous exertion which is demanded for the
 comprehension of ideas free from will must necessarily relax, and
 there are long intervals during which men of genius are placed in
 very much the same position as ordinary mortals, both as regards
 advantages and deficiencies. on this account the action of genius
 has always been regarded as an inspiration, as indeed the name
 indicates, as the action of a superhuman being distinct from the
 individual himself, and which takes possession of him only
 periodically. the disinclination of men of genius to direct their
 attention to the content of the principle of sufficient reason will
 first show itself, with regard to the ground of being, as dislike
 of mathematics; for its procedure is based upon the most universal
 forms of the phenomenon space and time, which are themselves merely
 modes of the principle of sufficient reason, and is consequently
 precisely the opposite of that method of thought which seeks merely
 the content of the phenomenon, the idea which expresses itself in
 it apart from all relations. the logical method of mathematics is
 also antagonistic to genius, for it does not satisfy but obstructs
 true insight, and presents merely a chain of conclusions in
 accordance with the principle of [pg ] the ground of knowing. the mental faculty
 upon which it makes the greatest claim is memory, for it is
 necessary to recollect all the earlier propositions which are
 referred to. experience has also proved that men of great artistic
 genius have no faculty for mathematics; no man was ever very
 distinguished for both. alfieri relates that he was never able to
 understand the fourth proposition of euclid. goethe was constantly
 reproached with his want of mathematical knowledge by the ignorant
 opponents of his theory of colours. here certainly, where it was
 not a question of calculation and measurement upon hypothetical
 data, but of direct knowledge by the understanding of causes and
 effects, this reproach was so utterly absurd and inappropriate,
 that by making it they have exposed their entire want of judgment,
 just as much as by the rest of their ridiculous arguments. the fact
 that up to the present day, nearly half a century after the
 appearance of goethe's theory of colours, even in germany the
 newtonian fallacies still have undisturbed possession of the
 professorial chair, and men continue to speak quite seriously of
 the seven homogeneous rays of light and their different
 refrangibility, will some day be numbered among the great
 intellectual peculiarities of men generally, and especially of
 germans. from the same cause as we have referred to above, may be
 explained the equally well-known fact that, conversely, admirable
 mathematicians have very little susceptibility for works of fine
 art. this is very naïvely expressed in the well-known anecdote of
 the french mathematician, who, after having read racine's
 “iphigenia,” shrugged his shoulders
 and asked, “qu'est ce que cela
 prouve?” further, as quick comprehension of
 relations in accordance with the laws of causality and motivation
 is what specially constitutes prudence or sagacity, a prudent man,
 so far as and while he is so, will not be a genius, and a man of
 genius, so far as and while he is so, will not be a prudent man.
 lastly, perceptive knowledge generally, [pg ] in the province of which the idea always
 lies, is directly opposed to rational or abstract knowledge, which
 is guided by the principle of the ground of knowing. it is also
 well known that we seldom find great genius united with pre-eminent
 reasonableness; on the contrary, persons of genius are often
 subject to violent emotions and irrational passions. but the ground
 of this is not weakness of reason, but partly unwonted energy of
 that whole phenomenon of will—the man of genius—which expresses
 itself through the violence of all his acts of will, and partly
 preponderance of the knowledge of perception through the senses and
 understanding over abstract knowledge, producing a decided tendency
 to the perceptible, the exceedingly lively impressions of which so
 far outshine colourless concepts, that they take their place in the
 guidance of action, which consequently becomes irrational.
 accordingly the impression of the present moment is very strong
 with such persons, and carries them away into unconsidered action,
 violent emotions and passions. moreover, since, in general, the
 knowledge of persons of genius has to some extent freed itself from
 the service of will, they will not in conversation think so much of
 the person they are addressing as of the thing they are speaking
 about, which is vividly present to them; and therefore they are
 likely to judge or narrate things too objectively for their own
 interests; they will not pass over in silence what would more
 prudently be concealed, and so forth. finally, they are given to
 soliloquising, and in general may exhibit certain weaknesses which
 are actually akin to madness. it has often been remarked that there
 is a side at which genius and madness touch, and even pass over
 into each other, and indeed poetical inspiration has been called a
 kind of madness: amabilis
 insania, horace calls it (od. iii. ), and wieland in
 the introduction to “oberon” speaks
 of it as “amiable madness.” even
 aristotle, as quoted by seneca (de tranq. animi, , ), is
 reported to have [pg
 said: nullum magnum ingenium sine
 mixtura dementiæ fuit. plato expresses it in the
 figure of the dark cave, referred to above (de rep. ), when he
 says: “those who, outside the cave, have
 seen the true sunlight and the things that have true being (ideas),
 cannot afterwards see properly down in the cave, because their eyes
 are not accustomed to the darkness; they cannot distinguish the
 shadows, and are jeered at for their mistakes by those who have
 never left the cave and its shadows.” in the “phædrus” also (p. ), he distinctly says that
 there can be no true poet without a certain madness; in fact, (p.
 ), that every one appears mad who recognises the eternal ideas
 in fleeting things. cicero also quotes: negat enim sine furore, democritus, quemquam
 poetam magnum esse posse; quod idem dicit plato (de
 divin., i. ). and, lastly, pope says—
“great
 wits to madness sure are near allied,
and thin partitions do their bounds
 divide.”
especially
 instructive in this respect is goethe's “torquato tasso,” in which he shows us not only
 the suffering, the martyrdom of genius as such, but also how it
 constantly passes into madness. finally, the fact of the direct
 connection of genius and madness is established by the biographies
 of great men of genius, such as rousseau, byron, and alfieri, and
 by anecdotes from the lives of others. on the other hand, i must
 mention that, by a diligent search in lunatic asylums, i have found
 individual cases of patients who were unquestionably endowed with
 great talents, and whose genius distinctly appeared through their
 madness, which, however, had completely gained the upper hand. now
 this cannot be ascribed to chance, for on the one hand the number
 of mad persons is relatively very small, and on the other hand a
 person of genius is a phenomenon which is rare beyond all ordinary
 estimation, and only appears in nature as the greatest exception.
 it will be sufficient to convince us of this if we compare the
 [pg ] number of really
 great men of genius that the whole of civilised europe has
 produced, both in ancient and modern times, with the two hundred
 and fifty millions who are always living in europe, and who change
 entirely every thirty years. in estimating the number of men of
 outstanding genius, we must of course only count those who have
 produced works which have retained through all time an enduring
 value for mankind. i shall not refrain from mentioning, that i have
 known some persons of decided, though not remarkable, mental
 superiority, who also showed a slight trace of insanity. it might
 seem from this that every advance of intellect beyond the ordinary
 measure, as an abnormal development, disposes to madness. in the
 meantime, however, i will explain as briefly as possible my view of
 the purely intellectual ground of the relation between genius and
 madness, for this will certainly assist the explanation of the real
 nature of genius, that is to say, of that mental endowment which
 alone can produce genuine works of art. but this necessitates a
 brief explanation of madness itself.
a clear and
 complete insight into the nature of madness, a correct and distinct
 conception of what constitutes the difference between the sane and
 the insane, has, as far as i know, not as yet been found. neither
 reason nor understanding can be denied to madmen, for they talk and
 understand, and often draw very accurate conclusions; they also, as
 a rule, perceive what is present quite correctly, and apprehend the
 connection between cause and effect. visions, like the phantasies
 of delirium, are no ordinary symptom of madness: delirium falsifies
 perception, madness the thoughts. for the most part, madmen do not
 err in the knowledge of what is immediately present; their raving always
 relates to what is absent and past,
 and only through these to their connection with what is present.
 therefore it seems to me that [pg ] their malady specially concerns the memory;
 not indeed that memory fails them entirely, for many of them know a
 great deal by heart, and sometimes recognise persons whom they have
 not seen for a long time; but rather that the thread of memory is
 broken, the continuity of its connection destroyed, and no
 uniformly connected recollection of the past is possible.
 particular scenes of the past are known correctly, just like the
 particular present; but there are gaps in their recollection which
 they fill up with fictions, and these are either always the same,
 in which case they become fixed ideas, and the madness that results
 is called monomania or melancholy; or they are always different,
 momentary fancies, and then it is called folly, fatuitas. this is why it is so
 difficult to find out their former life from lunatics when they
 enter an asylum. the true and the false are always mixed up in
 their memory. although the immediate present is correctly known, it
 becomes falsified through its fictitious connection with an
 imaginary past; they therefore regard themselves and others as
 identical with persons who exist only in their imaginary past; they
 do not recognise some of their acquaintances at all, and thus while
 they perceive correctly what is actually present, they have only
 false conceptions of its relations to what is absent. if the
 madness reaches a high degree, there is complete absence of memory,
 so that the madman is quite incapable of any reference to what is
 absent or past, and is only determined by the caprice of the moment
 in connection with the fictions which, in his mind, fill the past.
 in such a case, we are never for a moment safe from violence or
 murder, unless we constantly make the madman aware of the presence
 of superior force. the knowledge of the madman has this in common
 with that of the brute, both are confined to the present. what
 distinguishes them is that the brute has really no idea of the past
 as such, though the past acts upon it through the medium of custom,
 so that, for example, the dog [pg ] recognises its former master even after
 years, that is to say, it receives the wonted impression at the
 sight of him; but of the time that has passed since it saw him it
 has no recollection. the madman, on the other hand, always carries
 about in his reason an abstract past, but it is a false past, which
 exists only for him, and that either constantly, or only for the
 moment. the influence of this false past prevents the use of the
 true knowledge of the present which the brute is able to make. the
 fact that violent mental suffering or unexpected and terrible
 calamities should often produce madness, i explain in the following
 manner. all such suffering is as an actual event confined to the
 present. it is thus merely transitory, and is consequently never
 excessively heavy; it only becomes unendurably great when it is
 lasting pain; but as such it exists only in thought, and therefore
 lies in the memory. if now such a sorrow, such
 painful knowledge or reflection, is so bitter that it becomes
 altogether unbearable, and the individual is prostrated under it,
 then, terrified nature seizes upon madness
 as the last resource of life; the mind so fearfully tortured at
 once destroys the thread of its memory, fills up the gaps with
 fictions, and thus seeks refuge in madness from the mental
 suffering that exceeds its strength, just as we cut off a mortified
 limb and replace it with a wooden one. the distracted ajax, king
 lear, and ophelia may be taken as examples; for the creations of
 true genius, to which alone we can refer here, as universally
 known, are equal in truth to real persons; besides, in this case,
 frequent actual experience shows the same thing. a faint analogy of
 this kind of transition from pain to madness is to be found in the
 way in which all of us often seek, as it were mechanically, to
 drive away a painful thought that suddenly occurs to us by some
 loud exclamation or quick movement—to turn ourselves from it, to
 distract our minds by force.
we see, from
 what has been said, that the madman has [pg ] a true knowledge of what is actually present,
 and also of certain particulars of the past, but that he mistakes
 the connection, the relations, and therefore falls into error and
 talks nonsense. now this is exactly the point at which he comes
 into contact with the man of genius; for he also leaves out of
 sight the knowledge of the connection of things, since he neglects
 that knowledge of relations which conforms to the principle of
 sufficient reason, in order to see in things only their ideas, and
 to seek to comprehend their true nature, which manifests itself to
 perception, and in regard to which one
 thing represents its whole species, in which way, as
 goethe says, one case is valid for a thousand. the particular
 object of his contemplation, or the present which is perceived by
 him with extraordinary vividness, appear in so strong a light that
 the other links of the chain to which they belong are at once
 thrown into the shade, and this gives rise to phenomena which have
 long been recognised as resembling those of madness. that which in
 particular given things exists only incompletely and weakened by
 modifications, is raised by the man of genius, through his way of
 contemplating it, to the idea of the thing, to completeness: he
 therefore sees everywhere extremes, and therefore his own action
 tends to extremes; he cannot hit the mean, he lacks soberness, and
 the result is what we have said. he knows the ideas completely but
 not the individuals. therefore it has been said that a poet may
 know mankind deeply and thoroughly, and may yet have a very
 imperfect knowledge of men. he is easily deceived, and is a tool in
 the hands of the crafty.
§ . genius,
 then, consists, according to our explanation, in the capacity for
 knowing, independently of the principle of sufficient reason, not
 individual things, which have their existence only in their
 relations, but the ideas of such things, and of being oneself the
 correlative of the idea, and thus no longer an individual, but the
 pure subject of knowledge. yet this faculty must exist in all
 [pg ] men in a smaller and
 different degree; for if not, they would be just as incapable of
 enjoying works of art as of producing them; they would have no
 susceptibility for the beautiful or the sublime; indeed, these
 words could have no meaning for them. we must therefore assume that
 there exists in all men this power of knowing the ideas in things,
 and consequently of transcending their personality for the moment,
 unless indeed there are some men who are capable of no æsthetic
 pleasure at all. the man of genius excels ordinary men only by
 possessing this kind of knowledge in a far higher degree and more
 continuously. thus, while under its influence he retains the
 presence of mind which is necessary to enable him to repeat in a
 voluntary and intentional work what he has learned in this manner;
 and this repetition is the work of art. through this he
 communicates to others the idea he has grasped. this idea remains
 unchanged and the same, so that æsthetic pleasure is one and the
 same whether it is called forth by a work of art or directly by the
 contemplation of nature and life. the work of art is only a means
 of facilitating the knowledge in which this pleasure consists. that
 the idea comes to us more easily from the work of art than directly
 from nature and the real world, arises from the fact that the
 artist, who knew only the idea, no longer the actual, has
 reproduced in his work the pure idea, has abstracted it from the
 actual, omitting all disturbing accidents. the artist lets us see
 the world through his eyes. that he has these eyes, that he knows
 the inner nature of things apart from all their relations, is the
 gift of genius, is inborn; but that he is able to lend us this
 gift, to let us see with his eyes, is acquired, and is the
 technical side of art. therefore, after the account which i have
 given in the preceding pages of the inner nature of æsthetical
 knowledge in its most general outlines, the following more exact
 philosophical treatment of the beautiful and the sublime will
 explain them both, in nature and in art, without separating
 [pg ] them further. first
 of all we shall consider what takes place in a man when he is
 affected by the beautiful and the sublime; whether he derives this
 emotion directly from nature, from life, or partakes of it only
 through the medium of art, does not make any essential, but merely
 an external, difference.
 § . in
 the æsthetical mode of contemplation we have found two inseparable
 constituent parts—the knowledge of the object, not as
 individual thing but as platonic idea, that is, as the enduring
 form of this whole species of things; and the self-consciousness of
 the knowing person, not as individual, but as pure will-less
 subject of knowledge. the condition under which both
 these constituent parts appear always united was found to be the
 abandonment of the method of knowing which is bound to the
 principle of sufficient reason, and which, on the other hand, is
 the only kind of knowledge that is of value for the service of the
 will and also for science. moreover, we shall see that the pleasure
 which is produced by the contemplation of the beautiful arises from
 these two constituent parts, sometimes more from the one, sometimes
 more from the other, according to what the object of the æsthetical
 contemplation may be.
all willing
 arises from want, therefore from deficiency, and therefore from
 suffering. the satisfaction of a wish ends it; yet for one wish
 that is satisfied there remain at least ten which are denied.
 further, the desire lasts long, the demands are infinite; the
 satisfaction is short and scantily measured out. but even the final
 satisfaction is itself only apparent; every satisfied wish at once
 makes room for a new one; both are illusions; the one is known to
 be so, the other not yet. no attained object of desire can give
 lasting satisfaction, but merely a fleeting gratification; it is
 like the alms thrown to the beggar, that keeps him alive to-day
 that his misery may be prolonged till the morrow. therefore, so
 long as our consciousness is filled by our will, so long as we are
 [pg ] given up to the
 throng of desires with their constant hopes and fears, so long as
 we are the subject of willing, we can never have lasting happiness
 nor peace. it is essentially all the same whether we pursue or
 flee, fear injury or seek enjoyment; the care for the constant
 demands of the will, in whatever form it may be, continually
 occupies and sways the consciousness; but without peace no true
 well-being is possible. the subject of willing is thus constantly
 stretched on the revolving wheel of ixion, pours water into the
 sieve of the danaids, is the ever-longing tantalus.
but when some
 external cause or inward disposition lifts us suddenly out of the
 endless stream of willing, delivers knowledge from the slavery of
 the will, the attention is no longer directed to the motives of
 willing, but comprehends things free from their relation to the
 will, and thus observes them without personal interest, without
 subjectivity, purely objectively, gives itself entirely up to them
 so far as they are ideas, but not in so far as they are motives.
 then all at once the peace which we were always seeking, but which
 always fled from us on the former path of the desires, comes to us
 of its own accord, and it is well with us. it is the painless state
 which epicurus prized as the highest good and as the state of the
 gods; for we are for the moment set free from the miserable
 striving of the will; we keep the sabbath of the penal servitude of
 willing; the wheel of ixion stands still.
but this is just
 the state which i described above as necessary for the knowledge of
 the idea, as pure contemplation, as sinking oneself in perception,
 losing oneself in the object, forgetting all individuality,
 surrendering that kind of knowledge which follows the principle of
 sufficient reason, and comprehends only relations; the state by
 means of which at once and inseparably the perceived particular
 thing is raised to the idea of its whole species, and the knowing
 individual to the pure subject of will-less [pg ] knowledge, and as such they are both
 taken out of the stream of time and all other relations. it is then
 all one whether we see the sun set from the prison or from the
 palace.
inward
 disposition, the predominance of knowing over willing, can produce
 this state under any circumstances. this is shown by those
 admirable dutch artists who directed this purely objective
 perception to the most insignificant objects, and established a
 lasting monument of their objectivity and spiritual peace in their
 pictures of still life, which the æsthetic
 beholder does not look on without emotion; for they present to him
 the peaceful, still, frame of mind of the artist, free from will,
 which was needed to contemplate such insignificant things so
 objectively, to observe them so attentively, and to repeat this
 perception so intelligently; and as the picture enables the
 onlooker to participate in this state, his emotion is often
 increased by the contrast between it and the unquiet frame of mind,
 disturbed by vehement willing, in which he finds himself. in the
 same spirit, landscape-painters, and particularly ruisdael, have
 often painted very insignificant country scenes, which produce the
 same effect even more agreeably.
all this is
 accomplished by the inner power of an artistic nature alone; but
 that purely objective disposition is facilitated and assisted from
 without by suitable objects, by the abundance of natural beauty
 which invites contemplation, and even presses itself upon us.
 whenever it discloses itself suddenly to our view, it almost always
 succeeds in delivering us, though it may be only for a moment, from
 subjectivity, from the slavery of the will, and in raising us to
 the state of pure knowing. this is why the man who is tormented by
 passion, or want, or care, is so suddenly revived, cheered, and
 restored by a single free glance into nature: the storm of passion,
 the pressure of desire and fear, and all the miseries of willing
 are then at once, and in a marvellous manner, [pg ] calmed and appeased. for at the moment
 at which, freed from the will, we give ourselves up to pure
 will-less knowing, we pass into a world from which everything is
 absent that influenced our will and moved us so violently through
 it. this freeing of knowledge lifts us as wholly and entirely away
 from all that, as do sleep and dreams; happiness and unhappiness
 have disappeared; we are no longer individual; the individual is
 forgotten; we are only pure subject of knowledge; we are only that
 one eye of the world which looks
 out from all knowing creatures, but which can become perfectly free
 from the service of will in man alone. thus all difference of
 individuality so entirely disappears, that it is all the same
 whether the perceiving eye belongs to a mighty king or to a
 wretched beggar; for neither joy nor complaining can pass that
 boundary with us. so near us always lies a sphere in which we
 escape from all our misery; but who has the strength to continue
 long in it? as soon as any single relation to our will, to our
 person, even of these objects of our pure contemplation, comes
 again into consciousness, the magic is at an end; we fall back into
 the knowledge which is governed by the principle of sufficient
 reason; we know no longer the idea, but the particular thing, the
 link of a chain to which we also belong, and we are again abandoned
 to all our woe. most men remain almost always at this standpoint
 because they entirely lack objectivity, i.e.,
 genius. therefore they have no pleasure in being alone with nature;
 they need company, or at least a book. for their knowledge remains
 subject to their will; they seek, therefore, in objects, only some
 relation to their will, and whenever they see anything that has no
 such relation, there sounds within them, like a ground bass in
 music, the constant inconsolable cry, “it
 is of no use to me;” thus in solitude the most beautiful
 surroundings have for them a desolate, dark, strange, and hostile
 appearance.
lastly, it is
 this blessedness of will-less perception [pg ] which casts an enchanting glamour over the
 past and distant, and presents them to us in so fair a light by
 means of self-deception. for as we think of days long gone by, days
 in which we lived in a distant place, it is only the objects which
 our fancy recalls, not the subject of will, which bore about with
 it then its incurable sorrows just as it bears them now; but they
 are forgotten, because since then they have often given place to
 others. now, objective perception acts with regard to what is
 remembered just as it would in what is present, if we let it have
 influence over us, if we surrendered ourselves to it free from
 will. hence it arises that, especially when we are more than
 ordinarily disturbed by some want, the remembrance of past and
 distant scenes suddenly flits across our minds like a lost
 paradise. the fancy recalls only what was objective, not what was
 individually subjective, and we imagine that that objective stood
 before us then just as pure and undisturbed by any relation to the
 will as its image stands in our fancy now; while in reality the
 relation of the objects to our will gave us pain then just as it
 does now. we can deliver ourselves from all suffering just as well
 through present objects as through distant ones whenever we raise
 ourselves to a purely objective contemplation of them, and so are
 able to bring about the illusion that only the objects are present
 and not we ourselves. then, as the pure subject of knowledge, freed
 from the miserable self, we become entirely one with these objects,
 and, for the moment, our wants are as foreign to us as they are to
 them. the world as idea alone remains, and the world as will has
 disappeared.
in all these
 reflections it has been my object to bring out clearly the nature
 and the scope of the subjective element in æsthetic pleasure; the
 deliverance of knowledge from the service of the will, the
 forgetting of self as an individual, and the raising of the
 consciousness to the pure will-less, timeless, subject of
 knowledge, independent [pg
 of all relations. with this subjective side of æsthetic
 contemplation, there must always appear as its necessary
 correlative the objective side, the intuitive comprehension of the
 platonic idea. but before we turn to the closer consideration of
 this, and to the achievements of art in relation to it, it is
 better that we should pause for a little at the subjective side of
 æsthetic pleasure, in order to complete our treatment of this by
 explaining the impression of the sublime
 which depends altogether upon it, and arises from a modification of
 it. after that we shall complete our investigation of æsthetic
 pleasure by considering its objective side.
but we must
 first add the following remarks to what has been said. light is the
 pleasantest and most gladdening of things; it has become the symbol
 of all that is good and salutary. in all religions it symbolises
 salvation, while darkness symbolises damnation. ormuzd dwells in
 the purest light, ahrimines in eternal night. dante's paradise
 would look very much like vauxhall in london, for all the blessed
 spirits appear as points of light and arrange themselves in regular
 figures. the very absence of light makes us sad; its return cheers
 us. colours excite directly a keen delight, which reaches its
 highest degree when they are transparent. all this depends entirely
 upon the fact that light is the correlative and condition of the
 most perfect kind of knowledge of perception, the only knowledge
 which does not in any way affect the will. for sight, unlike the
 affections of the other senses, cannot, in itself, directly and
 through its sensuous effect, make the sensation of the special organ
 agreeable or disagreeable; that is, it has no immediate connection
 with the will. such a quality can only belong to the perception
 which arises in the understanding, and then it lies in the relation
 of the object to the will. in the case of hearing this is to some
 extent otherwise; sounds can give pain directly, and they may also
 be sensuously agreeable, directly and without regard to
 [pg ] harmony or melody.
 touch, as one with the feeling of the whole body, is still more
 subordinated to this direct influence upon the will; and yet there
 is such a thing as a sensation of touch which is neither painful
 nor pleasant. but smells are always either agreeable or
 disagreeable, and tastes still more so. thus the last two senses
 are most closely related to the will, and therefore they are always
 the most ignoble, and have been called by kant the subjective
 senses. the pleasure which we experience from light is in fact only
 the pleasure which arises from the objective possibility of the
 purest and fullest perceptive knowledge, and as such it may be
 traced to the fact that pure knowledge, freed and delivered from
 all will, is in the highest degree pleasant, and of itself
 constitutes a large part of æsthetic enjoyment. again, we must
 refer to this view of light the incredible beauty which we
 associate with the reflection of objects in water. that lightest,
 quickest, finest species of the action of bodies upon each other,
 that to which we owe by far the completest and purest of our
 perceptions, the action of reflected rays of light, is here brought
 clearly before our eyes, distinct and perfect, in cause and in
 effect, and indeed in its entirety, hence the æsthetic delight it
 gives us, which, in the most important aspect, is entirely based on
 the subjective ground of æsthetic pleasure, and is delight in pure
 knowing and its method.
§ . all these
 reflections are intended to bring out the subjective part of
 æsthetic pleasure; that is to say, that pleasure so far as it
 consists simply of delight in perceptive knowledge as such, in
 opposition to will. and as directly connected with this, there
 naturally follows the explanation of that disposition or frame of
 mind which has been called the sense of the sublime.
we have already
 remarked above that the transition to the state of pure perception
 takes place most easily when the objects bend themselves to it,
 that is, when by their manifold and yet definite and distinct form
 they easily [pg
 become representatives of their ideas, in which beauty, in the
 objective sense, consists. this quality belongs pre-eminently to
 natural beauty, which thus affords even to the most insensible at
 least a fleeting æsthetic satisfaction: indeed it is so remarkable
 how especially the vegetable world invites æsthetic observation,
 and, as it were, presses itself upon it, that one might say, that
 these advances are connected with the fact that these organisms,
 unlike the bodies of animals, are not themselves immediate objects
 of knowledge, and therefore require the assistance of a foreign
 intelligent individual in order to rise out of the world of blind
 will and enter the world of idea, and that thus they long, as it
 were, for this entrance, that they may attain at least indirectly
 what is denied them directly. but i leave this suggestion which i
 have hazarded, and which borders perhaps upon extravagance,
 entirely undecided, for only a very intimate and devoted
 consideration of nature can raise or justify it. as
 long as that which raises us from the knowledge of mere relations
 subject to the will, to æsthetic contemplation, and thereby exalts
 us to the position of the subject of knowledge free from will, is
 this fittingness of nature, this significance and distinctness of
 its forms, on account of which the ideas individualised in them
 readily present themselves to us; so long is it merely beauty
 that affects us and the sense of the beautiful that is excited. but if
 these very objects whose significant forms invite us to pure
 contemplation, have a hostile relation to the human will in
 general, as it exhibits itself in its objectivity, the human body,
 if they are opposed to it, so that it is menaced by the
 irresistible predominance of their power, or sinks into
 insignificance before their immeasurable [pg ] greatness; if, nevertheless, the beholder
 does not direct his attention to this eminently hostile relation to
 his will, but, although perceiving and recognising it, turns
 consciously away from it, forcibly detaches himself from his will
 and its relations, and, giving himself up entirely to knowledge,
 quietly contemplates those very objects that are so terrible to the
 will, comprehends only their idea, which is foreign to all
 relation, so that he lingers gladly over its contemplation, and is
 thereby raised above himself, his person, his will, and all
 will:—in that case he is filled with the sense of the sublime, he is in the state of
 spiritual exaltation, and therefore the object producing such a
 state is called sublime. thus what distinguishes
 the sense of the sublime from that of the beautiful is this: in the
 case of the beautiful, pure knowledge has gained the upper hand
 without a struggle, for the beauty of the object, i.e.,
 that property which facilitates the knowledge of its idea, has
 removed from consciousness without resistance, and therefore
 imperceptibly, the will and the knowledge of relations which is
 subject to it, so that what is left is the pure subject of
 knowledge without even a remembrance of will. on the other hand, in
 the case of the sublime that state of pure knowledge is only
 attained by a conscious and forcible breaking away from the
 relations of the same object to the will, which are recognised as
 unfavourable, by a free and conscious transcending of the will and
 the knowledge related to it.
this exaltation
 must not only be consciously won, but also consciously retained,
 and it is therefore accompanied by a constant remembrance of will;
 yet not of a single particular volition, such as fear or desire,
 but of human volition in general, so far as it is universally
 expressed in its objectivity the human body. if a single real act
 of will were to come into consciousness, through actual personal
 pressure and danger from the object, then the individual will thus
 actually influenced would at once [pg ] gain the upper hand, the peace of
 contemplation would become impossible, the impression of the
 sublime would be lost, because it yields to the anxiety, in which
 the effort of the individual to right itself has sunk every other
 thought. a few examples will help very much to elucidate this
 theory of the æsthetic sublime and remove all doubt with regard to
 it; at the same time they will bring out the different degrees of
 this sense of the sublime. it is in the main identical with that of
 the beautiful, with pure will-less knowing, and the knowledge, that
 necessarily accompanies it of ideas out of all relation determined
 by the principle of sufficient reason, and it is distinguished from
 the sense of the beautiful only by the additional quality that it
 rises above the known hostile relation of the object contemplated
 to the will in general. thus there come to be various degrees of
 the sublime, and transitions from the beautiful to the sublime,
 according as this additional quality is strong, bold, urgent, near,
 or weak, distant, and merely indicated. i think it is more in
 keeping with the plan of my treatise, first to give examples of
 these transitions, and of the weaker degrees of the impression of
 the sublime, although persons whose æsthetical susceptibility in
 general is not very great, and whose imagination is not very
 lively, will only understand the examples given later of the higher
 and more distinct grades of that impression; and they should
 therefore confine themselves to these, and pass over the examples
 of the very weak degrees of the sublime that are to be given
 first.
as man is at
 once impetuous and blind striving of will (whose pole or focus lies
 in the genital organs), and eternal, free, serene subject of pure
 knowing (whose pole is the brain); so, corresponding to this
 antithesis, the sun is both the source of light,
 the condition of the most perfect kind of knowledge, and therefore
 of the most delightful of things—and the source of warmth,
 the first condition of life, i.e., of all phenomena of will
 in its higher grades. [pg
 therefore, what warmth is for the will, light is for knowledge.
 light is the largest gem in the crown of beauty, and has the most
 marked influence on the knowledge of every beautiful object. its
 presence is an indispensable condition of beauty; its favourable
 disposition increases the beauty of the most beautiful.
 architectural beauty more than any other object is enhanced by
 favourable light, though even the most insignificant things become
 through its influence most beautiful. if, in the dead of winter,
 when all nature is frozen and stiff, we see the rays of the setting
 sun reflected by masses of stone, illuminating without warming, and
 thus favourable only to the purest kind of knowledge, not to the
 will; the contemplation of the beautiful effect of the light upon
 these masses lifts us, as does all beauty, into a state of pure
 knowing. but, in this case, a certain transcending of the interests
 of the will is needed to enable us to rise into the state of pure
 knowing, because there is a faint recollection of the lack of
 warmth from these rays, that is, an absence of the principle of
 life; there is a slight challenge to persist in pure knowing, and
 to refrain from all willing, and therefore it is an example of a
 transition from the sense of the beautiful to that of the sublime.
 it is the faintest trace of the sublime in the beautiful; and
 beauty itself is indeed present only in a slight degree. the
 following is almost as weak an example.
let us imagine
 ourselves transported to a very lonely place, with unbroken
 horizon, under a cloudless sky, trees and plants in the perfectly
 motionless air, no animals, no men, no running water, the deepest
 silence. such surroundings are, as it were, a call to seriousness
 and contemplation, apart from all will and its cravings; but this
 is just what imparts to such a scene of desolate stillness a touch
 of the sublime. for, because it affords no object, either
 favourable or unfavourable, for the will which is constantly in
 need of striving and attaining, [pg ] there only remains the state of pure
 contemplation, and whoever is incapable of this, is ignominiously
 abandoned to the vacancy of unoccupied will, and the misery of
 ennui. so far it is a test of our intellectual worth, of which,
 generally speaking, the degree of our power of enduring solitude,
 or our love of it, is a good criterion. the scene we have sketched
 affords us, then, an example of the sublime in a low degree, for in
 it, with the state of pure knowing in its peace and
 all-sufficiency, there is mingled, by way of contrast, the
 recollection of the dependence and poverty of the will which stands
 in need of constant action. this is the species of the sublime for
 which the sight of the boundless prairies of the interior of north
 america is celebrated.
but let us
 suppose such a scene, stripped also of vegetation, and showing only
 naked rocks; then from the entire absence of that organic life
 which is necessary for existence, the will at once becomes uneasy,
 the desert assumes a terrible aspect, our mood becomes more tragic;
 the elevation to the sphere of pure knowing takes place with a more
 decided tearing of ourselves away from the interests of the will;
 and because we persist in continuing in the state of pure knowing,
 the sense of the sublime distinctly appears.
the following
 situation may occasion this feeling in a still higher degree:
 nature convulsed by a storm; the sky darkened by black threatening
 thunder-clouds; stupendous, naked, overhanging cliffs, completely
 shutting out the view; rushing, foaming torrents; absolute desert;
 the wail of the wind sweeping through the clefts of the rocks. our
 dependence, our strife with hostile nature, our will broken in the
 conflict, now appears visibly before our eyes. yet, so long as the
 personal pressure does not gain the upper hand, but we continue in
 æsthetic contemplation, the pure subject of knowing gazes unshaken
 and unconcerned through that strife of nature, through that picture
 of the broken will, and quietly comprehends [pg ] the ideas even of those objects which
 are threatening and terrible to the will. in this contrast lies the
 sense of the sublime.
but the
 impression becomes still stronger, if, when we have before our
 eyes, on a large scale, the battle of the raging elements, in such
 a scene we are prevented from hearing the sound of our own voice by
 the noise of a falling stream; or, if we are abroad in the storm of
 tempestuous seas, where the mountainous waves rise and fall, dash
 themselves furiously against steep cliffs, and toss their spray
 high into the air; the storm howls, the sea boils, the lightning
 flashes from black clouds, and the peals of thunder drown the voice
 of storm and sea. then, in the undismayed beholder, the two-fold
 nature of his consciousness reaches the highest degree of
 distinctness. he perceives himself, on the one hand, as an
 individual, as the frail phenomenon of will, which the slightest
 touch of these forces can utterly destroy, helpless against
 powerful nature, dependent, the victim of chance, a vanishing
 nothing in the presence of stupendous might; and, on the other
 hand, as the eternal, peaceful, knowing subject, the condition of
 the object, and, therefore, the supporter of this whole world; the
 terrific strife of nature only his idea; the subject itself free
 and apart from all desires and necessities, in the quiet
 comprehension of the ideas. this is the complete impression of the
 sublime. here he obtains a glimpse of a power beyond all comparison
 superior to the individual, threatening it with annihilation.
the impression
 of the sublime may be produced in quite another way, by presenting
 a mere immensity in space and time; its immeasurable greatness
 dwindles the individual to nothing. adhering to kant's nomenclature
 and his accurate division, we may call the first kind the
 dynamical, and the second the mathematical sublime, although we
 entirely dissent from his explanation of the inner nature of the
 impression, and can allow no share [pg ] in it either to moral reflections, or to
 hypostases from scholastic philosophy.
if we lose
 ourselves in the contemplation of the infinite greatness of the
 universe in space and time, meditate on the thousands of years that
 are past or to come, or if the heavens at night actually bring
 before our eyes innumerable worlds and so force upon our
 consciousness the immensity of the universe, we feel ourselves
 dwindle to nothing; as individuals, as living bodies, as transient
 phenomena of will, we feel ourselves pass away and vanish into
 nothing like drops in the ocean. but at once there rises against
 this ghost of our own nothingness, against such lying
 impossibility, the immediate consciousness that all these worlds
 exist only as our idea, only as modifications of the eternal
 subject of pure knowing, which we find ourselves to be as soon as
 we forget our individuality, and which is the necessary supporter
 of all worlds and all times the condition of their possibility. the
 vastness of the world which disquieted us before, rests now in us;
 our dependence upon it is annulled by its dependence upon us. all
 this, however, does not come at once into reflection, but shows
 itself merely as the felt consciousness that in some sense or other
 (which philosophy alone can explain) we are one with the world, and
 therefore not oppressed, but exalted by its immensity. it is the
 felt consciousness of this that the upanishads of the vedas
 repeatedly express in such a multitude of different ways; very
 admirably in the saying already quoted: hæ
 omnes creaturæ in totum ego sum, et præter me aliud ens non
 est (oupnek'hat, vol. i. p. .) it is the
 transcending of our own individuality, the sense of the
 sublime.
we receive this
 impression of the mathematical-sublime, quite directly, by means of
 a space which is small indeed as compared with the world, but which
 has become directly perceptible to us, and affects us with its
 whole extent in all its three dimensions, so as to make our own
 [pg ] body seem almost
 infinitely small. an empty space can never be thus perceived, and
 therefore never an open space, but only space that is directly
 perceptible in all its dimensions by means of the limits which
 enclose it; thus for example a very high, vast dome, like that of
 st. peter's at rome, or st. paul's in london. the sense of the
 sublime here arises through the consciousness of the vanishing
 nothingness of our own body in the presence of a vastness which,
 from another point of view, itself exists only in our idea, and of
 which we are as knowing subject, the supporter. thus here as
 everywhere it arises from the contrast between the insignificance
 and dependence of ourselves as individuals, as phenomena of will,
 and the consciousness of ourselves as pure subject of knowing. even
 the vault of the starry heaven produces this if it is contemplated
 without reflection; but just in the same way as the vault of stone,
 and only by its apparent, not its real extent. some objects of our
 perception excite in us the feeling of the sublime because, not
 only on account of their spatial vastness, but also of their great
 age, that is, their temporal duration, we feel ourselves dwarfed to
 insignificance in their presence, and yet revel in the pleasure of
 contemplating them: of this kind are very high mountains, the
 egyptian pyramids, and colossal ruins of great antiquity.
our explanation
 of the sublime applies also to the ethical, to what is called the
 sublime character. such a character arises from this, that the will
 is not excited by objects which are well calculated to excite it,
 but that knowledge retains the upper hand in their presence. a man
 of sublime character will accordingly consider men in a purely
 objective way, and not with reference to the relations which they
 might have to his will; he will, for example, observe their faults,
 even their hatred and injustice to himself, without being himself
 excited to hatred; he will behold their happiness without envy; he
 will recognise their good qualities without desiring any
 [pg ] closer relations
 with them; he will perceive the beauty of women, but he will not
 desire them. his personal happiness or unhappiness will not greatly
 affect him, he will rather be as hamlet describes horatio:—
“... for
 thou hast been,
as one, in suffering all, that
 suffers nothing;
a man that fortune's buffets and
 rewards
hast ta'en with equal
 thanks,”
&c. (a. . sc. .)
for in the
 course of his own life and its misfortunes, he will consider less
 his individual lot than that of humanity in general, and will
 therefore conduct himself in its regard, rather as knowing than as
 suffering.
§ . opposites
 throw light upon each other, and therefore the remark may be in
 place here, that the proper opposite of the sublime is something
 which would not at the first glance be recognised, as such:
 the
 charming or attractive. by this, however, i
 understand, that which excites the will by presenting to it
 directly its fulfilment, its satisfaction. we saw that the feeling
 of the sublime arises from the fact, that something entirely
 unfavourable to the will, becomes the object of pure contemplation,
 so that such contemplation can only be maintained by persistently
 turning away from the will, and transcending its interests; this
 constitutes the sublimity of the character. the charming or
 attractive, on the contrary, draws the beholder away from the pure
 contemplation which is demanded by all apprehension of the
 beautiful, because it necessarily excites this will, by objects
 which directly appeal to it, and thus he no longer remains pure
 subject of knowing, but becomes the needy and dependent subject of
 will. that every beautiful thing which is bright or cheering should
 be called charming, is the result of a too general concept, which
 arises from a want of accurate discrimination, and which i must
 entirely set aside, and indeed condemn. but in the sense of the
 word which has been given and explained, i [pg ] find only two species of the charming or
 attractive in the province of art, and both of them are unworthy of
 it. the one species, a very low one, is found in dutch paintings of
 still life, when they err by representing articles of food, which
 by their deceptive likeness necessarily excite the appetite for the
 things they represent, and this is just an excitement of the will,
 which puts an end to all æsthetic contemplation of the object.
 painted fruit is yet admissible, because we may regard it as the
 further development of the flower, and as a beautiful product of
 nature in form and colour, without being obliged to think of it as
 eatable; but unfortunately we often find, represented with
 deceptive naturalness, prepared and served dishes, oysters,
 herrings, crabs, bread and butter, beer, wine, and so forth, which
 is altogether to be condemned. in historical painting and in
 sculpture the charming consists in naked figures, whose position,
 drapery, and general treatment are calculated to excite the
 passions of the beholder, and thus pure æsthetical contemplation is
 at once annihilated, and the aim of art is defeated. this mistake
 corresponds exactly to that which we have just censured in the
 dutch paintings. the ancients are almost always free from this
 fault in their representations of beauty and complete nakedness of
 form, because the artist himself created them in a purely objective
 spirit, filled with ideal beauty, not in the spirit of subjective,
 and base sensuality. the charming is thus everywhere to be avoided
 in art.
there is also a
 negative species of the charming or exciting which is even more
 reprehensible than the positive form which has been discussed; this
 is the disgusting or the loathsome. it arouses the will of the
 beholder, just as what is properly speaking charming, and therefore
 disturbs pure æsthetic contemplation. but it is an active aversion
 and opposition which is excited by it; it arouses the will by
 presenting to it objects which it abhors. therefore it has always
 been recognised that it is [pg ] altogether inadmissible in art, where even
 what is ugly, when it is not disgusting, is allowable in its proper
 place, as we shall see later.
§ . the course
 of the discussion has made it necessary to insert at this point the
 treatment of the sublime, though we have only half done with the
 beautiful, as we have considered its subjective side only. for it
 was merely a special modification of this subjective side that
 distinguished the beautiful from the sublime. this difference was
 found to depend upon whether the state of pure will-less knowing,
 which is presupposed and demanded by all æsthetic contemplation,
 was reached without opposition, by the mere disappearance of the
 will from consciousness, because the object invited and drew us
 towards it; or whether it was only attained through the free,
 conscious transcending of the will, to which the object
 contemplated had an unfavourable and even hostile relation, which
 would destroy contemplation altogether, if we were to give
 ourselves up to it. this is the distinction between the beautiful
 and the sublime. in the object they are not essentially different,
 for in every case the object of æsthetical contemplation is not the
 individual thing, but the idea in it which is striving to reveal
 itself; that is to say, adequate objectivity of will at a
 particular grade. its necessary correlative, independent, like
 itself of the principle of sufficient reason, is the pure subject
 of knowing; just as the correlative of the particular thing is the
 knowing individual, both of which lie within the province of the
 principle of sufficient reason.
when we say that
 a thing is beautiful, we thereby assert that
 it is an object of our æsthetic contemplation, and this has a
 double meaning; on the one hand it means that the sight of the
 thing makes us objective, that is to say, that in
 contemplating it we are no longer conscious of ourselves as
 individuals, but as pure will-less subjects of knowledge; and on
 the other hand it means that we recognise in the object, not the
 particular thing, [pg
 but an idea; and this can only happen, so far as our contemplation
 of it is not subordinated to the principle of sufficient reason,
 does not follow the relation of the object to anything outside it
 (which is always ultimately connected with relations to our own
 will), but rests in the object itself. for the idea and the pure
 subject of knowledge always appear at once in consciousness as
 necessary correlatives, and on their appearance all distinction of
 time vanishes, for they are both entirely foreign to the principle
 of sufficient reason in all its forms, and lie outside the
 relations which are imposed by it; they may be compared to the
 rainbow and the sun, which have no part in the constant movement
 and succession of the falling drops. therefore, if, for example, i
 contemplate a tree æsthetically, i.e.,
 with artistic eyes, and thus recognise, not it, but its idea, it
 becomes at once of no consequence whether it is this tree or its
 predecessor which flourished a thousand years ago, and whether the
 observer is this individual or any other that lived anywhere and at
 any time; the particular thing and the knowing individual are
 abolished with the principle of sufficient reason, and there
 remains nothing but the idea and the pure subject of knowing, which
 together constitute the adequate objectivity of will at this grade.
 and the idea dispenses not only with time, but also with space, for
 the idea proper is not this special form which appears before me
 but its expression, its pure significance, its inner being, which
 discloses itself to me and appeals to me, and which may be quite
 the same though the spatial relations of its form be very
 different.
since, on the
 one hand, every given thing may be observed in a. purely objective
 manner and apart from all relations; and since, on the other hand,
 the will manifests itself in everything at some grade of its
 objectivity, so that everything is the expression of an idea; it
 follows that everything is also beautiful. that even the most
 insignificant things admit of pure objective and [pg ] will-less contemplation, and thus prove
 that they are beautiful, is shown by what was said above in this
 reference about the dutch pictures of still-life (§ ). but one thing is more
 beautiful than another, because it makes this pure objective
 contemplation easier, it lends itself to it, and, so to speak, even
 compels it, and then we call it very beautiful. this is the case
 sometimes because, as an individual thing, it expresses in its
 purity the idea of its species by the very distinct, clearly
 defined, and significant relation of its parts, and also fully
 reveals that idea through the completeness of all the possible
 expressions of its species united in it, so that it makes the
 transition from the individual thing to the idea, and therefore
 also the condition of pure contemplation, very easy for the
 beholder. sometimes this possession of special beauty in an object
 lies in the fact that the idea itself which appeals to us in it is
 a high grade of the objectivity of will, and therefore very
 significant and expressive. therefore it is that man is more
 beautiful than all other objects, and the revelation of his nature
 is the highest aim of art. human form and expression are the most
 important objects of plastic art, and human action the most
 important object of poetry. yet each thing has its own peculiar
 beauty, not only every organism which expresses itself in the unity
 of an individual being, but also everything unorganised and
 formless, and even every manufactured article. for all these reveal
 the ideas through which the will objectifies itself at its lowest
 grades, they give, as it were, the deepest resounding bass-notes of
 nature. gravity, rigidity, fluidity, light, and so forth, are the
 ideas which express themselves in rocks, in buildings, in waters.
 landscape-gardening or architecture can do no more than assist them
 to unfold their qualities distinctly, fully, and variously; they
 can only give them the opportunity of expressing themselves purely,
 so that they lend themselves to æsthetic contemplation and make it
 easier. [pg
 inferior buildings or ill-favoured localities, on the contrary,
 which nature has neglected or art has spoiled, perform this task in
 a very slight degree or not at all; yet even from them these
 universal, fundamental ideas of nature cannot altogether disappear.
 to the careful observer they present themselves here also, and even
 bad buildings and the like are capable of being æsthetically
 considered; the ideas of the most universal properties of their
 materials are still recognisable in them, only the artificial form
 which has been given them does not assist but hinders æsthetic
 contemplation. manufactured articles also serve to express ideas,
 only it is not the idea of the manufactured article which speaks in
 them, but the idea of the material to which this artificial form
 has been given. this may be very conveniently expressed in two
 words, in the language of the schoolmen, thus,—the manufactured
 article expresses the idea of its forma substantialis, but not
 that of its forma
 accidentalis; the latter leads to no idea, but only
 to a human conception of which it is the result. it is needless to
 say that by manufactured article no work of plastic art is meant.
 the schoolmen understand, in fact, by forma substantialis that which i
 call the grade of the objectification of will in a thing. we shall
 return immediately, when we treat of architecture, to the idea of
 the material. our view, then, cannot be reconciled with that of
 plato if he is of opinion that a table or a chair express the idea
 of a table or a chair (de rep., x., pp. , , et parmen., p.
 , ed. bip.), but we say that they express the ideas which are
 already expressed in their mere material as such. according to
 aristotle (metap. xi., chap. ), however, plato himself only
 maintained ideas of natural objects: ὁ πλατων εφη, ὁτι ειδη εστιν
 ὁποσα φυσει (plato dixit, quod ideæ eorum
 sunt, quæ natura sunt), and in chap.  he says that,
 according to the platonists, there are no ideas of house and ring.
 in any case, plato's earliest disciples, as alcinous informs us
 (introductio [pg ]in platonicam
 philosophiam, chap. ), denied that there were any
 ideas of manufactured articles. he says: ὁριζονται δε την ιδεαν,
 αυτοτελεις (definiunt autem
ideam exemplar æternum eorum, quæ secundum naturam
 existunt. nam plurimis ex iis, qui platonem secuti sunt, minime
 placuit, arte factorum ideas esse, ut clypei atque lyræ; neque
 rursus eorum, quæ prætor naturam, ut febris et choleræ, neque
 particularium, ceu socratis et platonis; neque etiam rerum vilium,
 veluti sordium et festucæ; neque relationum, ut majoris et
 excedentis: esse namque ideas intellectiones dei æternas, ac
 seipsis perfectas). we may take this opportunity of
 mentioning another point in which our doctrine of ideas differs
 very much from that of plato. he teaches (de rep., x., p. ) that
 the object which art tries to express, the ideal of painting and
 poetry, is not the idea but the particular thing. our whole
 exposition hitherto has maintained exactly the opposite, and
 plato's opinion is the less likely to lead us astray, inasmuch as
 it is the source of one of the greatest and best known errors of
 this great man, his depreciation and rejection of art, and
 especially poetry; he directly connects his false judgment in
 reference to this with the passage quoted.
§ . i return
 to the exposition of the æsthetic impression. the knowledge of the
 beautiful always supposes at once and inseparably the pure knowing
 subject and the known idea as object. yet the source of æsthetic
 satisfaction will sometimes lie more in the comprehension of the
 known idea, sometimes more in the blessedness and spiritual peace
 of the pure knowing subject [pg ] freed from all willing, and therefore from
 all individuality, and the pain that proceeds from it. and, indeed,
 this predominance of one or the other constituent part of æsthetic
 feeling will depend upon whether the intuitively grasped idea is a
 higher or a lower grade of the objectivity of will. thus in
 æsthetic contemplation (in the real, or through the medium of art)
 of the beauty of nature in the inorganic and vegetable worlds, or
 in works of architecture, the pleasure of pure will-less knowing
 will predominate, because the ideas which are here apprehended are
 only low grades of the objectivity of will, and are therefore not
 manifestations of deep significance and rich content. on the other
 hand, if animals and man are the objects of æsthetic contemplation
 or representation, the pleasure will consist rather in the
 comprehension of these ideas, which are the most distinct
 revelation of will; for they exhibit the greatest multiplicity of
 forms, the greatest richness and deep significance of phenomena,
 and reveal to us most completely the nature of will, whether in its
 violence, its terribleness, its satisfaction or its aberration (the
 latter in tragic situations), or finally in its change and
 self-surrender, which is the peculiar theme of christian painting;
 as the idea of the will enlightened by full knowledge is the object
 of historical painting in general, and of the drama. we shall now
 go through the fine arts one by one, and this will give
 completeness and distinctness to the theory of the beautiful which
 we have advanced.
§ . matter as
 such cannot be the expression of an idea. for, as we found in the
 first book, it is throughout nothing but causality: its being
 consists in its casual action. but causality is a form of the
 principle of sufficient reason; knowledge of the idea, on the other
 hand, absolutely excludes the content of that principle. we also
 found, in the second book, that matter is the common substratum of
 all particular phenomena of the ideas, and consequently is the
 connecting link between [pg
 the idea and the phenomenon, or the particular thing. accordingly
 for both of these reasons it is impossible that matter can for
 itself express any idea. this is confirmed a
 posteriori by the fact that it is impossible to have
 a perceptible idea of matter as such, but only an abstract
 conception; in the former, i.e., in perceptible ideas are
 exhibited only the forms and qualities of which matter is the
 supporter, and in all of which ideas reveal themselves. this
 corresponds also with the fact, that causality (the whole essence
 of matter) cannot for itself be presented perceptibly, but is
 merely a definite casual connection. on the other hand, every
 phenomenon of an idea, because as such it has entered
 the form of the principle of sufficient reason, or the principium individuationis, must
 exhibit itself in matter, as one of its qualities. so far then
 matter is, as we have said, the connecting link between the idea
 and the principium
 individuationis, which is the form of knowledge of
 the individual, or the principle of sufficient reason. plato is
 therefore perfectly right in his enumeration, for after the idea
 and the phenomenon, which include all other things in the world, he
 gives matter only, as a third thing which is different from both
 (timaus, p. ). the individual, as a phenomenon of the idea, is
 always matter. every quality of matter is also the phenomenon of an
 idea, and as such it may always be an object of æsthetic
 contemplation, i.e., the idea expressed in it
 may always be recognised. this holds good of even the most
 universal qualities of matter, without which it never appears, and
 which are the weakest objectivity of will. such are gravity,
 cohesion, rigidity, fluidity, sensitiveness to light, and so
 forth.
if now we
 consider architecture simply as a fine art
 and apart from its application to useful ends, in which it serves
 the will and not pure knowledge, and therefore ceases to be art in
 our sense; we can assign to it no other aim than that of bringing
 to greater distinctness [pg
 some of those ideas, which are the lowest grades of the objectivity
 of will; such as gravity, cohesion, rigidity, hardness, those
 universal qualities of stone, those first, simplest, most
 inarticulate manifestations of will; the bass notes of nature; and
 after these light, which in many respects is their opposite. even
 at these low grades of the objectivity of will we see its nature
 revealing itself in discord; for properly speaking the conflict
 between gravity and rigidity is the sole æsthetic material of
 architecture; its problem is to make this conflict appear with
 perfect distinctness in a multitude of different ways. it solves it
 by depriving these indestructible forces of the shortest way to
 their satisfaction, and conducting them to it by a circuitous
 route, so that the conflict is lengthened and the inexhaustible
 efforts of both forces become visible in many different ways. the
 whole mass of the building, if left to its original tendency, would
 exhibit a mere heap or clump, bound as closely as possible to the
 earth, to which gravity, the form in which the will appears here,
 continually presses, while rigidity, also objectivity of will,
 resists. but this very tendency, this effort, is hindered by
 architecture from obtaining direct satisfaction, and only allowed
 to reach it indirectly and by roundabout ways. the roof, for
 example, can only press the earth through columns, the arch must
 support itself, and can only satisfy its tendency towards the earth
 through the medium of the pillars, and so forth. but just by these
 enforced digressions, just by these restrictions, the forces which
 reside in the crude mass of stone unfold themselves in the most
 distinct and multifarious ways; and the purely æsthetic aim of
 architecture can go no further than this. therefore the beauty, at
 any rate, of a building lies in the obvious adaptation of every
 part, not to the outward arbitrary end of man (so far the work
 belongs to practical architecture), but directly to the stability
 of the whole, to which the position, dimensions, and form of every
 part must have so [pg
 necessary a relation that, where it is possible, if any one part
 were taken away, the whole would fall to pieces. for just because
 each part bears just as much as it conveniently can, and each is
 supported just where it requires to be and just to the necessary
 extent, this opposition unfolds itself, this conflict between
 rigidity and gravity, which constitutes the life, the manifestation
 of will, in the stone, becomes completely visible, and these lowest
 grades of the objectivity of will reveal themselves distinctly. in
 the same way the form of each part must not be determined
 arbitrarily, but by its end, and its relation to the whole. the
 column is the simplest form of support, determined simply by its
 end: the twisted column is tasteless; the four-cornered pillar is
 in fact not so simple as the round column, though it happens that
 it is easier to make it. the forms also of frieze, rafter, roof,
 and dome are entirely determined by their immediate end, and
 explain themselves from it. the decoration of capitals, &c.,
 belongs to sculpture, not to architecture, which admits it merely
 as extraneous ornament, and could dispense with it. according to
 what has been said, it is absolutely necessary, in order to
 understand the æsthetic satisfaction afforded by a work of
 architecture, to have immediate knowledge through perception of its
 matter as regards its weight, rigidity, and cohesion, and our
 pleasure in such a work would suddenly be very much diminished by
 the discovery that the material used was pumice-stone; for then it
 would appear to us as a kind of sham building. we would be affected
 in almost the same way if we were told that it was made of wood,
 when we had supposed it to be of stone, just because this alters
 and destroys the relation between rigidity and gravity, and
 consequently the significance and necessity of all the parts, for
 these natural forces reveal themselves in a far weaker degree in a
 wooden building. therefore no real work of architecture as a fine
 art can be made of wood, although it assumes all forms so easily;
 this can only be [pg
 explained by our theory. if we were distinctly told that a
 building, the sight of which gave us pleasure, was made of
 different kinds of material of very unequal weight and consistency,
 but not distinguishable to the eye, the whole building would become
 as utterly incapable of affording us pleasure as a poem in an
 unknown language. all this proves that architecture does not affect
 us mathematically, but also dynamically, and that what speaks to us
 through it, is not mere form and symmetry, but rather those
 fundamental forces of nature, those first ideas, those lowest
 grades of the objectivity of will. the regularity of the building
 and its parts is partly produced by the direct adaptation of each
 member to the stability of the whole, partly it serves to
 facilitate the survey and comprehension of the whole, and finally,
 regular figures to some extent enhance the beauty because they
 reveal the constitution of space as such. but all this is of
 subordinate value and necessity, and by no means the chief concern;
 indeed, symmetry is not invariably demanded, as ruins are still
 beautiful.
works of
 architecture have further quite a special relation to light; they
 gain a double beauty in the full sunshine, with the blue sky as a
 background, and again they have quite a different effect by
 moonlight. therefore, when a beautiful work of architecture is to
 be erected, special attention is always paid to the effects of the
 light and to the climate. the reason of all this is, indeed,
 principally that all the parts and their relations are only made
 clearly visible by a bright, strong light; but besides this i am of
 opinion that it is the function of architecture to reveal the
 nature of light just as it reveals that of things so opposite to it
 as gravity and rigidity. for the light is intercepted, confined,
 and reflected by the great opaque, sharply outlined, and variously
 formed masses of stone, and thus it unfolds its nature and
 qualities in the purest and clearest way, to the great pleasure of
 the beholders, for light is the [pg ] most joy-giving of things, as the condition
 and the objective correlative of the most perfect kind of knowledge
 of perception.
now, because the
 ideas which architecture brings to clear perception, are the lowest
 grades of the objectivity of will, and consequently their objective
 significance, which architecture reveals to us, is comparatively
 small; the æsthetic pleasure of looking at a beautiful building in
 a good light will lie, not so much in the comprehension of the
 idea, as in the subjective correlative which accompanies this
 comprehension; it will consist pre-eminently in the fact that the
 beholder, set free from the kind of knowledge that belongs to the
 individual, and which serves the will and follows the principle of
 sufficient reason, is raised to that of the pure subject of knowing
 free from will. it will consist then principally in pure
 contemplation itself, free from all the suffering of will and of
 individuality. in this respect the opposite of architecture, and
 the other extreme of the series of the fine arts, is the drama,
 which brings to knowledge the most significant ideas. therefore in
 the æsthetic pleasure afforded by the drama the objective side is
 throughout predominant.
architecture has
 this distinction from plastic art and poetry: it does not give us a
 copy but the thing itself. it does not repeat, as they do, the
 known idea, so that the artist lends his eyes to the beholder, but
 in it the artist merely presents the object to the beholder, and
 facilitates for him the comprehension of the idea by bringing the
 actual, individual object to a distinct and complete expression of
 its nature.
unlike the works
 of the other arts, those of architecture are very seldom executed
 for purely æsthetic ends. these are generally subordinated to other
 useful ends which are foreign to art itself. thus the great merit
 of the architect consists in achieving and attaining the pure
 æsthetic ends, in spite of their subordination to other
 [pg ] ends which are
 foreign to them. this he does by cleverly adapting them in a
 variety of ways to the arbitrary ends in view, and by rightly
 judging which form of æsthetical architectonic beauty is compatible
 and may be associated with a temple, which with a palace, which
 with a prison, and so forth. the more a harsh climate increases
 these demands of necessity and utility, determines them definitely,
 and prescribes them more inevitably, the less free play has beauty
 in architecture. in the mild climate of india, egypt, greece, and
 rome, where the demands of necessity were fewer and less definite,
 architecture could follow its æsthetic ends with the greatest
 freedom. but under a northern sky this was sorely hindered. here,
 when caissons, pointed roofs and towers were what was demanded,
 architecture could only unfold its own beauty within very narrow
 limits, and therefore it was obliged to make amends by resorting
 all the more to the borrowed ornaments of sculpture, as is seen in
 gothic architecture.
we thus see that
 architecture is greatly restricted by the demands of necessity and
 utility; but on the other hand it has in them a very powerful
 support, for, on account of the magnitude and costliness of its
 works, and the narrow sphere of its æsthetic effect, it could not
 continue to exist merely as a fine art, if it had not also, as a
 useful and necessary profession, a firm and honourable place among
 the occupations of men. it is the want of this that prevents
 another art from taking its place beside architecture as a sister
 art, although in an æsthetical point of view it is quite properly
 to be classed along with it as its counterpart; i mean artistic
 arrangements of water. for what architecture accomplishes for the
 idea of gravity when it appears in connection with that of
 rigidity, hydraulics accomplishes for the same idea, when it is
 connected with fluidity, i.e., formlessness, the greatest
 mobility and transparency. leaping waterfalls foaming and tumbling
 over rocks, [pg
 cataracts dispersed into floating spray, springs gushing up as high
 columns of water, and clear reflecting lakes, reveal the ideas of
 fluid and heavy matter, in precisely the same way as the works of
 architecture unfold the ideas of rigid matter. artistic hydraulics,
 however, obtains no support from practical hydraulics, for, as a
 rule, their ends cannot be combined; yet, in exceptional cases,
 this happens; for example, in the cascata di trevi at rome.
§ . what the
 two arts we have spoken of accomplish for these lowest grades of
 the objectivity of will, is performed for the higher grades of
 vegetable nature by artistic horticulture. the landscape beauty of
 a scene consists, for the most part, in the multiplicity of natural
 objects which are present in it, and then in the fact that they are
 clearly separated, appear distinctly, and yet exhibit a fitting
 connection and alternation. these two conditions are assisted and
 promoted by landscape-gardening, but it has by no means such a
 mastery over its material as architecture, and therefore its effect
 is limited. the beauty with which it is concerned belongs almost
 exclusively to nature; it has done little for it; and, on the other
 hand, it can do little against unfavourable nature, and when nature
 works, not for it, but against it, its achievements are small.
the vegetable
 world offers itself everywhere for æsthetic enjoyment without the
 medium of art; but so far as it is an object of art, it belongs
 principally to landscape-painting; to the province of which all the
 rest of unconscious nature also belongs. in paintings of still
 life, and of mere architecture, ruins, interiors of churches,
 &c., the subjective side of æsthetic pleasure is predominant,
 i.e., our satisfaction does not
 lie principally in the direct comprehension of the represented
 ideas, but rather in the subjective correlative of this
 comprehension, pure, will-less knowing. for, because the painter
 lets us see these [pg
 things through his eyes, we at once receive a sympathetic and
 reflected sense of the deep spiritual peace and absolute silence of
 the will, which were necessary in order to enter with knowledge so
 entirely into these lifeless objects, and comprehend them with such
 love, i.e., in this case with such a
 degree of objectivity. the effect of landscape-painting proper is
 indeed, as a whole, of this kind; but because the ideas expressed
 are more distinct and significant, as higher grades of the
 objectivity of will, the objective side of æsthetic pleasure
 already comes more to the front and assumes as much importance as
 the subjective side. pure knowing as such is no longer the
 paramount consideration, for we are equally affected by the known
 platonic idea, the world as idea at an important grade of the
 objectification of will.
but a far higher
 grade is revealed by animal painting and sculpture. of the latter
 we have some important antique remains; for example, horses at
 venice, on monte cavallo, and on the elgin marbles, also at
 florence in bronze and marble; the ancient boar, howling wolves,
 the lions in the arsenal at venice, also in the vatican a whole
 room almost filled with ancient animals, &c. in these
 representations the objective side of æsthetic pleasure obtains a
 marked predominance over the subjective. the peace of the subject
 which knows these ideas, which has silenced its own will, is indeed
 present, as it is in all æsthetic contemplation; but its effect is
 not felt, for we are occupied with the restlessness and impetuosity
 of the will represented. it is that very will, which constitutes
 our own nature, that here appears to us in forms, in which its
 manifestation is not, as in us, controlled and tempered by
 intellect, but exhibits itself in stronger traits, and with a
 distinctness that borders on the grotesque and monstrous. for this
 very reason there is no concealment; it is free, naïve, open as the
 day, and this is the cause of our interest in animals. the
 characteristics of species appeared already in the representation
 [pg ] of plants, but
 showed itself only in the forms; here it becomes much more
 distinct, and expresses itself not only in the form, but in the
 action, position, and mien, yet always merely as the character of
 the species, not of the individual. this knowledge of the ideas of
 higher grades, which in painting we receive through extraneous
 means, we may gain directly by the pure contemplative perception of
 plants, and observation of beasts, and indeed of the latter in
 their free, natural, and unrestrained state. the objective
 contemplation of their manifold and marvellous forms, and of their
 actions and behaviour, is an instructive lesson from the great book
 of nature, it is a deciphering of the true signatura rerum. we see
 in them the manifold grades and modes of the manifestation of will,
 which in all beings of one and the same grade, wills always in the
 same way, which objectifies itself as life, as existence in such
 endless variety, and such different forms, which are all
 adaptations to the different external circumstances, and may be
 compared to many variations on the same theme. but if we had to
 communicate to the observer, for reflection, and in a word, the
 explanation of their inner nature, it would be best to make use of
 that sanscrit formula which occurs so often in the sacred books of
 the hindoos, and is called mahavakya, i.e., the great word:
 “tat twam
 asi,” which means, “this living thing art thou.”
§ . the great
 problem of historical painting and sculpture is to express directly
 and for perception the idea in which the will reaches the highest
 grade of its objectification. the objective side of the pleasure
 afforded by the beautiful is here always predominant, [pg ] and the subjective side has retired
 into the background. it is further to be observed that at the next
 grade below this, animal painting, the characteristic is entirely
 one with the beautiful; the most characteristic lion, wolf, horse,
 sheep, or ox, was always the most beautiful also. the reason of
 this is that animals have only the character of their species, no
 individual character. in the representation of men the character of
 the species is separated from that of the individual; the former is
 now called beauty (entirely in the objective sense), but the latter
 retains the name, character, or expression, and the new difficulty
 arises of representing both, at once and completely, in the same
 individual.
human
 beauty is an objective expression, which means the
 fullest objectification of will at the highest grade at which it is
 knowable, the idea of man in general, completely expressed in the
 sensible form. but however much the objective side of the beautiful
 appears here, the subjective side still always accompanies it. and
 just because no object transports us so quickly into pure æsthetic
 contemplation, as the most beautiful human countenance and form, at
 the sight of which we are instantly filled with unspeakable
 satisfaction, and raised above ourselves and all that troubles us;
 this is only possible because this most distinct and purest
 knowledge of will raises us most easily and quickly to the state of
 pure knowing, in which our personality, our will with its constant
 pain, disappears, so long as the pure æsthetic pleasure lasts.
 therefore it is that goethe says: “no evil
 can touch him who looks on human beauty; he feels himself at one
 with himself and with the world.” that a beautiful human
 form is produced by nature must be explained in this way. at this
 its highest grade the will objectifies itself in an individual; and
 therefore through circumstances and its own power it completely
 overcomes all the hindrances and opposition which the phenomena of
 the lower grades present to it. such are the forces [pg ] of nature, from which the will must
 always first extort and win back the matter that belongs to all its
 manifestations. further, the phenomenon of will at its higher
 grades always has multiplicity in its form. even the tree is only a
 systematic aggregate of innumerably repeated sprouting fibres. this
 combination assumes greater complexity in higher forms, and the
 human body is an exceedingly complex system of different parts,
 each of which has a peculiar life of its own, vita propria, subordinate to the
 whole. now that all these parts are in the proper fashion
 subordinate to the whole, and co-ordinate to each other, that they
 all work together harmoniously for the expression of the whole,
 nothing superfluous, nothing restricted; all these are the rare
 conditions, whose result is beauty, the completely expressed
 character of the species. so is it in nature. but how in art? one
 would suppose that art achieved the beautiful by imitating nature.
 but how is the artist to recognise the perfect work which is to be
 imitated, and distinguish it from the failures, if he does not
 anticipate the beautiful before experience? and besides
 this, has nature ever produced a human being perfectly beautiful in
 all his parts? it has accordingly been thought that the artist must
 seek out the beautiful parts, distributed among a number of
 different human beings, and out of them construct a beautiful
 whole; a perverse and foolish opinion. for it will be asked, how is
 he to know that just these forms and not others are beautiful? we
 also see what kind of success attended the efforts of the old
 german painters to achieve the beautiful by imitating nature.
 observe their naked figures. no knowledge of the beautiful is
 possible purely a posteriori,
 and from mere experience; it is always, at least in part,
 a priori, although quite
 different in kind, from the forms of the principle of sufficient
 reason, of which we are conscious a
 priori. these concern the universal form of phenomena
 as such, as it constitutes the possibility [pg ] of knowledge in general, the universal
 how of all phenomena, and from
 this knowledge proceed mathematics and pure natural science. but
 this other kind of knowledge a
 priori, which makes it possible to express the
 beautiful, concerns, not the form but the content of phenomena, not
 the how but the what of
 the phenomenon. that we all recognise human beauty when we see it,
 but that in the true artist this takes place with such clearness
 that he shows it as he has never seen it, and surpasses nature in
 his representation; this is only possible because we ourselves
 are the will whose adequate objectification at its
 highest grade is here to be judged and discovered. thus alone have
 we in fact an anticipation of that which nature (which is just the
 will that constitutes our own being) strives to express. and in the
 true genius this anticipation is accompanied by so great a degree
 of intelligence that he recognises the idea in the particular
 thing, and thus, as it were, understands the half-uttered speech of
 nature, and articulates clearly what she only stammered
 forth. he expresses in the hard marble that beauty of form which in
 a thousand attempts she failed to produce, he presents it to
 nature, saying, as it were, to her, “that
 is what you wanted to say!” and whoever is able to judge
 replies, “yes, that is it.” only in
 this way was it possible for the genius of the greeks to find the
 type of human beauty and establish it as a canon for the school of
 sculpture; and only by virtue of such an anticipation is it
 possible for all of us to recognise beauty, when it has actually
 been achieved by nature in the particular case. this anticipation
 is the ideal. it is the idea so
 far as it is known a
 priori, at least half, and it becomes practical for
 art, because it corresponds to and completes what is given
 a posteriori through nature. the
 possibility of such an anticipation of the beautiful a priori in the artist, and of
 its recognition a posteriori by
 the critic, lies in the fact that the artist and the critic are
 themselves the “in-itself” of
 nature, the [pg
 will which objectifies itself. for, as empedocles said, like can
 only be known by like: only nature can understand itself: only
 nature can fathom itself: but only spirit also can understand
 spirit.
the opinion,
 which is absurd, although expressed by the socrates of xenophon
 (stobæi floril, vol. ii. p. ) that the greeks discovered the
 established ideal of human beauty empirically, by collecting
 particular beautiful parts, uncovering and noting here a knee,
 there an arm, has an exact parallel in the art of poetry. the view
 is entertained, that shakespeare, for example, observed, and then
 gave forth from his own experience of life, the innumerable variety
 of the characters in his dramas, so true, so sustained, so
 profoundly worked out. the impossibility and absurdity of such an
 assumption need not be dwelt upon. it is obvious that the man of
 genius produces the works of poetic art by means of an anticipation
 of what is characteristic, just as he produces the works of plastic
 and pictorial art by means of a prophetic anticipation of the
 beautiful; yet both require experience as a pattern or model, for
 thus alone can that which is dimly known a
 priori be called into clear consciousness, and an
 intelligent representation of it becomes possible.
human beauty was
 explained above as the fullest objectification of will at the
 highest grade at which it is knowable. it expresses itself through
 the form; and this lies in space alone, and has no necessary
 connection with time, as, for example, motion has. thus far then we
 may say: the adequate objectification of will through a merely
 spatial phenomenon is beauty, in the objective sense. a plant is
 nothing but such a merely spatial [pg ] phenomenon of will; for no motion, and
 consequently no relation to time (regarded apart from its
 development), belongs to the expression of its nature; its mere
 form expresses its whole being and displays it openly. but brutes
 and men require, further, for the full revelation of the will which
 is manifested in them, a series of actions, and thus the
 manifestation in them takes on a direct relation to time. all this
 has already been explained in the preceding book; it is related to
 what we are considering at present in the following way. as the
 merely spatial manifestation of will can objectify it fully or
 defectively at each definite grade,—and it is this which
 constitutes beauty or ugliness,—so the temporal objectification of
 will, i.e., the action, and indeed the
 direct action, the movement, may correspond to the will, which
 objectifies itself in it, purely and fully without foreign
 admixture, without superfluity, without defect, only expressing
 exactly the act of will determined in each case;—or the converse of
 all this may occur. in the first case the movement is made with
 grace, in the second case without
 it. thus as beauty is the adequate representation of will
 generally, through its merely spatial manifestation; grace
 is the adequate representation of will through its temporal
 manifestation, that is to say, the perfectly accurate and fitting
 expression of each act of will, through the movement and position
 which objectify it. since movement and position presuppose the
 body, winckelmann's expression is very true and suitable, when he
 says, “grace is the proper relation of the
 acting person to the action” (works, vol. i. p. ). it is
 thus evident that beauty may be attributed to a plant, but no
 grace, unless in a figurative sense; but to brutes and men, both
 beauty and grace. grace consists, according to what has been said,
 in every movement being performed, and every position assumed, in
 the easiest, most appropriate and convenient way, and therefore
 being the pure, adequate expression of its intention, or of
 [pg ] the act of will,
 without any superfluity, which exhibits itself as aimless,
 meaningless bustle, or as wooden stiffness. grace presupposes as
 its condition a true proportion of all the limbs, and a
 symmetrical, harmonious figure; for complete ease and evident
 appropriateness of all positions and movements are only possible by
 means of these. grace is therefore never without a certain degree
 of beauty of person. the two, complete and united, are the most
 distinct manifestation of will at the highest grade of its
 objectification.
it was mentioned
 above that in order rightly to portray man, it is necessary to
 separate the character of the species from that of the individual,
 so that to a certain extent every man expresses an idea peculiar to
 himself, as was said in the last book. therefore the arts whose aim
 is the representation of the idea of man, have as their problem,
 not only beauty, the character of the species, but also the
 character of the individual, which is called, par excellence, character. but this is only the
 case in so far as this character is to be regarded, not as
 something accidental and quite peculiar to the man as a single
 individual, but as a side of the idea of humanity which is
 specially apparent in this individual, and the representation of
 which is therefore of assistance in revealing this idea. thus the
 character, although as such it is individual, must yet be ideal,
 that is, its significance in relation to the idea of humanity
 generally (the objectifying of which it assists in its own way)
 must be comprehended and expressed with special prominence. apart
 from this the representation is a portrait, a copy of the
 individual as such, with all his accidental qualities. and even the
 portrait ought to be, as winckelmann says, the ideal of the
 individual.
that character which is to be ideally
 comprehended, as the prominence of a special side of the idea of
 humanity, expresses itself visibly, partly through permanent
 physiognomy and bodily form, partly through passing [pg ] emotion and passion, the reciprocal
 modification of knowing and willing by each other, which is all
 exhibited in the mien and movements. since the individual always
 belongs to humanity, and, on the other hand, humanity always
 reveals itself in the individual with what is indeed peculiar ideal
 significance, beauty must not be destroyed by character nor
 character by beauty. for if the character of the species is
 annulled by that of the individual, the result is caricature; and
 if the character of the individual is annulled by that of the
 species, the result is an absence of meaning. therefore the
 representation which aims at beauty, as sculpture principally does,
 will yet always modify this (the character of the species), in some
 respect, by the individual character, and will always express the
 idea of man in a definite individual manner, giving prominence to a
 special side of it. for the human individual as such has to a
 certain extent the dignity of a special idea, and it is essential
 to the idea of man that it should express itself in individuals of
 special significance. therefore we find in the works of the
 ancients, that the beauty distinctly comprehended by them, is not
 expressed in one form, but in many forms of different character. it
 is always apprehended, as it were, from a different side, and
 expressed in one way in apollo, in another way in bacchus, in
 another in hercules, in another in antinous; indeed the
 characteristic may limit the beautiful, and finally extend even to
 hideousness, in the drunken silenus, in the faun, &c. if the
 characteristic goes so far as actually to annul the character of
 the species, if it extends to the unnatural, it becomes caricature.
 but we can far less afford to allow grace to be interfered with by
 what is characteristic than even beauty, for graceful position and
 movement are demanded for the expression of the character also; but
 yet it must be achieved in the way which is most fitting,
 appropriate, and easy for the person. this will be observed, not
 only by the sculptor and the painter, but [pg ] also by every good actor; otherwise
 caricature will appear here also as grimace or distortion.
in sculpture,
 beauty and grace are the principal concern. the special character
 of the mind, appearing in emotion, passion, alternations of knowing
 and willing, which can only be represented by the expression of the
 countenance and the gestures, is the peculiar sphere of painting. for although eyes and
 colour, which lie outside the province of sculpture, contribute
 much to beauty, they are yet far more essential to character.
 further, beauty unfolds itself more completely when it is
 contemplated from various points of view; but the expression, the
 character, can only be completely comprehended from one
 point of view.
because beauty
 is obviously the chief aim of sculpture, lessing tried to explain
 the fact that the laocoon does not cry out, by
 saying that crying out is incompatible with beauty. the laocoon
 formed for lessing the theme, or at least the text of a work of his
 own, and both before and after him a great deal has been written on
 the subject. i may therefore be allowed to express my views about
 it in passing, although so special a discussion does not properly
 belong to the scheme of this work, which is throughout concerned
 with what is general.
§ . that
 laocoon, in the celebrated group, does not cry out is obvious, and
 the universal and ever-renewed surprise at this must be occasioned
 by the fact that any of us would cry out if we were in his place.
 and nature demands that it should be so; for in the case of the
 acutest physical pain, and the sudden seizure by the greatest
 bodily fear, all reflection, that might have inculcated silent
 endurance, is entirely expelled from consciousness, and nature
 relieves itself by crying out, thus expressing both the pain and
 the fear, summoning the deliverer and terrifying the assailer. thus
 winckelmann missed the expression of crying out; but as he wished
 to justify the artist he turned laocoon into a stoic, who
 considered it beneath his dignity to cry out [pg ] secundum
 naturam, but added to his pain the useless constraint
 of suppressing all utterance of it. winckelmann therefore sees in
 him “the tried spirit of a great man, who
 writhes in agony, and yet seeks to suppress the utterance of his
 feeling, and to lock it up in himself. he does not break forth into
 loud cries, as in virgil, but only anxious sighs escape
 him,” &c. (works, vol. vii. p. , and at greater length
 in vol. vi. p. ). now lessing criticised this opinion of
 winckelmann's in his laocoon, and improved it in the way mentioned
 above. in place of the psychological he gave the purely æsthetic
 reason that beauty, the principle of ancient art, does not admit of
 the expression of crying out. another argument which he added to
 this, that a merely passing state incapable of duration ought not
 to be represented in motionless works of art, has a hundred
 examples of most excellent figures against it, which are fixed in
 merely transitory movements, dancing, wrestling, catching, &c.
 indeed goethe, in the essay on the laocoon, which opens the
 propylaen (p. ), holds that the choice of such a merely fleeting
 movement is absolutely necessary. in our own day hirt (horen, ,
 tenth st.) finally decided the point, deducing everything from the
 highest truth of expression, that laocoon does not cry out, because
 he can no longer do so, as he is at the point of death from
 choking. lastly, fernow (“römische
 studien,” vol. i. p. ) expounded and weighed all these
 opinions; he added, however, no new one of his own, but combined
 these three eclectically.
i cannot but
 wonder that such thoughtful and acute men should laboriously bring
 far-fetched and insufficient reasons, should resort to
 psychological and physiological arguments, to explain a matter the
 reason of which lies so near at hand, and is obvious at once to the
 unprejudiced; and especially i wonder that lessing, who came so
 near the true explanation, should yet have entirely missed the real
 point.[pg
before all
 psychological and physiological inquiries as to whether laocoon
 would cry out in his position or not (and i certainly affirm that
 he would), it must be decided as regards the group in question,
 that crying out ought not to be expressed in it, for the simple
 reason that its expression lies quite outside the province of
 sculpture. a shrieking laocoon could not be produced in marble, but
 only a figure with the mouth open vainly endeavouring to shriek; a
 laocoon whose voice has stuck in his throat, vox faucibus haesit. the essence
 of shrieking, and consequently its effect upon the onlooker, lies
 entirely in sound; not in the distortion of the mouth. this
 phenomenon, which necessarily accompanies shrieking, derives motive
 and justification only from the sound produced by means of it; then
 it is permissible and indeed necessary, as characteristic of the
 action, even though it interferes with beauty. but in plastic art,
 to which the representation of shrieking is quite foreign and
 impossible, it would be actual folly to represent the medium of
 violent shrieking, the distorted mouth, which would disturb all the
 features and the remainder of the expression; for thus at the
 sacrifice of many other things the means would be represented,
 while its end, the shrieking itself, and its effect upon our
 feelings, would be left out. nay more, there would be produced the
 spectacle of a continuous effort without effect, which is always
 ridiculous, and may really be compared to what happened when some
 one for a joke stopped the horn of a night watchman with wax while
 he was asleep, and then awoke him with the cry of fire, and amused
 himself by watching his vain endeavours to blow the horn. when, on
 the other hand, the expression of shrieking lies in the province of
 poetic or histrionic art, it is quite admissible, because it helps
 to express the truth, i.e., the complete expression of
 the idea. thus it is with poetry, which claims the assistance of
 the imagination of the reader, in order to enable it to represent
 things perceptibly. [pg
 therefore virgil makes laocoon cry out like the bellowing of an ox
 that has broken loose after being struck by the axe; and homer (il.
 xx. -) makes mars and minerva shriek horribly, without
 derogating from their divine dignity or beauty. the same with
 acting; laocoon on the stage would certainly have to shriek.
 sophocles makes philoctetus cry out, and, on the ancient stage at
 any rate, he must actually have done so. as a case in point, i
 remember having seen in london the great actor kemble play in a
 piece called pizarro, translated from the german. he took the part
 of the american, a half-savage, but of very noble character. when
 he was wounded he cried out loudly and wildly, which had a great
 and admirable effect, for it was exceedingly characteristic and
 therefore assisted the truth of the representation very much. on
 the other hand, a painted or sculptured model of a man shrieking,
 would be much more absurd than the painted music which is censured
 in goethe's propylaen. for shrieking does far more injury to the
 expression and beauty of the whole than music, which at the most
 only occupies the hands and arms, and is to be looked upon as an
 occupation characteristic of the person; indeed thus far it may
 quite rightly be painted, as long as it demands no violent movement
 of the body, or distortion of the mouth: for example, st. cecilia
 at the organ, raphael's violin-player in the sciarra gallery at
 rome, and others. since then, on account of the limits of the art,
 the pain of laocoon must not be expressed by shrieking, the artist
 was obliged to employ every other expression of pain; this he has
 done in the most perfect manner, as is ably described by
 winckelmann (works, vol. vi. p. ), whose admirable account thus
 retains its full value and truth, as soon as we abstract from the
 stoical view which underlies it.[pg ]
§ . because
 beauty accompanied with grace is the principal object of sculpture,
 it loves nakedness, and allows clothing only so far as it does not
 conceal the form. it makes use of drapery, not as a covering, but
 as a means of exhibiting the form, a method of exposition that
 gives much exercise to the understanding, for it can only arrive at
 a perception of the cause, the form of the body, through the only
 directly given effect, the drapery. thus to a certain extent
 drapery is in sculpture what fore-shortening is in painting. both
 are suggestions, yet not symbolical, but such that, if they are
 successful, they force the understanding directly to perceive what
 is suggested, just as if it were actually given.
i may be
 allowed, in passing, to insert here a comparison that is very
 pertinent to the arts we are discussing. it is this: as the
 beautiful bodily form is seen to the greatest advantage when
 clothed in the lightest way, or indeed without any clothing at all,
 and therefore a very handsome man, if he had also taste and the
 courage to follow it, would go about almost naked, clothed only
 after the manner of the ancients; so every one who possesses a
 beautiful and rich mind will always express himself in the most
 natural, direct, and simple way, concerned, if it be possible, to
 communicate his thoughts to others, and thus relieve the loneliness
 that he must feel in such a world as this. and conversely, poverty
 of mind, confusion, and perversity of thought, will clothe itself
 in the most far-fetched expressions and the obscurest forms of
 speech, in order to wrap up in difficult and pompous phraseology
 small, trifling, insipid, or commonplace thoughts; like a man who
 has lost the majesty of beauty, and trying to make up for the
 deficiency by means of clothing, seeks to hide the insignificance
 or ugliness of his person under barbaric finery, tinsel, feathers,
 ruffles, cuffs, and mantles. many an author, if compelled to
 translate his pompous and [pg
 obscure book into its little clear content, would be as utterly
 spoilt as this man if he had to go naked.
§ . historical
 painting has for its principal object, besides beauty
 and grace, character. by character we mean generally, the
 representation of will at the highest grade of its objectification,
 when the individual, as giving prominence to a particular side of
 the idea of humanity, has special significance, and shows this not
 merely by his form, but makes it visible in his bearing and
 occupation, by action of every kind, and the modifications of
 knowing and willing that occasion and accompany it. the idea of man
 must be exhibited in these circumstances, and therefore the
 unfolding of its many-sidedness must be brought before our eyes by
 means of representative individuals, and these individuals can only
 be made visible in their significance through various scenes,
 events, and actions. this is the endless problem of the historical
 painter, and he solves it by placing before us scenes of life of
 every kind, of greater or less significance. no individual and no
 action can be without significance; in all and through all the idea
 of man unfolds itself more and more. therefore no event of human
 life is excluded from the sphere of painting. it is thus a great
 injustice to the excellent painters of the dutch school, to prize
 merely their technical skill, and to look down upon them in other
 respects, because, for the most part, they represent objects of
 common life, whereas it is assumed that only the events of the
 history of the world, or the incidents of biblical story, have
 significance. we ought first to bethink ourselves that the inward
 significance of an action is quite different from its outward
 significance, and that these are often separated from each other.
 the outward significance is the importance of an action in relation
 to its result for and in the actual world; thus according to the
 principle of sufficient reason. the inward significance is the
 depth of the insight into the idea of man which it reveals, in that
 it brings [pg
 to light sides of that idea which rarely appear, by making
 individuals who assert themselves distinctly and decidedly,
 disclose their peculiar characteristics by means of appropriately
 arranged circumstances. only the inward significance concerns art;
 the outward belongs to history. they are both completely
 independent of each other; they may appear together, but may each
 appear alone. an action which is of the highest significance for
 history may in inward significance be a very ordinary and common
 one; and conversely, a scene of ordinary daily life may be of great
 inward significance, if human individuals, and the inmost recesses
 of human action and will, appear in it in a clear and distinct
 light. further, the outward and the inward significance of a scene
 may be equal and yet very different. thus, for example, it is all
 the same, as far as inward significance is concerned, whether
 ministers discuss the fate of countries and nations over a map, or
 boors wrangle in a beer-house over cards and dice, just as it is
 all the same whether we play chess with golden or wooden pieces.
 but apart from this, the scenes and events that make up the life of
 so many millions of men, their actions, their sorrows, their joys,
 are on that account important enough to be the object of art, and
 by their rich variety they must afford material enough for
 unfolding the many-sided idea of man. indeed the very
 transitoriness of the moment which art has fixed in such a picture
 (now called genre-painting) excites a slight
 and peculiar sensation; for to fix the fleeting, ever-changing
 world in the enduring picture of a single event, which yet
 represents the whole, is an achievement of the art of painting by
 which it seems to bring time itself to a standstill, for it raises
 the individual to the idea of its species. finally, the historical
 and outwardly significant subjects of painting have often the
 disadvantage that just what is significant in them cannot be
 presented to perception, but must be arrived at by thought. in this
 respect the nominal [pg
 significance of the picture must be distinguished from its real
 significance. the former is the outward significance, which,
 however, can only be reached as a conception; the latter is that
 side of the idea of man which is made visible to the onlooker in
 the picture. for example, moses found by the egyptian princess is
 the nominal significance of a painting; it represents a moment of
 the greatest importance in history; the real significance, on the
 other hand, that which is really given to the onlooker, is a
 foundling child rescued from its floating cradle by a great lady,
 an incident which may have happened more than once. the costume
 alone can here indicate the particular historical case to the
 learned; but the costume is only of importance to the nominal
 significance, and is a matter of indifference to the real
 significance; for the latter knows only the human being as such,
 not the arbitrary forms. subjects taken from history have no
 advantage over those which are taken from mere possibility, and
 which are therefore to be called, not individual, but merely
 general. for what is peculiarly significant in the former is not
 the individual, not the particular event as such, but the universal
 in it, the side of the idea of humanity which expresses itself
 through it. but, on the other hand, definite historical subjects
 are not on this account to be rejected, only the really artistic
 view of such subjects, both in the painter and in the beholder, is
 never directed to the individual particulars in them, which
 properly constitute the historical, but to the universal which
 expresses itself in them, to the idea. and only those historical
 subjects are to be chosen the chief point of which can actually be
 represented, and not merely arrived at by thought, otherwise the
 nominal significance is too remote from the real; what is merely
 thought in connection with the picture becomes of most importance,
 and interferes with what is perceived. if even on the stage it is
 not right that the chief incident of the plot should take place
 behind the [pg
 scenes (as in french tragedies), it is clearly a far greater fault
 in a picture. historical subjects are distinctly disadvantageous
 only when they confine the painter to a field which has not been
 chosen for artistic but for other reasons, and especially when this
 field is poor in picturesque and significant objects—if, for
 example, it is the history of a small, isolated, capricious,
 hierarchical (i.e., ruled by error), obscure
 people, like the jews, despised by the great contemporary nations
 of the east and the west. since the wandering of the tribes lies
 between us and all ancient nations, as the change of the bed of the
 ocean lies between the earth's surface as it is to-day and as it
 was when those organisations existed which we only know from fossil
 remains, it is to be regarded generally as a great misfortune that
 the people whose culture was to be the principal basis of our own
 were not the indians or the greeks, or even the romans, but these
 very jews. but it was especially a great misfortune for the italian
 painters of genius in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries that,
 in the narrow sphere to which they were arbitrarily driven for the
 choice of subjects, they were obliged to have recourse to miserable
 beings of every kind. for the new testament, as regards its
 historical part, is almost more unsuitable for painting than the
 old, and the subsequent history of martyrs and doctors of the
 church is a very unfortunate subject. yet of the pictures, whose
 subject is the history or mythology of judaism and christianity, we
 must carefully distinguish those in which the peculiar,
 i.e., the ethical spirit of
 christianity is revealed for perception, by the representation of
 men who are full of this spirit. these representations are in fact
 the highest and most admirable achievements of the art of painting;
 and only the greatest masters of this art succeeded in this,
 particularly raphael and correggio, and especially in their earlier
 pictures. pictures of this kind are not properly to be classed as
 historical: for, as a rule, they represent no event, no action; but
 are merely groups of [pg
 saints, with the saviour himself, often still a child, with his
 mother, angels, &c. in their countenances, and especially in
 the eyes, we see the expression, the reflection, of the completest
 knowledge, that which is not directed to particular things, but has
 fully grasped the ideas, and thus the whole nature of the world and
 life. and this knowledge in them, reacting upon the will, does not,
 like other knowledge, convey motives to it, but on the contrary
 has become a quieter of all will, from which
 proceeded the complete resignation, which is the innermost spirit
 of christianity, as of the indian philosophy; the surrender of all
 volition, conversion, the suppression of will, and with it of the
 whole inner being of this world, that is to say, salvation. thus
 these masters of art, worthy of eternal praise, expressed
 perceptibly in their works the highest wisdom. and this is the
 summit of all art. it has followed the will in its adequate
 objectivity, the ideas, through all its grades, in which it is
 affected and its nature unfolded in so many ways, first by causes,
 then by stimuli, and finally by motives. and now art ends with the
 representation of the free self-suppression of will, by means of
 the great peace which it gains from the perfect knowledge of its
 own nature.
§ . the truth
 which lies at the foundation of all that we have hitherto said
 about art, is that the object of art, the representation of which
 is the aim of the artist, and the knowledge of which must therefore
 precede his work as its germ and source, is an idea in plato's
 sense, and never anything else; not the particular thing, the
 object of common apprehension, and not the concept, the object of
 rational thought and of science. although the idea and the concept
 have something in common, because both represent as unity a
 multiplicity of real things; yet the great difference between them
 has no doubt been made clear and evident enough by what we have
 said [pg ] about concepts in
 the first book, and about ideas in this book. i by no means wish to
 assert, however, that plato really distinctly comprehended this
 difference; indeed many of his examples of ideas, and his
 discussions of them, are applicable only to concepts. meanwhile we
 leave this question alone and go on our own way, glad when we come
 upon traces of any great and noble mind, yet not following his
 footsteps but our own aim. the concept
 is abstract, discursive, undetermined within its own sphere, only
 determined by its limits, attainable and comprehensible by him who
 has only reason, communicable by words without any other
 assistance, entirely exhausted by its definition. the idea on
 the contrary, although defined as the adequate representative of
 the concept, is always object of perception, and although
 representing an infinite number of particular things, is yet
 thoroughly determined. it is never known by the individual as such,
 but only by him who has raised himself above all willing and all
 individuality to the pure subject of knowing. thus it is only
 attainable by the man of genius, and by him who, for the most part
 through the assistance of the works of genius, has reached an
 exalted frame of mind, by increasing his power of pure knowing. it
 is therefore not absolutely but only conditionally communicable,
 because the idea, comprehended and repeated in the work of art,
 appeals to every one only according to the measure of his own
 intellectual worth. so that just the most excellent works of every
 art, the noblest productions of genius, must always remain sealed
 books to the dull majority of men, inaccessible to them, separated
 from them by a wide gulf, just as the society of princes is
 inaccessible to the common people. it is true that even the dullest
 of them accept on authority recognisedly great works, lest
 otherwise they should argue their own incompetence; but they wait
 in silence, always ready to express their condemnation, as soon as
 they are allowed to hope that they may do so without being left
 [pg ] to stand alone; and
 then their long-restrained hatred against all that is great and
 beautiful, and against the authors of it, gladly relieves itself;
 for such things never appealed to them, and for that very reason
 were humiliating to them. for as a rule a man must have worth in
 himself in order to recognise it and believe in it willingly and
 freely in others. on this rests the necessity of modesty in all
 merit, and the disproportionately loud praise of this virtue, which
 alone of all its sisters is always included in the eulogy of every
 one who ventures to praise any distinguished man, in order to
 appease and quiet the wrath of the unworthy. what then is modesty
 but hypocritical humility, by means of which, in a world swelling
 with base envy, a man seeks to obtain pardon for excellences and
 merits from those who have none? for whoever attributes to himself
 no merits, because he actually has none, is not modest but merely
 honest.
the idea is
 the unity that falls into multiplicity on account of the temporal
 and spatial form of our intuitive apprehension; the concept, on the contrary, is the
 unity reconstructed out of multiplicity by the abstraction of our
 reason; the latter may be defined as unitas post rem, the former as
 unitas ante rem. finally, we may
 express the distinction between the idea and the concept, by a
 comparison, thus: the concept is like a dead receptacle,
 in which, whatever has been put, actually lies side by side, but
 out of which no more can be taken (by analytical judgment) than was
 put in (by synthetical reflection); the (platonic) idea,
 on the other hand, develops, in him who has comprehended it, ideas
 which are new as regards the concept of the same name; it resembles
 a living organism, developing itself and possessed of the power of
 reproduction, which brings forth what was not put into it.
it follows from
 all that has been said, that the concept, useful as it is in life,
 and serviceable, necessary and productive as it is in science, is
 yet always barren [pg
 and unfruitful in art. the comprehended idea, on the contrary, is
 the true and only source of every work of art. in its powerful
 originality it is only derived from life itself, from nature, from
 the world, and that only by the true genius, or by him whose
 momentary inspiration reaches the point of genius. genuine and
 immortal works of art spring only from such direct apprehension.
 just because the idea is and remains object of perception, the
 artist is not conscious in the abstract of the intention and aim of
 his work; not a concept, but an idea floats before his mind;
 therefore he can give no justification of what he does. he works,
 as people say, from pure feeling, and unconsciously, indeed
 instinctively. on the contrary, imitators, mannerists, imitatores, servum pecus, start,
 in art, from the concept; they observe what pleases and affects us
 in true works of art; understand it clearly, fix it in a concept,
 and thus abstractly, and then imitate it, openly or disguisedly,
 with dexterity and intentionally. they suck their nourishment, like
 parasite plants, from the works of others, and like polypi, they
 become the colour of their food. we might carry comparison further,
 and say that they are like machines which mince fine and mingle
 together whatever is put into them, but can never digest it, so
 that the different constituent parts may always be found again if
 they are sought out and separated from the mixture; the man of
 genius alone resembles the organised, assimilating, transforming
 and reproducing body. for he is indeed educated and cultured by his
 predecessors and their works; but he is really fructified only by
 life and the world directly, through the impression of what he
 perceives; therefore the highest culture never interferes with his
 originality. all imitators, all mannerists, apprehend in concepts
 the nature of representative works of art; but concepts can never
 impart inner life to a work. the age, i.e.,
 the dull multitude of every time, knows only concepts, and sticks
 to them, and therefore receives [pg ] mannered works of art with ready and loud
 applause: but after a few years these works become insipid, because
 the spirit of the age, i.e., the prevailing concepts,
 in which alone they could take root, have changed. only true works
 of art, which are drawn directly from nature and life, have eternal
 youth and enduring power, like nature and life themselves. for they
 belong to no age, but to humanity, and as on that account they are
 coldly received by their own age, to which they disdain to link
 themselves closely, and because indirectly and negatively they
 expose the existing errors, they are slowly and unwillingly
 recognised; on the other hand, they cannot grow old, but appear to
 us ever fresh and new down to the latest ages. then they are no
 longer exposed to neglect and ignorance, for they are crowned and
 sanctioned by the praise of the few men capable of judging, who
 appear singly and rarely in the course of ages, and
 give in their votes, whose slowly growing number constitutes the
 authority, which alone is the judgment-seat we mean when we appeal
 to posterity. it is these successively appearing individuals, for
 the mass of posterity will always be and remain just as perverse
 and dull as the mass of contemporaries always was and always is. we
 read the complaints of great men in every century about the customs
 of their age. they always sound as if they referred to our own age,
 for the race is always the same. at every time and in every art,
 mannerisms have taken the place of the spirit, which was always the
 possession of a few individuals, but mannerisms are just the old
 cast-off garments of the last manifestation of the spirit that
 existed and was recognised. from all this it appears that, as a
 rule, the praise of posterity can only be gained at the cost of the
 praise of one's contemporaries, and vice
 versa.
§ . if the aim
 of all art is the communication of the comprehended idea, which
 through the mind of the artist [pg ] appears in such a form that it is purged and
 isolated from all that is foreign to it, and may now be grasped by
 the man of weaker comprehension and no productive faculty; if
 further, it is forbidden in art to start from the concept, we shall
 not be able to consent to the intentional and avowed employment of
 a work of art for the expression of a concept; this is the case in
 the allegory. an allegory is a work of
 art which means something different from what it represents. but
 the object of perception, and consequently also the idea, expresses
 itself directly and completely, and does not require the medium of
 something else which implies or indicates it. thus, that which in
 this way is indicated and represented by something entirely
 different, because it cannot itself be made object of perception,
 is always a concept. therefore through the allegory a conception
 has always to be signified, and consequently the mind of the
 beholder has to be drawn away from the expressed perceptible idea
 to one which is entirely different, abstract and not perceptible,
 and which lies quite outside the work of art. the picture or statue
 is intended to accomplish here what is accomplished far more fully
 by a book. now, what we hold is the end of art, representation of a
 perceivable, comprehensible idea, is not here the end. no great
 completeness in the work of art is demanded for what is aimed at
 here. it is only necessary that we should see what the thing is
 meant to be, for, as soon as this has been discovered, the end is
 reached, and the mind is now led away to quite a different kind of
 idea to an abstract conception, which is the end that was in view.
 allegories in plastic and pictorial art are, therefore, nothing but
 hieroglyphics; the artistic value which they may have as
 perceptible representations, belongs to them not as allegories, but
 otherwise. that the “night” of
 correggio, the “genius of fame” of
 hannibal caracci, and the “hours” of
 poussin, are very beautiful pictures, is to be separated altogether
 from the fact that they are [pg ] allegories. as allegories they do not
 accomplish more than a legend, indeed rather less. we are here
 again reminded of the distinction drawn above between the real and
 the nominal significance of a picture. the nominal is here the
 allegorical as such, for example, the “genius of fame.” the real is what is actually
 represented, in this case a beautiful winged youth, surrounded by
 beautiful boys; this expresses an idea. but this real significance
 affects us only so long as we forget the nominal, allegorical
 significance; if we think of the latter, we forsake the perception,
 and the mind is occupied with an abstract conception; but the
 transition from the idea to the conception is always a fall.
 indeed, that nominal significance, that allegorical intention,
 often injures the real significance, the perceptible truth. for
 example, the unnatural light in the “night” of correggio, which, though beautifully
 executed, has yet a merely allegorical motive, and is really
 impossible. if then an allegorical picture has artistic value, it
 is quite separate from and independent of what it accomplishes as
 allegory. such a work of art serves two ends at once, the
 expression of a conception and the expression of an idea. only the
 latter can be an end of art; the other is a foreign end, the
 trifling amusement of making a picture also do service as a legend,
 as a hieroglyphic, invented for the pleasure of those to whom the
 true nature of art can never appeal. it is the same thing as when a
 work of art is also a useful implement of some kind, in which case
 it also serves two ends; for example, a statue which is at the same
 time a candelabrum or a caryatide; or a bas-relief, which is also
 the shield of achilles. true lovers of art will allow neither the
 one nor the other. it is true that an allegorical picture may,
 because of this quality, produce a vivid impression upon the
 feelings; but when this is the case, a legend would under the same
 circumstances produce the same effect. for example, if the desire
 of fame were firmly and lastingly [pg ] rooted in the heart of a man, because he
 regarded it as his rightful possession, which is only withheld from
 him so long as he has not produced the charter of his ownership;
 and if the genius of fame, with his laurel crown, were to appear to
 such a man, his whole mind would be excited, and his powers called
 into activity; but the same effect would be produced if he were
 suddenly to see the word “fame,” in
 large distinct letters on the wall. or if a man has made known a
 truth, which is of importance either as a maxim for practical life,
 or as insight for science, but it has not been believed; an
 allegorical picture representing time as it lifts the veil, and
 discloses the naked figure of truth, will affect him powerfully;
 but the same effect would be produced by the legend: “le temps découvre la
 vérité.” for what really produces the effect
 here is the abstract thought, not the object of perception.
if then, in
 accordance with what has been said, allegory in plastic and
 pictorial art is a mistaken effort, serving an end which is
 entirely foreign to art, it becomes quite unbearable when it leads
 so far astray that the representation of forced and violently
 introduced subtilties degenerates into absurdity. such, for
 example, is a tortoise, to represent feminine seclusion; the
 downward glance of nemesis into the drapery of her bosom,
 signifying that she can see into what is hidden; the explanation of
 bellori that hannibal carracci represents voluptuousness clothed in
 a yellow robe, because he wishes to indicate that her lovers soon
 fade and become yellow as straw. if there is absolutely no
 connection between the representation and the conception signified
 by it, founded on subsumption under the concept, or association of
 ideas; but the signs and the things signified are combined in a
 purely conventional manner, by positive, accidentally introduced
 laws; then i call this degenerate kind of allegory symbolism. thus the rose is the
 symbol of secrecy, the laurel is the symbol of fame, the palm is
 [pg ] the symbol of peace,
 the scallop-shell is the symbol of pilgrimage, the cross is the
 symbol of the christian religion. to this class also belongs all
 significance of mere colour, as yellow is the colour of falseness,
 and blue is the colour of fidelity. such symbols may often be of
 use in life, but their value is foreign to art. they are simply to
 be regarded as hieroglyphics, or like chinese word-writing, and
 really belong to the same class as armorial bearings, the bush that
 indicates a public-house, the key of the chamberlain, or the
 leather of the mountaineer. if, finally, certain historical or
 mythical persons, or personified conceptions, are represented by
 certain fixed symbols, these are properly called emblems. such are the beasts of
 the evangelist, the owl of minerva, the apple of paris, the anchor
 of hope, &c. for the most part, however, we understand by
 emblems those simple allegorical representations explained by a
 motto, which are meant to express a moral truth, and of which large
 collections have been made by j. camerarius, alciatus, and others.
 they form the transition to poetical allegory, of which we shall
 have more to say later. greek sculpture devotes itself to the
 perception, and therefore it is æsthetical; indian sculpture
 devotes itself to the conception, and therefore it is merely
 symbolical.
this conclusion
 in regard to allegory, which is founded on our consideration of the
 nature of art and quite consistent with it, is directly opposed to
 the opinion of winckelmann, who, far from explaining allegory, as
 we do, as something quite foreign to the end of art, and often
 interfering with it, always speaks in favour of it, and indeed
 (works, vol. i. p. ) places the highest aim of art in the
 “representation of universal conceptions,
 and non-sensuous things.” we leave it to every one to adhere
 to whichever view he pleases. only the truth became very clear to
 me from these and similar views of winckelmann connected with his
 peculiar metaphysic of the beautiful, that one may have the
 greatest susceptibility [pg
 for artistic beauty, and the soundest judgment in regard to it,
 without being able to give an abstract and strictly philosophical
 justification of the nature of the beautiful; just as one may be
 very noble and virtuous, and may have a tender conscience, which
 decides with perfect accuracy in particular cases, without on that
 account being in a position to investigate and explain in the
 abstract the ethical significance of action.
allegory has an
 entirely different relation to poetry from that which it has to
 plastic and pictorial art, and although it is to be rejected in the
 latter, it is not only permissible, but very serviceable to the
 former. for in plastic and pictorial art it leads away from what is
 perceptibly given, the proper object of all art, to abstract
 thoughts; but in poetry the relation is reversed; for here what is
 directly given in words is the concept, and the first aim is to
 lead from this to the object of perception, the representation of
 which must be undertaken by the imagination of the hearer. if in
 plastic and pictorial art we are led from what is immediately given
 to something else, this must always be a conception, because here
 only the abstract cannot be given directly; but a conception must
 never be the source, and its communication must never be the end of
 a work of art. in poetry, on the contrary, the conception is the
 material, the immediately given, and therefore we may very well
 leave it, in order to call up perceptions which are quite
 different, and in which the end is reached. many a conception or
 abstract thought may be quite indispensable to the connection of a
 poem, which is yet, in itself and directly, quite incapable of
 being perceived; and then it is often made perceptible by means of
 some example which is subsumed under it. this takes place in every
 trope, every metaphor, simile, parable, and allegory, all of which
 differ only in the length and completeness of their expression.
 therefore, in the arts which employ language as their medium,
 similes and allegories are of striking effect. how beautifully
 cervantes [pg
 says of sleep in order to express the fact that it frees us from
 all spiritual and bodily suffering, “it is
 a mantle that covers all mankind.” how beautifully kleist
 expresses allegorically the thought that philosophers and men of
 science enlighten mankind, in the line, “those whose midnight lamp lights the world.”
 how strongly and sensuously homer describes the harmful ate when he
 says: “she has tender feet, for she walks
 not on the hard earth, but treads on the heads of men” (il.
 xix. .) how forcibly we are struck by menenius agrippa's fable of
 the belly and the limbs, addressed to the people of rome when they
 seceded. how beautifully plato's figure of the cave, at the
 beginning of the seventh book of the “republic” to which we have already referred,
 expresses a very abstract philosophical dogma. the fable of
 persephone is also to be regarded as a deeply significant allegory
 of philosophical tendency, for she became subject to the nether
 world by tasting a pomegranate. this becomes peculiarly
 enlightening from goethe's treatment of the fable, as an episode in
 the triumph der empfindsamkeit,
 which is beyond all praise. three detailed allegorical works are
 known to me, one, open and avowed, is the incomparable “criticon” of balthasar gracian. it consists of
 a great rich web of connected and highly ingenious allegories, that
 serve here as the fair clothing of moral truths, to which he thus
 imparts the most perceptible form, and astonishes us by the
 richness of his invention. the two others are concealed allegories,
 “don quixote” and “gulliver's travels.” the first is an allegory
 of the life of every man, who will not, like others, be careful,
 merely for his own welfare, but follows some objective, ideal end,
 which has taken possession of his thoughts and will; and certainly,
 in this world, he has then a strange appearance. in the case of
 gulliver we have only to take everything physical as spiritual or
 intellectual, in order to see what the “satirical rogue,” as hamlet would call him,
 meant by it. such, then, in the [pg ] poetical allegory, the conception is always
 the given, which it tries to make perceptible by means of a
 picture; it may sometimes be expressed or assisted by a painted
 picture. such a picture will not be regarded as a work of art, but
 only as a significant symbol, and it makes no claim to pictorial,
 but only to poetical worth. such is that beautiful allegorical
 vignette of lavater's, which must be so heartening to every
 defender of truth: a hand holding a light is stung by a wasp, while
 gnats are burning themselves in the flame above; underneath is the
 motto:
“and
 although it singes the wings of the gnats,
destroys their heads and all
 their little brains,
light is still light;
and although i am stung by the
 angriest wasp,
i will not let it go.”
to this class
 also belongs the gravestone with the burnt-out, smoking candle, and
 the inscription—
“when it
 is out, it becomes clear
whether the candle was tallow or
 wax.”
finally, of this
 kind is an old german genealogical tree, in which the last
 representative of a very ancient family thus expresses his
 determination to live his life to the end in abstinence and perfect
 chastity, and therefore to let his race die out; he represents
 himself at the root of the high-branching tree cutting it over
 himself with shears. in general all those symbols referred to
 above, commonly called emblems, which might also be defined as
 short painted fables with obvious morals, belong to this class.
 allegories of this kind are always to be regarded as belonging to
 poetry, not to painting, and as justified thereby; moreover, the
 pictorial execution is here always a matter of secondary
 importance, and no more is demanded of it than that it shall
 represent the thing so that we can recognise it. but in poetry, as
 in plastic art, the allegory passes into the symbol if there is
 merely [pg
 an arbitrary connection between what it presented to perception and
 the abstract significance of it. for as all symbolism rests, at
 bottom, on an agreement, the symbol has this among other
 disadvantages, that in time its meaning is forgotten, and then it
 is dumb. who would guess why the fish is a symbol of christianity
 if he did not know? only a champollion; for it is entirely a
 phonetic hieroglyphic. therefore, as a poetical allegory, the
 revelation of john stands much in the same position as the reliefs
 with magnus deus sol mithra, which
 are still constantly being explained.
§ . if now,
 with the exposition which has been given of art in general, we turn
 from plastic and pictorial art to poetry, we shall have no doubt
 that its aim also is the revelation of the ideas, the grades of the
 objectification of will, and the communication of them to the
 hearer with the distinctness and vividness with which the poetical
 sense comprehends them. ideas are essentially perceptible; if,
 therefore, in poetry only abstract conceptions are directly
 communicated through words, it is yet clearly the intention to make
 the hearer perceive the ideas of life in the representatives of
 these conceptions, and this can only take place through the
 assistance of his own imagination. but in order to set the
 imagination to work for the accomplishment of this end, the
 abstract conceptions, which are the immediate material of poetry as
 of dry prose, must be so arranged that their spheres intersect each
 other in such a way that none of them can remain in its abstract
 universality; but, instead of it, a perceptible representative
 appears to the imagination; and this is always further modified by
 the words of the poet according to what his intention may be. as
 the chemist obtains solid precipitates by combining perfectly clear
 and transparent fluids; the poet understands how to precipitate, as
 it were, the concrete, the individual, the perceptible idea, out of
 the abstract and transparent universality of the concepts by the
 manner in which he [pg
 combines them. for the idea can only be known by perception; and
 knowledge of the idea is the end of art. the skill of a master, in
 poetry as in chemistry, enables us always to obtain the precise
 precipitate we intended. this end is assisted by the numerous
 epithets in poetry, by means of which the universality of every
 concept is narrowed more and more till we reach the perceptible.
 homer attaches to almost every substantive an adjective, whose
 concept intersects and considerably diminishes the sphere of the
 concept of the substantive, which is thus brought so much the
 nearer to perception: for example—
(“occidit
 vero in oceanum splendidum lumen solis,
trahens noctem nigram super almam
 terram.”)
and—
“where
 gentle winds from the blue heavens sigh,
there stand the myrtles still, the laurel
 high,”—
calls up before
 the imagination by means of a few concepts the whole delight of a
 southern clime.
rhythm and rhyme
 are quite peculiar aids to poetry. i can give no other explanation
 of their incredibly powerful effect than that our faculties of
 perception have received from time, to which they are essentially
 bound, some quality on account of which we inwardly follow, and, as
 it were, consent to each regularly recurring sound. in this way
 rhythm and rhyme are partly a means of holding our attention,
 because we willingly follow the poem read, and partly they produce
 in us a blind consent to what is read prior to any judgment, and
 this gives the poem a certain emphatic power of convincing
 independent of all reasons.
from the general
 nature of the material, that is, the concepts, which poetry uses to
 communicate the ideas, the extent of its province is very great.
 the whole of [pg
 nature, the ideas of all grades, can be represented by means of it,
 for it proceeds according to the idea it has to impart, so that its
 representations are sometimes descriptive, sometimes narrative, and
 sometimes directly dramatic. if, in the representation of the lower
 grades of the objectivity of will, plastic and pictorial art
 generally surpass it, because lifeless nature, and even brute
 nature, reveals almost its whole being in a single well-chosen
 moment; man, on the contrary, so far as he does not express himself
 by the mere form and expression of his person, but through a series
 of actions and the accompanying thoughts and emotions, is the
 principal object of poetry, in which no other art can compete with
 it, for here the progress or movement which cannot be represented
 in plastic or pictorial art just suits its purpose.
the revelation
 of the idea, which is the highest grade of the objectivity of will,
 the representation of man in the connected series of his efforts
 and actions, is thus the great problem of poetry. it is true that
 both experience and history teach us to know man; yet oftener men
 than man, i.e., they give us empirical
 notes of the behaviour of men to each other, from which we may
 frame rules for our own conduct, oftener than they afford us deep
 glimpses of the inner nature of man. the latter function, however,
 is by no means entirely denied them; but as often as it is the
 nature of mankind itself that discloses itself to us in history or
 in our own experience, we have comprehended our experience, and the
 historian has comprehended history, with artistic eyes, poetically,
 i.e., according to the idea, not
 the phenomenon, in its inner nature, not in its relations. our own
 experience is the indispensable condition of understanding poetry
 as of understanding history; for it is, so to speak, the dictionary
 of the language that both speak. but history is related to poetry
 as portrait-painting is related to historical painting; the one
 gives us the true in the individual, the other the true in the
 universal; the one has the [pg ] truth of the phenomenon, and can therefore
 verify it from the phenomenal, the other has the truth of the idea,
 which can be found in no particular phenomenon, but yet speaks to
 us from them all. the poet from deliberate choice represents
 significant characters in significant situations; the historian
 takes both as they come. indeed, he must regard and select the
 circumstances and the persons, not with reference to their inward
 and true significance, which expresses the idea, but according to
 the outward, apparent, and relatively important significance with
 regard to the connection and the consequences. he must consider
 nothing in and for itself in its essential character and
 expression, but must look at everything in its relations, in its
 connection, in its influence upon what follows, and especially upon
 its own age. therefore he will not overlook an action of a king,
 though of little significance, and in itself quite common, because
 it has results and influence. and, on the other hand, actions of
 the highest significance of particular and very eminent individuals
 are not to be recorded by him if they have no consequences. for his
 treatment follows the principle of sufficient reason, and
 apprehends the phenomenon, of which this principle is the form. but
 the poet comprehends the idea, the inner nature of man apart from
 all relations, outside all time, the adequate objectivity of the
 thing-in-itself, at its highest grade. even in that method of
 treatment which is necessary for the historian, the inner nature
 and significance of the phenomena, the kernel of all these shells,
 can never be entirely lost. he who seeks for it, at any rate, may
 find it and recognise it. yet that which is significant in itself,
 not in its relations, the real unfolding of the idea, will be found
 far more accurately and distinctly in poetry than in history, and,
 therefore, however paradoxical it may sound, far more really
 genuine inner truth is to be attributed to poetry than to history.
 for the historian must accurately follow the particular event
 according to [pg
 life, as it develops itself in time in the manifold tangled chains
 of causes and effects. it is, however, impossible that he can have
 all the data for this; he cannot have seen all and discovered all.
 he is forsaken at every moment by the original of his picture, or a
 false one substitutes itself for it, and this so constantly that i
 think i may assume that in all history the false outweighs the
 true. the poet, on the contrary, has comprehended the idea of man
 from some definite side which is to be represented; thus it is the
 nature of his own self that objectifies itself in it for him. his
 knowledge, as we explained above when speaking of sculpture, is
 half a priori; his
 ideal stands before his mind firm, distinct, brightly illuminated,
 and cannot forsake him; therefore he shows us, in the mirror of his
 mind, the idea pure and distinct, and his delineation of it down to
 the minutest particular is true as life itself. the
 great ancient historians are, therefore, in those particulars in
 which their data fail them, for example, in the speeches of their
 heroes—poets; indeed their whole manner of handling their material
 approaches [pg
 to the epic. but this gives their representations unity, and
 enables them to retain inner truth, even when outward truth was not
 accessible, or indeed was falsified. and as we compared history to
 portrait-painting, in contradistinction to poetry, which
 corresponds to historical painting, we find that winckelmann's
 maxim, that the portrait ought to be the ideal of the individual,
 was followed by the ancient historians, for they represent the
 individual in such a way as to bring out that side of the idea of
 man which is expressed in it. modern historians, on the contrary,
 with few exceptions, give us in general only “a dust-bin and a lumber-room, and at the most a
 chronicle of the principal political events.” therefore,
 whoever desires to know man in his inner nature, identical in all
 its phenomena and developments, to know him according to the idea,
 will find that the works of the great, immortal poet present a far
 truer, more distinct picture, than the historians can ever give.
 for even the best of the historians are, as poets, far from the
 first; and moreover their hands are tied. in this aspect the
 relation between the historian and the poet may be illustrated by
 the following comparison. the mere, pure historian, who works only
 according to data, is like a man, who without any knowledge of
 mathematics, has investigated the relations of certain figures,
 which he has accidentally found, by measuring them; and the problem
 thus empirically solved is affected of course by all the errors of
 the drawn figure. the poet, on the other hand, is like the
 mathematician, who constructs these relations a priori in pure perception, and
 expresses them not as they actually are in the drawn figure, but as
 they are in the idea, which the drawing is intended to render for
 the senses. therefore schiller says:—
“what
 has never anywhere come to pass,
that alone never grows
 old.”
[pg ]
indeed i must
 attribute greater value to biographies, and especially to
 autobiographies, in relation to the knowledge of the nature of man,
 than to history proper, at least as it is commonly handled. partly
 because in the former the data can be collected more accurately and
 completely than in the latter; partly, because in history proper,
 it is not so much men as nations and heroes that act, and the
 individuals who do appear, seem so far off, surrounded with such
 pomp and circumstance, clothed in the stiff robes of state, or
 heavy, inflexible armour, that it is really hard through all this
 to recognise the human movements. on the other hand, the life of
 the individual when described with truth, in a narrow sphere, shows
 the conduct of men in all its forms and subtilties, the excellence,
 the virtue, and even holiness of a few, the perversity, meanness,
 and knavery of most, the dissolute profligacy of some. besides, in
 the only aspect we are considering here, that of the inner
 significance of the phenomenal, it is quite the same whether the
 objects with which the action is concerned, are, relatively
 considered, trifling or important, farm-houses or kingdoms: for all
 these things in themselves are without significance, and obtain it
 only in so far as the will is moved by them. the motive has
 significance only through its relation to the will, while the
 relation which it has as a thing to other things like itself, does
 not concern us here. as a circle of one inch in diameter, and a
 circle of forty million miles in diameter, have precisely the same
 geometrical properties, so are the events and the history of a
 village and a kingdom essentially the same; and we may study and
 learn to know mankind as well in the one as in the other. it is
 also a mistake to suppose that autobiographies are full of deceit
 and dissimulation. on the contrary, lying (though always possible)
 is perhaps more difficult there than elsewhere. dissimulation is
 easiest in mere conversation; indeed, though it may sound
 paradoxical, it is really more [pg ] difficult even in a letter. for in the case
 of a letter the writer is alone, and looks into himself, and not
 out on the world, so that what is strange and distant does not
 easily approach him; and he has not the test of the impression made
 upon another before his eyes. but the receiver of the letter
 peruses it quietly in a mood unknown to the writer, reads it
 repeatedly and at different times, and thus easily finds out the
 concealed intention. we also get to know an author as a man most
 easily from his books, because all these circumstances act here
 still more strongly and permanently. and in an autobiography it is
 so difficult to dissimulate, that perhaps there does not exist a
 single one that is not, as a whole, more true, than any history
 that ever was written. the man who writes his own life surveys it
 as a whole, the particular becomes small, the near becomes distant,
 the distant becomes near again, the motives that influenced him
 shrink; he seats himself at the confessional, and has done so of
 his own free will; the spirit of lying does not so easily take hold
 of him here, for there is also in every man an inclination to truth
 which has first to be overcome whenever he lies, and which here has
 taken up a specially strong position. the relation between
 biography and the history of nations may be made clear for
 perception by means of the following comparison: history shows us
 mankind as a view from a high mountain shows us nature; we see much
 at a time, wide stretches, great masses, but nothing is distinct
 nor recognisable in all the details of its own peculiar nature. on
 the other hand, the representation of the life of the individual
 shows us the man, as we see nature if we go about among her trees,
 plants, rocks, and waters. but in landscape-painting, in which the
 artist lets us look at nature with his eyes, the knowledge of the
 ideas, and the condition of pure will-less knowing, which is
 demanded by these, is made much easier for us; and, in the same
 way, poetry is far superior both to [pg ] history and biography, in the representation
 of the ideas which may be looked for in all three. for here also
 genius holds up to us the magic glass, in which all that is
 essential and significant appears before us collected and placed in
 the clearest light, and what is accidental and foreign is left
 out.
the
 representation of the idea of man, which is the work of the poet,
 may be performed, so that what is represented is also the
 representer. this is the case in lyrical poetry, in songs, properly
 so called, in which the poet only perceives vividly his own state
 and describes it. thus a certain subjectivity is essential to this
 kind of poetry from the nature of its object. again, what is to be
 represented may be entirely different from him who represents it,
 as is the case in all other kinds of poetry, in which the poet more
 or less conceals himself behind his representation, and at last
 disappears altogether. in the ballad the poet still expresses to
 some extent his own state through the tone and proportion of the
 whole; therefore, though much more objective than the lyric, it has
 yet something subjective. this becomes less in the idyll, still
 less in the romantic poem, almost entirely disappears in the true
 epic, and even to the last vestige in the drama, which is the most
 objective and, in more than one respect, the completest and most
 difficult form of poetry. the lyrical form of poetry is
 consequently the easiest, and although art, as a whole, belongs
 only to the true man of genius, who so rarely appears, even a man
 who is not in general very remarkable may produce a beautiful song
 if, by actual strong excitement from without, some inspiration
 raises his mental powers; for all that is required for this is a
 lively perception of his own state at a moment of emotional
 excitement. this is proved by the existence of many single songs by
 individuals who have otherwise remained unknown; especially the
 german national songs, of which we have an exquisite collection
 [pg ] in the “wunderhorn;” and also by innumerable love-songs
 and other songs of the people in all languages;—for to seize the
 mood of a moment and embody it in a song is the whole achievement
 of this kind of poetry. yet in the lyrics of true poets the inner
 nature of all mankind is reflected, and all that millions of past,
 present, and future men have found, or will find, in the same
 situations, which are constantly recurring, finds its exact
 expression in them. and because these situations, by constant
 recurrence, are permanent as man himself and always call up the
 same sensations, the lyrical productions of genuine poets remain
 through thousands of years true, powerful, and fresh. but if the
 poet is always the universal man, then all that has ever moved a
 human heart, all that human nature in any situation has ever
 produced from itself, all that dwells and broods in any human
 breast—is his theme and his material, and also all the rest of
 nature. therefore the poet may just as well sing of voluptuousness
 as of mysticism, be anacreon or angelus silesius, write tragedies
 or comedies, represent the sublime or the common mind—according to
 humour or vocation. and no one has the right to prescribe to the
 poet what he ought to be—noble and sublime, moral, pious,
 christian, one thing or another, still less to reproach him because
 he is one thing and not another. he is the mirror of mankind, and
 brings to its consciousness what it feels and does.
if we now
 consider more closely the nature of the lyric proper, and select as
 examples exquisite and pure models, not those that approach in any
 way to some other form of poetry, such as the ballad, the elegy,
 the hymn, the epigram, &c., we shall find that the peculiar
 nature of the lyric, in the narrowest sense, is this: it is the
 subject of will, i.e., his own volition, which
 the consciousness of the singer feels; often as a released and
 satisfied desire (joy), but still oftener as a restricted desire
 (grief), always as an emotion, a passion, a moved frame of mind.
 [pg ] besides this,
 however, and along with it, by the sight of surrounding nature, the
 singer becomes conscious of himself as the subject of pure,
 will-less knowing, whose unbroken blissful peace now appears, in
 contrast to the stress of desire which is always restricted and
 always needy. the feeling of this contrast, this alternation, is
 really what the lyric as a whole expresses, and what principally
 constitutes the lyrical state of mind. in it pure knowing comes to
 us, as it were, to deliver us from desire and its stain; we follow,
 but only for an instant; desire, the remembrance of our own
 personal ends, tears us anew from peaceful contemplation; yet ever
 again the next beautiful surrounding in which the pure will-less
 knowledge presents itself to us, allures us away from desire.
 therefore, in the lyric and the lyrical mood, desire (the personal
 interest of the ends), and pure perception of the surrounding
 presented, are wonderfully mingled with each other; connections
 between them are sought for and imagined; the subjective
 disposition, the affection of the will, imparts its own hue to the
 perceived surrounding, and conversely, the surroundings communicate
 the reflex of their colour to the will. the true lyric is the
 expression of the whole of this mingled and divided state of mind.
 in order to make clear by examples this abstract analysis of a
 frame of mind that is very far from all abstraction, any of the
 immortal songs of goethe may be taken. as specially adapted for
 this end i shall recommend only a few: “the
 shepherd's lament,” “welcome and
 farewell,” “to the moon,”
“on the lake,” “autumn;” also the songs in the “wunderhorn” are excellent examples;
 particularly the one which begins, “o
 bremen, i must now leave thee.” as a comical and happy
 parody of the lyrical character a song of voss strikes me as
 remarkable. it describes the feeling of a drunk plumber falling
 from a tower, who observes in passing that the clock on the tower
 is at half-past eleven, a remark which is quite foreign to his
 condition, and thus [pg
 belongs to knowledge free from will. whoever accepts the view that
 has been expressed of the lyrical frame of mind, will also allow,
 that it is the sensuous and poetical knowledge of the principle
 which i established in my essay on the principle of sufficient
 reason, and have also referred to in this work, that the identity
 of the subject of knowing with that of willing may be called the
 miracle κατ᾽ εξοχην; so that the poetical effect of the lyric rests
 finally on the truth of that principle. in the course of life these
 two subjects, or, in popular language, head and heart, are ever
 becoming further apart; men are always separating more between
 their subjective feeling and their objective knowledge. in the
 child the two are still entirely blended together; it scarcely
 knows how to distinguish itself from its surroundings, it is at one
 with them. in the young man all perception chiefly affects feeling
 and mood, and even mingles with it, as byron very beautifully
 expresses—
“i live
 not in myself, but i become
portion of that around me; and
 to me
high mountains are a
 feeling.”
this is why the
 youth clings so closely to the perceptible and outward side of
 things; this is why he is only fit for lyrical poetry, and only the
 full-grown man is capable of the drama. the old man we can think of
 as at the most an epic poet, like ossian, and homer, for narration
 is characteristic of old age.
in the more
 objective kinds of poetry, especially in the romance, the epic, and
 the drama, the end, the revelation of the idea of man, is
 principally attained by two means, by true and profound
 representation of significant characters, and by the invention of
 pregnant situations in which they disclose themselves. for as it is
 incumbent upon the chemist not only to exhibit the simple elements,
 pure and genuine, and their principal compounds, but also to expose
 them to the influence of such reagents as will [pg ] clearly and strikingly bring out their
 peculiar qualities, so is it incumbent on the poet not only to
 present to us significant characters truly and faithfully as nature
 itself; but, in order that we may get to know them, he must place
 them in those situations in which their peculiar qualities will
 fully unfold themselves, and appear distinctly in sharp outline;
 situations which are therefore called significant. in real life,
 and in history, situations of this kind are rarely brought about by
 chance, and they stand alone, lost and concealed in the multitude
 of those which are insignificant. the complete significance of the
 situations ought to distinguish the romance, the epic, and the
 drama from real life as completely as the arrangement and selection
 of significant characters. in both, however, absolute truth is a
 necessary condition of their effect, and want of unity in the
 characters, contradiction either of themselves or of the nature of
 humanity in general, as well as impossibility, or very great
 improbability in the events, even in mere accessories, offend just
 as much in poetry as badly drawn figures, false perspective, or
 wrong lighting in painting. for both in poetry and painting we
 demand the faithful mirror of life, of man, of the world, only made
 more clear by the representation, and more significant by the
 arrangement. for there is only one end of all the arts, the
 representation of the ideas; and their essential difference lies
 simply in the different grades of the objectification of will to
 which the ideas that are to be represented belong. this also
 determines the material of the representation. thus the arts which
 are most widely separated may yet throw light on each other. for
 example, in order to comprehend fully the ideas of water it is not
 sufficient to see it in the quiet pond or in the evenly-flowing
 stream; but these ideas disclose themselves fully only when the
 water appears under all circumstances and exposed to all kinds of
 obstacles. the effects of the varied circumstances and obstacles
 give it the opportunity of fully [pg ] exhibiting all its qualities. this is why we
 find it beautiful when it tumbles, rushes, and foams, or leaps into
 the air, or falls in a cataract of spray; or, lastly, if
 artificially confined it springs up in a fountain. thus showing
 itself different under different circumstances, it yet always
 faithfully asserts its character; it is just as natural to it to
 spout up as to lie in glassy stillness; it is as ready for the one
 as for the other as soon as the circumstances appear. now, what the
 engineer achieves with the fluid matter of water, the architect
 achieves with the rigid matter of stone, and just this the epic or
 dramatic poet achieves with the idea of man. unfolding and
 rendering distinct the idea expressing itself in the object of
 every art, the idea of the will which objectifies itself at each
 grade, is the common end of all the arts. the life of man, as it
 shows itself for the most part in the real world, is like the
 water, as it is generally seen in the pond and the river; but in
 the epic, the romance, the tragedy, selected characters are placed
 in those circumstances in which all their special qualities unfold
 themselves, the depths of the human heart are revealed, and become
 visible in extraordinary and very significant actions. thus poetry
 objectifies the idea of man, an idea which has the peculiarity of
 expressing itself in highly individual characters.
tragedy is to be
 regarded, and is recognised as the summit of poetical art, both on
 account of the greatness of its effect and the difficulty of its
 achievement. it is very significant for our whole system, and well
 worthy of observation, that the end of this highest poetical
 achievement is the representation of the terrible side of life. the
 unspeakable pain, the wail of humanity, the triumph of evil, the
 scornful mastery of chance, and the irretrievable fall of the just
 and innocent, is here presented to us; and in this lies a
 significant hint of the nature of the world and of existence. it is
 the strife of will with itself, which here, completely unfolded at
 the [pg ] highest grade of its
 objectivity, comes into fearful prominence. it becomes visible in
 the suffering of men, which is now introduced, partly through
 chance and error, which appear as the rulers of the world,
 personified as fate, on account of their insidiousness, which even
 reaches the appearance of design; partly it proceeds from man
 himself, through the self-mortifying efforts of a few, through the
 wickedness and perversity of most. it is one and the same will that
 lives and appears in them all, but whose phenomena fight against
 each other and destroy each other. in one individual it appears
 powerfully, in another more weakly; in one more subject to reason,
 and softened by the light of knowledge, in another less so, till at
 last, in some single case, this knowledge, purified and heightened
 by suffering itself, reaches the point at which the phenomenon, the
 veil of mâya, no longer deceives it. it sees through the form of
 the phenomenon, the principium
 individuationis. the egoism which rests on this
 perishes with it, so that now the motives
 that were so powerful before have lost their might, and instead of
 them the complete knowledge of the nature of the world, which has a
 quieting effect on the will,
 produces resignation, the surrender not merely of life, but of the
 very will to live. thus we see in tragedies the noblest men, after
 long conflict and suffering, at last renounce the ends they have so
 keenly followed, and all the pleasures of life for ever, or else
 freely and joyfully surrender life itself. so is it with the
 steadfast prince of calderon; with gretchen in “faust;” with hamlet, whom his friend horatio
 would willingly follow, but is bade remain a while, and in this
 harsh world draw his breath in pain, to tell the story of hamlet,
 and clear his memory; so also is it with the maid of orleans, the
 bride of messina; they all die purified by suffering, i.e.,
 after the will to live which was formerly in them is dead. in the
 “mohammed” of voltaire this is
 actually expressed in the concluding [pg ] words which the dying palmira addresses to
 mohammad: “the world is for tyrants:
 live!” on the other hand, the demand for so-called poetical
 justice rests on entire misconception of the nature of tragedy,
 and, indeed, of the nature of the world itself. it boldly appears
 in all its dulness in the criticisms which dr. samuel johnson made
 on particular plays of shakespeare, for he very naïvely laments its
 entire absence. and its absence is certainly obvious, for in what
 has ophelia, desdemona, or cordelia offended? but only the dull,
 optimistic, protestant-rationalistic, or peculiarly jewish view of
 life will make the demand for poetical justice, and find
 satisfaction in it. the true sense of tragedy is the deeper
 insight, that it is not his own individual sins that the hero
 atones for, but original sin, i.e., the crime of existence
 itself:
“pues el
 delito mayor
del hombre es haber
 nacido;”
(“for the
 greatest crime of man
is that he was born;”)
as calderon
 exactly expresses it.
i shall allow
 myself only one remark, more closely concerning the treatment of
 tragedy. the representation of a great misfortune is alone
 essential to tragedy. but the many different ways in which this is
 introduced by the poet may be brought under three specific
 conceptions. it may happen by means of a character of extraordinary
 wickedness, touching the utmost limits of possibility, who becomes
 the author of the misfortune; examples of this kind are richard
 iii., iago in “othello,” shylock in
 “the merchant of venice,” franz
 moor, phædra of euripides, creon in the “antigone,” &c., &c. secondly, it may
 happen through blind fate, i.e., chance and error; a true
 pattern of this kind is the œdipus rex of sophocles, the
 “trachiniæ” also; and in general
 most of the tragedies of the ancients belong [pg ] to this class. among modern tragedies,
 “romeo and juliet,” “tancred” by voltaire, and “the bride of messina,” are examples. lastly,
 the misfortune may be brought about by the mere position of the
 dramatis personæ with regard to
 each other, through their relations; so that there is no need
 either for a tremendous error or an unheard-of accident, nor yet
 for a character whose wickedness reaches the limits of human
 possibility; but characters of ordinary morality, under
 circumstances such as often occur, are so situated with regard to
 each other that their position compels them, knowingly and with
 their eyes open, to do each other the greatest injury, without any
 one of them being entirely in the wrong. this last kind of tragedy
 seems to me far to surpass the other two, for it shows us the
 greatest misfortune, not as an exception, not as something
 occasioned by rare circumstances or monstrous characters, but as
 arising easily and of itself out of the actions and characters of
 men, indeed almost as essential to them, and thus brings it
 terribly near to us. in the other two kinds we may look on the
 prodigious fate and the horrible wickedness as terrible powers
 which certainly threaten us, but only from afar, which we may very
 well escape without taking refuge in renunciation. but in the last
 kind of tragedy we see that those powers which destroy happiness
 and life are such that their path to us also is open at every
 moment; we see the greatest sufferings brought about by
 entanglements that our fate might also partake of, and through
 actions that perhaps we also are capable of performing, and so
 could not complain of injustice; then shuddering we feel ourselves
 already in the midst of hell. this last kind of tragedy is also the
 most difficult of achievement; for the greatest effect has to be
 produced in it with the least use of means and causes of movement,
 merely through the position and distribution of the characters;
 therefore even in many of the best tragedies this difficulty is
 [pg ] evaded. yet one
 tragedy may be referred to as a perfect model of this kind, a
 tragedy which in other respects is far surpassed by more than one
 work of the same great master; it is “clavigo.” “hamlet” belongs to a certain extent to this
 class, as far as the relation of hamlet to laertes and ophelia is
 concerned. “wallenstein” has also
 this excellence. “faust” belongs
 entirely to this class, if we regard the events connected with
 gretchen and her brother as the principal action; also the
 “cid” of corneille, only that it
 lacks the tragic conclusion, while on the contrary the analogous
 relation of max to thecla has it.
§ . now that
 we have considered all the fine arts in the general way that is
 suitable to our point of view, beginning with architecture, the
 peculiar end of which is to elucidate the objectification of will
 at the lowest grades of its visibility, in which it shows itself as
 the dumb unconscious tendency of the mass in accordance with laws,
 and yet already reveals a breach of the unity of will with itself
 in a conflict between gravity and rigidity—and ending with the
 consideration of tragedy, which presents to us at the highest
 grades of the objectification of will this very conflict with
 itself in terrible magnitude and distinctness; we find that there
 is still another fine art which has been excluded from our
 consideration, and had to be excluded, for in the systematic
 connection of our exposition there was no fitting place for it—i
 mean music. it stands alone, quite cut
 off from all the other arts. in it we do not recognise the copy or
 repetition of any idea of existence in the world. yet it is such a
 great and exceedingly noble art, its effect on the inmost nature of
 man is so powerful, and it is so entirely and deeply understood by
 him in his inmost consciousness as a perfectly universal language,
 the distinctness of which surpasses even that of the perceptible
 world itself, that we certainly have more to [pg ] look for in it than an exercitum arithmeticæ occultum nescientis se
 numerare animi, which
 leibnitz called it. yet he was perfectly right, as he considered
 only its immediate external significance, its form. but if it were
 nothing more, the satisfaction which it affords would be like that
 which we feel when a sum in arithmetic comes out right, and could
 not be that intense pleasure with which we see the deepest recesses
 of our nature find utterance. from our standpoint, therefore, at
 which the æsthetic effect is the criterion, we must attribute to
 music a far more serious and deep significance, connected with the
 inmost nature of the world and our own self, and in reference to
 which the arithmetical proportions, to which it may be reduced, are
 related, not as the thing signified, but merely as the sign. that
 in some sense music must be related to the world as the
 representation to the thing represented, as the copy to the
 original, we may conclude from the analogy of the other arts, all
 of which possess this character, and affect us on the whole in the
 same way as it does, only that the effect of music is stronger,
 quicker, more necessary and infallible. further, its representative
 relation to the world must be very deep, absolutely true, and
 strikingly accurate, because it is instantly understood by every
 one, and has the appearance of a certain infallibility, because its
 form may be reduced to perfectly definite rules expressed in
 numbers, from which it cannot free itself without entirely ceasing
 to be music. yet the point of comparison between music and the
 world, the respect in which it stands to the world in the relation
 of a copy or repetition, is very obscure. men have practised music
 in all ages without being able to account for this; content to
 understand it directly, they renounce all claim to an abstract
 conception of this direct understanding itself.
i gave my mind
 entirely up to the impression of music [pg ] in all its forms, and then returned to
 reflection and the system of thought expressed in the present work,
 and thus i arrived at an explanation of the inner nature of music
 and of the nature of its imitative relation to the world—which from
 analogy had necessarily to be presupposed—an explanation which is
 quite sufficient for myself, and satisfactory to my investigation,
 and which will doubtless be equally evident to any one who has
 followed me thus far and has agreed with my view of the world. yet
 i recognise the fact that it is essentially impossible to prove
 this explanation, for it assumes and establishes a relation of
 music, as idea, to that which from its nature can never be idea,
 and music will have to be regarded as the copy of an original which
 can never itself be directly presented as idea. i can therefore do
 no more than state here, at the conclusion of this third book,
 which has been principally devoted to the consideration of the
 arts, the explanation of the marvellous art of music which
 satisfies myself, and i must leave the acceptance or denial of my
 view to the effect produced upon each of my readers both by music
 itself and by the whole system of thought communicated in this
 work. moreover, i regard it as necessary, in order to be able to
 assent with full conviction to the exposition of the significance
 of music i am about to give, that one should often listen to music
 with constant reflection upon my theory concerning it, and for this
 again it is necessary to be very familiar with the whole of my
 system of thought.
the (platonic)
 ideas are the adequate objectification of will. to excite or
 suggest the knowledge of these by means of the representation of
 particular things (for works of art themselves are always
 representations of particular things) is the end of all the other
 arts, which can only be attained by a corresponding change in the
 knowing subject. thus all these arts objectify the will indirectly
 only by means of the ideas; and since our world is nothing but the
 manifestation of the ideas in [pg ] multiplicity, though their entrance into the
 principium individuationis (the
 form of the knowledge possible for the individual as such), music
 also, since it passes over the ideas, is entirely independent of
 the phenomenal world, ignores it altogether, could to a certain
 extent exist if there was no world at all, which cannot be said of
 the other arts. music is as direct an objectification and copy
 of the whole will as the world itself, nay,
 even as the ideas, whose multiplied manifestation constitutes the
 world of individual things. music is thus by no means like the
 other arts, the copy of the ideas, but the copy of the will
 itself, whose objectivity the ideas are. this is why
 the effect of music is so much more powerful and penetrating than
 that of the other arts, for they speak only of shadows, but it
 speaks of the thing itself. since, however, it is the same will
 which objectifies itself both in the ideas and in music, though in
 quite different ways, there must be, not indeed a direct likeness,
 but yet a parallel, an analogy, between music and the ideas whose
 manifestation in multiplicity and incompleteness is the visible
 world. the establishing of this analogy will facilitate, as an
 illustration, the understanding of this exposition, which is so
 difficult on account of the obscurity of the subject.
i recognise in
 the deepest tones of harmony, in the bass, the lowest grades of the
 objectification of will, unorganised nature, the mass of the
 planet. it is well known that all the high notes which are easily
 sounded, and die away more quickly, are produced by the vibration
 in their vicinity of the deep bass-notes. when, also, the low notes
 sound, the high notes always sound faintly, and it is a law of
 harmony that only those high notes may accompany a bass-note which
 actually already sound along with it of themselves (its sons harmoniques) on account of
 its vibration. this is analogous to the fact that the whole of the
 bodies and organisations of nature must be regarded as having come
 into existence through gradual development out of the mass of the
 planet; this [pg
 is both their supporter and their source, and the same relation
 subsists between the high notes and the bass. there is a limit of
 depth, below which no sound is audible. this corresponds to the
 fact that no matter can be perceived without form and quality,
 i.e., without the manifestation
 of a force which cannot be further explained, in which an idea
 expresses itself, and, more generally, that no matter can be
 entirely without will. thus, as a certain pitch is inseparable from
 the note as such, so a certain grade of the manifestation of will
 is inseparable from matter. bass is thus, for us, in harmony what
 unorganised nature, the crudest mass, upon which all rests, and
 from which everything originates and develops, is in the world.
 now, further, in the whole of the complemental parts which make up
 the harmony between the bass and the leading voice singing the
 melody, i recognise the whole gradation of the ideas in which the
 will objectifies itself. those nearer to the bass are the lower of
 these grades, the still unorganised, but yet manifold phenomenal
 things; the higher represent to me the world of plants and beasts.
 the definite intervals of the scale are parallel to the definite
 grades of the objectification of will, the definite species in
 nature. the departure from the arithmetical correctness of the
 intervals, through some temperament, or produced by the key
 selected, is analogous to the departure of the individual from the
 type of the species. indeed, even the impure discords, which give
 no definite interval, may be compared to the monstrous abortions
 produced by beasts of two species, or by man and beast. but to all
 these bass and complemental parts which make up the harmony
 there is wanting that connected progress which belongs only to the
 high voice singing the melody, and it alone moves quickly and
 lightly in modulations and runs, while all these others have only a
 slower movement without a connection in each part for itself. the
 deep bass moves most slowly, the representative of the crudest
 mass. its [pg
 rising and falling occurs only by large intervals, in thirds,
 fourths, fifths, never by one tone, unless it is a base
 inverted by double counterpoint. this slow movement is also
 physically essential to it; a quick run or shake in the low notes
 cannot even be imagined. the higher complemental parts, which are
 parallel to animal life, move more quickly, but yet without
 melodious connection and significant progress. the disconnected
 course of all the complemental parts, and their regulation by
 definite laws, is analogous to the fact that in the whole
 irrational world, from the crystal to the most perfect animal, no
 being has a connected consciousness of its own which would make its
 life into a significant whole, and none experiences a succession of
 mental developments, none perfects itself by culture, but
 everything exists always in the same way according to its kind,
 determined by fixed law. lastly, in the melody,
 in the high, singing, principal voice leading the whole and
 progressing with unrestrained freedom, in the unbroken significant
 connection of one thought from beginning to end
 representing a whole, i recognise the highest grade of the
 objectification of will, the intellectual life and effort of man.
 as he alone, because endowed with reason, constantly looks before
 and after on the path of his actual life and its innumerable
 possibilities, and so achieves a course of life which is
 intellectual, and therefore connected as a whole; corresponding to
 this, i say, the melody has significant intentional
 connection from beginning to end. it records, therefore, the
 history of the intellectually enlightened will. this will expresses
 itself in the actual world as the series of its deeds; but melody
 says more, it records the most secret history of this
 intellectually-enlightened will, pictures every excitement, every
 effort, every movement of it, all that which the reason collects
 under the wide and negative concept of feeling, and which it cannot
 apprehend further through its abstract concepts. therefore it has
 always been said that music [pg ] is the language of feeling and of passion, as
 words are the language of reason. plato explains it as ἡ των μελων
 (melodiarum motus, animi affectus
 imitans), de leg. vii.; and also aristotle says: δια
 τι οἱ ρυθμοι και τα μελη, φωνη ουσα, ηθεσιν εοικε (cur numeri musici et modi, qui voces sunt,
 moribus similes sese exhibent?): probl. c. .
now the nature
 of man consists in this, that his will strives, is satisfied and
 strives anew, and so on for ever. indeed, his happiness and
 well-being consist simply in the quick transition from wish to
 satisfaction, and from satisfaction to a new wish. for the absence
 of satisfaction is suffering, the empty longing for a new wish,
 languor, ennui. and corresponding to this
 the nature of melody is a constant digression and deviation from
 the key-note in a thousand ways, not only to the harmonious
 intervals to the third and dominant, but to every tone, to the
 dissonant sevenths and to the superfluous degrees; yet there always
 follows a constant return to the key-note. in all these deviations
 melody expresses the multifarious efforts of will, but always its
 satisfaction also by the final return to an harmonious interval,
 and still more, to the key-note. the composition of melody, the
 disclosure in it of all the deepest secrets of human willing and
 feeling, is the work of genius, whose action, which is more
 apparent here than anywhere else, lies far from all reflection and
 conscious intention, and may be called an inspiration. the
 conception is here, as everywhere in art, unfruitful. the composer
 reveals the inner nature of the world, and expresses the deepest
 wisdom in a language which his reason does not understand; as a
 person under the influence of mesmerism tells things of which he
 has no conception when he awakes. therefore in the composer, more
 than in any other artist, the man is entirely separated and
 distinct from the artist. even in the explanation of this wonderful
 art, the concept shows its poverty [pg ] and limitation. i shall try, however, to
 complete our analogy. as quick transition from wish to
 satisfaction, and from satisfaction to a new wish, is happiness and
 well-being, so quick melodies without great deviations are
 cheerful; slow melodies, striking painful discords, and only
 winding back through many bars to the keynote are, as analogous to
 the delayed and hardly won satisfaction, sad. the delay of the new
 excitement of will, languor, could have no other expression than
 the sustained keynote, the effect of which would soon be
 unbearable; very monotonous and unmeaning melodies approach this
 effect. the short intelligible subjects of quick dance-music seem
 to speak only of easily attained common pleasure. on the other
 hand, the allegro
 maestoso, in elaborate movements, long passages, and
 wide deviations, signifies a greater, nobler effort towards a more
 distant end, and its final attainment. the adagio speaks of the pain of a
 great and noble effort which despises all trifling happiness. but
 how wonderful is the effect of the minor
 and major! how astounding that the
 change of half a tone, the entrance of a minor third instead of a
 major, at once and inevitably forces upon us an anxious painful
 feeling, from which again we are just as instantaneously delivered
 by the major. the adagio
 lengthens in the minor the expression of the keenest pain, and
 becomes even a convulsive wail. dance-music in the minor seems to
 indicate the failure of that trifling happiness which we ought
 rather to despise, seems to speak of the attainment of a lower end
 with toil and trouble. the inexhaustibleness of possible melodies
 corresponds to the inexhaustibleness of nature in difference of
 individuals, physiognomies, and courses of life. the transition
 from one key to an entirely different one, since it altogether
 breaks the connection with what went before, is like death, for the
 individual ends in it; but the will which appeared in this
 individual lives after him as before him, appearing in other
 [pg ] individuals, whose
 consciousness, however, has no connection with his.
but it must
 never be forgotten, in the investigation of all these analogies i
 have pointed out, that music has no direct, but merely an indirect
 relation to them, for it never expresses the phenomenon, but only
 the inner nature, the in-itself of all phenomena, the will itself.
 it does not therefore express this or that particular and definite
 joy, this or that sorrow, or pain, or horror, or delight, or
 merriment, or peace of mind; but joy, sorrow, pain, horror,
 delight, merriment, peace of mind themselves, to a certain extent in
 the abstract, their essential nature, without accessories, and
 therefore without their motives. yet we completely understand them
 in this extracted quintessence. hence it arises that our
 imagination is so easily excited by music, and now seeks to give
 form to that invisible yet actively moved spirit-world which speaks
 to us directly, and clothe it with flesh and blood, i.e.,
 to embody it in an analogous example. this is the origin of the
 song with words, and finally of the opera, the text of which should
 therefore never forsake that subordinate position in order to make
 itself the chief thing and the music a mere means of expressing it,
 which is a great misconception and a piece of utter perversity; for
 music always expresses only the quintessence of life and its
 events, never these themselves, and therefore their differences do
 not always affect it. it is precisely this universality, which
 belongs exclusively to it, together with the greatest
 determinateness, that gives music the high worth which it has as
 the panacea for all our woes. thus, if music is too closely united
 to the words, and tries to form itself according to the events, it
 is striving to speak a language which is not its own. no one has
 kept so free from this mistake as rossini; therefore his music
 speaks its own language so distinctly and
 purely that it requires no words, and produces its full effect when
 rendered by instruments alone.[pg ]
according to all
 this, we may regard the phenomenal world, or nature, and music as
 two different expressions of the same thing, which is therefore
 itself the only medium of their analogy, so that a knowledge of it
 is demanded in order to understand that analogy. music, therefore,
 if regarded as an expression of the world, is in the highest degree
 a universal language, which is related indeed to the universality
 of concepts, much as they are related to the particular things. its
 universality, however, is by no means that empty universality of
 abstraction, but quite of a different kind, and is united with
 thorough and distinct definiteness. in this respect it resembles
 geometrical figures and numbers, which are the universal forms of
 all possible objects of experience and applicable to them all
 a priori, and yet are not
 abstract but perceptible and thoroughly determined. all possible
 efforts, excitements, and manifestations of will, all that goes on
 in the heart of man and that reason includes in the wide, negative
 concept of feeling, may be expressed by the infinite number of
 possible melodies, but always in the universal, in the mere form,
 without the material, always according to the thing-in-itself, not
 the phenomenon, the inmost soul, as it were, of the phenomenon,
 without the body. this deep relation which music has to the true
 nature of all things also explains the fact that suitable music
 played to any scene, action, event, or surrounding seems to
 disclose to us its most secret meaning, and appears as the most
 accurate and distinct commentary upon it. this is so truly the
 case, that whoever gives himself up entirely to the impression of a
 symphony, seems to see all the possible events of life and the
 world take place in himself, yet if he reflects, he can find no
 likeness between the music and the things that passed before his
 mind. for, as we have said, music is distinguished from all the
 other arts by the fact that it is not a copy of the phenomenon, or,
 more accurately, the adequate objectivity of will, but is the
 direct copy of the [pg
 will itself, and therefore exhibits itself as the metaphysical to
 everything physical in the world, and as the thing-in-itself to
 every phenomenon. we might, therefore, just as well call the world
 embodied music as embodied will; and this is the reason why music
 makes every picture, and indeed every scene of real life and of the
 world, at once appear with higher significance, certainly all the
 more in proportion as its melody is analogous to the inner spirit
 of the given phenomenon. it rests upon this that we are able to set
 a poem to music as a song, or a perceptible representation as a
 pantomime, or both as an opera. such particular pictures of human
 life, set to the universal language of music, are never bound to it
 or correspond to it with stringent necessity; but they stand to it
 only in the relation of an example chosen at will to a general
 concept. in the determinateness of the real, they represent that
 which music expresses in the universality of mere form. for
 melodies are to a certain extent, like general concepts, an
 abstraction from the actual. this actual world, then, the world of
 particular things, affords the object of perception, the special
 and individual, the particular case, both to the universality of
 the concepts and to the universality of the melodies. but these two
 universalities are in a certain respect opposed to each other; for
 the concepts contain particulars only as the first forms abstracted
 from perception, as it were, the separated shell of things; thus
 they are, strictly speaking, abstracta; music, on the other
 hand, gives the inmost kernel which precedes all forms, or the
 heart of things. this relation may be very well expressed in the
 language of the schoolmen by saying the concepts are the
 universalia post rem, but music
 gives the universalia ante
 rem, and the real world the universalia in re. to the
 universal significance of a melody to which a poem has been set, it
 is quite possible to set other equally arbitrarily selected
 examples of the universal expressed in this poem corresponding to
 the significance of the melody in the [pg ] same degree. this is why the same composition
 is suitable to many verses; and this is also what makes the
 vaudeville possible. but that in
 general a relation is possible between a composition and a
 perceptible representation rests, as we have said, upon the fact
 that both are simply different expressions of the same inner being
 of the world. when now, in the particular case, such a relation is
 actually given, that is to say, when the composer has been able to
 express in the universal language of music the emotions of will
 which constitute the heart of an event, then the melody of the
 song, the music of the opera, is expressive. but the analogy
 discovered by the composer between the two must have proceeded from
 the direct knowledge of the nature of the world unknown to his
 reason, and must not be an imitation produced with conscious
 intention by means of conceptions, otherwise the music does not
 express the inner nature of the will itself, but merely gives an
 inadequate imitation of its phenomenon. all specially imitative
 music does this; for example, “the
 seasons,” by haydn; also many passages of his “creation,” in which phenomena of the external
 world are directly imitated; also all battle-pieces. such music is
 entirely to be rejected.
the unutterable
 depth of all music by virtue of which it floats through our
 consciousness as the vision of a paradise firmly believed in yet
 ever distant from us, and by which also it is so fully understood
 and yet so inexplicable, rests on the fact that it restores to us
 all the emotions of our inmost nature, but entirely without reality
 and far removed from their pain. so also the seriousness which is
 essential to it, which excludes the absurd from its direct and
 peculiar province, is to be explained by the fact that its object
 is not the idea, with reference to which alone deception and
 absurdity are possible; but its object is directly the will, and
 this is essentially the most serious of all things, for it is that
 on which all depends. how rich in content and full of [pg ] significance the language of music is,
 we see from the repetitions, as well as the da
 capo, the like of which would be unbearable in works
 composed in a language of words, but in music are very appropriate
 and beneficial, for, in order to comprehend it fully, we must hear
 it twice.
in the whole of
 this exposition of music i have been trying to bring out clearly
 that it expresses in a perfectly universal language, in a
 homogeneous material, mere tones, and with the greatest
 determinateness and truth, the inner nature, the in-itself of the
 world, which we think under the concept of will, because will is
 its most distinct manifestation. further, according to my view and
 contention, philosophy is nothing but a complete and accurate
 repetition or expression of the nature of the world in very general
 concepts, for only in such is it possible to get a view of that
 whole nature which will everywhere be adequate and applicable.
 thus, whoever has followed me and entered into my mode of thought,
 will not think it so very paradoxical if i say, that supposing it
 were possible to give a perfectly accurate, complete explanation of
 music, extending even to particulars, that is to say, a detailed
 repetition in concepts of what it expresses, this would also be a
 sufficient repetition and explanation of the world in concepts, or
 at least entirely parallel to such an explanation, and thus it
 would be the true philosophy. consequently the saying of leibnitz
 quoted above, which is quite accurate from a lower standpoint, may
 be parodied in the following way to suit our higher view of music:
 musica est exercitium metaphysices occultum
 nescientis se philosophari animi; for scire, to know, always means to
 have fixed in abstract concepts. but further, on account of the
 truth of the saying of leibnitz, which is confirmed in various
 ways, music, regarded apart from its æsthetic or inner
 significance, and looked at merely externally and purely
 empirically, is simply the means of comprehending directly and in
 the concrete [pg
 large numbers and complex relations of numbers, which otherwise we
 could only know indirectly by fixing them in concepts. therefore by
 the union of these two very different but correct views of music we
 may arrive at a conception of the possibility of a philosophy of
 number, such as that of pythagoras and of the chinese in y-king,
 and then interpret in this sense the saying of the pythagoreans
 which sextus empiricus quotes (adv. math., l. vii.): τῳ αριθμῳ δε
 τα παντ᾽ επεοικεν (numero cuncta
 assimilantur). and if, finally, we apply this view to
 the interpretation of harmony and melody given above, we shall find
 that a mere moral philosophy without an explanation of nature, such
 as socrates wanted to introduce, is precisely analogous to a mere
 melody without harmony, which rousseau exclusively desired; and, in
 opposition to this mere physics and metaphysics without ethics,
 will correspond to mere harmony without melody. allow me to add to
 these cursory observations a few more remarks concerning the
 analogy of music with the phenomenal world. we found in the second
 book that the highest grade of the objectification of will, man,
 could not appear alone and isolated, but presupposed the grades
 below him, as these again presupposed the grades lower still. in
 the same way music, which directly objectifies the will, just as
 the world does, is complete only in full harmony. in order to
 achieve its full effect, the high leading voice of the melody
 requires the accompaniment of all the other voices, even to the
 lowest bass, which is to be regarded as the origin of all. the
 melody itself enters as an integral part into the harmony, as the
 harmony enters into it, and only thus, in the full harmonious
 whole, music expresses what it aims at expressing. thus also the
 one will outside of time finds its full objectification only in the
 complete union of all the steps which reveal its nature in the
 innumerable ascending grades of distinctness. the following analogy
 is also very remarkable. we have seen in the preceding book that
 notwithstanding [pg
 the self-adaptation of all the phenomena of will to each other as
 regards their species, which constitutes their teleological aspect,
 there yet remains an unceasing conflict between those phenomena as
 individuals, which is visible at every grade, and makes the world a
 constant battle-field of all those manifestations of one and the
 same will, whose inner contradiction with itself becomes visible
 through it. in music also there is something corresponding to this.
 a complete, pure, harmonious system of tones is not only physically
 but arithmetically impossible. the numbers themselves by which the
 tones are expressed have inextricable irrationality. there is no
 scale in which, when it is counted, every fifth will be related to
 the keynote as  to , every major third as  to , every minor
 third as  to , and so on. for if they are correctly related to
 the keynote, they can no longer be so to each other; because, for
 example, the fifth must be the minor third to the third, &c.
 for the notes of the scale may be compared to actors who must play
 now one part, now another. therefore a perfectly accurate system of
 music cannot even be thought, far less worked out; and on this
 account all possible music deviates from perfect purity; it can
 only conceal the discords essential to it by dividing them among
 all the notes, i.e., by temperament. on this
 see chladni's “akustik,” § , and
 his “kurze uebersicht der schall- und
 klanglehre.”
i might still
 have something to say about the way in which music is perceived,
 namely, in and through time alone, with absolute exclusion of
 space, and also apart from the influence of the knowledge of
 causality, thus without understanding; for the tones make the
 æsthetic impression as effect, and without obliging us to go back
 to their causes, as in the case of perception. i do not wish,
 however, to lengthen this discussion, as i have perhaps already
 gone too much into detail with regard to [pg ] some things in this third book, or have dwelt
 too much on particulars. but my aim made it necessary, and it will
 be the less disapproved if the importance and high worth of art,
 which is seldom sufficiently recognised, be kept in mind. for if,
 according to our view, the whole visible world is just the
 objectification, the mirror, of the will, conducting it to
 knowledge of itself, and, indeed, as we shall soon see, to the
 possibility of its deliverance; and if, at the same time, the world
 as idea, if we regard it in isolation, and, freeing ourselves from
 all volition, allow it alone to take possession of our
 consciousness, is the most joy-giving and the only innocent side of
 life; we must regard art as the higher ascent, the more complete
 development of all this, for it achieves essentially just what is
 achieved by the visible world itself, only with greater
 concentration, more perfectly, with intention and intelligence, and
 therefore may be called, in the full significance of the word, the
 flower of life. if the whole world as idea is only the visibility
 of will, the work of art is to render this visibility more
 distinct. it is the camera
 obscura which shows the objects more purely, and
 enables us to survey them and comprehend them better. it is the
 play within the play, the stage upon the stage in “hamlet.”
the pleasure we
 receive from all beauty, the consolation which art affords, the
 enthusiasm of the artist, which enables him to forget the cares of
 life,—the latter an advantage of the man of genius over other men,
 which alone repays him for the suffering that increases in
 proportion to the clearness of consciousness, and for the desert
 loneliness among men of a different race,—all this rests on the
 fact that the in-itself of life, the will, existence itself, is, as
 we shall see farther on, a constant sorrow, partly miserable,
 partly terrible; while, on the contrary, as idea alone, purely
 contemplated, or copied by art, free from pain, it presents to us a
 drama full of significance. this purely knowable side of the world,
 [pg ] and the copy of it
 in any art, is the element of the artist. he is chained to the
 contemplation of the play, the objectification of will; he remains
 beside it, does not get tired of contemplating it and representing
 it in copies; and meanwhile he bears himself the cost of the
 production of that play, i.e., he himself is the will
 which objectifies itself, and remains in constant suffering. that
 pure, true, and deep knowledge of the inner nature of the world
 becomes now for him an end in itself: he stops there. therefore it
 does not become to him a quieter of the will, as, we shall see in
 the next book, it does in the case of the saint who has attained to
 resignation; it does not deliver him for ever from life, but only
 at moments, and is therefore not for him a path out of life, but
 only an occasional consolation in it, till his power, increased by
 this contemplation and at last tired of the play, lays hold on the
 real. the st. cecilia of raphael may be regarded as a
 representation of this transition. to the real, then, we now turn
 in the following book.
[pg ]
fourth book. the world as
 will.
second aspect. the assertion and
 denial of the will to live, when self-consciousness has been
 attained.
tempore quo cognitio simul
 advenit, amor e medio supersurrexit.—oupnek'hat,
 studio anquetil duperron, vol. ii. p. .
[pg ]
§ . the last
 part of our work presents itself as the most serious, for it
 relates to the action of men, the matter which concerns every one
 directly and can be foreign or indifferent to none. it is indeed so
 characteristic of the nature of man to relate everything else to
 action, that in every systematic investigation he will always treat
 the part that has to do with action as the result or outcome of the
 whole work, so far, at least, as it interests him, and will
 therefore give his most serious attention to this part, even if to
 no other. in this respect the following part of our work would, in
 ordinary language, be called practical philosophy, in opposition to
 the theoretical, which has occupied us hitherto. but, in my
 opinion, all philosophy is theoretical, because it is essential to
 it that it should retain a purely contemplative attitude, and
 should investigate, not prescribe. to become, on the contrary,
 practical, to guide conduct, to transform character, are old
 claims, which with fuller insight it ought finally to give up. for
 here, where the worth or worthlessness of an existence, where
 salvation or damnation are in question, the dead conceptions of
 philosophy do not decide the matter, but the inmost nature of man
 himself, the dæmon that guides him and that has not chosen him, but
 been chosen by him, as plato would say; his intelligible character,
 as kant expresses himself. virtue cannot be taught any more than
 genius; indeed, for it the concept is just as unfruitful as it is
 in art, and in both cases can only be used as [pg ] an instrument. it would, therefore, be
 just as absurd to expect that our moral systems and ethics will
 produce virtuous, noble, and holy men, as that our æsthetics will
 produce poets, painters, and musicians.
philosophy can
 never do more than interpret and explain what is given. it can only
 bring to distinct abstract knowledge of the reason the nature of
 the world which in the concrete, that is, as feeling, expresses
 itself comprehensibly to every one. this, however, it does in every
 possible reference and from every point of view. now, as this
 attempt has been made from other points of view in the three
 preceding books with the generality that is proper to philosophy,
 in this book the action of men will be considered in the same way;
 and this side of the world might, indeed, be considered the most
 important of all, not only subjectively, as i remarked above, but
 also objectively. in considering it i shall faithfully adhere to
 the method i have hitherto followed, and shall support myself by
 presupposing all that has already been advanced. there is, indeed,
 just one thought which forms the content of this whole work. i have
 endeavoured to work it out in all other spheres, and i shall now do
 so with regard to human action. i shall then have done all that is
 in my power to communicate it as fully as possible.
the given point
 of view, and the method of treatment announced, are themselves
 sufficient to indicate that in this ethical book no precepts, no
 doctrine of duty must be looked for; still less will a general
 moral principle be given, an universal receipt, as it were, for the
 production of all the virtues. neither shall we talk of an
 “absolute ought,” for this
 contains a contradiction, as is explained in the appendix; nor yet
 of a “law of freedom,” which is
 in the same position. in general, we shall not speak at all of
 “ought,” for this is how one speaks
 to children and to nations still in their childhood, but not to
 those who have appropriated all the culture of a full-grown
 [pg ] age. it is a
 palpable contradiction to call the will free, and yet to prescribe
 laws for it according to which it ought to will. “ought to will!”—wooden iron! but it follows
 from the point of view of our system that the will is not only
 free, but almighty. from it proceeds not only its action, but also
 its world; and as the will is, so does its action and its world
 become. both are the self-knowledge of the will and nothing more.
 the will determines itself, and at the same time both its action
 and its world; for besides it there is nothing, and these are the
 will itself. only thus is the will truly autonomous, and from every
 other point of view it is heteronomous. our philosophical
 endeavours can only extend to exhibiting and explaining the action
 of men in its inner nature and content, the various and even
 opposite maxims, whose living expression it is. this we shall do in
 connection with the preceding portion of our work, and in precisely
 the same way as we have hitherto explained the other phenomena of
 the world, and have sought to bring their inmost nature to distinct
 abstract knowledge. our philosophy will maintain the same
 immanency in the case of action,
 as in all that we have hitherto considered. notwithstanding kant's
 great doctrine, it will not attempt to use the forms of the
 phenomenon, the universal expression of which is the principle of
 sufficient reason, as a leaping-pole to jump over the phenomenon
 itself, which alone gives meaning to these forms, and land in the
 boundless sphere of empty fictions. but this actual world of
 experience, in which we are, and which is in us, remains both the
 material and the limits of our consideration: a world which is so
 rich in content that even the most searching investigation of which
 the human mind is capable could not exhaust it. since then the real
 world of experience will never fail to afford material and reality
 to our ethical investigations, any more than to those we have
 already conducted, nothing will be less needful than to take refuge
 in negative conceptions [pg
 void of content, and then somehow or other make even ourselves
 believe that we are saying something when we speak with lifted
 eyebrows of “absolutes,”
“infinites,” “supersensibles,” and whatever other mere
 negations of this sort there may be (ουδεν εστι, η το της στερησεως
 ονομα, μετα αμυδρας επινοιας—nihil est, nisi negationis nomen, cum obscura
 notione.—jul. or. ), instead of which it would be
 shorter to say at once cloud-cuckoo-town (νεφελοκοκκυγια): we shall
 not require to serve up covered empty dishes of this kind. finally,
 we shall not in this book, any more than in those which have
 preceded it, narrate histories and give them out as philosophy. for
 we are of opinion that whoever supposes that the inner nature of
 the world can in any way, however plausibly disguised, be
 historically comprehended, is
 infinitely far from a philosophical knowledge of the world. yet
 this is what is supposed whenever a “becoming,” or a “having
 become,” or an “about to
 become” enters into a theory of the nature of the world,
 whenever an earlier or a later has the least place in it; and in
 this way a beginning and an end of the world, and the path it
 pursues between them, is, either openly or disguisedly, both sought
 for and found, and the individual who philosophises even recognises
 his own position on that path. such historical
 philosophising in most cases produces a cosmogony which
 admits of many varieties, or else a system of emanations, a
 doctrine of successive disengagements from one being; or, finally,
 driven in despair from fruitless efforts upon these paths to the
 last path of all, it takes refuge in the converse doctrine of a
 constant becoming, springing up, arising, coming to light out of
 darkness, out of the hidden ground source or groundlessness, or
 whatever other nonsense of this sort there may be, which is most
 shortly disposed of with the remark that at the present moment a
 whole eternity, i.e., an endless time, has
 already passed, so that everything that can or ought to become must
 have already done so. for all such historical philosophy, whatever
 [pg ] airs it may give
 itself, regards time just as if kant had never
 lived, as a quality of the thing-in-itself, and thus stops at that
 which kant calls the phenomenon in opposition to the
 thing-in-itself; which plato calls the becoming and never being, in
 opposition to the being and never becoming; and which, finally, is
 called in the indian philosophy the web of mâya. it is just the
 knowledge which belongs to the principle of sufficient reason, with
 which no one can penetrate to the inner nature of things, but
 endlessly pursues phenomena, moving without end or aim, like a
 squirrel in its wheel, till, tired out at last, he stops at some
 point or other arbitrarily chosen, and now desires to extort
 respect for it from others also. the genuine philosophical
 consideration of the world, i.e., the consideration that
 affords us a knowledge of its inner nature, and so leads us beyond
 the phenomenon, is precisely that method which does not concern
 itself with the whence, the whither, and the why of the world, but
 always and everywhere demands only the what; the method which
 considers things not according to any relation, not as becoming and
 passing away, in short, not according to one of the four forms of
 the principle of sufficient reason; but, on the contrary, just that
 which remains when all that belongs to the form of knowledge proper
 to that principle has been abstracted, the inner nature of the
 world, which always appears unchanged in all the relations, but is
 itself never subject to them, and has the ideas of the world as its
 object or material. from such knowledge as this proceeds
 philosophy, like art, and also, as we shall see in this book, that
 disposition of mind which alone leads to true holiness and to
 deliverance from the world.
§ . the first
 three books will, it is hoped, have conveyed the distinct and
 certain knowledge that the world as idea is the complete mirror of
 the will, in which it knows itself in ascending grades of
 distinctness [pg
 and completeness, the highest of which is man, whose nature,
 however, receives its complete expression only through the whole
 connected series of his actions. the self-conscious connection of
 these actions is made possible by reason, which enables a man
 constantly to survey the whole in the abstract.
the will, which,
 considered purely in itself, is without knowledge, and is merely a
 blind incessant impulse, as we see it appear in unorganised and
 vegetable nature and their laws, and also in the vegetative part of
 our own life, receives through the addition of the world as idea,
 which is developed in subjection to it, the knowledge of its own
 willing and of what it is that it wills. and this is nothing else
 than the world as idea, life, precisely as it exists. therefore we
 called the phenomenal world the mirror of the will, its
 objectivity. and since what the will wills is always life, just
 because life is nothing but the representation of that willing for
 the idea, it is all one and a mere pleonism if, instead of simply
 saying “the will,” we say
 “the will to live.”
will is the
 thing-in-itself, the inner content, the essence of the world. life,
 the visible world, the phenomenon, is only the mirror of the will.
 therefore life accompanies the will as inseparably as the shadow
 accompanies the body; and if will exists, so will life, the world,
 exist. life is, therefore, assured to the will to live; and so long
 as we are filled with the will to live we need have no fear for our
 existence, even in the presence of death. it is true we see the
 individual come into being and pass away; but the individual is
 only phenomenal, exists only for the knowledge which is bound to
 the principle of sufficient reason, to the principio individuationis.
 certainly, for this kind of knowledge, the individual receives his
 life as a gift, rises out of nothing, then suffers the loss of this
 gift through death, and returns again to nothing. but we desire to
 consider life [pg
 philosophically, i.e., according to its ideas,
 and in this sphere we shall find that neither the will, the
 thing-in-itself in all phenomena, nor the subject of knowing, that
 which perceives all phenomena, is affected at all by birth or by
 death. birth and death belong merely to the phenomenon of will,
 thus to life; and it is essential to this to exhibit itself in
 individuals which come into being and pass away, as fleeting
 phenomena appearing in the form of time—phenomena of that which in
 itself knows no time, but must exhibit itself precisely in the way
 we have said, in order to objectify its peculiar nature. birth and
 death belong in like manner to life, and hold the balance as
 reciprocal conditions of each other, or, if one likes the
 expression, as poles of the whole phenomenon of life. the wisest of
 all mythologies, the indian, expresses this by giving to the very
 god that symbolises destruction, death (as brahma, the most sinful
 and the lowest god of the trimurti, symbolises generation, coming
 into being, and vishnu maintaining or preserving), by giving, i
 say, to siva as an attribute not only the necklace of skulls, but
 also the lingam, the symbol of generation, which appears here as
 the counterpart of death, thus signifying that generation and death
 are essentially correlatives, which reciprocally neutralise and
 annul each other. it was precisely the same sentiment that led the
 greeks and romans to adorn their costly sarcophagi, just as we see
 them now, with feasts, dances, marriages, the chase, fights of wild
 beasts, bacchanalians, &c.; thus with representations of the
 full ardour of life, which they place before us not only in such
 revels and sports, but also in sensual groups, and even go so far
 as to represent the sexual intercourse of satyrs and goats. clearly
 the aim was to point in the most impressive manner away from the
 death of the mourned individual to the immortal life of nature, and
 thus to indicate, though without abstract knowledge, that the whole
 of nature is the phenomenon and also the fulfilment of the will to
 live. the form of [pg
 this phenomenon is time, space, and causality, and by means of
 these individuation, which carries with it that the individual must
 come into being and pass away. but this no more affects the will to
 live, of whose manifestation the individual is, as it were, only a
 particular example or specimen, than the death of an individual
 injures the whole of nature. for it is not the individual, but only
 the species that nature cares for, and for the preservation of
 which she so earnestly strives, providing for it with the utmost
 prodigality through the vast surplus of the seed and the great
 strength of the fructifying impulse. the individual, on the
 contrary, neither has nor can have any value for nature, for her
 kingdom is infinite time and infinite space, and in these infinite
 multiplicity of possible individuals. therefore she is always ready
 to let the individual fall, and hence it is not only exposed to
 destruction in a thousand ways by the most insignificant accident,
 but originally destined for it, and conducted towards it by nature
 herself from the moment it has served its end of maintaining the
 species. thus nature naïvely expresses the great truth that only
 the ideas, not the individuals, have, properly speaking, reality,
 i.e., are complete objectivity
 of the will. now, since man is nature itself, and indeed nature at
 the highest grade of its self-consciousness, but nature is only the
 objectified will to live, the man who has comprehended and retained
 this point of view may well console himself, when contemplating his
 own death and that of his friends, by turning his eyes to the
 immortal life of nature, which he himself is. this is the
 significance of siva with the lingam, and of those ancient
 sarcophagi with their pictures of glowing life, which say to the
 mourning beholder, natura non
 contristatur.
that generation
 and death are to be regarded as something belonging to life, and
 essential to this phenomenon of the will, arises also from the fact
 that they both exhibit themselves merely as higher powers of the
 expression [pg
 of that in which all the rest of life consists. this is through and
 through nothing else than the constant change of matter in the
 fixed permanence of form; and this is what constitutes the
 transitoriness of the individual and the permanence of the species.
 constant nourishment and renewal differ from generation only in
 degree, and constant excretion differs only in degree from death.
 the first shows itself most simply and distinctly in the plant. the
 plant is throughout a constant recurrence of the same impulse of
 its simplest fibre, which groups itself into leaf and branch. it is
 a systematic aggregate of similar plants supporting each other,
 whose constant reproduction is its single impulse. it ascends to
 the full satisfaction of this tendency through the grades of its
 metamorphosis, finally to the blossom and fruit, that compendium of
 its existence and effort in which it now attains, by a short way,
 to that which is its single aim, and at a stroke produces a
 thousand-fold what, up till then, it effected only in the
 particular case—the repetition of itself. its earlier growth and
 development stands in the same relation to its fruit as writing
 stands to printing. with the animal it is clearly quite the same.
 the process of nourishing is a constant reproduction; the process
 of reproduction is a higher power of nourishing. the pleasure which
 accompanies the act of procreation is a higher power of the
 agreeableness of the sense of life. on the other hand, excretion,
 the constant exhalation and throwing off of matter, is the same as
 that which, at a higher power, death, is the contrary of
 generation. and if here we are always content to retain the form
 without lamenting the discarded matter, we ought to bear ourselves
 in the same way if in death the same thing happens, in a higher
 degree and to the whole, as takes place daily and hourly in a
 partial manner in excretion: if we are indifferent to the one, we
 ought not to shrink from the other. therefore, from this point of
 view, it appears just as perverse to desire [pg ] the continuance of an individuality
 which will be replaced by other individuals as to desire the
 permanence of matter which will be replaced by other matter. it
 appears just as foolish to embalm the body as it would be carefully
 to preserve its excrement. as to the individual consciousness which
 is bound to the individual body, it is absolutely interrupted every
 day by sleep. deep sleep is, while it lasts, in no way different
 from death, into which, in fact, it often passes continuously, as
 in the case of freezing to death. it differs only with regard to
 the future, the awaking. death is a sleep in which individuality is
 forgotten; everything else wakes again, or rather never
 slept.
above all
 things, we must distinctly recognise that the form of the
 phenomenon of will, the form of life or reality, is really only the
 present, not the future nor the
 past. the latter are only in the conception, exist only in the
 connection of knowledge, so far as it follows the principle of
 sufficient reason. no man has ever lived in the past, and none will
 live in the future; the present alone is the form of all
 life, and is its sure possession which can never be taken from it.
 the present always exists, together with its content. both remain
 fixed without wavering, like the rainbow on the waterfall. for life
 is firm and certain in the will, and the present is firm and
 certain in life. certainly, if we reflect on [pg ] the thousands of years that are past,
 of the millions of men who lived in them, we ask, what were they?
 what has become of them? but, on the other hand, we need only
 recall our own past life and renew its scenes vividly in our
 imagination, and then ask again, what was all this? what has become
 of it? as it is with it, so is it with the life of those millions.
 or should we suppose that the past could receive a new existence
 because it has been sealed by death? our own past, the most recent
 part of it, and even yesterday, is now no more than an empty dream
 of the fancy, and such is the past of all those millions. what was?
 what is? the will, of which life is the mirror, and knowledge free
 from will, which beholds it clearly in that mirror. whoever has not
 yet recognised this, or will not recognise it, must add to the
 question asked above as to the fate of past generations of men this
 question also: why he, the questioner, is so fortunate as to be
 conscious of this costly, fleeting, and only real present, while
 those hundreds of generations of men, even the heroes and
 philosophers of those ages, have sunk into the night of the past,
 and have thus become nothing; but he, his insignificant ego,
 actually exists? or more shortly, though somewhat strangely: why
 this now, his now, is just now and was not
 long ago? since he asks such strange questions, he regards his
 existence and his time as independent of each other, and the former
 as projected into the latter. he assumes indeed two nows—one which
 belongs to the object, the other which belongs to the subject, and
 marvels at the happy accident of their coincidence. but in truth,
 only the point of contact of the object, the form of which is time,
 with the subject, which has no mode of the principle of sufficient
 reason as its form, constitutes the present, as is shown in the
 essay on the principle of sufficient reason. now all object is the
 will so far as it has become idea, and the subject is the necessary
 correlative of the object. but real objects are only in the
 [pg ] present; the past
 and the future contain only conceptions and fancies, therefore the
 present is the essential form of the phenomenon of the will, and
 inseparable from it. the present alone is that which always exists
 and remains immovable. that which, empirically apprehended, is the
 most transitory of all, presents itself to the metaphysical vision,
 which sees beyond the forms of empirical perception, as that which
 alone endures, the nunc
 stans of the schoolmen. the source and the supporter
 of its content is the will to live or the thing-in-itself,—which we
 are. that which constantly becomes and passes away, in that it has
 either already been or is still to be, belongs to the phenomenon as
 such on account of its forms, which make coming into being and
 passing away possible. accordingly, we must think:—quid fuit?—quod est. quid erit?—quod fuit; and take it in the
 strict meaning of the words; thus understand not simile but idem. for life is certain to the
 will, and the present is certain to life. thus it is that every one
 can say, “i am once for all lord of the
 present, and through all eternity it will accompany me as my
 shadow: therefore i do not wonder where it has come from, and how
 it happens that it is exactly now.” we might compare time to
 a constantly revolving sphere; the half that was always sinking
 would be the past, that which was always rising would be the
 future; but the indivisible point at the top, where the tangent
 touches, would be the extensionless present. as the tangent does
 not revolve with the sphere, neither does the present, the point of
 contact of the object, the form of which is time, with the subject,
 which has no form, because it does not belong to the knowable, but
 is the condition of all that is knowable. or, time is like an
 unceasing stream, and the present a rock on which the stream breaks
 itself, but does not carry away with it. the will, as
 thing-in-itself, is just as little subordinate to the principle of
 sufficient reason [pg
 as the subject of knowledge, which, finally, in a certain regard is
 the will itself or its expression. and as life, its own phenomenon,
 is assured to the will, so is the present, the single form of real
 life. therefore we have not to investigate the past before life,
 nor the future after death: we have rather to know the present, the one form in which the
 will manifests itself. it
 will not escape from the will, but neither will the will escape
 from it. if, therefore, life as it is satisfies, whoever affirms it
 in every way may regard it with confidence as endless, and banish
 the fear of death as an illusion that inspires him with the foolish
 dread that he can ever be robbed of the present, and foreshadows a
 time in which there is no present; an illusion with regard to time
 analogous to the illusion with regard to space through which every
 one imagines the position on the globe he happens to occupy as
 above, and all other places as below. in the same way every one
 links the present to his own individuality, and imagines that all
 present is extinguished with it; that then past and future might be
 without a present. but as on the surface of the globe every place
 is above, so the form of all life is the present, and to fear death because
 it robs us of the present, is just as foolish as to fear that we
 may slip down from the round globe upon which we have now the good
 fortune to occupy the upper surface. the present is the form
 essential to the objectification of the will. it cuts time, which
 extends infinitely in both directions, as a mathematical point, and
 stands immovably fixed, like an everlasting mid-day with no cool
 evening, as the actual sun burns without intermission, while it
 only seems to sink into the bosom of night. therefore, if a man
 fears death as his annihilation, it is just as if he were to think
 that the sun cries out at evening, “woe is
 [pg ] me! for i go down
 into eternal night.” and
 conversely, whoever is oppressed with the burden of life, whoever
 desires life and affirms it, but abhors its torments, and
 especially can no longer endure the hard lot that has fallen to
 himself, such a man has no deliverance to hope for from death, and
 cannot right himself by suicide. the cool shades of orcus allure
 him only with the false appearance of a haven of rest. the earth
 rolls from day into night, the individual dies, but the sun itself
 shines without intermission, an eternal noon. life is assured to
 the will to live; the form of life is an endless present, no matter
 how the individuals, the phenomena of the idea, arise and pass away
 in time, like fleeting dreams. thus even already suicide appears to
 us as a vain and therefore a foolish action; when we have carried
 our investigation further it will appear to us in a still less
 favourable light.
dogmas change
 and our knowledge is deceptive; but nature never errs, her
 procedure is sure, and she never conceals it. everything is
 entirely in nature, and nature is entire in everything. she has her
 centre in every brute. it has surely found its way into existence,
 and it will surely find its way out of it. in the meantime it
 lives, fearless and without care, in the presence of annihilation,
 supported by the consciousness that it is nature herself, and
 imperishable as she is. man alone carries about with him, in
 abstract conceptions, the certainty of his death; yet this can only
 trouble him very rarely, [pg
 when for a single moment some occasion calls it up to his
 imagination. against the mighty voice of nature reflection can do
 little. in man, as in the brute which does not think, the certainty
 that springs from his inmost consciousness that he himself is
 nature, the world, predominates as a lasting frame of mind; and on
 account of this no man is observably disturbed by the thought of
 certain and never-distant death, but lives as if he would live for
 ever. indeed this is carried so far that we may say that no one has
 really a lively conviction of the certainty of his death, otherwise
 there would be no great difference between his frame of mind and
 that of a condemned criminal. every one recognises that certainty
 in the abstract and theoretically, but lays it aside like other
 theoretical truths which are not applicable to practice, without
 really receiving it into his living consciousness. whoever
 carefully considers this peculiarity of human character will see
 that the psychological explanations of it, from habit and
 acquiescence in the inevitable, are by no means sufficient, and
 that its true explanation lies in the deeper ground we have given.
 the same fact explains the circumstance that at all times and among
 all peoples dogmas of some kind or other relating to the continued
 existence of the individual after death arise, and are believed in,
 although the evidence in support of them must always be very
 insufficient, and the evidence against them forcible and varied.
 but, in truth, this really requires no proof, but is recognised by
 the healthy understanding as a fact, and confirmed by the
 confidence that nature never lies any more than she errs, but
 openly exhibits and naïvely expresses her action and her nature,
 while only we ourselves obscure it by our folly, in order to
 establish what is agreeable to our limited point of view.
but this that we
 have brought to clearest consciousness, that although the
 particular phenomenon of the will has a temporal beginning and end,
 the will itself as thing-in-itself is not affected by it, nor yet
 the correlative of [pg
 all object, the knowing but never known subject, and that life is
 always assured to the will to live—this is not to be numbered with
 the doctrines of immortality. for permanence has no more to do with
 the will or with the pure subject of knowing, the eternal eye of
 the world, than transitoriness, for both are predicates that are
 only valid in time, and the will and the pure subject of knowing
 lie outside time. therefore the egoism of the individual (this
 particular phenomenon of will enlightened by the subject of
 knowing) can extract as little nourishment and consolation for his
 wish to endure through endless time from the view we have
 expressed, as he could from the knowledge that after his death the
 rest of the eternal world would continue to exist, which is just
 the expression of the same view considered objectively, and
 therefore temporally. for every individual is transitory only as
 phenomenon, but as thing-in-itself is timeless, and therefore
 endless. but it is also only as phenomenon that an individual is
 distinguished from the other things of the world; as
 thing-in-itself he is the will which appears in all, and death
 destroys the illusion which separates his consciousness from that
 of the rest: this is immortality. his exemption from death, which
 belongs to him only as thing-in-itself, is for the phenomenon one
 with the immortality of the rest of the external world. hence
 also, it arises that although the inward and merely felt
 consciousness of that which we have raised to distinct knowledge is
 indeed, as we have said, sufficient to prevent the thought of death
 from poisoning the life of the rational being, because this
 consciousness is the basis of that love of life which maintains
 everything living, and enables it to live on [pg ] at ease as if there were no such thing
 as death, so long as it is face to face with life, and turns its
 attention to it, yet it will not prevent the individual from being
 seized with the fear of death, and trying in every way to escape
 from it, when it presents itself to him in some particular real
 case, or even only in his imagination, and he is compelled to
 contemplate it. for just as, so long as his knowledge was directed
 to life as such, he was obliged to recognise immortality in it, so
 when death is brought before his eyes, he is obliged to recognise
 it as that which it is, the temporal end of the particular temporal
 phenomenon. what we fear in death is by no means the pain, for it
 lies clearly on this side of death, and, moreover, we often take
 refuge in death from pain, just as, on the contrary, we sometimes
 endure the most fearful suffering merely to escape death for a
 while, although it would be quick and easy. thus we distinguish
 pain and death as two entirely different evils. what we fear in
 death is the end of the individual, which it openly professes
 itself to be, and since the individual is a particular
 objectification of the will to live itself, its whole nature
 struggles against death. now when feeling thus exposes us helpless,
 reason can yet step in and for the most part overcome its adverse
 influence, for it places us upon a higher standpoint, from which we
 no longer contemplate the particular but the whole. therefore a
 philosophical knowledge of the nature of the world, which extended
 to the point we have now reached in this work but went no farther,
 could even at this point of view overcome the terror of death in
 the measure in which reflection had power over direct feeling in
 the given individual. a man who had thoroughly assimilated the
 truths we have already advanced, but had not come to know, either
 from his own experience or from a deeper insight, that constant
 suffering is essential to life, who found satisfaction and all that
 he wished in life, and could calmly and deliberately desire that
 his [pg ] life, as he had
 hitherto known it, should endure for ever or repeat itself ever
 anew, and whose love of life was so great that he willingly and
 gladly accepted all the hardships and miseries to which it is
 exposed for the sake of its pleasures,—such a man would stand
 “with firm-knit bones on the well-rounded,
 enduring earth,” and would have nothing to fear. armed with
 the knowledge we have given him, he would await with indifference
 the death that hastens towards him on the wings of time. he would
 regard it as a false illusion, an impotent spectre, which frightens
 the weak but has no power over him who knows that he is himself the
 will of which the whole world is the objectification or copy, and
 that therefore he is always certain of life, and also of the
 present, the peculiar and only form of the phenomenon of the will.
 he could not be terrified by an endless past or future in which he
 would not be, for this he would regard as the empty delusion of the
 web of mâya. thus he would no more fear death than the sun fears
 the night. in the “bhagavad-gita”
 krishna thus raises the mind of his young pupil arjuna, when,
 seized with compunction at the sight of the arrayed hosts (somewhat
 as xerxes was), he loses heart and desires to give up the battle in
 order to avert the death of so many thousands. krishna leads him to
 this point of view, and the death of those thousands can no longer
 restrain him; he gives the sign for battle. this point of view is
 also expressed by goethe's prometheus, especially when he says—
“here
 sit i, form mankind
in my own image,
a race like to myself,
to suffer and to weep,
rejoice, enjoy,
and heed thee not,
as i.”
the philosophy
 of bruno and that of spinoza might also lead any one to this point
 of view whose conviction was [pg ] not shaken and weakened by their errors and
 imperfections. that of bruno has properly no ethical theory at all,
 and the theory contained in the philosophy of spinoza does not
 really proceed from the inner nature of his doctrine, but is merely
 tacked on to it by means of weak and palpable sophisms, though in
 itself it is praiseworthy and beautiful. finally, there are many
 men who would occupy this point of view if their knowledge kept
 pace with their will, i.e., if, free from all
 illusion, they were in a position to become clearly and distinctly
 themselves. for this is, for knowledge, the point of view of the
 complete assertion of the will to live.
that the will
 asserts itself means, that while in its objectivity, i.e.,
 in the world and life, its own nature is completely and distinctly
 given it as idea, this knowledge does not by any means check its
 volition; but this very life, so known, is willed as such by the
 will with knowledge, consciously and deliberately, just as up to
 this point it willed it as blind effort without knowledge. the
 opposite of this, the denial of the will to live, shows
 itself if, when that knowledge is attained, volition ends, because
 the particular known phenomena no longer act as motives
 for willing, but the whole knowledge of the nature of the world,
 the mirror of the will, which has grown up through the
 comprehension of the ideas, becomes a quieter
 of the will; and thus free, the will suppresses itself. these quite
 unfamiliar conceptions are difficult to understand when expressed
 in this general way, but it is hoped they will become clear through
 the exposition we shall give presently, with special reference to
 action, of the phenomena in which, on the one hand, the assertion
 in its different grades, and, on the other hand, the denial,
 expresses itself. for both proceed from knowledge, yet not from
 abstract knowledge, which is expressed in words, but from living
 knowledge, which is expressed in action and behaviour alone, and is
 independent of the dogmas which at the same time occupy the reason
 as abstract knowledge. to [pg
 exhibit them both, and bring them to distinct knowledge of the
 reason, can alone be my aim, and not to prescribe or recommend the
 one or the other, which would be as foolish as it would be useless;
 for the will in itself is absolutely free and entirely
 self-determining, and for it there is no law. but before we go on
 to the exposition referred to, we must first explain and more
 exactly define this freedom and its relation to
 necessity. and also, with regard to the life, the assertion and
 denial of which is our problem, we must insert a few general
 remarks connected with the will and its objects. through all this
 we shall facilitate the apprehension of the inmost nature of the
 knowledge we are aiming at, of the ethical significance of methods
 of action.
since, as has
 been said, this whole work is only the unfolding of a single
 thought, it follows that all its parts have the most intimate
 connection with each other. not merely that each part stands in a
 necessary relation to what immediately precedes it, and only
 presupposes a recollection of that by the reader, as is the case
 with all philosophies which consist merely of a series of
 inferences, but that every part of the whole work is related to
 every other part and presupposes it. it is, therefore, necessary
 that the reader should remember not only what has just been said,
 but all the earlier parts of the work, so that he may be able to
 connect them with what he is reading, however much may have
 intervened. plato also makes this demand upon his readers through
 the intricate digressions of his dialogues, in which he only
 returns to the leading thought after long episodes, which
 illustrate and explain it. in our case this demand is necessary;
 for the breaking up of our one single thought into its many aspects
 is indeed the only means of imparting it, though not essential to
 the thought itself, but merely an artificial form. the division of
 four principal points of view into four books, and the most careful
 bringing together of all that is related and homogeneous, assists
 the exposition [pg
 and its comprehension; yet the material absolutely does not admit
 of an advance in a straight line, such as the progress of history,
 but necessitates a more complicated exposition. this again makes a
 repeated study of the book necessary, for thus alone does the
 connection of all the parts with each other become distinct, and
 only then do they all mutually throw light upon each other and
 become quite clear.
§ . that the
 will as such is free, follows from the fact that,
 according to our view, it is the thing-in-itself, the content of
 all phenomena. the phenomena, on the other hand, we recognise as
 absolutely subordinate to the principle of sufficient reason in its
 four forms. and since we know that necessity is throughout
 identical with following from given grounds, and that these are
 convertible conceptions, all that belongs to the phenomenon,
 i.e., all that is object for the
 knowing subject as individual, is in one aspect reason, and in
 another aspect consequent; and in this last capacity is determined
 with absolute necessity, and can, therefore, in no respect be other
 than it is. the whole content of nature, the collective sum of its
 phenomena, is thus throughout necessary, and the necessity of every
 part, of every phenomenon, of every event, can always be proved,
 because it must be possible to find the reason from which it
 follows as a consequent. this admits of no exception: it follows
 from the unrestricted validity of the principle of sufficient
 reason. in another aspect, however, the same world is for us, in
 all its phenomena, objectivity of will. and the will, since it is
 not phenomenon, is not idea or object, but thing-in-itself, and is
 not subordinate to the principle of sufficient reason, the form of
 all object; thus is not determined as a consequent through any
 reason, knows no necessity, i.e., is free.
 the concept of freedom is thus [pg ] properly a negative concept, for its content
 is merely the denial of necessity, i.e.,
 the relation of consequent to its reason, according to the
 principle of sufficient reason. now here lies before us in its most
 distinct form the solution of that great contradiction, the union
 of freedom with necessity, which has so often been discussed in
 recent times, yet, so far as i know, never clearly and adequately.
 everything is as phenomenon, as object, absolutely necessary:
 in
 itself it is will, which is perfectly free to all
 eternity. the phenomenon, the object, is necessarily and
 unalterably determined in that chain of causes and effects which
 admits of no interruption. but the existence in general of this
 object, and its specific nature, i.e.,
 the idea which reveals itself in it, or, in other words, its
 character, is a direct manifestation of will. thus, in conformity
 with the freedom of this will, the object might not be at all, or
 it might be originally and essentially something quite different
 from what it is, in which case, however, the whole chain of which
 it is a link, and which is itself a manifestation of the same will,
 would be quite different also. but once there and existing, it has
 entered the chain of causes and effects, is always necessarily
 determined in it, and can, therefore, neither become something
 else, i.e., change itself, nor yet
 escape from the chain, i.e., vanish. man, like every
 other part of nature, is objectivity of the will; therefore all
 that has been said holds good of him. as everything in nature has
 its forces and qualities, which react in a definite way when
 definitely affected, and constitute its character, man also has his
 character, from which the motives
 call forth his actions with necessity. in this manner of conduct
 his empirical character reveals itself, but in this again his
 intelligible character, the will in itself, whose determined
 phenomenon he is. but man is the most complete phenomenon of will,
 and, as we explained in the second book, he had to be enlightened
 with so high a degree of knowledge [pg ] in order to maintain himself in existence,
 that in it a perfectly adequate copy or repetition of the nature of
 the world under the form of the idea became possible: this is the
 comprehension of the ideas, the pure mirror of the world, as we
 learnt in the third book. thus in man the will can attain to full
 self-consciousness, to distinct and exhaustive knowledge of its own
 nature, as it mirrors itself in the whole world. we saw in the
 preceding book that art springs from the actual presence of this
 degree of knowledge; and at the end of our whole work it will
 further appear that, through the same knowledge, in that the will
 relates it to itself, a suppression and self-denial of the will in
 its most perfect manifestation is possible. so that the freedom
 which otherwise, as belonging to the thing-in-itself, can never
 show itself in the phenomenon, in such a case does also appear in
 it, and, by abolishing the nature which lies at the foundation of
 the phenomenon, while the latter itself still continues to exist in
 time, it brings about a contradiction of the phenomenon with
 itself, and in this way exhibits the phenomena of holiness and
 self-renunciation. but all this can only be fully understood at the
 end of this book. what has just been said merely affords a
 preliminary and general indication of how man is distinguished from
 all the other phenomena of will by the fact that freedom,
 i.e., independence of the
 principle of sufficient reason, which only belongs to the will as
 thing-in-itself, and contradicts the phenomenon, may yet possibly,
 in his case, appear in the phenomenon also, where, however, it
 necessarily exhibits itself as a contradiction of the phenomenon
 with itself. in this sense, not only the will in itself, but man
 also may certainly be called free, and thus distinguished from all
 other beings. but how this is to be understood can only become
 clear through all that is to follow, and for the present we must
 turn away from it altogether. for, in the first place, we must
 beware of the error that the action of the individual definite man
 is subject to no [pg
 necessity, i.e., that the power of the
 motive is less certain than the power of the cause, or the
 following of the conclusion from the premises. the freedom of the
 will as thing-in-itself, if, as has been said, we abstract from the
 entirely exceptional case mentioned above, by no means extends
 directly to its phenomenon, not even in the case in which this
 reaches the highest made of its visibility, and thus does not
 extend to the rational animal endowed with individual character,
 i.e., the person. the person is
 never free although he is the phenomenon of a free will; for he is
 already the determined phenomenon of the free volition of this
 will, and, because he enters the form of every object, the
 principle of sufficient reason, he develops indeed the unity of
 that will in a multiplicity of actions, but on account of the
 timeless unity of that volition in itself, this multiplicity
 exhibits in itself the regular conformity to law of a force of
 nature. since, however, it is that free volition that becomes
 visible in the person and the whole of his conduct, relating itself
 to him as the concept to the definition, every individual action of
 the person is to be ascribed to the free will, and directly
 proclaims itself as such in consciousness. therefore, as was said
 in the second book, every one regards himself a priori (i.e.,
 here in this original feeling) as free in his individual actions,
 in the sense that in every given case every action is possible for
 him, and he only recognises a
 posteriori from experience and reflection upon
 experience that his actions take place with absolute necessity from
 the coincidence of his character with his motives. hence it arises
 that every uncultured man, following his feeling, ardently defends
 complete freedom in particular actions, while the great thinkers of
 all ages, and indeed the more profound systems of religion, have
 denied it. but whoever has come to see clearly that the whole
 nature of man is will, and he himself only a phenomenon of this
 will, and that such a phenomenon has, even from the subject itself,
 the principle of sufficient reason as its [pg ] necessary form, which here appears as the law
 of motivation,—such a man will regard it as just as absurd to doubt
 the inevitable nature of an action when the motive is presented to
 a given character, as to doubt that the three angles of any
 triangle are together equal to two right angles. priestley has very
 sufficiently proved the necessity of the individual action in his
 “doctrine of philosophical
 necessity;” but kant, whose merit in this respect is
 specially great, first proved the coexistence of this necessity
 with the freedom of the will in itself, i.e.,
 apart from the phenomenon, by
 establishing the distinction between the intelligible and the
 empirical character. i entirely adhere to this distinction, for the
 former is the will as thing-in-itself so far as it appears in a
 definite individual in a definite grade, and the latter is this
 phenomenon itself as it exhibits itself in time in the mode of
 action, and in space in the physical structure. in order to make
 the relation of the two comprehensible, the best expression is that
 which i have already used in the introductory essay, that the
 intelligible character of every man is to be regarded as an act of
 will outside time, and therefore indivisible and unchangeable, and
 the manifestation of this act of will developed and broken up in
 time and space and all the forms of the principle of sufficient
 reason is the empirical character as it exhibits itself for
 experience in the whole conduct and life of this man. as the whole
 tree is only the constantly repeated manifestation of one and the
 same tendency, which exhibits itself in its simplest form in the
 fibre, and recurs and is easily recognised in the construction of
 the leaf, shoot, branch, and trunk, so all a man's deeds are merely
 the constantly repeated expression, somewhat varied in form, of his
 intelligible character, and the induction based on the sum of all
 these expressions gives us his empirical [pg ] character. for the rest, i shall not at this
 point repeat in my own words kant's masterly exposition, but
 presuppose it as known.
in the year 
 i dealt with the important chapter on the freedom of the will,
 thoroughly and in detail, in my crowned prize-essay upon the
 subject, and exposed the reason of the delusion which led men to
 imagine that they found an empirically given absolute freedom of
 the will, that is to say, a liberum arbitrium
 indifferentiæ, as a fact in self-consciousness; for
 the question propounded for the essay was with great insight
 directed to this point. therefore, as i refer the reader to that
 work, and also to the tenth paragraph of the prize-essay on the
 basis of morals, which was published along with it under the title
 “the two fundamental problems of
 ethics,” i now omit the incomplete exposition of the
 necessity of the act of will, which was given at this place in the
 first edition. instead of it i shall explain the delusion mentioned
 above in a brief discussion which is presupposed in the nineteenth
 chapter of the supplement to the present work, and therefore could
 not be given in the prize-essay referred to.
apart from the
 fact that the will as the true thing-in-itself is actually original
 and independent, and that the feeling of its originality and
 absoluteness must accompany its acts in self-consciousness, though
 here they are already determined, there arises the illusion of an
 empirical freedom of the will (instead of the transcendental
 freedom which alone is to be attributed to it), and thus a freedom
 of its particular actions, from that attitude of the intellect
 towards the will which is explained, separated, and subordinated in
 the nineteenth chapter of the supplement, especially under no. .
 the intellect knows the conclusions of the will only a posteriori and empirically;
 therefore when a choice is presented, it has no data as to how the
 will is to decide. for the intelligible character, by virtue of
 which, when motives are given, only one
[pg ] decision is possible
 and is therefore necessary, does not come within the knowledge of
 the intellect, but merely the empirical character is known to it
 through the succession of its particular acts. therefore it seems
 to the intellect that in a given case two opposite decisions are
 possible for the will. but this is just the same thing as if we
 were to say of a perpendicular beam that has lost its balance, and
 is hesitating which way to fall, “it can
 fall either to the right hand or the left.” this can has
 merely a subjective significance, and really means “as far as the data known to us are concerned.”
 objectively, the direction of the fall is necessarily determined as
 soon as the equilibrium is lost. accordingly, the decision of one's
 own will is undetermined only to the beholder, one's own intellect,
 and thus merely relatively and subjectively for the subject of
 knowing. in itself and objectively, on the other hand, in every
 choice presented to it, its decision is at once determined and
 necessary. but this determination only comes into consciousness
 through the decision that follows upon it. indeed, we receive an
 empirical proof of this when any difficult and important choice
 lies before us, but only under a condition which is not yet
 present, but merely hoped for, so that in the meanwhile we can do
 nothing, but must remain passive. now we consider how we shall
 decide when the circumstances occur that will give us a free
 activity and choice. generally the foresight of rational
 deliberation recommends one decision, while direct inclination
 leans rather to the other. so long as we are compelled to remain
 passive, the side of reason seems to wish to keep the upper hand;
 but we see beforehand how strongly the other side will influence us
 when the opportunity for action arises. till then we are eagerly
 concerned to place the motives on both sides in the clearest light,
 by calm meditation on the pro et
 contra, so that every motive may exert its full
 influence upon the will when the time arrives, and it may not be
 misled by a [pg
 mistake on the part of the intellect to decide otherwise than it
 would have done if all the motives had their due influence upon it.
 but this distinct unfolding of the motives on both sides is all
 that the intellect can do to assist the choice. it awaits the real
 decision just as passively and with the same intense curiosity as
 if it were that of a foreign will. therefore from its point of view
 both decisions must seem to it equally possible; and this is just
 the illusion of the empirical freedom of the will. certainly the
 decision enters the sphere of the intellect altogether empirically,
 as the final conclusion of the matter; but yet it proceeded from
 the inner nature, the intelligible character, of the individual
 will in its conflict with given motives, and therefore with
 complete necessity. the intellect can do nothing more than bring
 out clearly and fully the nature of the motives; it cannot
 determine the will itself; for the will is quite inaccessible to
 it, and, as we have seen, cannot be investigated.
if, under the
 same circumstances, a man could act now one way and now another, it
 would be necessary that his will itself should have changed in the
 meantime, and thus that it should lie in time, for change is only
 possible in time; but then either the will would be a mere
 phenomenon, or time would be a condition of the thing-in-itself.
 accordingly the dispute as to the freedom of the particular action,
 the liberum arbitrium
 indifferentiæ, really turns on the question whether
 the will lies in time or not. if, as both kant's doctrine and the
 whole of my system necessitates, the will is the thing-in-itself
 outside time and outside every form of the principle of sufficient
 reason, not only must the individual act in the same way in the
 same circumstances, and not only must every bad action be the sure
 warrant of innumerable others, which the individual must
 perform and cannot leave, but, as kant said,
 if only the empirical character and the motives were completely
 given, it would be possible to calculate the future conduct of a
 man just as we can calculate an [pg ] eclipse of the sun or moon. as nature is
 consistent, so is the character; every action must take place in
 accordance with it, just as every phenomenon takes place according
 to a law of nature: the causes in the latter case and the motives
 in the former are merely the occasional causes, as was shown in the
 second book. the will, whose phenomenon is the whole being and life
 of man, cannot deny itself in the particular case, and what the man
 wills on the whole, that will he also will in the particular
 case.
the assertion of
 an empirical freedom of the will, a liberum arbitrium indifferentiæ,
 agrees precisely with the doctrine that places the inner nature of
 man in a soul, which is originally a
 knowing, and indeed really an
 abstract thinking nature, and only in
 consequence of this a willing nature—a doctrine which
 thus regards the will as of a secondary or derivative nature,
 instead of knowledge which is really so. the will indeed came to be
 regarded as an act of thought, and to be identified with the
 judgment, especially by descartes and spinoza. according to this
 doctrine every man must become what he is only through his
 knowledge; he must enter the world as a moral cipher come to know
 the things in it, and thereupon determine to be this or that, to
 act thus or thus, and may also through new knowledge achieve a new
 course of action, that is to say, become another person. further,
 he must first know a thing to be good,
 and in consequence of this will it, instead of first willing
 it, and in consequence of this calling it good.
 according to my fundamental point of view, all this is a reversal
 of the true relation. will is first and original; knowledge is
 merely added to it as an instrument belonging to the phenomenon of
 will. therefore every man is what he is through his will, and his
 character is original, for willing is the basis of his nature.
 through the knowledge which is added to it he comes to know in the
 course of experience what he is, i.e.,
 he learns his [pg
 character. thus he knows himself in consequence of
 and in accordance with the nature of his will, instead of
 willing in consequence of and in
 accordance with his knowing. according to the latter view, he would
 only require to consider how he would like best to be, and he would
 be it; that is its doctrine of the freedom of the will. thus it
 consists really in this, that a man is his own work guided by the
 light of knowledge. i, on the contrary, say that he is his own work
 before all knowledge, and knowledge is merely added to it to
 enlighten it. therefore he cannot resolve to be this or that, nor
 can he become other than he is; but he is once
 for all, and he knows in the course of experience what he
 is. according to one doctrine he wills
 what he knows, and according to the other he knows
 what he wills.
the greeks
 called the character ηθος, and its expression, i.e.,
 morals, ηθη. but this word comes from εθος, custom; they chose it
 in order to express metaphorically the constancy of character
 through the constancy of custom. το γαρ ηθος απο του εθους εχει την
 επωνυμιαν. ηθικε γαρ καλειται δια το εθιζεσθαι (a voce ηθος, i.e.,
 consuetudo ηθος est appellatum: ethica ergo dicta
 est απο του εθιζεσθαι, sivi ab assuescendo) says
 aristotle (eth. magna, i. , p. , and eth. eud., p. , and
 eth. nic., p. , ed. ber.) stobæus quotes: οἱ δε κατα ζηνωνα
 (stoici autem, zenonis castra sequentes,
 metaphorice ethos definiunt vitæ fontem, e quo singulæ manant
 actiones), ii. ch. . in christian theology we find
 the dogma of predestination in consequence of election and
 non-election (rom. ix. -), clearly originating from the
 knowledge that man does not change himself, but his life and
 conduct, i.e., his empirical character,
 is only the unfolding of his intelligible character, the
 development of decided and unchangeable natural dispositions
 recognisable even in the child; therefore, as it were, even at his
 birth his conduct is firmly determined, and [pg ] remains essentially the same to the
 end. this we entirely agree with; but certainly the consequences
 which followed from the union of this perfectly correct insight
 with the dogmas that already existed in jewish theology, and which
 now gave rise to the great difficulty, the gordian knot upon which
 most of the controversies of the church turned, i do not undertake
 to defend, for even the apostle paul scarcely succeeded in doing so
 by means of his simile of the potter's vessels which he invented
 for the purpose, for the result he finally arrived at was nothing
 else than this:—
“let
 mankind
fear the gods!
they hold the power
in everlasting hands:
and they can use it
as seems good to them.”
such
 considerations, however, are really foreign to our subject. some
 explanation as to the relation between the character and the
 knowledge in which all its motives lie, will now be more to the
 point.
the motives
 which determine the manifestation of the character or conduct
 influence it through the medium of knowledge. but knowledge is
 changeable, and often vacillates between truth and error, yet, as a
 rule, is rectified more and more in the course of life, though
 certainly in very different degrees. therefore the conduct of a man
 may be observably altered without justifying us in concluding that
 his character has been changed. what the man really and in general
 wills, the striving of his inmost nature, and the end he pursues in
 accordance with it, this we can never change by influence upon him
 from without by instruction, otherwise we could transform him.
 seneca says admirably, velle non
 discitur; whereby he preferred truth to his stoic
 philosophers, who taught διδακτην ειναι την αρετην (doceri posse virtutem). from
 without the will can only be affected by motives. but [pg ] these can never change the will itself;
 for they have power over it only under the presupposition that it
 is precisely such as it is. all that they can do is thus to alter
 the direction of its effort, i.e., bring it about that it
 shall seek in another way than it has hitherto done that which it
 invariably seeks. therefore instruction, improved knowledge, in
 other words, influence from without, may indeed teach the will that
 it erred in the means it employed, and can therefore bring it about
 that the end after which it strives once for all according to its
 inner nature shall be pursued on an entirely different path and in
 an entirely different object from what has hitherto been the case.
 but it can never bring about that the will shall will something
 actually different from what it has hitherto willed; this remains
 unchangeable, for the will is simply this willing itself, which
 would have to be abolished. the former, however, the possible
 modification of knowledge, and through knowledge of conduct,
 extends so far that the will seeks to attain its unalterable end,
 for example, mohammed's paradise, at one time in the real world, at
 another time in a world of imagination, adapting the means to each,
 and thus in the first case applying prudence, might, and fraud, and
 in the second case, abstinence, justice, alms, and pilgrimages to
 mecca. but its effort itself has not therefore changed, still less
 the will itself. thus, although its action certainly shows itself
 very different at different times, its willing has yet remained
 precisely the same. velle non
 discitur.
for motives to
 act, it is necessary not only that they should be present, but that
 they should be known; for, according to a very good expression of
 the schoolmen, which we referred to once before, causa finalis movet non secundum suum esse
 reale; sed secundum esse cognitum. for example, in
 order that the relation may appear that exists in a given man
 between egoism and sympathy, it is not sufficient that he should
 possess wealth [pg
 and see others in want, but he must also know what he can do with
 his wealth, both for himself and for others: not only must the
 suffering of others be presented to him, but he must know both what
 suffering and also what pleasure is. perhaps, on a first occasion,
 he did not know all this so well as on a second; and if, on a
 similar occasion, he acts differently, this arises simply from the
 fact that the circumstances were really different, as regards the
 part of them that depends on his knowing them, although they seem
 to be the same. as ignorance of actually existing circumstances
 robs them of their influence, so, on the other hand, entirely
 imaginary circumstances may act as if they were real, not only in
 the case of a particular deception, but also in general and
 continuously. for example, if a man is firmly persuaded that every
 good action will be repaid him a hundredfold in a future life, such
 a conviction affects him in precisely the same way as a good bill
 of exchange at a very long date, and he can give from mere egoism,
 as from another point of view he would take from egoism. he has not
 changed himself: velle non
 discitur. it is on account of this great influence of
 knowledge upon action, while the will remains unchangeable, that
 the character develops and its different features appear only
 little by little. therefore it shows itself different at every
 period of life, and an impetuous, wild youth may be succeeded by a
 staid, sober, manly age. especially what is bad in the character
 will always come out more strongly with time, yet sometimes it
 occurs that passions which a man gave way to in his youth are
 afterwards voluntarily restrained, simply because the motives
 opposed to them have only then come into knowledge. hence, also, we
 are all innocent to begin with, and this merely means that neither
 we nor others know the evil of our own nature; it only appears with
 the motives, and only in time do the motives appear in knowledge.
 [pg ] finally we come to
 know ourselves as quite different from what a
 priori we supposed ourselves to be, and then we are
 often terrified at ourselves.
repentance never
 proceeds from a change of the will (which is impossible), but from
 a change of knowledge. the essential and peculiar in what i have
 always willed i must still continue to will; for i myself am this
 will which lies outside time and change. i can therefore never
 repent of what i have willed, though i can repent of what i have
 done; because, led by false conceptions, i did something that was
 not in conformity with my will. the discovery of this through
 fuller knowledge is repentance. this extends not
 merely to worldly wisdom, to the choice of the means, and the
 judgment of the appropriateness of the end to my own will, but also
 to what is properly ethical. for example, i may have acted more
 egotistically than is in accordance with my character, led astray
 by exaggerated ideas of the need in which i myself stood, or of the
 craft, falseness, and wickedness of others, or because i hurried
 too much, i.e., acted without
 deliberation, determined not by motives distinctly known
 in abstracto, but by merely
 perceived motives, by the present and the emotion which it excited,
 and which was so strong that i had not properly the use of my
 reason; but the return of reflection is thus here also merely
 corrected knowledge, and from this repentance may proceed, which
 always proclaims itself by making amends for the past, as far as is
 possible. yet it must be observed that, in order to deceive
 themselves, men prearrange what seem to be hasty errors, but are
 really secretly considered actions. for we deceive and flatter no
 one through such fine devices as ourselves. the converse of the
 case we have given may also occur. i may be misled by too good an
 opinion of others, or want of knowledge of the relative value of
 the good things of life, or some abstract dogma in which i have
 since lost faith, and thus i may act less egotistically than is in
 [pg ] keeping with my
 character, and lay up for myself repentance of another kind. thus
 repentance is always corrected knowledge of the relation of an act
 to its special intention. when the will reveals its ideas in space
 alone, i.e., through mere form, the
 matter in which other ideas—in this case natural forces—already
 reign, resists the will, and seldom allows the form that is
 striving after visibility to appear in perfect purity and
 distinctness, i.e., in perfect beauty. and
 there is an analogous hindrance to the will as it reveals itself in
 time alone, i.e., through actions, in the
 knowledge which seldom gives it the data quite correctly, so that
 the action which takes place does not accurately correspond to the
 will, and leads to repentance. repentance thus always proceeds from
 corrected knowledge, not from the change of the will, which is
 impossible. anguish of conscience for past deeds is anything but
 repentance. it is pain at the knowledge of oneself in one's inmost
 nature, i.e., as will. it rests
 precisely on the certainty that we have still the same will. if the
 will were changed, and therefore the anguish of conscience mere
 repentance, it would cease to exist. the past could then no longer
 give us pain, for it exhibited the expressions of a will which is
 no longer that of him who has repented. we shall explain the
 significance of anguish of conscience in detail farther on.
the influence
 which knowledge, as the medium of motives, exerts, not indeed upon
 the will itself, but upon its appearance in actions, is also the
 source of the principal distinction between the action of men and
 that of brutes, for their methods of knowledge are different. the
 brute has only knowledge of perception, the man, through reason,
 has also abstract ideas, conceptions. now, although man and brute
 are with equal necessity determined by their motives, yet man, as
 distinguished from the brute, has a complete choice,
 which has often been regarded as a freedom of the will in
 particular actions, although it is nothing but the possibility of a
 [pg ]
 thoroughly-fought-out battle between several motives, the strongest
 of which then determines it with necessity. for this the motives
 must have assumed the form of abstract thoughts, because it is
 really only by means of these that deliberation, i.e., a
 weighing of opposite reasons for action, is possible. in the case
 of the brute there can only be a choice between perceptible motives
 presented to it, so that the choice is limited to the narrow sphere
 of its present sensuous perception. therefore the necessity of the
 determination of the will by the motive, which is like that of the
 effect by the cause, can be exhibited perceptibly and directly only
 in the case of the brutes, because here the spectator has the
 motives just as directly before his eyes as their effect; while in
 the case of man the motives are almost always abstract ideas, which
 are not communicated to the spectator, and even for the actor
 himself the necessity of their effect is hidden behind their
 conflict. for only in
 abstracto can several ideas, as judgments and chains
 of conclusions, lie beside each other in consciousness, and then,
 free from all determination of time, work against each other till
 the stronger overcomes the rest and determines the will. this is
 the complete choice or power of deliberation
 which man has as distinguished from the brutes, and on account of
 which freedom of the will has been attributed to him, in the belief
 that his willing is a mere result of the operations of his
 intellect, without a definite tendency which serves as its basis;
 while, in truth, the motives only work on the foundation and under
 the presupposition of his definite tendency, which in his case is
 individual, i.e., a character. a fuller
 exposition of this power of deliberation, and the difference
 between human and brute choice which is introduced by it, will be
 found in the “two fundamental problems of
 ethics” (st edition, p. , et
 seq.; d edition, p. , et
 seq.), to which i therefore refer. for the rest, this
 power of deliberation which man possesses is one of those things
 that makes his [pg
 existence so much more miserable than that of the brute. for in
 general our greatest sufferings do not lie in the present as ideas
 of perception or as immediate feelings; but in the reason, as
 abstract conceptions, painful thoughts, from which the brute, which
 lives only in the present, and therefore in enviable carelessness,
 is entirely free.
it seems to have
 been the dependence, which we have shown, of the human power of
 deliberation upon the faculty of abstract thinking, and thus also
 of judging and drawing conclusions also, that led both descartes
 and spinoza to identify the decisions of the will with the faculty
 of asserting and denying (the faculty of judgment). from this
 descartes deduced the doctrine that the will, which, according to
 him, is indifferently free, is the source of sin, and also of all
 theoretical error. and spinoza, on the other hand, concluded that
 the will is necessarily determined by the motives, as the judgment
 is by the reasons. the
 latter doctrine is in a sense true, but it appears as a true
 conclusion from false premises.
the distinction
 we have established between the ways in which the brutes and man
 are respectively moved by motives exerts a very wide influence upon
 the nature of both, and has most to do with the complete and
 obvious differences of their existence. while an idea of perception
 is in every case the motive which determines the brute, the man
 strives to exclude this kind of motivation altogether, and to
 determine himself entirely by abstract ideas. thus he uses his
 prerogative of reason to the greatest possible advantage.
 independent of the present, he neither chooses nor avoids the
 passing pleasure or pain, but reflects on the consequences of both.
 in most cases, setting aside quite insignificant actions, we are
 determined by abstract, thought motives, not present impressions.
 therefore all particular privation for the moment is for us
 comparatively light, but all renunciation is terribly [pg ] hard; for the former only concerns the
 fleeting present, but the latter concerns the future, and includes
 in itself innumerable privations, of which it is the equivalent.
 the causes of our pain, as of our pleasure, lie for the most part,
 not in the real present, but merely in abstract thoughts. it is
 these which are often unbearable to us—inflict torments in
 comparison with which all the sufferings of the animal world are
 very small; for even our own physical pain is not felt at all when
 they are present. indeed, in the case of keen mental suffering, we
 even inflict physical suffering on ourselves merely to distract our
 attention from the former to the latter. this is why, in great
 mental anguish, men tear their hair, beat their breasts, lacerate
 their faces, or roll on the floor, for all these are in reality
 only violent means of diverting the mind from an unbearable
 thought. just because mental pain, being much greater, makes us
 insensible to physical pain, suicide is very easy to the person who
 is in despair, or who is consumed by morbid depression, even though
 formerly, in comfortable circumstances, he recoiled at the thought
 of it. in the same way care and passion (thus the play of thought)
 wear out the body oftener and more than physical hardships. and in
 accordance with this epictetus rightly says: ταρασσει τους
 (perturbant homines non res ipsæ, sed de rebus
 decreta) (v.); and seneca: plura sunt quæ nos terrent, quam quæ premunt,
 et sæpius opinione quam re laboramus (ep. ).
 eulenspiegel also admirably bantered human nature, for going uphill
 he laughed, and going downhill he wept. indeed, children who have
 hurt themselves often cry, not at the pain, but at the thought of
 the pain which is awakened when some one condoles with them. such
 great differences in conduct and in life arise from the diversity
 between the methods of knowledge of the brutes and man. further,
 the appearance of the distinct and decided individual character,
 the [pg ] principal
 distinction between man and the brute, which has scarcely more than
 the character of the species, is conditioned by the choice between
 several motives, which is only possible through abstract
 conceptions. for only after a choice has been made are the
 resolutions, which vary in different individuals, an indication of
 the individual character which is different in each; while the
 action of the brute depends only upon the presence or absence of
 the impression, supposing this impression to be in general a motive
 for its species. and, finally, in the case of man, only the
 resolve, and not the mere wish, is a valid indication of his
 character both for himself and for others; but the resolve becomes
 for himself, as for others, a certain fact only through the deed.
 the wish is merely the necessary consequence of the present
 impression, whether of the outward stimulus, or the inward passing
 mood; and is therefore as immediately necessary and devoid of
 consideration as the action of the brutes. therefore, like the
 action of the brutes, it merely expresses the character of the
 species, not that of the individual, i.e.,
 it indicates merely what man in general, not what the
 individual who experiences the wish, is capable of doing. the deed
 alone,—because as human action it always requires a certain
 deliberation, and because as a rule a man has command of his
 reason, is considerate, i.e., decides in accordance with
 considered and abstract motives,—is the expression of the
 intelligible maxims of his conduct, the result of his inmost
 willing, and is related as a letter to the word that stands for his
 empirical character, itself merely the temporal expression of his
 intelligible character. in a healthy mind, therefore, only deeds
 oppress the conscience, not wishes and thoughts; for it is only our
 deeds that hold up to us the mirror of our will. the deed referred
 to above, that is entirely unconsidered and is really committed in
 blind passion, is to a certain extent an intermediate thing between
 the mere wish and the resolve.[pg ]
therefore, by
 true repentance, which, however, shows itself as action also, it
 can be obliterated, as a falsely drawn line, from that picture of
 our will which our course of life is. i may insert the remark here,
 as a very good comparison, that the relation between wish and deed
 has a purely accidental but accurate analogy with that between the
 accumulation and discharge of electricity.
as the result of
 the whole of this discussion of the freedom of the will and what
 relates to it, we find that although the will may, in itself and
 apart from the phenomenon, be called free and even omnipotent, yet
 in its particular phenomena enlightened by knowledge, as in men and
 brutes, it is determined by motives to which the special character
 regularly and necessarily responds, and always in the same way. we
 see that because of the possession on his part of abstract or
 rational knowledge, man, as distinguished from the brutes, has a
 choice, which only makes him the
 scene of the conflict of his motives, without withdrawing him from
 their control. this choice is therefore certainly the condition of
 the possibility of the complete expression of the individual
 character, but is by no means to be regarded as freedom of the
 particular volition, i.e., independence of the law of
 causality, the necessity of which extends to man as to every other
 phenomenon. thus the difference between human volition and that of
 the brutes, which is introduced by reason or knowledge through
 concepts, extends to the point we have indicated, and no farther.
 but, what is quite a different thing, there may arise a phenomenon
 of the human will which is quite impossible in the brute creation,
 if man altogether lays aside the knowledge of particular things as
 such which is subordinate to the principle of sufficient reason,
 and by means of his knowledge of the ideas sees through the
 principium individuationis. then
 an actual appearance of the real freedom of the will as a
 thing-in-itself is possible, by which the phenomenon comes into a
 sort of contradiction with [pg ] itself, as is indicated by the word
 self-renunciation; and, finally, the “in-itself” of its nature suppresses itself. but
 this, the one, real, and direct expression of the freedom of the
 will in itself in the phenomenon, cannot be distinctly explained
 here, but will form the subject of the concluding part of our
 work.
now that we have
 shown clearly in these pages the unalterable nature of the
 empirical character, which is just the unfolding of the
 intelligible character that lies outside time, together with the
 necessity with which actions follow upon its contact with motives,
 we hasten to anticipate an argument which may very easily be drawn
 from this in the interest of bad dispositions. our character is to
 be regarded as the temporal unfolding of an extra-temporal, and
 therefore indivisible and unalterable, act of will, or an
 intelligible character. this necessarily determines all that is
 essential in our conduct in life, i.e.,
 its ethical content, which must express itself in accordance with
 it in its phenomenal appearance, the empirical character; while
 only what is unessential in this, the outward form of our course of
 life, depends upon the forms in which the motives present
 themselves. it might, therefore, be inferred that it is a waste of
 trouble to endeavour to improve one's character, and that it is
 wiser to submit to the inevitable, and gratify every inclination at
 once, even if it is bad. but this is precisely the same thing as
 the theory of an inevitable fate which is called αργος λογος, and
 in more recent times turkish faith. its true refutation, as it is
 supposed to have been given by chrysippus, is explained by cicero
 in his book de fato, ch. , .
though
 everything may be regarded as irrevocably predetermined by fate,
 yet it is so only through the medium of the chain of causes;
 therefore in no case can it be determined that an effect shall
 appear without its cause. thus it is not simply the event that is
 [pg ] predetermined, but
 the event as the consequence of preceding causes; so that fate does
 not decide the consequence alone, but also the means as the
 consequence of which it is destined to appear. accordingly, if some
 means is not present, it is certain that the consequence also will
 not be present: each is always present in accordance with the
 determination of fate, but this is never known to us till
 afterwards.
as events always
 take place according to fate, i.e., according to the infinite
 concatenation of causes, so our actions always take place according
 to our intelligible character. but just as we do not know the
 former beforehand, so no a
 priori insight is given us into the latter, but we
 only come to know ourselves as we come to know other persons
 a posteriori through experience.
 if the intelligible character involved that we could only form a
 good resolution after a long conflict with a bad disposition, this
 conflict would have to come first and be waited for. reflection on
 the unalterable nature of the character, on the unity of the source
 from which all our actions flow, must not mislead us into claiming
 the decision of the character in favour of one side or the other;
 it is in the resolve that follows that we shall see what manner of
 men we are, and mirror ourselves in our actions. this is the
 explanation of the satisfaction or the anguish of soul with which
 we look back on the course of our past life. both are experienced,
 not because these past deeds have still an existence; they are
 past, they have been, and now are no more; but their great
 importance for us lies in their significance, lies in the fact that
 these deeds are the expression of the character, the mirror of the
 will, in which we look and recognise our inmost self, the kernel of
 our will. because we experience this not before, but only after, it
 behoves us to strive and fight in time, in order that the picture
 we produce by our deeds may be such that the contemplation of it
 may calm us as much as possible, instead of harassing us. the
 significance of [pg
 this consolation or anguish of soul will, as we have said, be
 inquired into farther on; but to this place there belongs the
 inquiry which follows, and which stands by itself.
besides the
 intelligible and the empirical character, we must mention a third
 which is different from them both, the acquired
 character, which one only receives in life through
 contact with the world, and which is referred to when one is
 praised as a man of character or censured as being without
 character. certainly one might suppose that, since the empirical
 character, as the phenomenon of the intelligible, is unalterable,
 and, like every natural phenomenon, is consistent with itself, man
 would always have to appear like himself and consistent, and would
 therefore have no need to acquire a character artificially by
 experience and reflection. but the case is otherwise, and although
 a man is always the same, yet he does not always understand
 himself, but often mistakes himself, till he has in some degree
 acquired real self-knowledge. the empirical character, as a mere
 natural tendency, is in itself irrational; nay, more, its
 expressions are disturbed by reason, all the more so the more
 intellect and power of thought the man has; for these always keep
 before him what becomes man in general as the character of
 the species, and what is possible for him both in will and in deed.
 this makes it the more difficult for him to see how much his
 individuality enables him to will and to accomplish. he finds in
 himself the germs of all the various human pursuits and powers, but
 the difference of degree in which they exist in his individuality
 is not clear to him in the absence of experience; and if he now
 applies himself to the pursuits which alone correspond to his
 character, he yet feels, especially at particular moments and in
 particular moods, the inclination to directly opposite pursuits
 which cannot be combined with them, but must be entirely suppressed
 if he desires to follow the former undisturbed. for as our physical
 path upon earth is always [pg
 merely a line, not an extended surface, so in life, if we desire to
 grasp and possess one thing, we must renounce and leave innumerable
 others on the right hand and on the left. if we cannot make up our
 minds to this, but, like children at the fair, snatch at everything
 that attracts us in passing, we are making the perverse endeavour
 to change the line of our path into an extended surface; we run in
 a zigzag, skip about like a will o' the wisp, and attain to
 nothing. or, to use another comparison, as, according to hobbes'
 philosophy of law, every one has an original right to everything
 but an exclusive right to nothing, yet can obtain an exclusive
 right to particular things by renouncing his right to all the rest,
 while others, on their part, do likewise with regard to what he has
 chosen; so is it in life, in which some definite pursuit, whether
 it be pleasure, honour, wealth, science, art, or virtue, can only
 be followed with seriousness and success when all claims that are
 foreign to it are given up, when everything else is renounced.
 accordingly, the mere will and the mere ability are not sufficient,
 but a man must also know what he wills, and know
 what he can do; only then will he show character, and only then can
 he accomplish something right. until he attains to that,
 notwithstanding the natural consistency of the empirical character,
 he is without character. and although, on the whole, he must remain
 true to himself, and fulfil his course, led by his dæmon, yet his
 path will not be a straight line, but wavering and uneven. he will
 hesitate, deviate, turn back, lay up for himself repentance and
 pain. and all this is because, in great and small, he sees before
 him all that is possible and attainable for man in general, but
 does not know what part of all this is alone suitable for him, can
 be accomplished by him, and is alone enjoyable by him. he will,
 therefore, envy many men on account of a position and circumstances
 which are yet only suitable to their characters and not to his, and
 in which he would feel unhappy, if indeed he found [pg ] them endurable at all. for as a fish is
 only at home in water, a bird in the air, a mole in the earth, so
 every man is only at home in the atmosphere suitable to him. for
 example, not all men can breathe the air of court life. from
 deficiency of proper insight into all this, many a man will make
 all kinds of abortive attempts, will do violence to his character
 in particulars, and yet, on the whole, will have to yield to it
 again; and what he thus painfully attains will give him no
 pleasure; what he thus learns will remain dead; even in an ethical
 regard, a deed that is too noble for his character, that has not
 sprung from pure, direct impulse, but from a concept, a dogma, will
 lose all merit, even in his own eyes, through subsequent egoistical
 repentance. velle non
 discitur. we only become conscious of the
 inflexibility of another person's character through experience, and
 till then we childishly believe that it is possible, by means of
 rational ideas, by prayers and entreaties, by example and
 noble-mindedness, ever to persuade any one to leave his own way, to
 change his course of conduct, to depart from his mode of thinking,
 or even to extend his capacities: so is it also with ourselves. we
 must first learn from experience what we desire and what we can do.
 till then we know it not, we are without character, and must often
 be driven back to our own way by hard blows from without. but if we
 have finally learnt it, then we have attained to what in the world
 is called character, the acquired character. this is
 accordingly nothing but the most perfect knowledge possible of our
 own individuality. it is the abstract, and consequently distinct,
 knowledge of the unalterable qualities of our own empirical
 character, and of the measure and direction of our mental and
 physical powers, and thus of the whole strength and weakness of our
 own individuality. this places us in a position to carry out
 deliberately and methodically the rôle which belongs to our own
 person, and to fill up the gaps which caprices or weaknesses
 [pg ] produce in it, under
 the guidance of fixed conceptions. this rôle is in itself
 unchangeably determined once for all, but hitherto we have allowed
 it to follow its natural course without any rule. we have now
 brought to distinct conscious maxims which are always present to us
 the form of conduct which is necessarily determined by our own
 individual nature, and now we conduct it in accordance with them as
 deliberately as if we had learned it; without ever falling into
 error through the passing influence of the mood or the impression
 of the present, without being checked by the bitterness or
 sweetness of some particular thing we meet with on our path,
 without delay, without hesitation, without inconsistency. we shall
 now no longer, as novices, wait, attempt, and grope about in order
 to see what we really desire and are able to do, but we know this
 once for all, and in every choice we have only to apply general
 principles to particular cases, and arrive at once at a decision.
 we know our will in general, and do not allow ourselves to be led
 by the passing mood or by solicitations from without to resolve in
 particular cases what is contrary to it as a whole. we know in the
 same way the nature and the measure of our strength and our
 weakness, and thereby are spared much suffering. for we experience
 no real pleasure except in the use and feeling of our own powers,
 and the greatest pain is the conscious deficiency of our powers
 where we need them. if, now, we have discovered where our strength
 and our weakness lie, we will endeavour to cultivate, employ, and
 in every way make use of those talents which are naturally
 prominent in us. we will always turn to those occupations in which
 they are valuable and to the purpose, and entirely avoid, even with
 self-renunciation, those pursuits for which we have naturally
 little aptitude; we will beware of attempting that in which we have
 no chance of succeeding. only he who has attained to this will
 constantly and with [pg
 full consciousness be completely himself, and will never fail
 himself at the critical moment, because he will always have known
 what he could expect from himself. he will often enjoy the
 satisfaction of feeling his strength, and seldom experience the
 pain of being reminded of his weakness. the latter is
 mortification, which causes perhaps the greatest of mental
 sufferings; therefore it is far more endurable to have our
 misfortune brought clearly before us than our incapacity. and,
 further, if we are thus fully acquainted with our strength and our
 weakness, we will not attempt to make a show of powers which we do
 not possess; we will not play with base coin, for all such
 dissimulation misses the mark in the end. for since the whole man
 is only the phenomenon of his will, nothing can be more perverse
 than to try, by means of reflection, to become something else than
 one is, for this is a direct contradiction of the will with itself.
 the imitation of the qualities and idiosyncrasies of others is much
 more shameful than to dress in other people's clothes; for it is
 the judgment of our own worthlessness pronounced by ourselves.
 knowledge of our own mind and its capacities of every kind, and
 their unalterable limits, is in this respect the surest way to the
 attainment of the greatest possible contentment with ourselves. for
 it holds good of inward as of outward circumstances that there is
 for us no consolation so effective as the complete certainty of
 unalterable necessity. no evil that befalls us pains us so much as
 the thought of the circumstances by which it might have been warded
 off. therefore nothing comforts us so effectually as the
 consideration of what has happened from the standpoint of
 necessity, from which all accidents appear as tools in the hand of
 an overruling fate, and we therefore recognise the evil that has
 come to us as inevitably produced by the conflict of inner and
 outer circumstances; in other words, fatalism. we really only
 complain and storm so long as we hope [pg ] either to affect others or to excite
 ourselves to unheard-of efforts. but children and grown-up people
 know very well to yield contentedly as soon as they clearly see
 that it absolutely cannot be otherwise:—θυμὸν ἐνὶ στήθεσσι φίλον
 δαμάσσαντες ἀνάγκη (animo in pectoribus
 nostro domito necessitate). we are like the entrapped
 elephants, that rage and struggle for many days, till they see that
 it is useless, and then suddenly offer their necks quietly to the
 yoke, tamed for ever. we are like king david, who, as long as his
 son still lived, unceasingly importuned jehovah with prayers, and
 behaved himself as if in despair; but as soon as his son was dead,
 thought no longer about it. hence it arises that innumerable
 permanent ills, such as lameness, poverty, low estate, ugliness, a
 disagreeable dwelling-place, are borne with indifference by
 innumerable persons, and are no longer felt, like healed wounds,
 just because these persons know that inward or outward necessity
 renders it impossible that any change can take place in these
 things; while those who are more fortunate cannot understand how
 such misfortunes can be borne. now as with outward necessity, so
 also with inward; nothing reconciles so thoroughly as a distinct
 knowledge of it. if we have once for all distinctly recognised not
 only our good qualities and our strength, but also our defects and
 weakness, established our aim accordingly, and rest satisfied
 concerning what cannot be attained, we thus escape in the surest
 way, as far as our individuality permits, the bitterest of all
 sorrows, discontentment with ourselves, which is the inevitable
 result of ignorance of our own individuality, of false conceit and
 the audacity that proceeds from it. to the bitter chapter of the
 self-knowledge here recommended the lines of ovid admit of
 excellent application—
“optimus
 ille animi vindex lædentia pectus,
vincula qui rupit,
 dedoluitque semel.”
[pg ]
so much with
 regard to the acquired character, which, indeed,
 is not of so much importance for ethics proper as for life in the
 world. but its investigation was related as that of a third species
 to the investigation of the intelligible and the empirical
 character, in regard to which we were obliged to enter upon a
 somewhat detailed inquiry in order to bring out clearly how in all
 its phenomena the will is subject to necessity, while yet in itself
 it may be called free and even omnipotent.
§ . this
 freedom, this omnipotence, as the expression of which the whole
 visible world exists and progressively develops in accordance with
 the laws which belong to the form of knowledge, can now, at the
 point at which in its most perfect manifestation it has attained to
 the completely adequate knowledge of its own nature, express itself
 anew in two ways. either it wills here, at the summit of mental
 endowment and self-consciousness, simply what it willed before
 blindly and unconsciously, and if so, knowledge always remains its
 motive in the whole as in the
 particular case. or, conversely, this knowledge becomes for it a
 quieter, which appeases and
 suppresses all willing. this is that assertion and denial of the
 will to live which was stated above in general terms. as, in the
 reference of individual conduct, a general, not a particular
 manifestation of will, it does not disturb and modify the
 development of the character, nor does it find its expression in
 particular actions; but, either by an ever more marked appearance
 of the whole method of action it has followed hitherto, or
 conversely by the entire suppression of it, it expresses in a
 living form the maxims which the will has freely adopted in
 accordance with the knowledge it has now attained to. by the
 explanations we have just given of freedom, necessity, and
 character, we have somewhat facilitated and prepared the way for
 the clearer development of all this, which is the principal subject
 of this last book. but we shall have done so still more when we
 have turned our attention to [pg ] life itself, the willing or not willing of
 which is the great question, and have endeavoured to find out
 generally what the will itself, which is everywhere the inmost
 nature of this life, will really attain by its assertion—in what
 way and to what extent this assertion satisfies or can satisfy the
 will; in short, what is generally and mainly to be regarded as its
 position in this its own world, which in every relation belongs to
 it.
first of all, i
 wish the reader to recall the passage with which we closed the
 second book,—a passage occasioned by the question, which met us
 then, as to the end and aim of the will. instead of the answer to
 this question, it appeared clearly before us how, in all the grades
 of its manifestation, from the lowest to the highest, the will
 dispenses altogether with a final goal and aim. it always strives,
 for striving is its sole nature, which no attained goal can put an
 end to. therefore it is not susceptible of any final satisfaction,
 but can only be restrained by hindrances, while in itself it goes
 on for ever. we see this in the simplest of all natural phenomena,
 gravity, which does not cease to strive and press towards a
 mathematical centre to reach which would be the annihilation both
 of itself and matter, and would not cease even if the whole
 universe were already rolled into one ball. we see it in the other
 simple natural phenomena. a solid tends towards fluidity either by
 melting or dissolving, for only so will its chemical forces be
 free; rigidity is the imprisonment in which it is held by cold. the
 fluid tends towards the gaseous state, into which it passes at once
 as soon as all pressure is removed from it. no body is without
 relationship, i.e., without tendency or
 without desire and longing, as jacob böhme would say. electricity
 transmits its inner self-repulsion to infinity, though the mass of
 the earth absorbs the effect. galvanism is certainly, so long as
 the pile is working, an aimless, unceasingly repeated act of
 repulsion and attraction. the existence of the plant is just such a
 restless, [pg
 never satisfied striving, a ceaseless tendency through
 ever-ascending forms, till the end, the seed, becomes a new
 starting-point; and this repeated ad
 infinitum—nowhere an end, nowhere a final
 satisfaction, nowhere a resting-place. it will also be remembered,
 from the second book, that the multitude of natural forces and
 organised forms everywhere strive with each other for the matter in
 which they desire to appear, for each of them only possesses what
 it has wrested from the others; and thus a constant internecine war
 is waged, from which, for the most part, arises the resistance
 through which that striving, which constitutes the inner nature of
 everything, is at all points hindered; struggles in vain, yet, from
 its nature, cannot leave off; toils on laboriously till this
 phenomenon dies, when others eagerly seize its place and its
 matter.
we have long
 since recognised this striving, which constitutes the kernel and
 in-itself of everything, as identical with that which in us, where
 it manifests itself most distinctly in the light of the fullest
 consciousness, is called will. its hindrance through an
 obstacle which places itself between it and its temporary aim we
 call suffering, and, on the other hand,
 its attainment of the end satisfaction, wellbeing, happiness. we
 may also transfer this terminology to the phenomena of the
 unconscious world, for though weaker in degree, they are identical
 in nature. then we see them involved in constant suffering, and
 without any continuing happiness. for all effort springs from
 defect—from discontent with one's estate—is thus suffering so long
 as it is not satisfied; but no satisfaction is lasting, rather it
 is always merely the starting-point of a new effort. the striving
 we see everywhere hindered in many ways, everywhere in conflict,
 and therefore always under the form of suffering. thus, if there is
 no final end of striving, there is no measure and end of
 suffering.
but what we only
 discover in unconscious nature by sharpened observation, and with
 an effort, presents itself [pg ] distinctly to us in the intelligent world in
 the life of animals, whose constant suffering is easily proved. but
 without lingering over these intermediate grades, we shall turn to
 the life of man, in which all this appears with the greatest
 distinctness, illuminated by the clearest knowledge; for as the
 phenomenon of will becomes more complete, the suffering also
 becomes more and more apparent. in the plant there is as yet no
 sensibility, and therefore no pain. a certain very small degree of
 suffering is experienced by the lowest species of animal
 life—infusoria and radiata; even in insects the capacity to feel
 and suffer is still limited. it first appears in a high degree with
 the complete nervous system of vertebrate animals, and always in a
 higher degree the more intelligence develops. thus, in proportion
 as knowledge attains to distinctness, as consciousness ascends,
 pain also increases, and therefore reaches its highest degree in
 man. and then, again, the more distinctly a man knows, the more
 intelligent he is, the more pain he has; the man who is gifted with
 genius suffers most of all. in this sense, that is, with reference
 to the degree of knowledge in general, not mere abstract rational
 knowledge, i understand and use here that saying of the preacher:
 qui auget scientiam, auget at
 dolorem. that philosophical painter or painting
 philosopher, tischbein, has very beautifully expressed the accurate
 relation between the degree of consciousness and that of suffering
 by exhibiting it in a visible and clear form in a drawing. the
 upper half of his drawing represents women whose children have been
 stolen, and who in different groups and attitudes, express in many
 ways deep maternal pain, anguish, and despair. the lower half of
 the drawing represents sheep whose lambs have been taken away. they
 are arranged and grouped in precisely the same way; so that every
 human head, every human attitude of the upper half, has below a
 brute head and attitude corresponding to it. thus we see distinctly
 how the pain which is possible in the dull brute consciousness
 [pg ] is related to the
 violent grief, which only becomes possible through distinctness of
 knowledge and clearness of consciousness.
we desire to
 consider in this way, in human existence, the inner and
 essential destiny of will. every one will easily recognise that
 same destiny expressed in various degrees in the life of the
 brutes, only more weakly, and may also convince himself to his own
 satisfaction, from the suffering animal world, how essential to
 all life is suffering.
§ . at every
 grade that is enlightened by knowledge, the will appears as an
 individual. the human individual finds himself as finite in
 infinite space and time, and consequently as a vanishing quantity
 compared with them. he is projected into them, and, on account of
 their unlimited nature, he has always a merely relative, never
 absolute when and where
 of his existence; for his place and duration are finite parts of
 what is infinite and boundless. his real existence is only in the
 present, whose unchecked flight into the past is a constant
 transition into death, a constant dying. for his past life, apart
 from its possible consequences for the present, and the testimony
 regarding the will that is expressed in it, is now entirely done
 with, dead, and no longer anything; and, therefore, it must be, as
 a matter of reason, indifferent to him whether the content of that
 past was pain or pleasure. but the present is always passing
 through his hands into the past; the future is quite uncertain and
 always short. thus his existence, even when we consider only its
 formal side, is a constant hurrying of the present into the dead
 past, a constant dying. but if we look at it from the physical
 side; it is clear that, as our walking is admittedly merely a
 constantly prevented falling, the life of our body is only a
 constantly prevented dying, an ever-postponed death: finally, in
 the same way, the activity of our mind is a constantly deferred
 ennui. [pg
 every breath we draw wards off the death that is constantly
 intruding upon us. in this way we fight with it every moment, and
 again, at longer intervals, through every meal we eat, every sleep
 we take, every time we warm ourselves, &c. in the end, death
 must conquer, for we became subject to him through birth, and he
 only plays for a little while with his prey before he swallows it
 up. we pursue our life, however, with great interest and much
 solicitude as long as possible, as we blow out a soap-bubble as
 long and as large as possible, although we know perfectly well that
 it will burst.
we saw that the
 inner being of unconscious nature is a constant striving without
 end and without rest. and this appears to us much more distinctly
 when we consider the nature of brutes and man. willing and striving
 is its whole being, which may be very well compared to an
 unquenchable thirst. but the basis of all willing is need,
 deficiency, and thus pain. consequently, the nature of brutes and
 man is subject to pain originally and through its very being. if,
 on the other hand, it lacks objects of desire, because it is at
 once deprived of them by a too easy satisfaction, a terrible void
 and ennui comes over it, i.e., its being and existence
 itself becomes an unbearable burden to it. thus its life swings
 like a pendulum backwards and forwards between pain and ennui. this
 has also had to express itself very oddly in this way; after man
 had transferred all pain and torments to hell, there then remained
 nothing over for heaven but ennui.
but the constant
 striving which constitutes the inner nature of every manifestation
 of will obtains its primary and most general foundation at the
 higher grades of objectification, from the fact that here the will
 manifests itself as a living body, with the iron command to nourish
 it; and what gives strength to this command is just that this body
 is nothing but the objectified will to live [pg ] itself. man, as the most complete
 objectification of that will, is in like measure also the most
 necessitous of all beings: he is through and through concrete
 willing and needing; he is a concretion of a thousand necessities.
 with these he stands upon the earth, left to himself, uncertain
 about everything except his own need and misery. consequently the
 care for the maintenance of that existence under exacting demands,
 which are renewed every day, occupies, as a rule, the whole of
 human life. to this is directly related the second claim, that of
 the propagation of the species. at the same time he is threatened
 from all sides by the most different kinds of dangers, from which
 it requires constant watchfulness to escape. with cautious steps
 and casting anxious glances round him he pursues his path, for a
 thousand accidents and a thousand enemies lie in wait for him. thus
 he went while yet a savage, thus he goes in civilised life; there
 is no security for him.
“qualibus in tenebris
 vitæ, quantisque periclis
degitur hocc' ævi,
 quodcunque est!”—lucr.
ii. .
the life of the
 great majority is only a constant struggle for this existence
 itself, with the certainty of losing it at last. but what enables
 them to endure this wearisome battle is not so much the love of
 life as the fear of death, which yet stands in the background as
 inevitable, and may come upon them at any moment. life itself is a
 sea, full of rocks and whirlpools, which man avoids with the
 greatest care and solicitude, although he knows that even if he
 succeeds in getting through with all his efforts and skill, he yet
 by doing so comes nearer at every step to the greatest, the total,
 inevitable, and irremediable shipwreck, death; nay, even steers
 right upon it: this is the final goal of the laborious voyage, and
 worse for him than all the rocks from which he has escaped.
now it is well
 worth observing that, on the one hand, [pg ] the suffering and misery of life may easily
 increase to such an extent that death itself, in the flight from
 which the whole of life consists, becomes desirable, and we hasten
 towards it voluntarily; and again, on the other hand, that as soon
 as want and suffering permit rest to a man, ennui is at once so
 near that he necessarily requires diversion. the striving after
 existence is what occupies all living things and maintains them in
 motion. but when existence is assured, then they know not what to
 do with it; thus the second thing that sets them in motion is the
 effort to get free from the burden of existence, to make it cease
 to be felt, “to kill time,”
i.e., to escape from ennui.
 accordingly we see that almost all men who are secure from want and
 care, now that at last they have thrown off all other burdens,
 become a burden to themselves, and regard as a gain every hour they
 succeed in getting through; and thus every diminution of the very
 life which, till then, they have employed all their powers to
 maintain as long as possible. ennui is by no means an evil to be
 lightly esteemed; in the end it depicts on the countenance real
 despair. it makes beings who love each other so little as men do,
 seek each other eagerly, and thus becomes the source of social
 intercourse. moreover, even from motives of policy, public
 precautions are everywhere taken against it, as against other
 universal calamities. for this evil may drive men to the greatest
 excesses, just as much as its opposite extreme, famine: the people
 require panem et
 circenses. the strict penitentiary system of
 philadelphia makes use of ennui alone as a means of punishment,
 through solitary confinement and idleness, and it is found so
 terrible that it has even led prisoners to commit suicide. as want
 is the constant scourge of the people, so ennui is that of the
 fashionable world. in middle-class life ennui is represented by the
 sunday, and want by the six week-days.
thus between
 desiring and attaining all human life flows on throughout. the wish
 is, in its nature, pain; [pg
 the attainment soon begets satiety: the end was only apparent;
 possession takes away the charm; the wish, the need, presents
 itself under a new form; when it does not, then follows
 desolateness, emptiness, ennui, against which the conflict is just
 as painful as against want. that wish and satisfaction should
 follow each other neither too quickly nor too slowly reduces the
 suffering, which both occasion to the smallest amount, and
 constitutes the happiest life. for that which we might otherwise
 call the most beautiful part of life, its purest joy, if it were
 only because it lifts us out of real existence and transforms us
 into disinterested spectators of it—that is, pure knowledge, which
 is foreign to all willing, the pleasure of the beautiful, the true
 delight in art—this is granted only to a very few, because it
 demands rare talents, and to these few only as a passing dream. and
 then, even these few, on account of their higher intellectual
 power, are made susceptible of far greater suffering than duller
 minds can ever feel, and are also placed in lonely isolation by a
 nature which is obviously different from that of others; thus here
 also accounts are squared. but to the great majority of men purely
 intellectual pleasures are not accessible. they are almost quite
 incapable of the joys which lie in pure knowledge. they are
 entirely given up to willing. if, therefore, anything is to win
 their sympathy, to be interesting to them, it must (as
 is implied in the meaning of the word) in some way excite their
 will, even if it is only through a
 distant and merely problematical relation to it; the will must not
 be left altogether out of the question, for their existence lies
 far more in willing than in knowing,—action and reaction is their
 one element. we may find in trifles and everyday occurrences the
 naïve expressions of this quality. thus, for example, at any place
 worth seeing they may visit, they write their names, in order thus
 to react, to affect the place since it does not affect them. again,
 when they see a strange rare animal, they cannot [pg ] easily confine themselves to merely
 observing it; they must rouse it, tease it, play with it, merely to
 experience action and reaction; but this need for excitement of the
 will manifests itself very specially in the discovery and support
 of card-playing, which is quite peculiarly the expression of the
 miserable side of humanity.
but whatever
 nature and fortune may have done, whoever a man be and whatever he
 may possess, the pain which is essential to life cannot be thrown
 off:—πηλειδης δ᾽ ῳμωξεν, ιδων εις ουρανον ευρυν (pelides autem ejulavit, intuitus in cælum
 latum). and again:—ζηνος μεν παις ηα κρονιονος, αυταρ
 οιζυν ειχον απειρεσιην (jovis quidem filius
 eram saturnii; verum ærumnam habebam infinitam). the
 ceaseless efforts to banish suffering accomplish no more than to
 make it change its form. it is essentially deficiency, want, care
 for the maintenance of life. if we succeed, which is very
 difficult, in removing pain in this form, it immediately assumes a
 thousand others, varying according to age and circumstances, such
 as lust, passionate love, jealousy, envy, hatred, anxiety,
 ambition, covetousness, sickness, &c., &c. if at last it
 can find entrance in no other form, it comes in the sad, grey
 garments of tediousness and ennui, against which we then strive in
 various ways. if finally we succeed in driving this away, we shall
 hardly do so without letting pain enter in one of its earlier
 forms, and the dance begin again from the beginning; for all human
 life is tossed backwards and forwards between pain and ennui.
 depressing as this view of life is, i will draw attention, by the
 way, to an aspect of it from which consolation may be drawn, and
 perhaps even a stoical indifference to one's own present ills may
 be attained. for our impatience at these arises for the most part
 from the fact that we regard them as brought about by a chain of
 causes which might easily be different. we do not generally grieve
 over ills which are directly necessary and quite universal; for
 example, the necessity of age and of [pg ] death, and many daily inconveniences. it is
 rather the consideration of the accidental nature of the
 circumstances that brought some sorrow just to us, that gives it
 its sting. but if we have recognised that pain, as such, is
 inevitable and essential to life, and that nothing depends upon
 chance but its mere fashion, the form under which it presents
 itself, that thus our present sorrow fills a place that, without
 it, would at once be occupied by another which now is excluded by
 it, and that therefore fate can affect us little in what is
 essential; such a reflection, if it were to become a living
 conviction, might produce a considerable degree of stoical
 equanimity, and very much lessen the anxious care for our own
 well-being. but, in fact, such a powerful control of reason over
 directly felt suffering seldom or never occurs.
besides, through
 this view of the inevitableness of pain, of the supplanting of one
 pain by another, and the introduction of a new pain through the
 passing away of that which preceded it, one might be led to the
 paradoxical but not absurd hypothesis, that in every individual the
 measure of the pain essential to him was determined once for all by
 his nature, a measure which could neither remain empty, nor be more
 than filled, however much the form of the suffering might change.
 thus his suffering and well-being would by no means be determined
 from without, but only through that measure, that natural
 disposition, which indeed might experience certain additions and
 diminutions from the physical condition at different times, but
 yet, on the whole, would remain the same, and would just be what is
 called the temperament, or, more accurately, the degree in which he
 might be ευκολος or δυσκολος, as plato expresses it in the first
 book of the republic, i.e., in an easy or difficult
 mood. this hypothesis is supported not only by the well-known
 experience that great suffering makes all lesser ills cease to be
 felt, and conversely that freedom from great suffering makes even
 the most trifling inconveniences torment us [pg ] and put us out of humour; but
 experience also teaches that if a great misfortune, at the mere
 thought of which we shuddered, actually befalls us, as soon as we
 have overcome the first pain of it, our disposition remains for the
 most part unchanged; and, conversely, that after the attainment of
 some happiness we have long desired, we do not feel ourselves on
 the whole and permanently very much better off and agreeably
 situated than before. only the moment at which these changes occur
 affects us with unusual strength, as deep sorrow or exulting joy,
 but both soon pass away, for they are based upon illusion. for they
 do not spring from the immediately present pleasure or pain, but
 only from the opening up of a new future which is anticipated in
 them. only by borrowing from the future could pain or pleasure be
 heightened so abnormally, and consequently not enduringly. it would
 follow, from the hypothesis advanced, that a large part of the
 feeling of suffering and of well-being would be subjective and
 determined a priori, as is
 the case with knowing; and we may add the following remarks as
 evidence in favour of it. human cheerfulness or dejection are
 manifestly not determined by external circumstances, such as wealth
 and position, for we see at least as many glad faces among the poor
 as among the rich. further, the motives which induce suicide are so
 very different, that we can assign no motive that is so great as to
 bring it about, even with great probability, in every character,
 and few that would be so small that the like of them had never
 caused it. now although the degree of our serenity or sadness is
 not at all times the same, yet, in consequence of this view, we
 shall not attribute it to the change of outward circumstances, but
 to that of the inner condition, the physical state. for when an
 actual, though only temporary, increase of our serenity, even to
 the extent of joyfulness, takes place, it usually appears without
 any external occasion. it is true that [pg ] we often see our pain arise only from some
 definite external relation, and are visibly oppressed and saddened
 by this only. then we believe that if only this were taken away,
 the greatest contentment would necessarily ensue. but this is
 illusion. the measure of our pain and our happiness is on the
 whole, according to our hypothesis, subjectively determined for
 each point of time, and the motive for sadness is related to that,
 just as a blister which draws to a head all the bad humours
 otherwise distributed is related to the body. the pain which is at
 that period of time essential to our nature, and therefore cannot
 be shaken off, would, without the definite external cause of our
 suffering, be divided at a hundred points, and appear in the form
 of a hundred little annoyances and cares about things which we now
 entirely overlook, because our capacity for pain is already filled
 by that chief evil which has concentrated in a point all the
 suffering otherwise dispersed. this corresponds also to the
 observation that if a great and pressing care is lifted from our
 breast by its fortunate issue, another immediately takes its place,
 the whole material of which was already there before, yet could not
 come into consciousness as care because there was no capacity left
 for it, and therefore this material of care remained indistinct and
 unobserved in a cloudy form on the farthest horizon of
 consciousness. but now that there is room, this prepared material
 at once comes forward and occupies the throne of the reigning care
 of the day (πρυτανευουσα). and if it is very much lighter in its
 matter than the material of the care which has vanished, it knows
 how to blow itself out so as apparently to equal it in size, and
 thus, as the chief care of the day, completely fills the
 throne.
excessive joy
 and very keen suffering always occur in the same person, for they
 condition each other reciprocally, and are also in common
 conditioned by great activity of the mind. both are produced, as we
 have just seen, not by what is really present, but by the
 anticipation of [pg
 the future. but since pain is essential to life, and its degree is
 also determined by the nature of the subject, sudden changes,
 because they are always external, cannot really alter its degree.
 thus an error and delusion always lies at the foundation of
 immoderate joy or grief, and consequently both these excessive
 strainings of the mind can be avoided by knowledge. every
 immoderate joy (exultatio, insolens
 lætitia) always rests on the delusion that one has
 found in life what can never be found there—lasting satisfaction of
 the harassing desires and cares, which are constantly breeding new
 ones. from every particular delusion of this kind one must
 inevitably be brought back later, and then when it vanishes must
 pay for it with pain as bitter as the joy its entrance caused was
 keen. so far, then, it is precisely like a height from which one
 can come down only by a fall. therefore one ought to avoid them;
 and every sudden excessive grief is just a fall from some such
 height, the vanishing of such a delusion, and so conditioned by it.
 consequently we might avoid them both if we had sufficient control
 over ourselves to survey things always with perfect clearness as a
 whole and in their connection, and steadfastly to guard against
 really lending them the colours which we wish they had. the
 principal effort of the stoical ethics was to free the mind from
 all such delusion and its consequences, and to give it instead an
 equanimity that could not be disturbed. it is this insight that
 inspires horace in the well-known ode—
“æquam
 memento rebus in arduiis
servare mentem, non secus in
 bonis
ab insolenti
 temperatam
lætitia.”
for the most
 part, however, we close our minds against the knowledge, which may
 be compared to a bitter medicine, that suffering is essential to
 life, and therefore does not flow in upon us from without, but that
 every one carries about with him its perennial source in his own
 [pg ] heart. we rather
 seek constantly for an external particular cause, as it were, a
 pretext for the pain which never leaves us, just as the free man
 makes himself an idol, in order to have a master. for we
 unweariedly strive from wish to wish; and although every
 satisfaction, however much it promised, when attained fails to
 satisfy us, but for the most part comes presently to be an error of
 which we are ashamed, yet we do not see that we draw water with the
 sieve of the danaides, but ever hasten to new desires.
“sed, dum abest quod
 avemus, id exsuperare videtur
cætera; post aliud, quum
 contigit illud, avemus;
et sitis æqua tenet
 vitai semper hiantes.”—lucr.
iii. .
thus it either
 goes on for ever, or, what is more rare and presupposes a certain
 strength of character, till we reach a wish which is not satisfied
 and yet cannot be given up. in that case we have, as it were, found
 what we sought, something that we can always blame, instead of our
 own nature, as the source of our suffering. and thus, although we
 are now at variance with our fate, we are reconciled to our
 existence, for the knowledge is again put far from us that
 suffering is essential to this existence itself, and true
 satisfaction impossible. the result of this form of development is
 a somewhat melancholy disposition, the constant endurance of a
 single great pain, and the contempt for all lesser sorrows or joys
 that proceeds from it; consequently an already nobler phenomenon
 than that constant seizing upon ever-new forms of illusion, which
 is much more common.
§ . all
 satisfaction, or what is commonly called happiness, is always
 really and essentially only negative, and never positive. it
 is not an original gratification coming to us of itself, but must
 always be the satisfaction of a wish. the wish, i.e.,
 some want, is the condition which precedes every pleasure. but with
 the satisfaction the wish and therefore the pleasure cease. thus
 the satisfaction or the pleasing can never be more than the
 [pg ] deliverance from a
 pain, from a want; for such is not only every actual, open sorrow,
 but every desire, the importunity of which disturbs our peace, and,
 indeed, the deadening ennui also that makes life a burden to us. it
 is, however, so hard to attain or achieve anything; difficulties
 and troubles without end are opposed to every purpose, and at every
 step hindrances accumulate. but when finally everything is overcome
 and attained, nothing can ever be gained but deliverance from some
 sorrow or desire, so that we find ourselves just in the same
 position as we occupied before this sorrow or desire appeared. all
 that is even directly given us is merely the want, i.e.,
 the pain. the satisfaction and the pleasure we can only know
 indirectly through the remembrance of the preceding suffering and
 want, which ceases with its appearance. hence it arises that we are
 not properly conscious of the blessings and advantages we actually
 possess, nor do we prize them, but think of them merely as a matter
 of course, for they gratify us only negatively by restraining
 suffering. only when we have lost them do we become sensible of
 their value; for the want, the privation, the sorrow, is the
 positive, communicating itself directly to us. thus also we are
 pleased by the remembrance of past need, sickness, want, and such
 like, because this is the only means of enjoying the present
 blessings. and, further, it cannot be denied that in this respect,
 and from this standpoint of egoism, which is the form of the will
 to live, the sight or the description of the sufferings of others
 affords us satisfaction and pleasure in precisely the way lucretius
 beautifully and frankly expresses it in the beginning of the second
 book—
“suave,
 mari magno, turbantibus æquora ventis,
e terra magnum alterius
 spectare laborem:
non, quia vexari
 quemquam est jucunda voluptas;
sed, quibus ipse malis
 careas, quia cernere suave est.”
yet we shall see
 farther on that this kind of pleasure, [pg ] through knowledge of our own well-being
 obtained in this way, lies very near the source of real, positive
 wickedness.
that all
 happiness is only of a negative not a positive nature, that just on
 this account it cannot be lasting satisfaction and gratification,
 but merely delivers us from some pain or want which must be
 followed either by a new pain, or by languor, empty longing, and
 ennui; this finds support in art, that true mirror of the world and
 life, and especially in poetry. every epic and dramatic poem can
 only represent a struggle, an effort, and fight for happiness,
 never enduring and complete happiness itself. it conducts its
 heroes through a thousand difficulties and dangers to the goal; as
 soon as this is reached, it hastens to let the curtain fall; for
 now there would remain nothing for it to do but to show that the
 glittering goal in which the hero expected to find happiness had
 only disappointed him, and that after its attainment he was no
 better off than before. because a genuine enduring happiness is not
 possible, it cannot be the subject of art. certainly the aim of the
 idyll is the description of such a happiness, but one also sees
 that the idyll as such cannot continue. the poet always finds that
 it either becomes epical in his hands, and in this case it is a
 very insignificant epic, made up of trifling sorrows, trifling
 delights, and trifling efforts—this is the commonest case—or else
 it becomes a merely descriptive poem, describing the beauty of
 nature, i.e., pure knowing free from
 will, which certainly, as a matter of fact, is the only pure
 happiness, which is neither preceded by suffering or want, nor
 necessarily followed by repentance, sorrow, emptiness, or satiety;
 but this happiness cannot fill the whole life, but is only possible
 at moments. what we see in poetry we find again in music; in the
 melodies of which we have recognised the universal expression of
 the inmost history of the self-conscious will, the most secret
 life, longing, suffering, and delight; the ebb and [pg ] flow of the human heart. melody is
 always a deviation from the keynote through a thousand capricious
 wanderings, even to the most painful discord, and then a final
 return to the keynote which expresses the satisfaction and
 appeasing of the will, but with which nothing more can then be
 done, and the continuance of which any longer would only be a
 wearisome and unmeaning monotony corresponding to ennui.
all that we
 intend to bring out clearly through these investigations, the
 impossibility of attaining lasting satisfaction and the negative
 nature of all happiness, finds its explanation in what is shown at
 the conclusion of the second book: that the will, of which human
 life, like every phenomenon, is the objectification, is a striving
 without aim or end. we find the stamp of this endlessness imprinted
 upon all the parts of its whole manifestation, from its most
 universal form, endless time and space, up to the most perfect of
 all phenomena, the life and efforts of man. we may theoretically
 assume three extremes of human life, and treat them as elements of
 actual human life. first, the powerful will, the strong passions
 (radscha-guna). it appears in great historical characters; it is
 described in the epic and the drama. but it can also show itself in
 the little world, for the size of the objects is measured here by
 the degree in which they influence the will, not according to their
 external relations. secondly, pure knowing, the comprehension of
 the ideas, conditioned by the freeing of knowledge from the service
 of will: the life of genius (satwa-guna). thirdly and lastly, the
 greatest lethargy of the will, and also of the knowledge attaching
 to it, empty longing, life-benumbing languor (tama-guna). the life
 of the individual, far from becoming permanently fixed in one of
 these extremes, seldom touches any of them, and is for the most
 part only a weak and wavering approach to one or the other side, a
 needy desiring of trifling objects, constantly recurring, and so
 [pg ] escaping ennui. it
 is really incredible how meaningless and void of significance when
 looked at from without, how dull and unenlightened by intellect
 when felt from within, is the course of the life of the great
 majority of men. it is a weary longing and complaining, a
 dream-like staggering through the four ages of life to death,
 accompanied by a series of trivial thoughts. such men are like
 clockwork, which is wound up, and goes it knows not why; and every
 time a man is begotten and born, the clock of human life is wound
 up anew, to repeat the same old piece it has played innumerable
 times before, passage after passage, measure after measure, with
 insignificant variations. every individual, every human being and
 his course of life, is but another short dream of the endless
 spirit of nature, of the persistent will to live; is only another
 fleeting form, which it carelessly sketches on its infinite page,
 space and time; allows to remain for a time so short that it
 vanishes into nothing in comparison with these, and then
 obliterates to make new room. and yet, and here lies the serious
 side of life, every one of these fleeting forms, these empty
 fancies, must be paid for by the whole will to live, in all its
 activity, with many and deep sufferings, and finally with a bitter
 death, long feared and coming at last. this is why the sight of a
 corpse makes us suddenly so serious.
the life of
 every individual, if we survey it as a whole and in general, and
 only lay stress upon its most significant features, is really
 always a tragedy, but gone through in detail, it has the character
 of a comedy. for the deeds and vexations of the day, the restless
 irritation of the moment, the desires and fears of the week, the
 mishaps of every hour, are all through chance, which is ever bent
 upon some jest, scenes of a comedy. but the never-satisfied wishes,
 the frustrated efforts, the hopes unmercifully crushed by fate, the
 unfortunate errors of the whole life, with increasing suffering and
 death at the [pg
 end, are always a tragedy. thus, as if fate would add derision to
 the misery of our existence, our life must contain all the woes of
 tragedy, and yet we cannot even assert the dignity of tragic
 characters, but in the broad detail of life must inevitably be the
 foolish characters of a comedy.
but however much
 great and small trials may fill human life, they are not able to
 conceal its insufficiency to satisfy the spirit; they cannot hide
 the emptiness and superficiality of existence, nor exclude ennui,
 which is always ready to fill up every pause that care may allow.
 hence it arises that the human mind, not content with the cares,
 anxieties, and occupations which the actual world lays upon it,
 creates for itself an imaginary world also in the form of a
 thousand different superstitions, then finds all manner of
 employment with this, and wastes time and strength upon it, as soon
 as the real world is willing to grant it the rest which it is quite
 incapable of enjoying. this is accordingly most markedly the case
 with nations for which life is made easy by the congenial nature of
 the climate and the soil, most of all with the hindus, then with
 the greeks, the romans, and later with the italians, the spaniards,
 &c. demons, gods, and saints man creates in his own image; and
 to them he must then unceasingly bring offerings, prayers, temple
 decorations, vows and their fulfilment, pilgrimages, salutations,
 ornaments for their images, &c. their service mingles
 everywhere with the real, and, indeed, obscures it. every event of
 life is regarded as the work of these beings; the intercourse with
 them occupies half the time of life, constantly sustains hope, and
 by the charm of illusion often becomes more interesting than
 intercourse with real beings. it is the expression and symptom of
 the actual need of mankind, partly for help and support, partly for
 occupation and diversion; and if it often works in direct
 opposition to the first need, because when accidents and dangers
 arise valuable time [pg
 and strength, instead of being directed to warding them off, are
 uselessly wasted on prayers and offerings; it serves the second end
 all the better by this imaginary converse with a visionary spirit
 world; and this is the by no means contemptible gain of all
 superstitions.
§ . if we have
 so far convinced ourselves a
 priori, by the most general consideration, by
 investigation of the primary and elemental features of human life,
 that in its whole plan it is capable of no true blessedness, but is
 in its very nature suffering in various forms, and throughout a
 state of misery, we might now awaken this conviction much more
 vividly within us if, proceeding more a
 posteriori, we were to turn to more definite
 instances, call up pictures to the fancy, and illustrate by
 examples the unspeakable misery which experience and history
 present, wherever one may look and in whatever direction one may
 seek. but the chapter would have no end, and would carry us far
 from the standpoint of the universal, which is essential to
 philosophy; and, moreover, such a description might easily be taken
 for a mere declamation on human misery, such as has often been
 given, and, as such, might be charged with one-sidedness, because
 it started from particular facts. from such a reproach and
 suspicion our perfectly cold and philosophical investigation of the
 inevitable suffering which is founded in the nature of life is
 free, for it starts from the universal and is conducted a priori. but confirmation
 a posteriori is everywhere
 easily obtained. every one who has awakened from the first dream of
 youth, who has considered his own experience and that of others,
 who has studied himself in life, in the history of the past and of
 his own time, and finally in the works of the great poets, will, if
 his judgment is not paralysed by some indelibly imprinted
 prejudice, certainly arrive at the conclusion that this human world
 is the kingdom of chance and error, which rule without mercy in
 great things and in small, and along with which folly and
 wickedness also wield the scourge. hence it arises [pg ] that everything better only struggles
 through with difficulty; what is noble and wise seldom attains to
 expression, becomes effective and claims attention, but the absurd
 and the perverse in the sphere of thought, the dull and tasteless
 in the sphere of art, the wicked and deceitful in the sphere of
 action, really assert a supremacy, only disturbed by short
 interruptions. on the other hand, everything that is excellent is
 always a mere exception, one case in millions, and therefore, if it
 presents itself in a lasting work, this, when it has outlived the
 enmity of its contemporaries, exists in isolation, is preserved
 like a meteoric stone, sprung from an order of things different
 from that which prevails here. but as far as the life of the
 individual is concerned, every biography is the history of
 suffering, for every life is, as a rule, a continual series of
 great and small misfortunes, which each one conceals as much as
 possible, because he knows that others can seldom feel sympathy or
 compassion, but almost always satisfaction at the sight of the woes
 from which they are themselves for the moment exempt. but perhaps
 at the end of life, if a man is sincere and in full possession of
 his faculties, he will never wish to have it to live over again,
 but rather than this, he will much prefer absolute annihilation.
 the essential content of the famous soliloquy in “hamlet” is briefly this: our state is so
 wretched that absolute annihilation would be decidedly preferable.
 if suicide really offered us this, so that the alternative
 “to be or not to be,” in the full
 sense of the word, was placed before us, then it would be
 unconditionally to be chosen as “a
 consummation devoutly to be wished.” but there is something
 in us which tells us that this is not the case: suicide is not the
 end; death is not absolute annihilation. in like manner, what was
 said by the father of history has
 not since him been contradicted, that no man has ever lived who has
 not wished more than once that he had not to live the following
 day. [pg ] according to this,
 the brevity of life, which is so constantly lamented, may be the
 best quality it possesses. if, finally, we should bring clearly to
 a man's sight the terrible sufferings and miseries to which his
 life is constantly exposed, he would be seized with horror; and if
 we were to conduct the confirmed optimist through the hospitals,
 infirmaries, and surgical operating-rooms, through the prisons,
 torture-chambers, and slave-kennels, over battle-fields and places
 of execution; if we were to open to him all the dark abodes of
 misery, where it hides itself from the glance of cold curiosity,
 and, finally, allow him to glance into the starving dungeon of
 ugolino, he, too, would understand at last the nature of this
 “best of possible worlds.” for
 whence did dante take the materials for his hell but from this our
 actual world? and yet he made a very proper hell of it. and when,
 on the other hand, he came to the task of describing heaven and its
 delights, he had an insurmountable difficulty before him, for our
 world affords no materials at all for this. therefore there
 remained nothing for him to do but, instead of describing the joys
 of paradise, to repeat to us the instruction given him there by his
 ancestor, by beatrice, and by various saints. but from this it is
 sufficiently clear what manner of world it is. certainly human
 life, like all bad ware, is covered over with a false lustre: what
 suffers always conceals itself; on the other hand, whatever pomp or
 splendour any one can get, he makes a show of openly, and the more
 inner contentment deserts him, the more he desires to exist as
 fortunate in the opinion of others: to such an extent does folly
 go, and the opinion of others is a chief aim of the efforts of
 every one, although the utter nothingness of it is expressed in the
 fact that in almost all languages vanity, vanitas, originally signifies
 emptiness and nothingness. but under all this false show, the
 miseries of life can so increase—and this happens every day—that
 the death which hitherto has been feared above all things is
 [pg ] eagerly seized upon.
 indeed, if fate will show its whole malice, even this refuge is
 denied to the sufferer, and, in the hands of enraged enemies, he
 may remain exposed to terrible and slow tortures without remedy. in
 vain the sufferer then calls on his gods for help; he remains
 exposed to his fate without grace. but this irremediableness is
 only the mirror of the invincible nature of his will, of which his
 person is the objectivity. as little as an external power can
 change or suppress this will, so little can a foreign power deliver
 it from the miseries which proceed from the life which is the
 phenomenal appearance of that will. in the principal matter, as in
 everything else, a man is always thrown back upon himself. in vain
 does he make to himself gods in order to get from them by prayers
 and flattery what can only be accomplished by his own will-power.
 the old testament made the world and man the work of a god, but the
 new testament saw that, in order to teach that holiness and
 salvation from the sorrows of this world can only come from the
 world itself, it was necessary that this god should become man. it
 is and remains the will of man upon which everything depends for
 him. fanatics, martyrs, saints of every faith and name, have
 voluntarily and gladly endured every torture, because in them the
 will to live had suppressed itself; and then even the slow
 destruction of its phenomenon was welcome to them. but i do not
 wish to anticipate the later exposition. for the rest, i cannot
 here avoid the statement that, to me, optimism, when it is not merely
 the thoughtless talk of such as harbour nothing but words under
 their low foreheads, appears not merely as an absurd, but also as a
 really wicked way of thinking, as a
 bitter mockery of the unspeakable suffering of humanity. let no one
 think that christianity is favourable to optimism; for, on the
 contrary, in the gospels world and evil are used as almost
 synonymous.[pg ]
§ . we have
 now completed the two expositions it was necessary to insert; the
 exposition of the freedom of the will in itself together with the
 necessity of its phenomenon, and the exposition of its lot in the
 world which reflects its own nature, and upon the knowledge of
 which it has to assert or deny itself. therefore we can now proceed
 to bring out more clearly the nature of this assertion and denial
 itself, which was referred to and explained in a merely general way
 above. this we shall do by exhibiting the conduct in which alone it
 finds its expression, and considering it in its inner
 significance.
the assertion of the
 will is the continuous willing itself, undisturbed by
 any knowledge, as it fills the life of man in general. for even the
 body of a man is the objectivity of the will, as it appears at this
 grade and in this individual. and thus his willing which develops
 itself in time is, as it were, a paraphrase of his body, an
 elucidation of the significance of the whole and its parts; it is
 another way of exhibiting the same thing-in-itself, of which the
 body is already the phenomenon. therefore, instead of saying
 assertion of the will, we may say assertion of the body. the
 fundamental theme or subject of all the multifarious acts of will
 is the satisfaction of the wants which are inseparable from the
 existence of the body in health, they already have their expression
 in it, and may be referred to the maintenance of the individual and
 the propagation of the species. but indirectly the most different
 kinds of motives obtain in this way power over the will, and bring
 about the most multifarious acts of will. each of these is only an
 example, an instance, of the will which here manifests itself
 generally. of what nature this example may be, what form the motive
 may have and impart to it, is not essential; the important point
 here is that something is willed in general and the degree of
 intensity with which it is so willed. the will can only become
 visible in the motives, as the eye only manifests its power of
 seeing in the light. [pg
 the motive in general stands before the will in protean forms. it
 constantly promises complete satisfaction, the quenching of the
 thirst of will. but whenever it is attained it at once appears in
 another form, and thus influences the will anew, always according
 to the degree of the intensity of this will, and its relation to
 knowledge which are revealed as empirical character, in these very
 examples and instances.
from the first
 appearance of consciousness, a man finds himself a willing being,
 and as a rule, his knowledge remains in constant relation to his
 will. he first seeks to know thoroughly the objects of his desire,
 and then the means of attaining them. now he knows what he has to
 do, and, as a rule, he does not strive after other knowledge. he
 moves and acts; his consciousness keeps him always working directly
 and actively towards the aims of his will; his thought is concerned
 with the choice of motives. such is life for almost all men; they
 wish, they know what they wish, and they strive after it, with
 sufficient success to keep them from despair, and sufficient
 failure to keep them from ennui and its consequences. from this
 proceeds a certain serenity, or at least indifference, which cannot
 be affected by wealth or poverty; for the rich and the poor do not
 enjoy what they have, for this, as we have shown, acts in a purely
 negative way, but what they hope to attain to by their efforts.
 they press forward with much earnestness, and indeed with an air of
 importance; thus children also pursue their play. it is always an
 exception if such a life suffers interruption from the fact that
 either the æsthetic demand for contemplation or the ethical demand
 for renunciation proceed from a knowledge which is independent of
 the service of the will, and directed to the nature of the world in
 general. most men are pursued by want all through life, without
 ever being allowed to come to their senses. on the other hand, the
 will is often inflamed to a degree that far transcends the
 assertion of the [pg
 body, and then violent emotions and powerful passions show
 themselves, in which the individual not only asserts his own
 existence, but denies and seeks to suppress that of others when it
 stands in his way.
the maintenance
 of the body through its own powers is so small a degree of the
 assertion of will, that if it voluntarily remains at this degree,
 we might assume that, with the death of this body, the will also
 which appeared in it would be extinguished. but even the
 satisfaction of the sexual passions goes beyond the assertion of
 one's own existence, which fills so short a time, and asserts life
 for an indefinite time after the death of the individual. nature,
 always true and consistent, here even naïve, exhibits to us openly
 the inner significance of the act of generation. our own
 consciousness, the intensity of the impulse, teaches us that in
 this act the most decided assertion of the will to live
 expresses itself, pure and without further addition (any denial of
 other individuals); and now, as the consequence of this act, a new
 life appears in time and the causal series, i.e.,
 in nature; the begotten appears before the begetter, different as
 regards the phenomenon, but in himself, i.e.,
 according to the idea, identical with him. therefore it is this act
 through which every species of living creature binds itself to a
 whole and is perpetuated. generation is, with reference to the
 begetter, only the expression, the symptom, of his decided
 assertion of the will to live: with reference to the begotten, it
 is not the cause of the will which appears in him, for the will in
 itself knows neither cause nor effect, but, like all causes, it is
 merely the occasional cause of the phenomenal appearance of this
 will at this time in this place. as thing-in-itself, the will of
 the begetter and that of the begotten are not different, for only
 the phenomenon, not the thing-in-itself, is subordinate to the
 principim individuationis. with
 that assertion beyond our own body and extending to the production
 of a new body, suffering [pg
 and death, as belonging to the phenomenon of life, have also been
 asserted anew, and the possibility of salvation, introduced by the
 completest capability of knowledge, has for this time been shown to
 be fruitless. here lies the profound reason of the shame connected
 with the process of generation. this view is mythically expressed
 in the dogma of christian theology that we are all partakers in
 adam's first transgression (which is clearly just the satisfaction
 of sexual passion), and through it are guilty of suffering and
 death. in this theology goes beyond the consideration of things
 according to the principle of sufficient reason, and recognises the
 idea of man, the unity of which is re-established out of its
 dispersion into innumerable individuals through the bond of
 generation which holds them all together. accordingly it regards
 every individual as on one side identical with adam, the
 representative of the assertion of life, and, so far, as subject to
 sin (original sin), suffering, and death; on the other side, the
 knowledge of the idea of man enables it to regard every individual
 as identical with the saviour, the representative of the denial of
 the will to live, and, so far as a partaker of his sacrifice of
 himself, saved through his merits, and delivered from the bands of
 sin and death, i.e., the world (rom. v.
another mythical
 exposition of our view of sexual pleasure as the assertion of the
 will to live beyond the individual life, as an attainment to life
 which is brought about for the first time by this means, or as it
 were a renewed assignment of life, is the greek myth of proserpine,
 who might return from the lower world so long as she had not tasted
 its fruit, but who became subject to it altogether through eating
 the pomegranate. this meaning appears very clearly in goethe's
 incomparable presentation of this myth, especially when, as soon as
 she has tasted the pomegranate, the invisible chorus of the
 fates—[pg
“thou
 art ours!
fasting shouldest thou
 return:
and the bite of the apple makes thee
 ours!”
it is worth
 noticing that clement of alexandria (strom. iii. c. ) illustrates
 the matter with the same image and the same expression: οἱ μεν
 (qui se castrarunt ab omni peccato propter
 regnum cœlorum, ii sunt beati, a mundo
 jejunantes).
the sexual
 impulse also proves itself the decided and strongest assertion of
 life by the fact that to man in a state of nature, as to the
 brutes, it is the final end, the highest goal of life.
 self-maintenance is his first effort, and as soon as he has made
 provision for that, he only strives after the propagation of the
 species: as a merely natural being he can attempt no more. nature
 also, the inner being of which is the will to live itself, impels
 with all her power both man and the brute towards propagation. then
 it has attained its end with the individual, and is quite
 indifferent to its death, for, as the will to live, it cares only
 for the preservation of the species, the individual is nothing to
 it. because the will to live expresses itself most strongly in the
 sexual impulse, the inner being of nature, the old poets and
 philosophers—hesiod and parmenides—said very significantly that
 eros is the first, the creator, the principle from which all things
 proceed. (cf. arist. metaph., i. .) pherecydes said: εις ερωτα
 μεταβεβλησθαι τον δια, μελλοντα δημιουργειν (jovem, cum mundum fabricare vellet, in
 cupidinem sese transformasse). proclus ad plat.
 tim., l. iii. a complete treatment of this subject we
 have recently received from g. f. schœmann, “de cupidine cosmogonico,”
 . the mâya of the hindus, whose work and web is the whole world
 of illusion, is also symbolised by love.
the genital
 organs are, far more than any other external member of the body,
 subject merely to the will, and [pg ] not at all to knowledge. indeed, the will
 shows itself here almost as independent of knowledge, as in those
 parts which, acting merely in consequence of stimuli, are
 subservient to vegetative life and reproduction, in which the will
 works blindly as in unconscious nature. for generation is only
 reproduction passing over to a new individual, as it were
 reproduction at the second power, as death is only excretion at the
 second power. according to all this, the genitals are properly the
 focus of will, and consequently
 the opposite pole of the brain, the representative of knowledge,
 i.e., the other side of the
 world, the world as idea. the former are the life-sustaining
 principle ensuring endless life to time. in this respect they were
 worshipped by the greeks in the phallus, and by the hindus in
 the lingam, which
 are thus the symbol of the assertion of the will. knowledge, on the
 other hand, affords the possibility of the suppression of willing,
 of salvation through freedom, of conquest and annihilation of the
 world.
we already
 considered fully at the beginning of this fourth book how the will
 to live in its assertion must regard its relation to death. we saw
 that death does not trouble it, because it exists as something
 included in life itself and belonging to it. its opposite,
 generation, completely counterbalances it; and, in spite of the
 death of the individual, ensures and guarantees life to the will to
 live through all time. to express this the hindus made the
 lingam an attribute of siva, the
 god of death. we also fully explained there how he who with full
 consciousness occupies the standpoint of the decided assertion of
 life awaits death without fear. we shall therefore say nothing more
 about this here. without clear consciousness most men occupy this
 standpoint and continually assert life. the world exists as the
 mirror of this assertion, with innumerable individuals in infinite
 time and space, in infinite suffering, between generation and death
 without end. yet from no side is a complaint to be [pg ] further raised about this; for the will
 conducts the great tragedy and comedy at its own expense, and is
 also its own spectator. the world is just what it is because the
 will, whose manifestation it is, is what it is, because it so
 wills. the justification of suffering is, that in this phenomenon
 also the will asserts itself; and this assertion is justified and
 balanced by the fact that the will bears the suffering. here we get
 a glimpse of eternal justice in the whole: we
 shall recognise it later more definitely and distinctly, and also
 in the particular. but first we must consider temporal or human
 justice.
 § . it
 may be remembered from the second book that in the whole of nature,
 at all the grades of the objectification of will, there was a
 necessary and constant conflict between the individuals of all
 species; and in this way was expressed the inner contradiction of
 the will to live with itself. at the highest grade of the
 objectification, this phenomenon, like all others, will exhibit
 itself with greater distinctness, and will therefore be more easily
 explained. with this aim we shall next attempt to trace the source
 of egoism as the starting-point of
 all conflict.
we have called
 time and space the principium
 individuationis, because only through them and in
 them is multiplicity of the homogeneous possible. they are the
 essential forms of natural knowledge, i.e.,
 knowledge springing from the will. therefore the will everywhere
 manifests itself in the multiplicity of individuals. but this
 multiplicity does not concern the will as thing-in-itself, but only
 its phenomena. the will itself is present, whole and undivided, in
 every one of these, and beholds around it the innumerably repeated
 image of its own nature; but this nature itself, the actually real,
 it finds directly only in its inner self. therefore every one
 desires everything for himself, desires to possess, or at least to
 control, everything, and whatever opposes it it would like to
 destroy. to this is added, in [pg ] the case of such beings as have knowledge,
 that the individual is the supporter of the knowing subject, and
 the knowing subject is the supporter of the world, i.e.,
 that the whole of nature outside the knowing subject, and thus also
 all other individuals, exist only in its idea; it is only conscious
 of them as its idea, thus merely indirectly as something which is
 dependent on its own nature and existence; for with its
 consciousness the world necessarily disappears for it, i.e.,
 its being and non-being become synonymous and indistinguishable.
 every knowing individual is thus in truth, and finds itself as the
 whole will to live, or the inner being of the world itself, and
 also as the complemental condition of the world as idea,
 consequently as a microcosm which is of equal value with the
 macrocosm. nature itself, which is everywhere and always truthful,
 gives him this knowledge, originally and independently of all
 reflection, with simple and direct certainty. now from these two
 necessary properties we have given the fact may be explained that
 every individual, though vanishing altogether and diminished to
 nothing in the boundless world, yet makes itself the centre of the
 world, has regard for its own existence and well-being before
 everything else; indeed, from the natural standpoint, is ready to
 sacrifice everything else for this—is ready to annihilate the world
 in order to maintain its own self, this drop in the ocean, a little
 longer. this disposition is egoism, which is essential to
 everything in nature. yet it is just through egoism that the inner
 conflict of the will with itself attains to such a terrible
 revelation; for this egoism has its continuance and being in that
 opposition of the microcosm and macrocosm, or in the fact that the
 objectification of will has the principium individuationis for
 its form, through which the will manifests itself in the same way
 in innumerable individuals, and indeed entire and completely in
 both aspects (will and idea) in each. thus, while each individual
 is given to itself directly as the [pg ] whole will and the whole subject of ideas,
 other individuals are only given it as ideas. therefore its own
 being, and the maintenance of it, is of more importance to it than
 that of all others together. every one looks upon his own death as
 upon the end of the world, while he accepts the death of his
 acquaintances as a matter of comparative indifference, if he is not
 in some way affected by it. in the consciousness that has reached
 the highest grade, that of man, egoism, as well as knowledge, pain
 and pleasure, must have reached its highest grade also, and the
 conflict of individuals which is conditioned by it must appear in
 its most terrible form. and indeed we see this everywhere before
 our eyes, in small things as in great. now we see its terrible side
 in the lives of great tyrants and miscreants, and in
 world-desolating wars; now its absurd side, in which it is the
 theme of comedy, and very specially appears as self-conceit and
 vanity. rochefoucault understood this better than any one else, and
 presented it in the abstract. we see it both in the history of the
 world and in our own experience. but it appears most distinctly of
 all when any mob of men is set free from all law and order; then
 there shows itself at once in the distinctest form the bellum omnium contra omnes,
 which hobbes has so admirably described in the first chapter
 de
 cive. we see not only how every one tries to seize
 from the other what he wants himself, but how often one will
 destroy the whole happiness or life of another for the sake of an
 insignificant addition to his own happiness. this is the highest
 expression of egoism, the manifestations of which in this regard
 are only surpassed by those of actual wickedness, which seeks,
 quite disinterestedly, the hurt and suffering of others, without
 any advantage to itself. of this we shall speak soon. with this
 exhibition of the source of egoism the reader should compare the
 presentation of it in my prize-essay on the basis of morals, §
a chief source
 of that suffering which we found above [pg ] to be essential and inevitable to all life
 is, when it really appears in a definite form, that eris, the conflict of all
 individuals, the expression of the contradiction, with which the
 will to live is affected in its inner self, and which attains a
 visible form through the principium
 individuationis. wild-beast fights are the most cruel
 means of showing this directly and vividly. in this original
 discord lies an unquenchable source of suffering, in spite of the
 precautions that have been taken against it, and which we shall now
 consider more closely.
§ . it has
 already been explained that the first and simplest assertion of the
 will to live is only the assertion of one's own body, i.e.,
 the exhibition of the will through acts in time, so far as the
 body, in its form and design, exhibits the same will in space, and
 no further. this assertion shows itself as maintenance of the body,
 by means of the application of its own powers. to it is directly
 related the satisfaction of the sexual impulse; indeed this belongs
 to it, because the genitals belong to the body. therefore
 voluntary renunciation of the
 satisfaction of that impulse, based upon no motive,
 is already a denial of the will to live, is a voluntary
 self-suppression of it, upon the entrance of knowledge which acts
 as a quieter. accordingly such denial
 of one's own body exhibits itself as a contradiction by the will of
 its own phenomenon. for although here also the body objectifies in
 the genitals the will to perpetuate the species, yet this is not
 willed. just on this account, because it is a denial or suppression
 of the will to live, such a renunciation is a hard and painful
 self-conquest; but of this later. but since the will exhibits that
 self-assertion of one's own body
 in innumerable individuals beside each other, it very easily
 extends in one individual, on account of the egoism peculiar to
 them all, beyond this assertion to the denial
 of the same will appearing in another individual. the will of the
 first breaks through the limits of the assertion of will of
 another, because the individual either destroys or injures
 [pg ] this other body
 itself, or else because it compels the powers of the other body to
 serve its
 own will, instead of the will which manifests itself in
 that other body. thus if, from the will manifesting itself as
 another body, it withdraws the powers of this body, and so
 increases the power serving its own will beyond that of its own
 body, it consequently asserts its own will beyond its own body by
 means of the negation of the will appearing in another body. this
 breaking through the limits of the assertion of will of another has
 always been distinctly recognised, and its concept denoted by the
 word wrong. for both sides recognise
 the fact instantly, not, indeed, as we do here in distinct
 abstraction, but as feeling. he who suffers wrong feels the
 transgression into the sphere of the assertion of his own body,
 through the denial of it by another individual, as a direct and
 mental pain which is entirely separated and different from the
 accompanying physical suffering experienced from the act or the
 vexation at the loss. to the doer of wrong, on the other hand, the
 knowledge presents itself that he is in himself the same will which
 appears in that body also, and which asserts itself with such
 vehemence; the one phenomenon that, transgressing the limits of its
 own body and its powers, it extends to the denial of this very will
 in another phenomenon, and so, regarded as will in itself, it
 strives against itself by this vehemence and rends itself.
 moreover, this knowledge presents itself to him instantly, not
 in abstracto, but as an obscure
 feeling; and this is called remorse, or, more accurately in this
 case, the feeling of wrong committed.
wrong,
 the conception of which we have thus analysed in its most general
 and abstract form, expresses itself in the concrete most
 completely, peculiarly, and palpably in cannibalism. this is its
 most distinct and evident type, the terrible picture of the
 greatest conflict of the will with itself at the highest grade of
 its objectification, which is man. next to this, it expresses
 itself most distinctly [pg
 in murder; and therefore the committal of murder is followed
 instantly and with fearful distinctness by remorse, the abstract
 and dry significance of which we have just given, which inflicts a
 wound on our peace of mind that a lifetime cannot heal. for our
 horror at the murder committed, as also our shrinking from the
 committal of it, corresponds to that infinite clinging to life with
 which everything living, as phenomenon of the will to live, is
 penetrated. (we shall analyse this feeling which accompanies the
 doing of wrong and evil, in other words, the pangs of conscience,
 more fully later on, and raise its concept to distinctness.)
 mutilation, or mere injury of another body, indeed every blow, is
 to be regarded as in its nature the same as murder, and differing
 from it only in degree. further, wrong shows itself in the
 subjugation of another individual, in forcing him into slavery,
 and, finally, in the seizure of another's goods, which, so far as
 these goods are regarded as the fruit of his labour, is just the
 same thing as making him a slave, and is related to this as mere
 injury is to murder.
for property, which is not taken from
 a man without wrong, can, according to our
 explanation of wrong, only be that which has been produced by his
 own powers. therefore by taking this we really take the powers of
 his body from the will objectified in it, to make them subject to
 the will objectified in another body. for only so does the
 wrong-doer, by seizing, not the body of another, but a lifeless
 thing quite different from it, break into the sphere of the
 assertion of will of another person, because the powers, the work
 of this other body, are, as it were, incorporated and identified
 with this thing. it follows from this that all true, i.e.,
 moral, right of property is based simply and solely on work, as was
 pretty generally assumed before kant, and is distinctly and
 beautifully expressed in the oldest of all codes of law:
 “wise men who know the past explain that a
 cultured field is the property of him who cut down the wood and
 cleared and [pg
 ploughed it, as an antelope belongs to the first hunter who
 mortally wounds it” (laws of manu, ix. ). kant's
 philosophy of law is an extraordinary concatenation of errors all
 leading to each other, and he bases the right of property upon
 first occupation. to me this is only explicable on the supposition
 that his powers were failing through old age. for how should the
 mere avowal of my will to exclude others from the use of a thing at
 once give me a right to it? clearly such an
 avowal itself requires a foundation of right, instead of being one,
 as kant assumes. and how would he act unjustly in se, i.e.,
 morally, who does not respect that claim to the sole possession of
 a thing which is based upon nothing but its own avowal? how should
 his conscience trouble him about it? for it is so clear and easy to
 understand that there can be absolutely no such thing as a just
 seizure of anything, but only a just conversion or acquired
 possession of it, by spending our own original powers upon it.
 when, by any foreign labour, however little, a thing has been
 cultivated, improved, kept from harm or preserved, even if this
 labour were only the plucking or picking up from the ground of
 fruit that has grown wild; the person who forcibly seizes such a
 thing clearly deprives the other of the result of his labour
 expended upon it, makes the body of this other serve his will
 instead of its own, asserts his will beyond its own phenomenon to
 the denial of that of the other, i.e.,
 does injustice or wrong. on the
 other hand, the mere enjoyment of a thing, without any cultivation
 or preservation of it from destruction, gives just as little right
 to it as the mere avowal of our desire for its sole possession.
 therefore, though one family has hunted a district alone, even for
 a [pg ] hundred years, but
 has done nothing for its improvement; if a stranger comes and
 desires to hunt there, it cannot prevent him from doing so without
 moral injustice. thus the so-called right of preoccupation,
 according to which, for the mere past enjoyment of a thing, there
 is demanded the further recompense of the exclusive right to its
 future enjoyment, is morally entirely without foundation. a
 new-comer might with far better right reply to him who was
 depending upon such a right, “just because
 you have so long enjoyed, it is right that others should now enjoy
 also.” no moral right can be established to the sole
 possession of anything upon which labour cannot be expended, either
 in improving it or in preserving it from harm, unless it be through
 a voluntary surrender on the part of others, as a reward for other
 services. this, however, already presupposes a community regulated
 by agreement—the state. the morally established right of property,
 as we have deduced it above, gives, from its nature, to the owner
 of a thing, the same unlimited power over it which he has over his
 own body; and hence it follows that he can part with his
 possessions to others either in exchange or as a gift, and they
 then possess them with the same moral right as he did.
as regards the
 doing of wrong generally, it occurs either through violence or
 through craft; it matters not which as far as what is morally
 essential is concerned. first, in the case of murder, it is a
 matter of indifference whether i make use of a dagger or of poison;
 and the case of every bodily injury is analogous. other cases of
 wrong can all be reduced to the fact that i, as the doer of wrong,
 compel another individual to serve my will instead of his own, to
 act according to my will instead of according to his own. on the
 path of violence i attain this end through physical causality, but
 on the path of craft by means of motivation, i.e.,
 by means of causality through knowledge; for i present to his will
 [pg ] illusive motives, on
 account of which he follows my will, while he believes he is
 following his own. since the medium in which the motives lie is
 knowledge, i can only accomplish this by falsifying his knowledge,
 and this is the lie. the lie always aims at
 influencing another's will, not merely his knowledge, for itself
 and as such, but only as a means, so far as it determines his will.
 for my lying itself, inasmuch as it proceeds from my will, requires
 a motive; and only the will of another can be such a motive, not
 his knowledge in and for itself; for as such it can never have an
 influence upon my will, therefore it can never
 move it, can never be a motive of its aim. but only the willing and
 doing of another can be this, and his knowledge indirectly through
 it. this holds good not only of all lies that have manifestly
 sprung from self-interest, but also of those which proceed from
 pure wickedness, which seeks enjoyment in the painful consequences
 of the error into which it has led another. indeed, mere empty
 boasting aims at influencing the will and action of others more or
 less, by increasing their respect or improving their opinion of the
 boaster. the mere refusal of a truth, i.e.,
 of an assertion generally, is in itself no wrong, but every
 imposing of a lie is certainly a wrong. he who refuses to show the
 strayed traveller the right road does him no wrong, but he who
 directs him to a false road certainly does. it follows from what
 has been said, that every lie, like every act of violence,
 is as such wrong, because as such it has for
 its aim the extension of the authority of my will to other
 individuals, and so the assertion of my will through the denial of
 theirs, just as much as violence has. but the most complete lie is
 the broken contract, because here all
 the conditions mentioned are completely and distinctly present
 together. for when i enter into a contract, the promised
 performance of the other individual is directly and confessedly the
 motive for my reciprocal performance. the promises were
 deliberately [pg
 and formally exchanged. the fulfilment of the declarations made is,
 it is assumed, in the power of each. if the other breaks the
 covenant, he has deceived me, and by introducing merely illusory
 motives into my knowledge, he has bent my will according to his
 intention; he has extended the control of his will to another
 individual, and thus has committed a distinct wrong. on this is
 founded the moral lawfulness and validity of the contract.
wrong through
 violence is not so shameful to the doer of it as
 wrong through craft; for the former arises from physical power,
 which under all circumstances impresses mankind; while the latter,
 by the use of subterfuge, betrays weakness, and lowers man at once
 as a physical and moral being. this is further the case because
 lying and deception can only succeed if he who employs them
 expresses at the same time horror and contempt of them in order to
 win confidence, and his victory rests on the fact that men credit
 him with honesty which he does not possess. the deep horror which
 is always excited by cunning, faithlessness, and treachery rests on
 the fact that good faith and honesty are the bond which externally
 binds into a unity the will which has been broken up into the
 multiplicity of individuals, and thereby limits the consequences of
 the egoism which results from that dispersion. faithlessness and
 treachery break this outward bond asunder, and thus give boundless
 scope to the consequences of egoism.
in the
 connection of our system we have found that the content of the
 concept of wrong is that quality of the
 conduct of an individual in which he extends the assertion of the
 will appearing in his own body so far that it becomes the denial of
 the will appearing in the bodies of others. we have also laid down,
 by means of very general examples, the limits at which the province
 of wrong begins; for we have at once defined its gradations, from
 the highest degree to the lowest, by means of a few [pg ] leading conceptions. according to this,
 the concept of wrong is the original and positive, and the concept
 of right, which is opposed to it, is the derivative and negative;
 for we must keep to the concepts, and not to the words. as a matter
 of fact, there would be no talk of right if there were no such
 thing as wrong. the concept right contains merely the negation of
 wrong, and every action is subsumed under it which does not
 transgress the limit laid down above, i.e.,
 is not a denial of the will of another for the stronger assertion
 of our own. that limit, therefore, divides, as regards a purely
 moral definition, the whole
 province of possible actions into such as are wrong or right.
 whenever an action does not encroach, in the way explained above,
 on the sphere of the assertion of will of another, denying it, it
 is not wrong. therefore, for example, the refusal of help to
 another in great need, the quiet contemplation of the death of
 another from starvation while we ourselves have more than enough,
 is certainly cruel and fiendish, but it is not wrong; only it can
 be affirmed with certainty that whoever is capable of carrying
 unkindness and hardness to such a degree will certainly also commit
 every wrong whenever his wishes demand it and no compulsion
 prevents it.
but the
 conception of right as the negation of wrong finds its principal
 application, and no doubt its origin, in cases in which an
 attempted wrong by violence is warded off. this warding off cannot
 itself be wrong, and consequently is right, although the violence
 it requires, regarded in itself and in isolation, would be wrong,
 and is here only justified by the motive, i.e.,
 becomes right. if an individual goes so far in the assertion of his
 own will that he encroaches upon the assertion of will which is
 essential to my person as such, and denies it, then my warding off
 of that encroachment is only the denial of that denial, and thus
 from my side is nothing more than the assertion of the will which
 essentially and originally appears in my body, and is already
 implicitly [pg
 expressed by the mere appearance of this body; consequently is not
 wrong, but right. that is to say: i have then a right to deny that
 denial of another with the force necessary to overcome it, and it
 is easy to see that this may extend to the killing of the other
 individual, whose encroachment as external violence pressing upon
 me may be warded off by a somewhat stronger counteraction, entirely
 without wrong, consequently with right. for all that happens from
 my side lies always within the sphere of the assertion of will
 essential to my person as such, and already expressed by it (which
 is the scene of the conflict), and does not encroach on that of the
 other, consequently is only negation of the negation, and thus
 affirmation, not itself negation. thus if the will of another
 denies my will, as this appears in my body and the use of its
 powers for its maintenance, without denial of any foreign will
 which observes a like limitation, i can without
 wrong compel it to desist from such denial,
 i.e., i have so far a right of
 compulsion.
in all cases in
 which i have a right of compulsion, a complete right to use
 violence against another, i may,
 according to the circumstances, just as well oppose the violence of
 the other with craft without doing any wrong, and
 accordingly i have an actual right to lie precisely so far as i have a
 right of compulsion. therefore a man acts with perfect
 right who assures a highway robber who is searching him that he has
 nothing more upon him; or, if a burglar has broken into his house
 by night, induces him by a lie to enter a cellar and then locks him
 in. a man who has been captured and carried off by robbers, for
 example by pirates, has the right to kill them not only by violence
 but also by craft, in order to regain his freedom. thus, also, a
 promise is certainly not binding when it has been extorted by
 direct bodily violence, because he who suffers such compulsion may
 with full right free himself by killing, and, a fortiori, by deceiving his
 oppressor. whoever cannot recover through force the property which
 has [pg ] been stolen from
 him, commits no wrong if he can accomplish it through craft.
 indeed, if some one plays with me for money he has stolen from me,
 i have the right to use false dice against him, because all that i
 win from him already belongs to me. whoever would deny this must
 still more deny the justifiableness of stratagem in war, which is
 just an acted lie, and is a proof of the saying of queen christina
 of sweden, “the words of men are to be
 esteemed as nothing; scarcely are their deeds to be
 trusted.” so sharply does the limit of right border upon
 that of wrong. for the rest, i regard it as superfluous to show
 that all this completely agrees with what was said above about the
 unlawfulness of the lie and of violence. it may also serve to
 explain the peculiar theory of the lie told under pressure.
in accordance
 with what has been said, wrong and right are merely moral
 determinations, i.e., such as are valid with
 regard to the consideration of human action as such, and in
 relation to the inner significance of this action in
 itself. this asserts itself directly in consciousness
 through the fact that the doing of wrong is accompanied by an
 inward pain, which is the merely felt consciousness of the
 wrong-doer of the excessive strength of the assertion of will in
 itself, which extends even to the denial of the manifestation of
 the will of another, and also the consciousness that although he is
 different from the person suffering wrong as far as the
 manifestation is concerned, yet in himself he is identical with
 him. the further explanation of this inner significance of all pain
 of conscience cannot be given till later. he who suffers wrong is,
 on the other hand, painfully conscious of the denial of his will,
 as it is expressed through the body and its natural requirements,
 for the satisfaction of which nature refers him to the powers of
 his body; and at the [pg
 same time he is conscious that without doing wrong he might ward
 off that denial by every means unless he lacks the power. this
 purely moral significance is the only one which right and wrong
 have for men as men, not as members of the state, and which
 consequently remains even when man is in a state of nature without
 any positive law. it constitutes the basis and the content of all
 that has on this account been named natural
 law, though it is better called moral law, for its
 validity does not extend to suffering, to the external reality, but
 only to the action of man and the self-knowledge of his individual
 will which grows up in him from his action, and which is called
 conscience. it cannot, however, in
 a state of nature, assert itself in all cases, and outwardly upon
 other individuals, and prevent might from reigning instead of
 right. in a state of nature it depends upon every one merely to see
 that in every case he does no wrong, but by no means to
 see that in every case he suffers no wrong, for this depends
 on the accident of his outward power. therefore the concepts right
 and wrong, even in a state of nature, are certainly valid and by no
 means conventional, but there they are valid merely as moral
 concepts, for the self-knowledge of one's own will in each. they
 are a fixed point in the scale of the very different degrees of
 strength with which the will to live asserts itself in human
 individuals, like the freezing-point on the thermometer; the point
 at which the assertion of one's own will becomes the denial of the
 will of another, i.e., specifies through
 wrong-doing the degree of its intensity, combined with the degree
 in which knowledge is involved in the principium individuationis
 (which is the form of all knowledge that is subject to the will).
 but whoever wants to set aside the purely moral consideration of
 human action, or denies it, and wishes to regard conduct merely in
 its outward effects and their consequences, may certainly, with
 hobbes, explain right and wrong as conventional definitions
 arbitrarily assumed, and therefore [pg ] not existing outside positive law, and we can
 never show him through external experience what does not belong to
 such experience. hobbes himself characterises his completely
 empirical method of thought very remarkably by the fact that in his
 book “de principiis
 geometrarum” he denies all pure mathematics
 properly so called, and obstinately maintains that the point has
 extension and the line has breadth, and we can never show him a
 point without extension or a line without breadth. thus we can just
 as little impart to him the a
 priori nature of mathematics as the a priori nature of right,
 because he shuts himself out from all knowledge which is not
 empirical.
the pure
 doctrine of right is thus a chapter of ethics, and is directly
 related only to action, not to suffering; for only the former is
 the expression of will, and this alone is considered by ethics.
 suffering is mere occurrence. ethics can only have regard to
 suffering indirectly, merely to show that what takes place merely
 to avoid suffering wrong is itself no infliction of wrong. the
 working out of this chapter of ethics would contain the precise
 definition of the limits to which an individual may go in the
 assertion of the will already objectified in his body without
 denying the same will as it appears in another individual; and also
 the actions which transgress these limits, which consequently are
 wrong, and therefore in their turn may be warded off without wrong.
 thus our own action always remains the point of
 view of the investigation.
but the
 suffering
 of wrong appears as an event in outward experience, and
 in it is manifested, as we have said, more distinctly than anywhere
 else, the phenomenon of the conflict of the will to live with
 itself, arising from the multiplicity of individuals and from
 egoism, both of which are conditioned through the principium individuationis,
 which is the form of the world as idea for the knowledge of the
 individual. we also saw above that a very large [pg ] part of the suffering essential to
 human life has its perennial source in that conflict of
 individuals.
the reason,
 however, which is common to all these individuals, and which
 enables them to know not merely the particular case, as the brutes
 do, but also the whole abstractly in its connection, has also
 taught them to discern the source of that suffering, and induced
 them to consider the means of diminishing it, or, when possible, of
 suppressing it by a common sacrifice, which is, however, more than
 counterbalanced by the common advantage that proceeds from it.
 however agreeable it is to the egoism of the individual to inflict
 wrong in particular cases, this has yet a necessary correlative in
 the suffering of wrong of another individual, to whom it is a great
 pain. and because the reason which surveys the whole left the
 one-sided point of view of the individual to which it belongs, and
 freed itself for the moment from its dependence upon it, it saw the
 pleasure of an individual in inflicting wrong always outweighed by
 the relatively greater pain of the other who suffered the wrong;
 and it found further, that because here everything was left to
 chance, every one had to fear that the pleasure of conveniently
 inflicting wrong would far more rarely fall to his lot than the
 pain of enduring it. from this reason recognised that both in order
 to diminish the suffering which is everywhere disseminated, and as
 far as possible to divide it equally, the best and only means was
 to spare all the pain of suffering wrong by renouncing all the
 pleasure to be obtained by inflicting it. this means is the
 contract
 of the state or law. it is easily conceived, and
 little by little carried out by the egoism, which, through the use
 of reason, proceeds methodically and forsakes its one-sided point
 of view. this origin of the state and of law i have indicated was
 already exhibited as such by plato in the “republic.” in fact, it is the essential and
 only origin, determined by the nature of the matter. moreover, in
 no land can the state have ever had a [pg ] different origin, because it is just this
 mode of originating this aim that makes it a state. but it is a
 matter of indifference whether, in each particular nation, the
 condition which preceded it was that of a horde of savages
 independent of each other (anarchy), or that of a horde of slaves
 ruled at will by the stronger (despotism). in both cases there
 existed as yet no state; it first arose through that common
 agreement; and according as that agreement is more or less free
 from anarchy or despotism, the state is more or less perfect.
 republics tend to anarchy, monarchies to despotism, and the mean of
 constitutional monarchy, which was therefore devised, tends to
 government by factions. in order to found a perfect state, we must
 begin by providing beings whose nature allows them always to
 sacrifice their own to the public good. till then, however,
 something may be attained through the existence of one
 family whose good is quite inseparable from that of the country; so
 that, at least in matters of importance, it can never advance the
 one without the other. on this rests the power and the advantage of
 the hereditary monarchy.
now as ethics
 was concerned exclusively with right and wrong doing, and could
 accurately point out the limits of his action to whoever was
 resolved to do no wrong; politics, on the contrary, the theory of
 legislation, is exclusively concerned with the suffering of wrong, and would
 never trouble itself with wrong-doing at all if it were not on
 account of its ever-necessary correlative, the suffering of wrong,
 which it always keeps in view as the enemy it opposes. indeed, if
 it were possible to conceive an infliction of wrong with which no
 suffering of wrong on the part of another was connected, the state
 would, consistently, by no means prohibit it. and because in ethics
 the will, the disposition, is the object of consideration, and the
 only real thing, the firm will to do wrong, which is only
 restrained [pg
 and rendered ineffective by external might, and the actually
 committed wrong, are to it quite the same, and it condemns him who
 so wills as unjust at its tribunal. on the other hand, will and
 disposition, merely as such, do not concern the state at all, but
 only the deed (whether it is merely
 attempted or carried out), on account of its correlative, the
 suffering on the part of another.
 thus for the state the deed, the event, is the only real; the
 disposition, the intention, is only investigated so far as the
 significance of the deed becomes known through it. therefore the
 state will forbid no one to carry about in his thought murder and
 poison against another, so long as it knows certainly that the fear
 of the sword and the wheel will always restrain the effects of that
 will. the state has also by no means to eradicate the foolish
 purpose, the inclination to wrong-doing, the wicked disposition;
 but merely always to place beside every possible motive for doing a
 wrong a more powerful motive for leaving it undone in the
 inevitable punishment that will ensue. therefore the criminal code
 is as complete a register as possible of motives against every
 criminal action that can possibly be imagined—both in abstracto, in order to make
 any case that occurs an application in
 concreto. politics or legislation will therefore for
 this end borrow from that chapter of ethics which is the doctrine
 of right, and which, besides the inner significance of right and
 wrong, determines the exact limits between them. yet it will only
 do so for the purpose of making use of its reverse side, and
 regarding all the limits which ethics lays down as not to be
 transgressed, if we are to avoid doing
 wrong, from the other side, as the limits which we must not allow
 others to transgress if we do not wish to suffer
 wrong, and from which we have therefore a right
 to drive others back. therefore these limits are, as much as
 possible, from the passive side, barricaded by laws. it is evident
 that as an historian has very wittily been called an inverted
 prophet, the professor of [pg
 law is an inverted moralist, and therefore law itself, in its
 proper sense, i.e., the doctrine of the
 right, which we ought to maintain,
 is inverted ethics in that chapter of it in which the rights are
 laid down which we ought not to violate. the concept of wrong and
 its negation, that of right, which is originally ethical, becomes juridical by the transference of
 the starting-point from the active to the passive side, and thus by
 inversion. this, as well as kant's theory of law, which very
 falsely deduces the institution of the state as a moral duty from
 his categorical imperative, has, even in the most recent times,
 repeatedly occasioned the very extraordinary error that the state
 is an institution for furthering morality; that it arises from the
 endeavour after this, and is, consequently, directed against
 egoism. as if the inward disposition, to which alone morality or
 immorality belongs, the externally free will, would allow itself to
 be modified from without and changed by influences exerted upon it!
 still more perverse is the theory that the state is the condition
 of freedom in the moral sense, and in this way the condition of
 morality; for freedom lies beyond the phenomenon, and indeed beyond
 human arrangements. the state is, as we have said, so little
 directed against egoism in general and as such, that, on the
 contrary, it has sprung from egoism and exists only in its
 service—an egoism that well understands itself, proceeds
 methodically and forsakes the one-sided for the universal point of
 view, and so by addition is the common egoism of all. the state is
 thus instituted under the correct presupposition that pure
 morality, i.e., right action from moral
 grounds, is not to be expected; if this were not the case, it would
 itself be superfluous. thus the state, which aims at well-being, is
 by no means directed against egoism, but only against the
 disadvantageous consequences which arise from the multiplicity of
 egoistic individuals, and reciprocally affect them all and disturb
 their well-being. therefore it was already said by aristotle (de.
 rep. iii.): τελος μεν ουν πολεως το ευ ζην; [pg ] τουτο δε εστιν το ζῃν ευδαιμονως και
 καλως (finis civitatis est bene
 vivere, hoc autem est beate et pulchre vivere).
 hobbes also has accurately and excellently expounded this origin
 and end of the state; and that old first principle of all state
 policy, salus publica prima lex
 esto, indicates the same thing. if the state
 completely attains its end, it will produce the same outward result
 as if perfect justice of disposition prevailed everywhere. but the
 inner nature and origin of both phenomena will be the converse.
 thus in the second case it would be that no one wished to
 do wrong, and in the first that no
 one wished to suffer wrong, and the means
 appropriate to this end had been fully employed. thus the same line
 may be drawn from opposite directions, and a beast of prey with a
 muzzle is as harmless as a graminivorous animal. but beyond this
 point the state cannot go. it cannot exhibit a phenomenon such as
 would spring from universal mutual well-wishing and love. for just
 as we found that from its nature it would not forbid the doing of a
 wrong which involved no corresponding suffering of wrong on the
 part of another, and prohibits all wrong-doing only because this is
 impossible; so conversely, in accordance with its tendency towards
 the well-being of all, it would very gladly take care that every
 benevolent action and work of human love should be experienced, if it were not that
 these also have an inevitable correlative in the performance of acts of benevolence
 and works of love, and every member of the state would wish to
 assume the passive and none the active rôle, and there would be no
 reason for exacting the latter from one member of the state rather
 than from another. accordingly only the negative, which is just the
 right, not the positive, which has
 been comprehended under the name of obligations of love, or, less
 completely, duties, can be exacted by force.
legislation, as
 we have said, borrows the pure philosophy of right, or the doctrine
 of the nature and limits of right and wrong, from ethics, in order
 to apply it from [pg
 the reverse side to its own ends, which are different from those of
 ethics, and to institute positive legislation and the means of
 supporting it, i.e., the state, in accordance
 with it. positive legislation is thus the inverted application of
 the purely moral doctrine of right. this application may be made
 with reference to the peculiar relations and circumstances of a
 particular people. but only if the positive legislation is, in
 essential matters, throughout determined in accordance with the
 guidance of the pure theory of right, and for each of its
 propositions a ground can be established in the pure theory of
 right, is the legislation which has arisen a positive
 right and the state a community based upon
 right, a state in the proper meaning of the
 word, a morally permissible, not immoral institution. otherwise the
 positive legislation is, on the contrary, the establishment of a
 positive
 wrong; it is itself an openly avowed enforced wrong.
 such is every despotism, the constitution of most mohammedan
 kingdoms; and indeed various parts of many constitutions are also
 of this kind; for example, serfdom, vassalage, and many such
 institutions. the pure theory of right or natural right—better,
 moral right—though always reversed, lies at the foundation of every
 just positive legislation, as pure mathematics lies at the
 foundation of every branch of applied mathematics. the most
 important points of the doctrine of right, as philosophy has to
 supply it for that end to legislation, are the following: . the
 explanation of the inner and real significance both of the origin
 of the conceptions of wrong and right, and of their application and
 position in ethics. . the deduction of the law of property. . the
 deduction of the moral validity of contracts; for this is the moral
 basis of the contract of the state. . the explanation of the
 origin and the aim of the state, of the relation of this aim to
 ethics, and of the intentional transference of the ethical doctrine
 of right, by reversing it, to legislation, in consequence of this
 relation. . the deduction of the [pg ] right of punishment. the remaining content of
 the doctrine of right is mere application of these principles, mere
 accurate definition of the limits of right and wrong for all
 possible relations of life, which are consequently united and
 distributed under certain points of view and titles. in these
 special doctrines the books which treat of pure law are fairly at
 one; it is only in the principles that they differ much, for these
 are always connected with some philosophical system. in connection
 with our system, we have explained the first four of these
 principal points shortly and generally, yet definitely and
 distinctly, and it remains for us to speak in the same way of the
 right of punishment.
kant makes the
 fundamentally false assertion that apart from the state there would
 be no complete right of property. it follows from our deduction, as
 given above, that even in a state of nature there is property with
 complete natural, i.e., moral right, which cannot
 be injured without wrong, but may without wrong be defended to the
 uttermost. on the other hand, it is certain that apart from the
 state there is no right of punishment. all right to punish is based
 upon the positive law alone, which before
 the offence has determined a punishment for it, the threat of
 which, as a counter-motive, is intended to outweigh all possible
 motives for the offence. this positive law is to be regarded as
 sanctioned and recognised by all the members of the state. it is
 thus based upon a common contract which the members of the state
 are in duty bound to fulfil, and thus, on the one hand, to inflict
 the punishment, and, on the other hand, to endure it; thus the
 endurance of the punishment may with right be enforced.
 consequently the immediate end of punishment is, in the
 particular case, the fulfilment of the law as a
 contract. but the one end of the law is
 deterrence from the infringement
 of the rights of others. for, in order that every one may be
 protected from suffering wrong, men have combined to [pg ] form a state, have renounced the doing
 of wrong, and assumed the task of maintaining the state. thus the
 law and the fulfilment of it, the punishment, are essentially
 directed to the future, not to the past.
 this distinguishes punishment from revenge; for the motives which
 instigate the latter are solely concerned with what has happened,
 and thus with the past as such. all requital of wrong by the
 infliction of pain, without any aim for the future, is revenge, and
 can have no other end than consolation for the suffering one has
 borne by the sight of the suffering one has inflicted upon another.
 this is wickedness and cruelty, and cannot be morally justified.
 wrong which some one has inflicted upon me by no means entitles me
 to inflict wrong upon him. the requital of evil with evil without
 further intention is neither morally nor otherwise through any
 rational ground to be justified, and the jus talionis set up as the
 absolute, final principle of the right of punishment, is
 meaningless. therefore kant's theory of punishment as mere requital
 for requital's sake is a completely groundless and perverse view.
 yet it is always appearing in the writings of many jurists, under
 all kinds of lofty phrases, which amount to nothing but empty
 words, as: through the punishment the crime is expiated or
 neutralised and abolished, and many such. but no man has the right
 to set himself up as a purely moral judge and requiter, and punish
 the misdeeds of another with pains which he inflicts upon him, and
 so to impose penance upon him for his sins. nay, this would rather
 be the most presumptuous arrogance; and therefore the bible says,
 “vengeance is mine; i will repay, saith the
 lord.” but man has the right to care for the safety of
 society; and this can only be done by interdicting all actions
 which are denoted by the word “criminal,” in order to prevent them by means of
 counter-motives, which are the threatened punishments. and this
 threat can only be made effective by carrying it out when a case
 [pg ] occurs in spite of
 it. accordingly that the end of punishment, or more accurately of
 penal law, is the deterrence from crime, is a truth so generally
 recognised and indeed self-evident, that in england it is expressed
 in the very old form of indictment which is still served by the
 counsel for the crown in criminal actions, for it concludes with
 the words, “if this be proved, you, the
 said n. n., ought to be punished with pains of law, to deter others
 from the like crimes in all time coming.” if a prince
 desires to extend mercy to a criminal who has justly been
 condemned, his ministers will represent to him that, if he does,
 this crime will soon be repeated. an end for the future
 distinguishes punishment from revenge, and punishment only has this
 end when it is inflicted in fulfilment of a law. it thus
 announces itself as inevitable in every future case, and thus the
 law obtains the power to deter, in which its end really consists.
 now here a kantian would inevitably reply that certainly according
 to this view the punished criminal would be used “merely as a means.” this proposition, so
 unweariedly repeated by all the kantians, “man must always be treated as an end, never as a
 means,” certainly sounds significant, and is therefore a
 very suitable proposition for those who like to have a formula
 which saves them all further thought; but looked at in the light,
 it is an exceedingly vague, indefinite assertion, which reaches its
 aim quite indirectly, requires to be explained, defined, and
 modified in every case of its application, and, if taken generally,
 is insufficient, meagre, and moreover problematical. the murderer
 who has been condemned to the punishment of death according to law
 must now, at any rate, and with complete right, be used as a mere
 means. for public security, the chief end of the state, is
 disturbed by him; indeed it is abolished if the law is not carried
 out. the murderer, his life, his person, must now be the means of
 fulfilling the law, and thereby of re-establishing the public
 security. and he is made such a means with perfect right,
 [pg ] in fulfilment of the
 contract of the state, which was entered into by him because he was
 a citizen, and in accordance with which, in order to enjoy security
 for his life, freedom, and property, he has pledged his life, his
 freedom, and his property for the security of all, which pledge has
 now been forfeited.
this theory of
 punishment which we have established, the theory which is directly
 supported by sound reason, is certainly in the main no new thought;
 but it is a thought which was almost supplanted by new errors, and
 therefore it was necessary to exhibit it as distinctly as possible.
 the same thing is in its essence contained in what puffendorf says
 on the subject, “de officio hominis et
 civis” (bk. ii. chap. ). hobbes also agrees
 with it, “leviathan” (chaps. -).
 in our own day feurbach is well known to have maintained it.
 indeed, it occurs even in the utterances of the ancient
 philosophers. plato expresses it clearly in the “protagoras” (p. , edit. bip.), also in the
 “gorgias” (p. ), and lastly in
 the eleventh book of the “laws” (p.
 ). seneca expresses plato's opinion and the theory of all
 punishment in the short sentence, “nemo prudens punit, quia
 peccatum est; sed ne peccetur” (de ira, i.
thus we have
 come to recognise in the state the means by which egoism endowed
 with reason seeks to escape from its own evil consequences which
 turn against itself, and now each promotes the well-being of all
 because he sees that his own well-being is involved in it. if the
 state attained its end completely, then to a certain extent
 something approaching to an utopia might finally, by the removal of
 all kinds of evil, be brought about. for by the human powers united
 in it, it is able to make the rest of nature more and more
 serviceable. but as yet the state has always remained very far from
 this goal. and even if it attained to it, innumerable evils
 essential to all life would still keep it in suffering; and
 finally, if they were all removed, ennui would at once occupy
 [pg ] every place they
 left. and besides, the strife of individuals is never completely
 abolished by the state, for it vexes in trifles when it is
 prohibited in greater things. finally, eris, happily expelled from
 within, turns to what is without; as the conflict of individuals,
 she is banished by the institution of the state; but she reappears
 from without as the war of nations, and now demands in bulk and at
 once, as an accumulated debt, the bloody sacrifice which by wise
 precautions has been denied her in the particular. and even
 supposing that all this were finally overcome and removed, by
 wisdom founded on the experience of thousands of years, at the end
 the result would be the actual over-population of the whole planet,
 the terrible evil of which only a bold imagination can now
 realise.
§ . we have
 recognised temporal justice, which has its
 seat in the state, as requiting and punishing, and have seen that
 this only becomes justice through a reference to the future.
 for without this reference all punishing and requiting would be an
 outrage without justification, and indeed merely the addition of
 another evil to that which has already occurred, without meaning or
 significance. but it is quite otherwise with eternal
 justice, which was referred to before, and which rules
 not the state but the world, is not dependent upon human
 institutions, is not subject to chance and deception, is not
 uncertain, wavering, and erring, but infallible, fixed, and sure.
 the conception of requital implies that of time; therefore
 eternal
 justice cannot be requital. thus it cannot, like
 temporal justice, admit of respite and delay, and require time in
 order to triumph, equalising the evil deed by the evil consequences
 only by means of time. the punishment must here be so bound up with
 the offence that both are one.[pg ]
eurip. ap. stob. ecl., i. c.
(“volare
 pennis scelera ad ætherias domus
putatis, illic in jovis
 tabularia
scripto referri; tum jovem
 lectis super
sententiam proferre?—sed
 mortalium
facinora cœli, quantaquanta est,
 regia
nequit tenere: nec legendis
 juppiter
et puniendis par est. est tamen
 ultio,
et, si intuemur, illa nos habitat
 prope.”)
now that such an
 eternal justice really lies in the nature of the world will soon
 become completely evident to whoever has grasped the whole of the
 thought which we have hitherto been developing.
the world, in
 all the multiplicity of its parts and forms, is the manifestation,
 the objectivity, of the one will to live. existence itself, and the
 kind of existence, both as a collective whole and in every part,
 proceeds from the will alone. the will is free, the will is
 almighty. the will appears in everything, just as it determines
 itself in itself and outside time. the world is only the mirror of
 this willing; and all finitude, all suffering, all miseries, which
 it contains, belong to the expression of that which the will wills,
 are as they are because the will so wills. accordingly with perfect
 right every being supports existence in general, and also the
 existence of its species and its peculiar individuality, entirely
 as it is and in circumstances as they are, in a world such as it
 is, swayed by chance and error, transient, ephemeral, and
 constantly suffering; and in all that it experiences, or indeed can
 experience, it always gets its [pg ] due. for the will belongs to it; and as the
 will is, so is the world. only this world itself can bear the
 responsibility of its own existence and nature—no other; for by
 what means could another have assumed it? do we desire to know what
 men, morally considered, are worth as a whole and in general, we
 have only to consider their fate as a whole and in general. this is
 want, wretchedness, affliction, misery, and death. eternal justice
 reigns; if they were not, as a whole, worthless, their fate, as a
 whole, would not be so sad. in this sense we may say, the world
 itself is the judgment of the world. if we could lay all the misery
 of the world in one scale of the balance, and all the guilt of the
 world in the other, the needle would certainly point to the
 centre.
certainly,
 however, the world does not exhibit itself to the knowledge of the
 individual as such, developed for the service of the will, as it
 finally reveals itself to the inquirer as the objectivity of the
 one and only will to live, which he himself is. but the sight of
 the uncultured individual is clouded, as the hindus say, by the
 veil of mâyâ. he sees not the thing-in-itself but the phenomenon in
 time and space, the principium
 individuationis, and in the other forms of the
 principle of sufficient reason. and in this form of his limited
 knowledge he sees not the inner nature of things, which is one, but
 its phenomena as separated, disunited, innumerable, very different,
 and indeed opposed. for to him pleasure appears as one thing and
 pain as quite another thing: one man as a tormentor and a murderer,
 another as a martyr and a victim; wickedness as one thing and evil
 as another. he sees one man live in joy, abundance, and pleasure,
 and even at his door another die miserably of want and cold. then
 he asks, where is the retribution? and he himself, in the vehement,
 pressure of will which is his origin and his nature, seizes upon
 the pleasures and enjoyments of life, firmly [pg ] embraces them, and knows not that by
 this very act of his will he seizes and hugs all those pains and
 sorrows at the sight of which he shudders. he sees the ills and he
 sees the wickedness in the world, but far from knowing that both of
 these are but different sides of the manifestation of the one will
 to live, he regards them as very different, and indeed quite
 opposed, and often seeks to escape by wickedness, i.e.,
 by causing the suffering of another, from ills, from the suffering
 of his own individuality, for he is involved in the principium individuationis,
 deluded by the veil of mâyâ. just as a sailor sits in a boat
 trusting to his frail barque in a stormy sea, unbounded in every
 direction, rising and falling with the howling mountainous waves;
 so in the midst of a world of sorrows the individual man sits
 quietly, supported by and trusting to the principium individuationis, or
 the way in which the individual knows things as phenomena. the
 boundless world, everywhere full of suffering in the infinite past,
 in the infinite future, is strange to him, indeed is to him but a
 fable; his ephemeral person, his extensionless present, his
 momentary satisfaction, this alone has reality for him; and he does
 all to maintain this, so long as his eyes are not opened by a
 better knowledge. till then, there lives only in the inmost depths
 of his consciousness a very obscure presentiment that all that is
 after all not really so strange to him, but has a connection with
 him, from which the principium
 individuationis cannot protect him. from this
 presentiment arises that ineradicable awe
 common to all men (and indeed perhaps even to the most sensible of
 the brutes) which suddenly seizes them if by any chance they become
 puzzled about the principium
 individuationis, because the principle of sufficient
 reason in some one of its forms seems to admit of an exception. for
 example, if it seems as if some change took place without a cause,
 or some one who is dead appears again, or if in any [pg ] other way the past or the future
 becomes present or the distant becomes near. the fearful terror at
 anything of the kind is founded on the fact that they suddenly
 become puzzled about the forms of knowledge of the phenomenon,
 which alone separate their own individuality from the rest of the
 world. but even this separation lies only in the phenomenon, and
 not in the thing-in-itself; and on this rests eternal justice. in
 fact, all temporal happiness stands, and all prudence proceeds,
 upon ground that is undermined. they defend the person from
 accidents and supply its pleasures; but the person is merely
 phenomenon, and its difference from other individuals, and
 exemption from the sufferings which they endure, rests merely in
 the form of the phenomenon, the principium individuationis.
 according to the true nature of things, every one has all the
 suffering of the world as his own, and indeed has to regard all
 merely possible suffering as for him actual, so long as he is the
 fixed will to live, i.e., asserts life with all his
 power. for the knowledge that sees through the principium individuationis, a
 happy life in time, the gift of chance or won by prudence, amid the
 sorrows of innumerable others, is only the dream of a beggar in
 which he is a king, but from which he must awake and learn from
 experience that only a fleeting illusion had separated him from the
 suffering of his life.
eternal justice
 withdraws itself from the vision that is involved in the knowledge
 which follows the principle of sufficient reason in the principium individuationis; such
 vision misses it altogether unless it vindicates it in some way by
 fictions. it sees the bad, after misdeeds and cruelties of every
 kind, live in happiness and leave the world unpunished. it sees the
 oppressed drag out a life full of suffering to the end without an
 avenger, a requiter appearing. but that man only will grasp and
 comprehend eternal justice who raises himself above the knowledge
 that proceeds under the guidance of the principle of sufficient
 [pg ] reason, bound to the
 particular thing, and recognises the ideas, sees through the
 principium individuationis, and
 becomes conscious that the forms of the phenomenon do not apply to
 the thing-in-itself. moreover, he alone, by virtue of the same
 knowledge, can understand the true nature of virtue, as it will
 soon disclose itself to us in connection with the present inquiry,
 although for the practice of virtue this knowledge in the abstract
 is by no means demanded. thus it becomes clear to whoever has
 attained to the knowledge referred to, that because the will is the
 in-itself of all phenomena, the misery which is awarded to others
 and that which he experiences himself, the bad and the evil, always
 concerns only that one inner being which is everywhere the same,
 although the phenomena in which the one and the other exhibits
 itself exist as quite different individuals, and are widely
 separated by time and space. he sees that the difference between
 him who inflicts the suffering and him who must bear it is only the
 phenomenon, and does not concern the thing-in-itself, for this is
 the will living in both, which here, deceived by the knowledge
 which is bound to its service, does not recognise itself, and
 seeking an increased happiness in one of
 its phenomena, produces great suffering in another, and thus, in the pressure
 of excitement, buries its teeth in its own flesh, not knowing that
 it always injures only itself, revealing in this form, through the
 medium of individuality, the conflict with itself which it bears in
 its inner nature. the inflicter of suffering and the sufferer are
 one. the former errs in that he believes he is not a partaker in
 the suffering; the latter, in that he believes he is not a partaker
 in the guilt. if the eyes of both were opened, the inflicter of
 suffering would see that he lives in all that suffers pain in the
 wide world, and which, if endowed with reason, in vain asks why it
 was called into existence for such great suffering, its desert of
 which it does not understand. and the sufferer would see that all
 the wickedness [pg
 which is or ever was committed in the world proceeds from that will
 which constitutes his own nature also, appears also
 in him, and that through this
 phenomenon and its assertion he has taken upon himself all the
 sufferings which proceed from such a will and bears them as his
 due, so long as he is this will. from this knowledge speaks the
 profound poet calderon in “life a
 dream”—
“pues el
 delito mayor
del hombre es haber
 nacido.”
(“for the
 greatest crime of man
is that he ever was born.”)
why should it
 not be a crime, since, according to an eternal law, death follows
 upon it? calderon has merely expressed in these lines the christian
 dogma of original sin.
the living
 knowledge of eternal justice, of the balance that inseparably binds
 together the malum culpæ
 with the malum pœnæ,
 demands the complete transcending of individuality and the
 principle of its possibility. therefore it will always remain
 unattainable to the majority of men, as will also be the case with
 the pure and distinct knowledge of the nature of all virtue, which
 is akin to it, and which we are about to explain. accordingly the
 wise ancestors of the hindu people have directly expressed it in
 the vedas, which are only allowed to the three regenerate castes,
 or in their esoteric teaching, so far at any rate as conception and
 language comprehend it, and their method of exposition, which
 always remains pictorial and even rhapsodical, admits; but in the
 religion of the people, or exoteric teaching, they only communicate
 it by means of myths. the direct exposition we find in the vedas,
 the fruit of the highest human knowledge and wisdom, the kernel of
 which has at last reached us in the upanishads as the greatest gift
 of this century. it is expressed in various [pg ] ways, but especially by making all the
 beings in the world, living and lifeless, pass successively before
 the view of the student, and pronouncing over every one of them
 that word which has become a formula, and as such has been called
 the mahavakya: tatoumes,—more correctly, tat twam asi,—which means,
 “this thou art.” but
 for the people, that great truth, so far as in their limited
 condition they could comprehend it, was translated into the form of
 knowledge which follows the principle of sufficient reason. this
 form of knowledge is indeed, from its nature, quite incapable of
 apprehending that truth pure and in itself, and even stands in
 contradiction to it, yet in the form of a myth it received a
 substitute for it which was sufficient as a guide for conduct. for
 the myth enables the method of knowledge, in accordance with the
 principle of sufficient reason, to comprehend by figurative
 representation the ethical significance of conduct, which itself is
 ever foreign to it. this is the aim of all systems of religion, for
 as a whole they are the mythical clothing of the truth which is
 unattainable to the uncultured human intellect. in this sense this
 myth might, in kant's language, be called a postulate of the
 practical reason; but regarded as such, it has the great advantage
 that it contains absolutely no elements but such as lie before our
 eyes in the course of actual experience, and can therefore support
 all its conceptions with perceptions. what is here referred to is
 the myth of the transmigration of souls. it teaches that all
 sufferings which in life one inflicts upon other beings must be
 expiated in a subsequent life in this world, through precisely the
 same sufferings; and this extends so far, that he who only kills a
 brute must, some time in endless time, be born as the same kind of
 brute and suffer the same death. it teaches that wicked conduct
 involves a future life in this world in suffering and despised
 creatures, and, accordingly, that one will then be born again in
 lower castes, or as [pg
 ] a
 woman, or as a brute, as pariah or tschandala, as a leper, or as a
 crocodile, and so forth. all the pains which the myth threatens it
 supports with perceptions from actual life, through suffering
 creatures which do not know how they have merited their misery, and
 it does not require to call in the assistance of any other hell. as
 a reward, on the other hand, it promises re-birth in better, nobler
 forms, as brahmans, wise men, or saints. the highest reward, which
 awaits the noblest deeds and the completest resignation, which is
 also given to the woman who in seven successive lives has
 voluntarily died on the funeral pile of her husband, and not less
 to the man whose pure mouth has never uttered a single lie,—this
 reward the myth can only express negatively in the language of this
 world by the promise, which is so often repeated, that they shall
 never be born again, non adsumes iterum
 existentiam apparentem; or, as the buddhists, who
 recognise neither vedas nor castes, express it, “thou shalt attain to nirvâna,” i.e.,
 to a state in which four things no longer exist—birth, age,
 sickness, and death.
never has a myth
 entered, and never will one enter, more closely into the
 philosophical truth which is attainable to so few than this
 primitive doctrine of the noblest and most ancient nation. broken
 up as this nation now is into many parts, this myth yet reigns as
 the universal belief of the people, and has the most decided
 influence upon life to-day, as four thousand years ago. therefore
 pythagoras and plato have seized with admiration on that
 ne plus ultra of mythical
 representation, received it from india or egypt, honoured it, made
 use of it, and, we know not how far, even believed it. we, on the
 contrary, now send the brahmans english clergymen and evangelical
 linen-weavers to set them right out of sympathy, and to show them
 that they are created out of nothing, and ought thankfully to
 rejoice in the fact. but it is just the same as if we fired a
 bullet against a cliff. in india our religions will never take
 root. the ancient [pg
 wisdom of the human race will not be displaced by what happened in
 galilee. on the contrary, indian philosophy streams back to europe,
 and will produce a fundamental change in our knowledge and
 thought.
§ . from our
 exposition of eternal justice, which is not mythical but
 philosophical, we will now proceed to the kindred investigation of
 the ethical significance of conduct and of conscience, which is the
 merely felt knowledge of that significance. but first i wish at
 this point to draw attention to two peculiarities of human nature,
 that might help to make clear how the nature of that eternal
 justice, and the unity and identity of the will in all its
 phenomena upon which it rests, is known to every one, at least as
 an obscure feeling.
when a bad deed
 has been done, it affords satisfaction not only to the sufferer,
 who for the most part feels the desire of revenge, but also to the
 perfectly indifferent spectator, to see that he who caused another
 pain suffers himself a like measure of pain; and this quite
 independently of the end which we have shown the state has in view
 in punishment, and which is the foundation of penal law. it seems
 to me that what expresses itself here is nothing but the
 consciousness of that eternal justice, which is, nevertheless, at
 once misunderstood and falsified by the unenlightened mind, for,
 involved in the principium
 individuationis, it produces an amphiboly of the
 concepts and demands from the phenomenon what only belongs to the
 thing in itself. it does not see how far in themselves the offender
 and the offended are one, and that it is the same being which, not
 recognising itself in its own manifestation, bears both the pain
 and the guilt, but it desires rather to see the pain also in the
 particular individual to whom the guilt belongs. therefore, most
 persons would demand that a man who had a very high degree of
 wickedness which might yet occur in many others, only not matched
 with other qualities such as are found in him, a man who also far
 surpassed [pg
 others by extraordinary intellectual powers, and who inflicted
 unspeakable sufferings upon millions of others—for example, as a
 conqueror,—most persons, i say, would demand that such a man should
 at some time and in some place expiate all these sufferings by a
 like amount of pain; for they do not recognise how in themselves
 the inflicter of suffering and the sufferers are one, and that it
 is the same will through which the latter exist and live which also
 appears in the former, and just through him attains to a distinct
 revelation of its nature, and which likewise suffers both in the
 oppressed and the oppressor; and indeed in the latter in a greater
 measure, as the consciousness has attained a higher degree of
 clearness and distinctness and the will has greater vehemence. but
 that the deeper knowledge, which is no longer involved in the
 principium individuationis, from
 which all virtue and nobleness proceed, no longer retains the
 disposition which demands requital, is shown by the christian
 ethics, which absolutely forbids all requital of evil with evil,
 and allows eternal justice to proceed in the sphere of the
 thing-in-itself, which is different from that of the phenomenon.
 (“vengeance is mine; i will repay, saith
 the lord,”—rom. xii. .)
a much more
 striking, but also a much rarer, characteristic of human nature,
 which expresses that desire to draw eternal justice into the
 province of experience, i.e., of individuality, and at
 the same time indicates a felt consciousness that, as i have
 expressed it above, the will to live conducts at its own cost the
 great tragedy and comedy, and that the same one will lives in all
 manifestations,—such a characteristic, i say, is the following. we
 sometimes see a man so deeply moved by a great injury which he has
 experienced, or, it may be, only witnessed, that he deliberately
 and irretrievably stakes his own life in order to take vengeance on
 the perpetrator of that wrong. we see him seek for some mighty
 oppressor through long years, murder him at last, and then himself
 die on the [pg
 scaffold, as he had foreseen, and often, it may be, did not seek to
 avoid, for his life had value for him only as a means of vengeance.
 we find examples of this especially among the spaniards. if,
 now, we consider the spirit of that desire for retribution
 carefully, we find that it is very different from common revenge,
 which seeks to mitigate the suffering, endured by the sight of the
 suffering inflicted; indeed, we find that what it aims at deserves
 to be called, not so much revenge as punishment. for in it there
 really lies the intention of an effect upon the future through the
 example, and that without any selfish aim, either for the avenging
 person, for it costs him his life, or for a society which secures
 its own safety by laws. for that punishment is carried out by
 individuals, not by the state, nor is it in fulfilment of a law,
 but, on the contrary, always concerns a deed which the state either
 would not or could not punish, and the punishment of which it
 condemns. it seems to me that the indignation which carries such a
 man so far beyond the limits of all self-love springs from the
 deepest consciousness that he himself is the whole will to live,
 which appears in all beings through all time, and that therefore
 the most distant future belongs to him just as the present, and
 cannot be indifferent to him. asserting this will, he yet desires
 that in the drama which represents its nature no such fearful wrong
 shall ever appear again, and wishes to frighten ever future
 wrong-doer by the example of a vengeance against which there is no
 means of defence, since the avenger is not deterred by the fear of
 death. the will to live, though still asserting itself, does not
 here depend any longer upon the particular phenomenon, the
 individual, but comprehends the idea of man, and wishes to keep its
 manifestation pure from such a fearful and shocking wrong. it is a
 rare, very significant, and even sublime [pg ] trait of character through which the
 individual sacrifices himself by striving to make himself the arm
 of eternal justice, of the true nature of which he is yet
 ignorant.
§ . in all the
 preceding investigations of human action, we have been leading up
 to the final investigation, and have to a considerable extent
 lightened the task of raising to abstract and philosophical
 clearness, and exhibiting as a branch of our central thought that
 special ethical significance of action which in life is with
 perfect understanding denoted by the words good
 and bad.
first, however,
 i wish to trace back to their real meaning those conceptions of
 good and bad
 which have been treated by the philosophical writers of the day,
 very extraordinarily, as simple conceptions, and thus incapable of
 analysis; so that the reader may not remain involved in the
 senseless delusion that they contain more than is actually the
 case, and express in and for themselves all that is here necessary.
 i am in a position to do this because in ethics i am no more
 disposed to take refuge behind the word good
 than formerly behind the words beautiful
 and true, in order that by the adding
 a “ness,” which at the present day
 is supposed to have a special σεμνοτης, and therefore to be of
 assistance in various cases, and by assuming an air of solemnity, i
 might induce the belief that by uttering three such words i had
 done more than denote three very wide and abstract, and
 consequently empty conceptions, of very different origin and
 significance. who is there, indeed, who has made himself acquainted
 with the books of our own day to whom these three words, admirable
 as are the things to which they originally refer, have not become
 an aversion after he has seen for the thousandth time how those who
 are least capable of thinking believe that they have only to utter
 these three words with open mouth and the air of an intelligent
 sheep, in order to have spoken the greatest wisdom?
the explanation
 of the concept true has already been [pg ] given in the essay on the principle of
 sufficient reason, chap. v. §  et seq.
 the content of the concept beautiful found for the first time
 its proper explanation through the whole of the third book of the
 present work. we now wish to discover the significance of the
 concept good, which can be done with very
 little trouble. this concept is essentially relative, and signifies
 the
 conformity of an object to any definite effort of the
 will. accordingly everything that corresponds to the
 will in any of its expressions and fulfils its end is thought
 through the concept good, however different such
 things may be in other respects. thus we speak of good eating, good
 roads, good weather, good weapons, good omens, and so on; in short,
 we call everything good that is just as we wish it to be; and
 therefore that may be good in the eyes of one man which is just the
 reverse in those of another. the conception of the good divides
 itself into two sub-species—that of the direct and present
 satisfaction of any volition, and that of its indirect satisfaction
 which has reference to the future, i.e.,
 the agreeable and the useful. the conception of the opposite, so
 long as we are speaking of unconscious existence, is expressed by
 the word bad, more rarely and abstractly by
 the word evil, which thus denotes
 everything that does not correspond to any effort of the will. like
 all other things that can come into relation to the will, men who
 are favourable to the ends which happen to be desired, who further
 and befriend them, are called good, in the same sense, and always
 with that relative limitation, which shows itself, for example, in
 the expression, “i find this good, but you
 don't.” those, however, who are naturally disposed not to
 hinder the endeavours of others, but rather to assist them, and who
 are thus consistently helpful, benevolent, friendly, and
 charitable, are called good men, on account of this
 relation of their conduct to the will of others in general. in the
 case of conscious beings (brutes and men) the contrary conception
 is denoted in german, [pg
 and, within the last hundred years or so, in french also, by a
 different word from that which is used in speaking of unconscious
 existence; in german, böse;
 in french, méchant; while
 in almost all other languages this distinction does not exist; and
 κακος, malus,
 cattivo, bad,
 are used of men, as of lifeless things, which are opposed to the
 ends of a definite individual will. thus, having started entirely
 from the passive element in the good, the inquiry could only
 proceed later to the active element, and investigate the conduct of
 the man who is called good, no longer with reference to others, but
 to himself; specially setting itself the task of explaining both
 the purely objective respect which such conduct produces in others,
 and the peculiar contentment with himself which it clearly produces
 in the man himself, since he purchases it with sacrifices of
 another kind; and also, on the other hand, the inner pain which
 accompanies the bad disposition, whatever outward advantages it
 brings to him who entertains it. it was from this source that the
 ethical systems, both the philosophical and those which are
 supported by systems of religion, took their rise. both seek
 constantly in some way or other to connect happiness with virtue,
 the former either by means of the principle of contradiction or
 that of sufficient reason, and thus to make happiness either
 identical with or the consequence of virtue, always sophistically;
 the latter, by asserting the existence of other worlds than that
 which alone can be known to experience. in our
 system, on the contrary, [pg
 virtue will show itself, not as a striving after happiness, that
 is, well-being and life, but as an effort in quite an opposite
 direction.
it follows from
 what has been said above, that the good
 is, according to its concept, των πρως τι; thus every good is
 essentially relative, for its being consists in its relation to a
 desiring will. absolute good is, therefore, a
 contradiction in terms; highest good, summum bonum, really signifies
 the same thing—a final satisfaction of the will, after which no new
 desire could arise,—a last motive, the attainment of which would
 afford enduring satisfaction of the will. but, according to the
 investigations which have already been conducted in this fourth
 book, such a consummation is not even thinkable. the will can just
 as little cease from willing altogether on account of some
 particular satisfaction, as time can end or begin; for it there is
 no such thing as a permanent fulfilment which shall completely and
 for ever satisfy its craving. it is the vessel of the danaides; for
 it there is no highest good, no absolute good, but always a merely
 temporary good. if, however, we wish to give an honorary position,
 as it were emeritus, to an old expression, which from custom we do
 not like to discard altogether, we may, metaphorically and
 figuratively, call the complete self-effacement and denial of the
 will, the true absence of will, which alone for ever stills and
 silences its struggle, alone gives that contentment which can never
 again be disturbed, alone redeems the world, and which we shall now
 soon consider at the close of our whole investigation—the
 [pg ] absolute good, the
 summum bonum—and regard it as
 the only radical cure of the disease of which all other means are
 only palliations or anodynes. in this sense the greek τελος and
 also finis bonorum
 correspond to the thing still better. so much for the words
 good and bad;
 now for the thing itself.
if a man is
 always disposed to do wrong whenever the opportunity
 presents itself, and there is no external power to restrain him, we
 call him bad. according to our doctrine of
 wrong, this means that such a man does not merely assert the will
 to live as it appears in his own body, but in this assertion goes
 so far that he denies the will which appears in other individuals.
 this is shown by the fact that he desires their powers for the
 service of his own will, and seeks to destroy their existence when
 they stand in the way of its efforts. the ultimate source of this
 is a high degree of egoism, the nature of which has been already
 explained. two things are here apparent. in the first place, that
 in such a man an excessively vehement will to live expresses
 itself, extending far beyond the assertion of his own body; and, in
 the second place, that his knowledge, entirely given up to the
 principle of sufficient reason and involved in the principium individuationis,
 cannot get beyond the difference which this latter principle
 establishes between his own person and every one else. therefore he
 seeks his own well-being alone, completely indifferent to that of
 all others, whose existence is to him altogether foreign and
 divided from his own by a wide gulf, and who are indeed regarded by
 him as mere masks with no reality behind them. and these two
 qualities are the constituent elements of the bad character.
this great
 intensity of will is in itself and directly a constant source of
 suffering. in the first place, because all volition as such arises
 from want; that is, suffering. (therefore, as will be remembered,
 from the [pg
 third book, the momentary cessation of all volition, which takes
 place whenever we give ourselves up to æsthetic contemplation, as
 pure will-less subject of knowledge, the correlative of the idea,
 is one of the principal elements in our pleasure in the beautiful.)
 secondly, because, through the causal connection of things, most of
 our desires must remain unfulfilled, and the will is oftener
 crossed than satisfied, and therefore much intense volition carries
 with it much intense suffering. for all suffering is simply
 unfulfilled and crossed volition; and even the pain of the body
 when it is injured or destroyed is as such only possible through
 the fact that the body is nothing but the will itself become
 object. now on this account, because much intense suffering is
 inseparable from much intense volition, very bad men bear the stamp
 of inward suffering in the very expression of the countenance; even
 when they have attained every external happiness, they always look
 unhappy so long as they are not transported by some momentary
 ecstasy and are not dissembling. from this inward torment, which is
 absolutely and directly essential to them, there finally proceeds
 that delight in the suffering of others which does not spring from
 mere egoism, but is disinterested, and which constitutes wickedness proper, rising to the
 pitch of cruelty. for this the suffering of
 others is not a means for the attainment of the ends of its own
 will, but an end in itself. the more definite explanation of this
 phenomenon is as follows:—since man is a manifestation of will
 illuminated by the clearest knowledge, he is always contrasting the
 actual and felt satisfaction of his will with the merely possible
 satisfaction of it which knowledge presents to him. hence arises
 envy: every privation is infinitely increased by the enjoyment of
 others, and relieved by the knowledge that others also suffer the
 same privation. those ills which are common to all and inseparable
 from human life trouble us little, just as those which belong to
 the [pg ] climate, to the
 whole country. the recollection of greater sufferings than our own
 stills our pain; the sight of the sufferings of others soothes our
 own. if, now, a man is filled with an exceptionally intense
 pressure of will,—if with burning eagerness he seeks to accumulate
 everything to slake the thirst of his egoism, and thus experiences,
 as he inevitably must, that all satisfaction is merely apparent,
 that the attained end never fulfils the promise of the desired
 object, the final appeasing of the fierce pressure of will, but
 that when fulfilled the wish only changes its form, and now
 torments him in a new one; and indeed that if at last all wishes
 are exhausted, the pressure of will itself remains without any
 conscious motive, and makes itself known to him with fearful pain
 as a feeling of terrible desolation and emptiness; if from all
 this, which in the case of the ordinary degrees of volition is only
 felt in a small measure, and only produces the ordinary degree of
 melancholy, in the case of him who is a manifestation of will
 reaching the point of extraordinary wickedness, there necessarily
 springs an excessive inward misery, an eternal unrest, an incurable
 pain; he seeks indirectly the alleviation which directly is denied
 him,—seeks to mitigate his own suffering by the sight of the
 suffering of others, which at the same time he recognises as an
 expression of his power. the suffering of others now becomes for
 him an end in itself, and is a spectacle in which he delights; and
 thus arises the phenomenon of pure cruelty, blood-thirstiness,
 which history exhibits so often in the neros and domitians, in the
 african deis, in robespierre, and the like.
the desire of
 revenge is closely related to wickedness. it recompenses evil with
 evil, not with reference to the future, which is the character of
 punishment, but merely on account of what has happened, what is
 past, as such, thus disinterestedly, not as a means, but as an end,
 in order to revel in the torment which the avenger himself has
 [pg ] inflicted on the
 offender. what distinguishes revenge from pure wickedness, and to
 some extent excuses it, is an appearance of justice. for if the
 same act, which is now revenge, were to be done legally, that is,
 according to a previously determined and known rule, and in a
 society which had sanctioned this rule, it would be punishment, and
 thus justice.
besides the
 suffering which has been described, and which is inseparable from
 wickedness, because it springs from the same root, excessive
 vehemence of will, another specific pain quite different from this
 is connected with wickedness, which is felt in the case of every
 bad action, whether it be merely injustice proceeding from egoism
 or pure wickedness, and according to the length of its duration is
 called the sting of conscience or
 remorse. now, whoever remembers
 and has present in his mind the content of the preceding portion of
 this fourth book, and especially the truth explained at the
 beginning of it, that life itself is always assured to the will to
 live, as its mere copy or mirror, and also the exposition of
 eternal justice, will find that the sting of conscience can have no
 other meaning than the following, i.e.,
 its content, abstractly expressed, is what follows, in which two
 parts are distinguished, which again, however, entirely coincide,
 and must be thought as completely united.
however closely
 the veil of mâyâ may envelop the mind of the bad man, i.e.,
 however firmly he may be involved in the principium individuationis,
 according to which he regards his person as absolutely different
 and separated by a wide gulf from all others, a knowledge to which
 he clings with all his might, as it alone suits and supports his
 egoism, so that knowledge is almost always corrupted by will, yet
 there arises in the inmost depths of his consciousness the secret
 presentiment that such an order of things is only phenomenal, and
 that their real constitution is quite different. he has a dim
 foreboding that, however much time and space may separate
 [pg ] him from other
 individuals and the innumerable miseries which they suffer, and
 even suffer through him, and may represent them as quite foreign to
 him, yet in themselves, and apart from the idea and its forms, it
 is the one will to live appearing in them all, which here failing
 to recognise itself, turns its weapons against itself, and, by
 seeking increased happiness in one of its phenomena, imposes the
 greatest suffering upon another. he dimly sees that he, the bad
 man, is himself this whole will; that consequently he is not only
 the inflicter of pain but also the endurer of it, from whose
 suffering he is only separated and exempted by an illusive dream,
 the form of which is space and time, which, however, vanishes away;
 that he must in reality pay for the pleasure with the pain, and
 that all suffering which he only knows as possible really concerns
 him as the will to live, inasmuch as the possible and actual, the
 near and the distant in time and space, are only different for the
 knowledge of the individual, only by means of the principium individuationis, not
 in themselves. this is the truth which mythically, i.e.,
 adapted to the principle of sufficient reason, and so translated
 into the form of the phenomenal, is expressed in the transmigration
 of souls. yet it has its purest expression, free from all foreign
 admixture, in that obscurely felt yet inconsolable misery called
 remorse. but this springs also from a second immediate knowledge,
 which is closely bound to the first—the knowledge of the strength
 with which the will to live asserts itself in the wicked
 individual, which extends far beyond his own individual phenomenon,
 to the absolute denial of the same will appearing in other
 individuals. consequently the inward horror of the wicked man at
 his own deed, which he himself tries to conceal, contains, besides
 that presentment of the nothingness, the mere illusiveness of the
 principium individuationis, and
 of the distinction established by it between him and others; also
 the knowledge of the [pg
 vehemence of his own will, the intensity with which he has seized
 upon life and attached himself closely to it, even that life whose
 terrible side he sees before him in the misery of those who are
 oppressed by him, and with which he is yet so firmly united, that
 just on this account the greatest atrocity proceeds from him
 himself, as a means for the fuller assertion of his own will. he
 recognises himself as the concentrated manifestation of the will to
 live, feels to what degree he is given up to life, and with it also
 to innumerable sufferings which are essential to it, for it has
 infinite time and infinite space to abolish the distinction between
 the possible and the actual, and to change all the sufferings which
 as yet are merely known to him into sufferings he
 has experienced. the millions of years
 of constant rebirth certainly exist, like the whole past and
 future, only in conception; occupied time, the form of the
 phenomenon of the will, is only the present, and for the individual
 time is ever new: it seems to him always as if he had newly come
 into being. for life is inseparable from the will to live, and the
 only form of life is the present. death (the repetition of the
 comparison must be excused) is like the setting of the sun, which
 is only apparently swallowed up by the night, but in reality,
 itself the source of all light, burns without intermission, brings
 new days to new worlds, is always rising and always setting.
 beginning and end only concern the individual through time, the
 form of the phenomenon for the idea. outside time lies only the
 will, kant's thing-in-itself, and its adequate objectification, the
 idea of plato. therefore suicide affords no escape; what every one
 in his inmost consciousness wills, that must he be; and
 what every one is, that he wills.
 thus, besides the merely felt knowledge of the illusiveness and
 nothingness of the forms of the idea which separate individuals, it
 is the self-knowledge of one's own will and its degree that gives
 the sting to conscience. the course of life draws [pg ] the image of the empirical character,
 whose original is the intelligible character, and horrifies the
 wicked man by this image. he is horrified all the same whether the
 image is depicted in large characters, so that the world shares his
 horror, or in such small ones that he alone sees it, for it only
 concerns him directly. the past would be a matter of indifference,
 and could not pain the conscience if the character did not feel
 itself free from all time and unalterable by it, so long as it does
 not deny itself. therefore things which are long past still weigh
 on the conscience. the prayer, “lead me not
 into temptation,” means, “let me not
 see what manner of person i am.” in the might with which the
 bad man asserts life, and which exhibits itself to him in the
 sufferings which he inflicts on others, he measures how far he is
 from the surrender and denial of that will, the only possible
 deliverance from the world and its miseries. he sees how far he
 belongs to it, and how firmly he is bound to it; the known
 suffering of others has no power to move him; he is given up to
 life and felt suffering. it remains hidden
 whether this will ever break and overcome the vehemence of his
 will.
this exposition
 of the significance and inner nature of the bad,
 which as mere feeling, i.e., not as distinct, abstract
 knowledge, is the content of remorse, will gain distinctness
 and completeness by the similar consideration of the good as
 a quality of human will, and finally of absolute resignation and
 holiness, which proceeds from it when it has attained its highest
 grade. for opposites always throw light upon each other, and the
 day at once reveals both itself and the night, as spinoza admirably
 remarks.
§ . a theory
 of morals without proof, that is, mere moralising, can effect
 nothing, because it does not act as a motive. a theory of morals
 which does act as a motive can do so only by working on self-love.
 but what springs from this source has no moral worth. it follows
 from this that no genuine virtue can be produced [pg ] through moral theory or abstract
 knowledge in general, but that such virtue must spring from that
 intuitive knowledge which recognises in the individuality of others
 the same nature as in our own.
for virtue
 certainly proceeds from knowledge, but not from the abstract
 knowledge that can be communicated through words. if it were so,
 virtue could be taught, and by here expressing in abstract language
 its nature and the knowledge which lies at its foundation, we
 should make every one who comprehends this even ethically better.
 but this is by no means the case. on the contrary, ethical
 discourses and preaching will just as little produce a virtuous man
 as all the systems of æsthetics from aristotle downwards have
 succeeded in producing a poet. for the real inner nature of virtue
 the concept is unfruitful, just as it is in art, and it is only in
 a completely subordinate position that it can be of use as a tool
 in the elaboration and preserving of what has been ascertained and
 inferred by other means. velle non
 discitur. abstract dogmas are, in fact, without
 influence upon virtue, i.e., upon the goodness of the
 disposition. false dogmas do not disturb it; true ones will
 scarcely assist it. it would, in fact, be a bad look-out if the
 cardinal fact in the life of man, his ethical worth, that worth
 which counts for eternity, were dependent upon anything the
 attainment of which is so much a matter of chance as is the case
 with dogmas, religious doctrines, and philosophical theories. for
 morality dogmas have this value only: the man who has become
 virtuous from knowledge of another kind, which is presently to be
 considered, possesses in them a scheme or formula according to
 which he accounts to his own reason, for the most part
 fictitiously, for his non-egoistical action, the nature of which
 it, i.e., he himself, does not
 comprehend, and with which account he has accustomed it to be
 content.
upon conduct,
 outward action, dogmas may certainly exercise a powerful influence,
 as also custom and example [pg ] (the last because the ordinary man does not
 trust his judgment, of the weakness of which he is conscious, but
 only follows his own or some one else's experience), but the
 disposition is not altered in this way. all
 abstract knowledge gives only motives; but, as was shown above,
 motives can only alter the direction of the will, not the will
 itself. all communicable knowledge, however, can only affect the
 will as a motive. thus when dogmas lead it, what the man really and
 in general wills remains still the same. he has only received
 different thoughts as to the ways in which it is to be attained,
 and imaginary motives guide him just like real ones. therefore, for
 example, it is all one, as regards his ethical worth, whether he
 gives large gifts to the poor, firmly persuaded that he will
 receive everything tenfold in a future life, or expends the same
 sum on the improvement of an estate which will yield interest,
 certainly late, but all the more surely and largely. and he who for
 the sake of orthodoxy commits the heretic to the flames is as much
 a murderer as the bandit who does it for gain; and indeed, as
 regards inward circumstances, so also was he who slaughtered the
 turks in the holy land, if, like the burner of heretics, he really
 did so because he thought that he would thereby gain a place in
 heaven. for these are careful only for themselves, for their own
 egoism, just like the bandit, from whom they are only distinguished
 by the absurdity of their means. from without, as has been said,
 the will can only be reached through motives, and these only alter
 the way in which it expresses itself, never the will itself.
 velle non discitur.
in the case of
 good deeds, however, the doer of which appeals to dogmas, we must
 always distinguish whether these dogmas really are the motives
 which lead to the good deeds, or whether, as was said above, they
 are [pg ] merely the illusive
 account of them with which he seeks to satisfy his own reason with
 regard to a good deed which really flows from quite a different
 source, a deed which he does because he is good, though he does not
 understand how to explain it rightly, and yet wishes to think
 something with regard to it. but this distinction is very hard to
 make, because it lies in the heart of a man. therefore we can
 scarcely ever pass a correct moral judgment on the action of
 others, and very seldom on our own. the deeds and conduct of an
 individual and of a nation may be very much modified through
 dogmas, example, and custom. but in themselves all deeds
 (opera operata) are merely empty
 forms, and only the disposition which leads to them gives them
 moral significance. this disposition, however, may be quite the
 same when its outward manifestation is very different. with an
 equal degree of wickedness, one man may die on the wheel, and
 another in the bosom of his family. it may be the same grade of
 wickedness which expresses itself in one nation in the coarse
 characteristics of murder and cannibalism, and in another finely
 and softly in miniature, in court intrigues, oppressions, and
 delicate plots of every kind; the inner nature remains the same. it
 is conceivable that a perfect state, or perhaps indeed a complete
 and firmly believed doctrine of rewards and punishments after
 death, might prevent every crime; politically much would be gained
 thereby; morally, nothing; only the expression of the will in life
 would be restricted.
thus genuine
 goodness of disposition, disinterested virtue, and pure nobility do
 not proceed from abstract knowledge. yet they do proceed from
 knowledge; but it is a direct intuitive knowledge, which can
 neither be reasoned away, nor arrived at by reasoning, a knowledge
 which, just because it is not abstract, cannot be communicated, but
 must arise in each for himself, which therefore finds its real and
 adequate expression not in [pg ] words, but only in deeds, in conduct, in the
 course of the life of man. we who here seek the theory of virtue,
 and have therefore also to express abstractly the nature of the
 knowledge which lies at its foundation, will yet be unable to
 convey that knowledge itself in this expression. we can only give
 the concept of this knowledge, and thus always start from action in
 which alone it becomes visible, and refer to action as its only
 adequate expression. we can only explain and interpret action,
 i.e., express abstractly what
 really takes place in it.
before we speak
 of the good proper, in opposition to the
 bad, which has been explained, we
 must touch on an intermediate grade, the mere negation of the bad:
 this is justice. the nature of right and
 wrong has been fully explained above; therefore we may briefly say
 here, that he who voluntarily recognises and observes those merely
 moral limits between wrong and right, even where this is not
 secured by the state or any other external power, thus he who,
 according to our explanation, never carries the assertion of his
 own will so far as to deny the will appearing in another
 individual, is just. thus, in order to increase
 his own well-being, he will not inflict suffering upon others,
 i.e., he will commit no crime,
 he will respect the rights and the property of others. we see that
 for such a just man the principium
 individuationis is no longer, as in the case of the
 bad man, an absolute wall of partition. we see that he does not,
 like the bad man, merely assert his own manifestation of will and
 deny all others; that other persons are not for him mere masks,
 whose nature is quite different from his own; but he shows in his
 conduct that he also recognises his own nature—the will to live as
 a thing-in-itself, in the foreign manifestation which is only given
 to him as idea. thus he finds himself again in that other
 manifestation, up to a certain point, that of doing no wrong,
 i.e., abstaining from injury. to
 this extent, therefore, he sees through the principium individuationis, the
 veil of mâyâ; so far he [pg
 sets the being external to him on a level with his own—he does it
 no injury.
if we examine
 the inmost nature of this justice, there already lies in it the
 resolution not to go so far in the assertion of one's own will as
 to deny the manifestations of will of others, by compelling them to
 serve one's own. one will therefore wish to render to others as
 much as one receives from them. the highest degree of this justice
 of disposition, which is, however, always united with goodness
 proper, whose character is no longer merely negative, extends so
 far that a man doubts his right to inherited property, wishes to
 support his body only by his own powers, mental and physical, feels
 every service of others and every luxury a reproach, and finally
 embraces voluntary poverty. thus we see how pascal, when he became
 an ascetic, would no longer permit any services to be rendered him,
 although he had servants enough; in spite of his constant bad
 health he made his bed himself, brought his own food from the
 kitchen, &c. (“vie de pascal, par sa
 sœur,” p. ). quite in keeping with this, it is reported
 that many hindus, even rajas with great wealth, expend it merely on
 the maintenance of their position, their court and attendants, and
 themselves observe with the greatest scrupulousness the maxim that
 a man should eat nothing that he has not himself both sowed and
 reaped. yet a certain misunderstanding lies at the bottom of this;
 for one man, just because he is rich and powerful, can render such
 signal services to the whole of human society that they
 counterbalance the wealth he has inherited, for the secure
 possession of which he is indebted to society. in reality that
 excessive justice of such hindus is already more than justice; it
 is actual renunciation, denial of the will to live,—asceticism, of
 which we shall speak last. on the other hand, pure idleness and
 living through the exertions of others, in the case of inherited
 wealth, without accomplishing anything, may be regarded as morally
 [pg ] wrong, even if it
 must remain right according to positive laws.
we have found
 that voluntary justice has its inmost source in a certain degree of
 penetration of the principium
 individuationis, while the unjust remain entirely
 involved in this principle. this penetration may exist not only in
 the degree which is required for justice, but also in the higher
 degree which leads to benevolence and well-doing, to love of
 mankind. and this may take place however strong and energetic in
 itself the will which appears in such an individual may be.
 knowledge can always counterbalance it in him, teach him to resist
 the tendency to wrong, and even produce in him every degree of
 goodness, and indeed of resignation. thus the good man is by no
 means to be regarded as originally a weaker manifestation of will
 than the bad man, but it is knowledge which in him masters the
 blind striving of will. there are certainly individuals who merely
 seem to have a good disposition on account of the weakness of the
 will appearing in them, but what they are soon appears from the
 fact that they are not capable of any remarkable self-conquest in
 order to perform a just or good deed.
if, however, as
 a rare exception, we meet a man who possesses a considerable
 income, but uses very little of it for himself and gives all the
 rest to the poor, while he denies himself many pleasures and
 comforts, and we seek to explain the action of this man, we shall
 find, apart altogether from the dogmas through which he tries to
 make his action intelligible to his reason, that the simplest
 general expression and the essential character of his conduct is
 that he
 makes less distinction than is usually made between himself and
 others. this distinction is so great in the eyes of
 many that the suffering of others is a direct pleasure to the
 wicked and a welcome means of happiness to the unjust. the merely
 just man is content not to cause it; and, in general, most men
 [pg ] know and are
 acquainted with innumerable sufferings of others in their vicinity,
 but do not determine to mitigate them, because to do so would
 involve some self-denial on their part. thus, in each of all these
 a strong distinction seems to prevail between his own ego and that
 of others; on the other hand, to the noble man we have imagined,
 this distinction is not so significant. the principium individuationis, the
 form of the phenomenon, no longer holds him so tightly in its
 grasp, but the suffering which he sees in others touches him almost
 as closely as his own. he therefore tries to strike a balance
 between them, denies himself pleasures, practises renunciation, in
 order to mitigate the sufferings of others. he sees that the
 distinction between himself and others, which to the bad man is so
 great a gulf, only belongs to a fleeting and illusive phenomenon.
 he recognises directly and without reasoning that the in-itself of
 his own manifestation is also that of others, the will to live,
 which constitutes the inner nature of everything and lives in all;
 indeed, that this applies also to the brutes and the whole of
 nature, and therefore he will not cause suffering even to a
 brute.
he is now just
 as little likely to allow others to starve, while he himself has
 enough and to spare, as any one would be to suffer hunger one day
 in order to have more the next day than he could enjoy. for to him
 who does works of love the veil of mâyâ has become transparent,
 [pg ] the illusion of the
 principium individuationis has
 left him. he recognises himself, his will, in every being, and
 consequently also in the sufferer. he is now free from the
 perversity with which the will to live, not recognising itself,
 here in one individual enjoys a fleeting and precarious pleasure,
 and there in another pays for it with suffering and starvation, and
 thus both inflicts and endures misery, not knowing that, like
 thyestes, it eagerly devours its own flesh; and then, on the one
 hand, laments its undeserved suffering, and on the other hand
 transgresses without fear of nemesis, always merely because,
 involved in the principium
 individuationis, thus generally in the kind of
 knowledge which is governed by the principle of sufficient reason,
 it does not recognise itself in the foreign phenomenon, and
 therefore does not perceive eternal justice. to be cured of this
 illusion and deception of mâyâ, and to do works of love, are one
 and the same. but the latter is the necessary and inevitable
 symptom of that knowledge.
the opposite of
 the sting of conscience, the origin and significance of which is
 explained above, is the good conscience, the satisfaction
 which we experience after every disinterested deed. it arises from
 the fact that such a deed, as it proceeds from the direct
 recognition of our own inner being in the phenomenon of another,
 affords us also the verification of this knowledge, the knowledge
 that our true self exists not only in our own person, this
 particular manifestation, but in everything that lives. by this the
 heart feels itself enlarged, as by egoism it is contracted. for as
 the latter concentrates our interest upon the particular
 manifestation of our own individuality, upon which knowledge always
 presents to us the innumerable dangers which constantly threaten
 this manifestation, and anxiety and care becomes the key-note of
 our disposition; the knowledge that everything living is just as
 much our own inner nature, as is our own person, extends our
 [pg ] interest to
 everything living; and in this way the heart is enlarged. thus
 through the diminished interest in our own self, the anxious care
 for the self is attacked at its very root and limited; hence the
 peace, the unbroken serenity, which a virtuous disposition and a
 good conscience affords, and the more distinct appearance of this
 with every good deed, for it proves to ourselves the depth of that
 disposition. the egoist feels himself surrounded by strange and
 hostile individuals, and all his hope is centred in his own good.
 the good man lives in a world of friendly individuals, the
 well-being of any of whom he regards as his own. therefore,
 although the knowledge of the lot of mankind generally does not
 make his disposition a joyful one, yet the permanent knowledge of
 his own nature in all living beings, gives him a certain evenness,
 and even serenity of disposition. for the interest which is
 extended to innumerable manifestations cannot cause such anxiety as
 that which is concentrated upon one. the accidents which concern
 individuals collectively, equalise themselves, while those which
 happen to the particular individual constitute good or bad
 fortune.
thus, though
 others have set up moral principles which they give out as
 prescriptions for virtue, and laws which it was necessary to
 follow, i, as has already been said, cannot do this because i have
 no “ought” or law to prescribe to
 the eternally free-will. yet on the other hand, in the connection
 of my system, what to a certain extent corresponds and is analogous
 to that undertaking is the purely theoretical truth, of which my
 whole exposition may be regarded as merely an elaboration, that the
 will is the in-itself of every phenomenon but itself, as such, is
 free from the forms of the phenomenal, and consequently from
 multiplicity; a truth, which, with reference to action, i do not
 know how to express better than by the formula of the vedas already
 quoted: “tat twam asi!” (this thou
 art!) whoever is able to say this to himself, with regard to every
 being with whom [pg
 he comes in contact, with clear knowledge and firm inward
 conviction, is certain of all virtue and blessedness, and is on the
 direct road to salvation.
but before i go
 further, and, as the conclusion of my exposition, show how love,
 the origin and nature of which we recognised as the penetration of
 the principium
 individuationis, leads to salvation, to the entire
 surrender of the will to live, i.e.,
 of all volition, and also how another path, less soft but more
 frequented, leads men to the same goal, a paradoxical proposition
 must first be stated and explained; not because it is paradoxical,
 but because it is true, and is necessary to the completeness of the
 thought i have present. it is this: “all
 love (αγαπη, caritas) is
 sympathy.”
§ . we have
 seen how justice proceeds from the penetration of the principium individuationis in a
 less degree, and how from its penetration in a higher degree there
 arises goodness of disposition proper, which shows itself as pure,
 i.e., disinterested love towards
 others. when now the latter becomes perfect, it places other
 individuals and their fate completely on a level with itself and
 its own fate. further than this it cannot go, for there exists no
 reason for preferring the individuality of another to its own. yet
 the number of other individuals whose whole happiness or life is in
 danger may outweigh the regard for one's own particular well-being.
 in such a case, the character that has attained to the highest
 goodness and perfect nobility will entirely sacrifice its own
 well-being, and even its life, for the well-being of many others.
 so died codrus, and leonidas, and regulus, and decius mus, and
 arnold von winkelried; so dies every one who voluntarily and
 consciously faces certain death for his friends or his country. and
 they also stand on the same level who voluntarily submit to
 suffering and death for maintaining what conduces and rightly
 belongs to the welfare of all mankind; that is, for maintaining
 universal and important truths and [pg ] destroying great errors. so died socrates and
 giordano bruno, and so many a hero of the truth suffered death at
 the stake at the hands of the priests.
now, however, i
 must remind the reader, with reference to the paradox stated above,
 that we found before that suffering is essential to life as a
 whole, and inseparable from it. and that we saw that every wish
 proceeds from a need, from a want, from suffering, and that
 therefore every satisfaction is only the removal of a pain, and
 brings no positive happiness; that the joys certainly lie to the
 wish, presenting themselves as a positive good, but in truth they
 have only a negative nature, and are only the end of an evil.
 therefore what goodness, love, and nobleness do for others, is
 always merely an alleviation of their suffering, and consequently
 all that can influence them to good deeds and works of love, is
 simply the knowledge of the suffering of
 others, which is directly understood from their own
 suffering and placed on a level with it. but it follows from this
 that pure love (αγαπη, caritas) is in its nature
 sympathy; whether the suffering it mitigates, to which every
 unsatisfied wish belongs, be great or small. therefore we shall
 have no hesitation, in direct contradiction to kant, who will only
 recognise all true goodness and all virtue to be such, if it has
 proceeded from abstract reflection, and indeed from the conception
 of duty and of the categorical imperative, and explains felt
 sympathy as weakness, and by no means virtue, we shall have no
 hesitation, i say, in direct contradiction to kant, in saying: the
 mere concept is for genuine virtue just as unfruitful as it is for
 genuine art: all true and pure love is sympathy, and all love which
 is not sympathy is selfishness. ερος is selfishness, αγαπη is
 sympathy. combinations of the two frequently occur. indeed genuine
 friendship is always a mixture of selfishness and sympathy; the
 former lies in the pleasure experienced in the presence of the
 friend, whose individuality corresponds to our [pg ] own, and this almost always constitutes
 the greatest part; sympathy shows itself in the sincere
 participation in his joy and grief, and the disinterested
 sacrifices made in respect of the latter. thus spinoza says:
 benevolentia nihil aliud est, quam cupiditas
 ex commiseratione orta (eth. iii. pr. , cor. ,
 schol.) as a confirmation of our paradoxical proposition it may be
 observed that the tone and words of the language and caresses of
 pure love, entirely coincide with the tones of sympathy; and we may
 also remark in passing that in italian sympathy and true love are
 denoted by the same word pietà.
this is also the
 place to explain one of the most striking peculiarities of human
 nature, weeping, which, like laughter,
 belongs to those qualities which distinguish man from the brutes.
 weeping is by no means a direct expression of pain, for it occurs
 where there is very little pain. in my opinion, indeed, we never
 weep directly on account of the pain we experience, but always
 merely on account of its repetition in reflection. we pass from the
 felt pain, even when it is physical, to a mere idea of it, and then
 find our own state so deserving of sympathy that we are firmly and
 sincerely convinced that if another were the sufferer, we would be
 full of sympathy, and love to relieve him. but now we ourselves are
 the object of our own sympathy; with the most benevolent
 disposition we are ourselves most in need of help; we feel that we
 suffer more than we could see another suffer; and in this very
 complex frame of mind, in which the directly felt suffering only
 comes to perception by a doubly circuitous route, imagined as the
 suffering of another, sympathised with as such, and then suddenly
 perceived again as directly our own,—in this complex frame of mind,
 i say, nature relieves itself through that remarkable physical
 conflict. weeping is accordingly sympathy with our
 own selves, or sympathy directed back on its source. it
 is therefore conditional upon the capacity for love and sympathy,
 and also upon imagination. therefore [pg ] men who are either hard-hearted or
 unimaginative do not weep easily, and weeping is even always
 regarded as a sign of a certain degree of goodness of character,
 and disarms anger, because it is felt that whoever can still weep,
 must necessarily always be capable of love, i.e.,
 sympathy towards others, for this enters in the manner described
 into the disposition that leads to weeping. the description which
 petrarch gives of the rising of his own tears, naïvely and truly
 expressing his feeling, entirely agrees with the explanation we
 have given—
“i vo
 pensando: e nel pensar m' assale
 una pietà si forte di me stesso,
che mi conduce spesso,
ad alto lagrimar, ch'i non
 soleva.”
what has been
 said is also confirmed by the fact that children who have been hurt
 generally do not cry till some one commiserates them; thus not on
 account of the pain, but on account of the idea of it. when we are
 moved to tears, not through our own suffering but through that of
 another, this happens as follows. either we vividly put ourselves
 in the place of the sufferer by imagination, or see in his fate the
 lot of humanity as a whole, and consequently, first of all, our own
 lot; and thus, in a very roundabout way, it is yet always about
 ourselves that we weep, sympathy with ourselves which we feel. this
 seems to be the principal reason of the universal, and thus
 natural, weeping in the case of death. the mourner does not weep
 for his loss; he would be ashamed of such egotistical tears,
 instead of which he is sometimes ashamed of not weeping. first of
 all he certainly weeps for the fate of the dead, but he also weeps
 when, after long, heavy, and incurable suffering, death was to this
 man a wished-for deliverance. thus, principally, he is seized with
 sympathy for the lot of all [pg ] mankind, which is necessarily finite, so that
 every life, however aspiring, and often rich in deeds, must be
 extinguished and become nothing. but in this lot of mankind the
 mourner sees first of all his own, and this all the more, the more
 closely he is related to him who has died, thus most of all if it
 is his father. although to his father his life was misery through
 age and sickness, and though his helplessness was a heavy burden to
 his son, yet that son weeps bitterly over the death of his father
 for the reason which has been given.
§ . after this
 digression about the identity of pure love and sympathy, the final
 return of which upon our own individuality has, as its symptom, the
 phenomenon of weeping, i now take up the thread of our discussion
 of the ethical significance of action, in order to show how, from
 the same source from which all goodness, love, virtue, and nobility
 of character spring, there finally arises that which i call the
 denial of the will to live.
we saw before
 that hatred and wickedness are conditioned by egoism, and egoism
 rests on the entanglement of knowledge in the principium individuationis. thus
 we found that the penetration of that principium individuationis is
 the source and the nature of justice, and when it is carried
 further, even to its fullest extent, it is the source and nature of
 love and nobility of character. for this penetration alone, by
 abolishing the distinction between our own individuality and that
 of others, renders possible and explains perfect goodness of
 disposition, extending to disinterested love and the most generous
 self-sacrifice for others.
if, however,
 this penetration of the principium
 individuationis, this direct knowledge of the
 identity of will in all its manifestations, is present in a high
 degree of distinctness, it will at once show an influence upon the
 will [pg ] which extends still
 further. if that veil of mâyâ, the principium individuationis, is
 lifted from the eyes of a man to such an extent that he no longer
 makes the egotistical distinction between his person and that of
 others, but takes as much interest in the sufferings of other
 individuals as in his own, and therefore is not only benevolent in
 the highest degree, but even ready to sacrifice his own
 individuality whenever such a sacrifice will save a number of other
 persons, then it clearly follows that such a man, who recognises in
 all beings his own inmost and true self, must also regard the
 infinite suffering of all suffering beings as his own, and take on
 himself the pain of the whole world. no suffering is any longer
 strange to him. all the miseries of others which he sees and is so
 seldom able to alleviate, all the miseries he knows directly, and
 even those which he only knows as possible, work upon his mind like
 his own. it is no longer the changing joy and sorrow of his own
 person that he has in view, as is the case with him who is still
 involved in egoism; but, since he sees through the principium individuationis, all
 lies equally near him. he knows the whole, comprehends its nature,
 and finds that it consists in a constant passing away, vain
 striving, inward conflict, and continual suffering. he sees
 wherever he looks suffering humanity, the suffering brute creation,
 and a world that passes away. but all this now lies as near him as
 his own person lies to the egoist. why should he now, with such
 knowledge of the world, assert this very life through constant acts
 of will, and thereby bind himself ever more closely to it, press it
 ever more firmly to himself? thus he who is still involved in the
 principium individuationis, in
 egoism, only knows particular things and their relation to his own
 person, and these constantly become new motives
 of his volition. but, on the other hand, that knowledge of the
 whole, of the nature of the thing-in-itself which has been
 described, becomes a quieter of all and every volition.
 the will now turns away [pg
 from life; it now shudders at the pleasures in which it recognises
 the assertion of life. man now attains to the state of voluntary
 renunciation, resignation, true indifference, and perfect
 will-lessness. if at times, in the hard experience of our own
 suffering, or in the vivid recognition of that of others, the
 knowledge of the vanity and bitterness of life draws nigh to us
 also who are still wrapt in the veil of mâyâ, and we would like to
 destroy the sting of the desires, close the entrance against all
 suffering, and purify and sanctify ourselves by complete and final
 renunciation; yet the illusion of the phenomenon soon entangles us
 again, and its motives influence the will anew; we cannot tear
 ourselves free. the allurement of hope, the flattery of the
 present, the sweetness of pleasure, the well-being which falls to
 our lot, amid the lamentations of a suffering world governed by
 chance and error, draws us back to it and rivets our bonds anew.
 therefore jesus says: “it is easier for a
 camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to
 enter into the kingdom of god.”
if we compare
 life to a course or path through which we must unceasingly run—a
 path of red-hot coals, with a few cool places here and there; then
 he who is entangled in delusion is consoled by the cool places, on
 which he now stands, or which he sees near him, and sets out to run
 through the course. but he who sees through the principium individuationis, and
 recognises the real nature of the thing-in-itself, and thus the
 whole, is no longer susceptible of such consolation; he sees
 himself in all places at once, and withdraws. his will turns round,
 no longer asserts its own nature, which is reflected in the
 phenomenon, but denies it. the phenomenon by which this change is
 marked, is the transition from virtue to asceticism. that is to
 say, it no longer suffices for such a man to love others as
 himself, and to do as much for them as for himself; but there
 arises within him a horror of the nature of which his own
 phenomenal existence [pg
 is an expression, the will to live, the kernel and inner nature of
 that world which is recognised as full of misery. he therefore
 disowns this nature which appears in him, and is already expressed
 through his body, and his action gives the lie to his phenomenal
 existence, and appears in open contradiction to it. essentially
 nothing else but a manifestation of will, he ceases to will
 anything, guards against attaching his will to anything, and seeks
 to confirm in himself the greatest indifference to everything. his
 body, healthy and strong, expresses through the genitals, the
 sexual impulse; but he denies the will and gives the lie to the
 body; he desires no sensual gratification under any condition.
 voluntary and complete chastity is the first step in asceticism or
 the denial of the will to live. it thereby denies the assertion of
 the will which extends beyond the individual life, and gives the
 assurance that with the life of this body, the will, whose
 manifestation it is, ceases. nature, always true and naïve,
 declares that if this maxim became universal, the human race would
 die out; and i think i may assume, in accordance with what was said
 in the second book about the connection of all manifestations of
 will, that with its highest manifestation, the weaker reflection of
 it would also pass away, as the twilight vanishes along with the
 full light. with the entire abolition of knowledge, the rest of the
 world would of itself vanish into nothing; for without a subject
 there is no object. i should like here to refer to a passage in the
 vedas, where it is said: “as in this world
 hungry infants press round their mother; so do all beings await the
 holy oblation.” (asiatic researches, vol. viii.; colebrooke,
 on the vedas, abstract of the sama-veda; also in colebrooke's
 miscellaneous essays, vol. i. p. .) sacrifice means resignation
 generally, and the rest of nature must look for its salvation to
 man who is at once the priest and the sacrifice. indeed it deserves
 to be noticed as very remarkable, that this thought has also
 [pg ] been expressed by
 the admirable and unfathomably profound angelus silesius, in the
 little poem entitled, “man brings all to
 god;” it runs, “man! all loves thee;
 around thee great is the throng. all things flee to thee that they
 may attain to god.” but a yet greater mystic, meister
 eckhard, whose wonderful writings are at last accessible ()
 through the edition of franz pfeiffer, says the same thing (p. )
 quite in the sense explained here: “i bear
 witness to the saying of christ. i, if i be lifted up from the
 earth, will draw all things unto me (john xii. ). so shall the
 good man draw all things up to god, to the source whence they first
 came. the masters certify to us that all creatures are made for the
 sake of man. this is proved in all created things, by the fact that
 the one makes the use of the other; the ox makes use of the grass,
 the fish of the water, the bird of the air, the wild beast of the
 forest. thus, all created things become of use to the good man. a
 good man brings to god the one created thing in the other.”
 he means to say, that man makes use of the brutes in this life
 because, in and with himself, he saves them also. it also seems to
 me that that difficult passage in the bible, rom. viii. -, must
 be interpreted in this sense.
in buddhism
 also, there is no lack of expressions of this truth. for example,
 when buddha, still as bodisatwa, has his horse saddled for the last
 time, for his flight into the wilderness from his father's house,
 he says these lines to the horse: “long
 hast thou existed in life and in death, but now thou shalt cease
 from carrying and drawing. bear me but this once more, o kantakana,
 away from here, and when i have attained to the law (have become
 buddha) i will not forget thee” (foe koue ki, trad. p. abel
 rémusat, p. ).
asceticism then
 shows itself further in voluntary and intentional poverty, which
 not only arises per accidens,
 because the possessions are given away to mitigate the sufferings
 of others, but is here an end in itself, is meant [pg ] to serve as a constant mortification of
 will, so that the satisfaction of the wishes, the sweet of life,
 shall not again arouse the will, against which self-knowledge has
 conceived a horror. he who has attained to this point, still always
 feels, as a living body, as concrete manifestation of will, the
 natural disposition for every kind of volition; but he
 intentionally suppresses it, for he compels himself to refrain from
 doing all that he would like to do, and to do all that he would
 like not to do, even if this has no further end than that of
 serving as a mortification of will. since he himself denies the
 will which appears in his own person, he will not resist if another
 does the same, i.e., inflicts wrongs upon him.
 therefore every suffering coming to him from without, through
 chance or the wickedness of others, is welcome to him, every
 injury, ignominy, and insult; he receives them gladly as the
 opportunity of learning with certainty that he no longer asserts
 the will, but gladly sides with every enemy of the manifestation of
 will which is his own person. therefore he bears such ignominy and
 suffering with inexhaustible patience and meekness, returns good
 for evil without ostentation, and allows the fire of anger to rise
 within him just as little as that of the desires. and he mortifies
 not only the will itself, but also its visible form, its
 objectivity, the body. he nourishes it sparingly, lest its
 excessive vigour and prosperity should animate and excite more
 strongly the will, of which it is merely the expression and the
 mirror. so he practises fasting, and even resorts to chastisement
 and self-inflicted torture, in order that, by constant privation
 and suffering, he may more and more break down and destroy the
 will, which he recognises and abhors as the source of his own
 suffering existence and that of the world. if at last death comes,
 which puts an end to this manifestation of that will, whose
 existence here has long since perished through free-denial of
 itself, with the exception of the weak residue of it [pg ] which appears as the life of this body;
 it is most welcome, and is gladly received as a longed-for
 deliverance. here it is not, as in the case of others, merely the
 manifestation which ends with death; but the inner nature itself is
 abolished, which here existed only in the manifestation, and that
 in a very weak degree; this
 last slight bond is now broken. for him who thus ends, the world
 has ended also.
and what i have
 here described with feeble tongue and only in general terms, is no
 philosophical fable, invented by myself, and only of to-day; no, it
 was the enviable life of so many saints and beautiful souls among
 christians, and still more among hindus and buddhists, and also
 among the believers of other religions. however different were the
 dogmas impressed on their reason, the same inward, direct,
 intuitive knowledge, from which alone all virtue and holiness
 proceed, expressed itself in precisely the same way in the conduct
 of life. for here also the great distinction between intuitive and
 abstract knowledge shows itself; a distinction which is of such
 importance and universal application in our whole investigation,
 and which has hitherto been too little attended to. there is a wide
 gulf between the two, which can only be crossed by the aid of
 philosophy, as regards the knowledge of the nature of the world.
 intuitively or in concreto,
 every man is really conscious of all philosophical truths, but to
 bring them to abstract knowledge, to reflection, is the work of
 philosophy, which neither ought nor is able to do more than
 this.
thus it may be
 that the inner nature of holiness, self-renunciation, mortification
 of our own will, asceticism, is [pg ] here for the first time expressed abstractly,
 and free from all mythical elements, as denial of the will
 to live, appearing after the complete knowledge of its
 own nature has become a quieter of all volition. on the other hand,
 it has been known directly and realised in practice by saints and
 ascetics, who had all the same inward knowledge, though they used
 very different language with regard to it, according to the dogmas
 which their reason had accepted, and in consequence of which an
 indian, a christian, or a lama saint must each give a very
 different account of his conduct, which is, however, of no
 importance as regards the fact. a saint may be full of the
 absurdest superstition, or, on the contrary, he may be a
 philosopher, it is all the same. his conduct alone certifies that
 he is a saint, for, in a moral regard, it proceeds from knowledge
 of the world and its nature, which is not abstractly but
 intuitively and directly apprehended, and is only expressed by him
 in any dogma for the satisfaction of his reason. it is therefore
 just as little needful that a saint should be a philosopher as that
 a philosopher should be a saint; just as it is not necessary that a
 perfectly beautiful man should be a great sculptor, or that a great
 sculptor should himself be a beautiful man. in general, it is a
 strange demand upon a moralist that he should teach no other virtue
 than that which he himself possesses. to repeat the whole nature of
 the world abstractly, universally, and distinctly in concepts, and
 thus to store up, as it were, a reflected image of it in permanent
 concepts always at the command of the reason; this and nothing else
 is philosophy. i refer the reader to the passage quoted from bacon
 in the first book.
but the
 description i have given above of the denial of the will to live,
 of the conduct of a beautiful soul, of a resigned and voluntarily
 expiating saint, is merely abstract and general, and therefore
 cold. as the knowledge from which the denial of the will proceeds
 is intuitive and not abstract, it finds its most perfect
 expression, not in abstract [pg ] conceptions, but in deeds and conduct.
 therefore, in order to understand fully what we philosophically
 express as denial of the will to live, one must come to know
 examples of it in experience and actual life. certainly they are
 not to be met with in daily experience: nam omnia præclara tam difficilia quam rara
 sunt, spinoza admirably says. therefore, unless by a
 specially happy fate we are made eye-witnesses, we have to content
 ourselves with descriptions of the lives of such men. indian
 literature, as we see from the little that we as yet know through
 translations, is very rich in descriptions of the lives of saints,
 penitents, samanas or ascetics, sannyâsis or mendicants, and
 whatever else they may be called. even the well-known “mythologie des indous, par mad. de polier,”
 though by no means to be commended in every respect, contains many
 excellent examples of this kind (especially in ch. , vol. ii.)
 among christians also there is no lack of examples which afford us
 the illustrations we desire. see the biographies, for the most part
 badly written, of those persons who are sometimes called saintly
 souls, sometimes pietists, quietists, devout enthusiasts, and so
 forth. collections of such biographies have been made at various
 times, such as tersteegen's “leben heiliger
 seelen,” reiz's “geschichte der
 wiedergeborennen,” in our own day, a collection by kanne,
 which, with much that is bad, yet contains some good, and
 especially the “leben der beata
 sturmin.” to this category very properly belongs the life of
 st. francis of assisi, that true personification of the ascetic,
 and prototype of all mendicant friars. his life, described by his
 younger contemporary, st. bonaventura, also famous as a scholastic,
 has recently been republished. “vita s.
 francisci a s. bonaventura concinnata” (soest, ), though
 shortly before a painstaking and detailed biography, making use of
 all sources of information, appeared in france, “histoire de s. françois d'assise, par chavin de
 mallan” (). as an oriental parallel of these
 [pg ] monastic writings we
 have the very valuable work of spence hardy, “eastern monachism; an account of the order of
 mendicants founded by gotama budha” (). it shows us the
 same thing in another dress. we also see what a matter of
 indifference it is whether it proceeds from a theistical or an
 atheistical religion. but as a special and exceedingly full example
 and practical illustration of the conceptions i have established, i
 can thoroughly recommend the “autobiography
 of madame de guion.” to become acquainted with this great
 and beautiful soul, the very thought of whom always fills me with
 reverence, and to do justice to the excellence of her disposition
 while making allowance for the superstition of her reason, must be
 just as delightful to every man of the better sort as with vulgar
 thinkers, i.e., the majority, that book
 will always stand in bad repute. for it is the case with regard to
 everything, that each man can only prize that which to a certain
 extent is analogous to him and for which he has at least a slight
 inclination. this holds good of ethical concerns as well as of
 intellectual. we might to a certain extent regard the well-known
 french biography of spinoza as a case in point, if we used as a key
 to it that noble introduction to his very insufficient essay,
 “de emendatione intellectus,” a
 passage which i can also recommend as the most effectual means i
 know of stilling the storm of the passions. finally, even the great
 goethe, greek as he is, did not think it below his dignity to show
 us this most beautiful side of humanity in the magic mirror of
 poetic art, for he represented the life of fräulein klettenberg in
 an idealised form in his “confessions of a
 beautiful soul,” and later, in his own biography, gave us
 also an historical account of it. besides this, he twice told the
 story of the life of st. philippo neri. the history of the world,
 will, and indeed must, keep silence about the men whose conduct is
 the best and only adequate illustration of this important point of
 our investigation, [pg
 for the material of the history of the world is quite different,
 and indeed opposed to this. it is not the denial of the will to
 live, but its assertion and its manifestation in innumerable
 individuals in which its conflict with itself at the highest grade
 of its objectification appears with perfect distinctness, and
 brings before our eyes, now the ascendancy of the individual
 through prudence, now the might of the many through their mass, now
 the might of chance personified as fate, always the vanity and
 emptiness of the whole effort. we, however, do not follow here the
 course of phenomena in time, but, as philosophers, we seek to
 investigate the ethical significance of action, and take this as
 the only criterion of what for us is significant and important.
 thus we will not be withheld by any fear of the constant numerical
 superiority of vulgarity and dulness from acknowledging that the
 greatest, most important, and most significant phenomenon that the
 world can show is not the conqueror of the world, but the subduer
 of it; is nothing but the quiet, unobserved life of a man who has
 attained to the knowledge in consequence of which he surrenders and
 denies that will to live which fills everything and strives and
 strains in all, and which first gains freedom here in him alone, so
 that his conduct becomes the exact opposite of that of other men.
 in this respect, therefore, for the philosopher, these accounts of
 the lives of holy, self-denying men, badly as they are generally
 written, and mixed as they are with superstition and nonsense, are,
 because of the significance of the material, immeasurably more
 instructive and important than even plutarch and livy.
it will further
 assist us much in obtaining a more definite and full knowledge of
 what we have expressed abstractly and generally, according to our
 method of exposition, as the denial of the will to live, if we
 consider the moral teaching that has been imparted with this
 intention, and by men who were full of this spirit; [pg ] and this will also show how old our
 view is, though the pure philosophical expression of it may be
 quite new. the teaching of this kind which lies nearest to hand is
 christianity, the ethics of which are entirely in the spirit
 indicated, and lead not only to the highest degrees of human love,
 but also to renunciation. the germ of this last side of it is
 certainly distinctly present in the writings of the apostles, but
 it was only fully developed and expressed later. we find the
 apostles enjoining the love of our neighbour as ourselves,
 benevolence, the requital of hatred with love and well-doing,
 patience, meekness, the endurance of all possible injuries without
 resistance, abstemiousness in nourishment to keep down lust,
 resistance to sensual desire, if possible, altogether. we already
 see here the first degrees of asceticism, or denial of the will
 proper. this last expression denotes that which in the gospels is
 called denying ourselves and taking up the cross (matt. xvi. ,
 ; mark viii. , ; luke ix. , , xiv. , , ). this
 tendency soon developed itself more and more, and was the origin of
 hermits, anchorites, and monasticism—an origin which in itself was
 pure and holy, but for that very reason unsuitable for the great
 majority of men; therefore what developed out of it could only be
 hypocrisy and wickedness, for abusus optimi pessimus. in more
 developed christianity, we see that seed of asceticism unfold into
 the full flower in the writings of the christian saints and
 mystics. these preach, besides the purest love, complete
 resignation, voluntary and absolute poverty, genuine calmness,
 perfect indifference to all worldly things, dying to our own will
 and being born again in god, entire forgetting of our own person,
 and sinking ourselves in the contemplation of god. a full
 exposition of this will be found in fénélon's “explication des maximes des saints sur la vie
 interieure.” but the spirit of this development of
 christianity is certainly nowhere so fully and powerfully
 [pg ] expressed as in the
 writings of the german mystics, in the works of meister eckhard,
 and in that justly famous book “die
 deutsche theologie,” of which luther says in the
 introduction to it which he wrote, that with the exception of the
 bible and st. augustine, he had learnt more from it of what god,
 christ, and man are than from any other book. yet we only got the
 genuine and correct text of it in the year , in the stuttgart
 edition by pfeiffer. the precepts and doctrines which are laid down
 there are the most perfect exposition, sprung from deep inward
 conviction of what i have presented as the denial of the will. it
 should therefore be studied more closely in that form before it is
 dogmatised about with jewish-protestant assurance. tauler's
 “nachfolgung des armen leben
 christi,” and also his “medulla
 animæ,” are written in the same admirable spirit, though not
 quite equal in value to that work. in my opinion the teaching of
 these genuine christian mystics, when compared with the teaching of
