"'disthroyed ut,' sez crook, an' he took us on, but not before toomey
that was in the tyrone sez aloud, his voice somewhere in his stummick:
'fwhat in the name av misfortune does this parrit widout a tail mane by
shtoppin' the road av his betthers?'
"the staff orf'cer wint blue, an' toomey makes him pink by changin' to
the voice av a minowderin' woman an' sayin': 'come an' kiss me, major
dear, for me husband's at the wars an' i'm all alone at the depot.'
"the staff orf'cer wint away, an' i cud see crook's shoulthers
shakin'.
"his corp'ril checks toomey. 'lave me alone,' sez toomey, widout a
wink. 'i was his batman before he was married an' he knows fwhat i mane,
av you don't. there's nothin' like livin' in the hoight av society.' d'you
remimber that, orth'ris!"
"hi do. toomey, 'e died in 'orspital, next week it was, 'cause i bought
'arf his kit; an' i remember after that"—
the relief had come; it was four o'clock. "i'll catch a kyart for you,
sorr," said mulvaney, diving hastily into his accoutrements. "come up to
the top av the fort an' we'll pershue our invistigations into m'grath's
shtable." the relieved guard strolled round the main bastion on its way to
the swimming-bath, and learoyd grew almost talkative. ortheris looked into
the fort ditch and across the plain. "ho! it's weary waitin' for ma-ary!"
he hummed; "but i'd like to kill some more bloomin' paythans before my
time's up. war! bloody war! north, east, south, and west."
"amen," said learoyd, slowly.
"fwhat's here?" said mulvaney, checking at a blurr of white by the foot
of the old sentry-box. he stooped and touched it. "it's norah—norah
m'taggart! why, nonie, darlin', fwhat are ye doin' out av your mother's
bed at this time?"
the two-year-old child of sergeant m'taggart must have wandered for a
breath of cool air to the very verge of the parapet of the fort ditch, her
tiny night-shift was gathered into a wisp round her neck and she moaned in
her sleep. "see there!" said mulvaney; "poor lamb! look at the heat-rash
on the innocint skin av her. 'tis hard—crool hard even for us. fwhat
must it be for these? wake up, nonie, your mother will be woild about you.
begad, the child might ha' fallen into the ditch!"
he picked her up in the growing light, and set her on his shoulder, and
her fair curls touched the grizzled stubble of his temples. ortheris and
learoyd followed snapping their fingers, while norah smiled at them a
sleepy smile. then carolled mulvaney, clear as a lark, dancing the baby on
his arm—
"if any young man should marry you,
say nothin' about the joke;
that iver ye slep' in a sinthry-box,
wrapped up in a soldier's cloak."
"though, on my sowl, nonie," he said, gravely, "there was not much
cloak about you. niver mind, you won't dhress like this ten years to come.
kiss your friends an' run along to your mother."
nonie, set down close to the married quarters, nodded with the quiet
obedience of the soldier's child, but, ere she pattered off over the
flagged path, held up her lips to be kissed by the three musketeers.
ortheris wiped his mouth with the back of his hand and swore
sentimentally; learoyd turned pink; and the two walked away together. the
yorkshireman lifted up his voice and gave in thunder the chorus of the
sentry-box, while ortheris piped at his side.
"'bin to a bloomin' sing-song, you two?" said the artilleryman, who was
taking his cartridge down to the morning gun, "you're over merry for these
dashed days."
"i bid ye take care o' the brat," said he,
"for it comes of a noble race"
learoyd bellowed. the voices died out in the swimming-bath.
"oh, terence!" i said, dropping into mulvaney's speech, when we were
alone, "it's you that have the tongue!"
he looked at me wearily; his eyes were sunk in his head, and his face
was drawn and white, "eyah!" said he; "i've blandandhered thim through the
night somehow, but can thim that helps others help thimselves? answer me
that, sorr!"
and over the bastions of fort amara broke the pitiless day.
"an officer and a gentleman."
his full name was percival william williams, but he picked up the other
name in a nursery-book, and that was the end of the christened titles. his
mother's ayah called him willie-baba, but as he never paid
the faintest attention to anything that the ayah said, her wisdom
did not help matters.
his father was the colonel of the th, and as soon as wee willie
winkie was old enough to understand what military discipline meant,
colonel williams put him under it. there was no other way of managing the
child. when he was good for a week, he drew good-conduct pay; and when he
was bad, he was deprived of his good-conduct stripe. generally he was bad,
for india offers so many chances to little six-year-olds of going
wrong.
children resent familiarity from strangers, and wee willie winkie was a
very particular child. once he accepted an acquaintance, he was graciously
pleased to thaw. he accepted brandis, a subaltern of the th, on sight.
brandis was having tea at the colonel's, and wee willie winkie entered
strong in the possession of a good-conduct badge won for not chasing the
hens round the compound. he regarded brandis with gravity for at least ten
minutes, and then delivered himself of his opinion.
"i like you," said he, slowly, getting off his chair and coming over to
brandis. "i like you. i shall call you coppy, because of your hair. do you
mind being called coppy? it is because of ve hair, you know."
here was one of the most embarrassing of wee willie winkie's
peculiarities. he would look at a stranger for some time, and then,
without warning or explanation, would give him a name. and the name stuck.
no regimental penalties could break wee willie winkie of this habit. he
lost his good-conduct badge for christening the commissioner's wife
"pobs"; but nothing that the colonel could do made the station forego the
nickname, and mrs. collen remained mrs. "pobs" till the end of her stay.
so brandis was christened "coppy," and rose, therefore, in the estimation
of the regiment.
if wee willie winkie took an interest in any one, the fortunate man was
envied alike by the mess and the rank and file. and in their envy lay no
suspicion of self-interest. "the colonel's son" was idolized on his own
merits entirely. yet wee willie winkie was not lovely. his face was
permanently freckled, as his legs were permanently scratched, and in spite
of his mother's almost tearful remonstrances he had insisted upon having
his long yellow locks cut short in the military fashion. "i want my hair
like sergeant tummil's," said wee willie winkie, and, his father abetting,
the sacrifice was accomplished.
three weeks after the bestowal of his youthful affections on lieutenant
brandis—henceforward to be called "coppy" for the sake of
brevity—wee willie winkie was destined to behold strange things and
far beyond his comprehension.
coppy returned his liking with interest. coppy had let him wear for
five rapturous minutes his own big sword—just as tall as wee willie
winkie. coppy had promised him a terrier puppy; and coppy had permitted
him to witness the miraculous operation of shaving. nay, more—coppy
had said that even he, wee willie winkie, would rise in time to the
ownership of a box of shiny knives, a silver soap-box and a silver-handled
"sputter-brush," as wee willie winkie called it. decidedly, there was no
one except his father, who could give or take away good-conduct badges at
pleasure, half so wise, strong, and valiant as coppy with the afghan and
egyptian medals on his breast. why, then, should coppy be guilty of the
unmanly weakness of kissing—vehemently kissing—a "big girl,"
miss allardyce to wit? in the course of a morning ride, wee willie winkie
had seen coppy so doing, and, like the gentleman he was, had promptly
wheeled round and cantered back to his groom, lest the groom should also
see.
under ordinary circumstances he would have spoken to his father, but he
felt instinctively that this was a matter on which coppy ought first to be
consulted.
"coppy," shouted wee willie winkie, reining up outside that subaltern's
bungalow early one morning—"i want to see you, coppy!"
"come in, young 'un," returned coppy, who was at early breakfast in the
midst of his dogs. "what mischief have you been getting into now?"
wee willie winkie had done nothing notoriously bad for three days, and
so stood on a pinnacle of virtue.
"i've been doing nothing bad," said he, curling himself into a long
chair with a studious affectation of the colonel's languor after a hot
parade. he buried his freckled nose in a tea-cup and, with eyes staring
roundly over the rim, asked:—"i say, coppy, is it pwoper to kiss big
girls?"
"by jove! you're beginning early. who do you want to kiss?"
"no one. my muvver's always kissing me if i don't stop her. if it isn't
pwoper, how was you kissing major allardyce's big girl last morning, by ve
canal?"
coppy's brow wrinkled. he and miss allardyce had with great craft
managed to keep their engagement secret for a fortnight. there were urgent
and imperative reasons why major allardyce should not know how matters
stood for at least another month, and this small marplot had discovered a
great deal too much.
"i saw you," said wee willie winkie, calmly. "but ve groom didn't see.
i said, 'hut jao.'"
"oh, you had that much sense, you young rip," groaned poor coppy, half
amused and half angry. "and how many people may you have told about
it?"
"only me myself. you didn't tell when i twied to wide ve buffalo ven my
pony was lame; and i fought you wouldn't like."
"winkie," said coppy, enthusiastically, shaking the small hand, "you're
the best of good fellows. look here, you can't understand all these
things. one of these days—hang it, how can i make you see
it!—i'm going to marry miss allardyce, and then she'll be mrs.
coppy, as you say. if your young mind is so scandalized at the idea of
kissing big girls, go and tell your father."
"what will happen?" said wee willie winkie, who firmly believed that
his father was omnipotent.
"i shall get into trouble." said coppy, playing his trump card with an
appealing look at the holder of the ace.
"ven i won't," said wee willie winkie, briefly. "but my faver says it's
un-man-ly to be always kissing, and i didn't fink you'd do vat,
coppy."
"i'm not always kissing, old chap. it's only now and then, and when
you're bigger you'll do it too. your father meant it's not good for little
boys."
"ah!" said wee willie winkie, now fully enlightened. "it's like ve
sputter-brush?"
"exactly," said coppy, gravely.
"but i don't fink i'll ever want to kiss big girls, nor no one, 'cept
my muvver. and i must vat, you know."
there was a long pause, broken by wee willie winkie,
"are you fond of vis big girl, coppy?"
"awfully!" said coppy.
"fonder van you are of bell or ve butcha—or me?"
"it's in a different way," said coppy. "you see, one of these days miss
allardyce will belong to me, but you'll grow up and command the regiment
and—all sorts of things. it's quite different, you see."
"very well," said wee willie winkie, rising. "if you're fond of ve big
girl, i won't tell any one. i must go now."
coppy rose and escorted his small guest to the door, adding: "you're
the best of little fellows, winkie. i tell you what. in thirty days from
now you can tell if you like—tell any one you like."
thus the secret of the brandis-allardyce engagement was dependent on a
little child's word. coppy, who knew wee willie winkie's idea of truth,
was at ease, for he felt that he would not break promises. wee willie
winkie betrayed a special and unusual interest in miss allardyce, and,
slowly revolving round that embarrassed young lady, was used to regard her
gravely with unwinking eye. he was trying to discover why coppy should
have kissed her. she was not half so nice as his own mother. on the other
hand, she was coppy's property, and would in time belong to him. therefore
it behooved him to treat her with as much respect as coppy's big sword or
shiny pistol.
the idea that he shared a great secret in common with coppy kept wee
willie winkie unusually virtuous for three weeks. then the old adam broke
out, and he made what he called a "camp-fire" at the bottom of the garden.
how could he have foreseen that the flying sparks would have lighted the
colonel's little hayrick and consumed a week's store for the horses?
sudden and swift was the punishment—deprivation of the good-conduct
badge and, most sorrowful of all, two days confinement to
barracks—the house and veranda—coupled with the withdrawal of
the light of his father's countenance.
he took the sentence like the man he strove to be, drew himself up with
a quivering under-lip, saluted, and, once clear of the room, ran to weep
bitterly in his nursery—called by him "my quarters," coppy came in
the afternoon and attempted to console the culprit.
"i'm under awwest," said wee willie winkie, mournfully, "and i didn't
ought to speak to you."
very early the next morning he climbed on to the roof of the
house—that was not forbidden—and beheld miss allardyce going
for a ride.
"where are you going?" cried wee willie winkie.
"across the river," she answered, and trotted forward.
now the cantonment in which the th lay was bounded on the north by a
river—dry in the winter. from his earliest years, wee willie winkie
had been forbidden to go across the river, and had noted that even
coppy—the almost almighty coppy—had never set foot beyond it.
wee willie winkie had once been read to, out of a big blue book, the
history of the princess and the goblins—a most wonderful tale of a
land where the goblins were always warring with the children of men until
they were defeated by one curdie. ever since that date it seemed to him
that the bare black and purple hills across the river were inhabited by
goblins, and, in truth, every one had said that there lived the bad men.
even in his own house the lower halves of the windows were covered with
green paper on account of the bad men who might, if allowed clear view,
fire into peaceful drawing-rooms and comfortable bedrooms. certainly,
beyond the river, which was the end of all the earth, lived the bad men.
and here was major allardyce's big girl, coppy's property, preparing to
venture into their borders! what would coppy say if anything happened to
her? if the goblins ran off with her as they did with curdie's princess?
she must at all hazards be turned back.
the house was still. wee willie winkie reflected for a moment on the
very terrible wrath of his father; and then—broke his arrest! it was
a crime unspeakable. the low sun threw his shadow, very large and very
black, on the trim garden-paths, as he went down to the stables and
ordered his pony. it seemed to him in the hush of the dawn that all the
big world had been bidden to stand still and look at wee willie winkie
guilty of mutiny. the drowsy groom handed him his mount, and, since the
one great sin made all others insignificant, wee willie winkie said that
he was going to ride over to coppy sahib, and went out at a foot-pace,
stepping on the soft mould of the flower-borders.
the devastating track of the pony's feet was the last misdeed that cut
him off from all sympathy of humanity, he turned into the road, leaned
forward; and rode as fast as the pony could put foot to the ground in the
direction of the river.
but the liveliest of twelve-two ponies can do little against the long
canter of a waler. miss allardyce was far ahead, had passed through the
crops, beyond the police-post when all the guards were asleep, and her
mount was scattering the pebbles of the river bed as wee willie winkie
left the cantonment and british india behind him. bowed forward and still
flogging, wee willie winkie shot into afghan territory, and could just see
miss allardyce a black speck, flickering across the stony plain. the
reason of her wandering was simple enough. coppy, in a tone of
too-hastily-assumed authority, had told her over night, that she must not
ride out by the river. and she had gone to prove her own spirit and teach
coppy a lesson.
almost at the foot of the inhospitable hills, wee willie winkie saw the
waler blunder and come down heavily. miss allardyce struggled clear, but
her ankle had been severely twisted, and she could not stand. having thus
demonstrated her spirit, she wept copiously, and was surprised by the
apparition of a white, wide-eyed child in khaki, on a nearly spent
pony.
"are you badly, badly hurted?" shouted wee willie winkie, as soon as he
was within range. "you didn't ought to be here."
"i don't know," said miss allardyce, ruefully, ignoring the reproof.
"good gracious, child, what are you doing here?"
"you said you was going acwoss ve wiver," panted wee willie winkie,
throwing himself off his pony. "and nobody—not even coppy—must
go acwoss ve wiver, and i came after you ever so hard, but you wouldn't
stop, and now you've hurted yourself, and coppy will be angwy wiv me,
and—i've bwoken my awwest! i've bwoken my awwest!"
the future colonel of the th sat down and sobbed. in spite of the
pain in her ankle the girl was moved.
"have you ridden all the way from cantonments, little man? what
for?"
"you belonged to coppy. coppy told me so!" wailed wee willie winkie,
disconsolately. "i saw him kissing you, and he said he was fonder of you
van bell or ve butcha or me. and so i came. you must get up and come back.
you didn't ought to be here. vis is a bad place, and i've bwoken my
awwest."
"i can't move, winkie," said miss allardyce, with a groan. "i've hurt
my foot. what shall i do?"
she showed a readiness to weep afresh, which steadied wee willie
winkie, who had been brought up to believe that tears were the depth of
unmanliness. still, when one is as great a sinner as wee willie winkie,
even a man may be permitted to break down,
"winkie," said miss allardyce, "when you've rested a little, ride back
and tell them to send out something to carry me back in. it hurts
fearfully."
the child sat still for a little time and miss allardyce closed her
eyes; the pain was nearly making her faint. she was roused by wee willie
winkie tying up the reins on his pony's neck and setting it free with a
vicious cut of his whip that made it whicker. the little animal headed
toward the cantonments.
"oh, winkie! what are you doing?"
"hush!" said wee willie winkie. "vere's a man coming—one of ve
bad men. i must stay wiv you. my faver says a man must always look
after a girl. jack will go home, and ven vey'll come and look for us.
vat's why i let him go."
not one man but two or three had appeared from behind the rocks of the
hills, and the heart of wee willie winkie sank within him, for just in
this manner were the goblins wont to steal out and vex curdie's soul. thus
had they played in curdie's garden, he had seen the picture, and thus had
they frightened the princess's nurse. he heard them talking to each other,
and recognized with joy the bastard pushto that he had picked up from one
of his father's grooms lately dismissed. people who spoke that tongue
could not be the bad men. they were only natives after all.
they came up to the bowlders on which miss allardyce's horse had
blundered.
then rose from the rock wee willie winkie, child of the dominant race,
aged six and three-quarters, and said briefly and emphatically
"jao!" the pony had crossed the river-bed.
the men laughed, and laughter from natives was the one thing wee willie
winkie could not tolerate. he asked them what they wanted and why they did
not depart. other men with most evil faces and crooked-stocked guns crept
out of the shadows of the hills, till, soon, wee willie winkie was face to
face with an audience some twenty strong, miss allardyce screamed.
"who are you?" said one of the men.
"i am the colonel sahib's son, and my order is that you go at once. you
black men are frightening the miss sahib. one of you must run into
cantonments and take the news that miss sahib has hurt herself, and that
the colonel's son is here with her."
"put our feet into the trap?" was the laughing reply. "hear this boy's
speech!"
"say that i sent you—i, the colonel's son. they will give you
money."
"what is the use of this talk? take up the child and the girl, and we
can at least ask for the ransom. ours are the villages on the heights,"
said a voice in the background.
these were the bad men—worse than goblins—and it
needed all wee willie winkie's training to prevent him from bursting into
tears. but he felt that to cry before a native, excepting only his
mother's ayah, would be an infamy greater than any mutiny.
moreover, he, as future colonel of the th, had that grim regiment at
his back.
"are you going to carry us away?" said wee willie winkie, very blanched
and uncomfortable.
"yes, my little sahib bahadur," said the tallest of the men,
"and eat you afterward."
"that is child's talk," said wee willie winkie. "men do not eat
men."
a yell of laughter interrupted him, but he went on firmly,—"and
if you do carry us away, i tell you that all my regiment will come up in a
day and kill you all without leaving one. who will take my message to the
colonel sahib?"
speech in any vernacular—and wee willie winkie had a colloquial
acquaintance with three—was easy to the boy who could not yet manage
his "r's" and "th's" aright.
another man joined the conference, crying:—"o foolish men! what
this babe says is true. he is the heart's heart of those white troops. for
the sake of peace let them go both, for if he be taken, the regiment will
break loose and gut the valley. our villages are in the valley, and
we shall not escape. that regiment are devils. they broke khoda yar's
breast-bone with kicks when he tried to take the rifles; and if we touch
this child they will fire and rape and plunder for a month, till nothing
remains. better to send a man back to take the message and get a reward. i
say that this child is their god, and that they will spare none of us, nor
our women, if we harm him."
it was din mahommed, the dismissed groom of the colonel, who made the
diversion, and an angry and heated discussion followed. wee willie winkie,
standing over miss allardyce, waited the upshot. surely his "wegiment,"
his own "wegiment," would not desert him if they knew of his
extremity.
the riderless pony brought the news to the th, though there had been
consternation in the colonel's household for an hour before. the little
beast came in through the parade ground in front of the main barracks,
where the men were settling down to play spoil-five till the afternoon.
devlin, the color sergeant of e company, glanced at the empty saddle and
tumbled through the barrack-rooms, kicking up each room corporal as he
passed. "up, ye beggars! there's something happened to the colonel's son,"
he shouted.
"he couldn't fall off! s'elp me, 'e couldn't fall off,"
blubbered a drummer-boy, "go an' hunt acrost the river. he's over there if
he's anywhere, an' maybe those pathans have got 'im. for the love o' gawd
don't look for 'im in the nullahs! let's go over the river."
"there's sense in mott yet," said devlin. "e company, double out to the
river—sharp!"
so e company, in its shirt-sleeves mainly, doubled for the dear life,
and in the rear toiled the perspiring sergeant, adjuring it to double yet
faster. the cantonment was alive with the men of the th hunting for wee
willie winkie, and the colonel finally overtook e company, far too
exhausted to swear, struggling in the pebbles of the river-bed.
up the hill under which wee willie winkie's bad men were discussing the
wisdom of carrying off the child and the girl, a look-out fired two
shots.
"what have i said?" shouted din mahommed. "there is the warning! the
pulton are out already and are coming across the plain! get away!
let us not be seen with the boy!"
the men waited for an instant, and then, as another shot was fired,
withdrew into the hills, silently as they had appeared.
"the wegiment is coming," said wee willie winkie, confidently, to miss
allardyce, "and it's all wight. don't cwy!"
he needed the advice himself, for ten minutes later, when his father
came up, he was weeping bitterly with his head in miss allardyce's
lap.
and the men of the th carried him home with shouts and rejoicings;
and coppy, who had ridden a horse into a lather, met him, and, to his
intense disgust, kissed him openly in the presence of the men.
but there was balm for his dignity. his father assured him that not
only would the breaking of arrest be condoned, but that the good-conduct
badge would be restored as soon as his mother could sew it on his
blouse-sleeve. miss allardyce had told the colonel a story that made him
proud of his son.
"she belonged to you, coppy," said wee willie winkie, indicating miss
allardyce with a grimy forefinger. "i knew she didn't ought to go
acwoss ve wiver, and i knew ve wegiment would come to me if i sent jack
home."
"you're a hero, winkie," said coppy—"a pukka hero!"
"i don't know what vat means," said wee willie winkie, "but you mustn't
call me winkie any no more, i'm percival will'am will'ams."
and in this manner did wee willie winkie enter into his manhood.
it was not in the open fight
we threw away the sword,
but in the lonely watching
in the darkness by the ford.
the waters lapped, the night-wind blew,
full-armed the fear was born and grew.
and we were flying ere we knew
from panic in the night.
 —beoni bar.
some people hold that an english cavalry regiment cannot run. this is a
mistake. i have seen four hundred and thirty-seven sabres flying over the
face of the country in abject terror—have seen the best regiment
that ever drew bridle wiped off the army list for the space of two hours.
if you repeat this tale to the white hussars they will, in all
probability, treat you severely. they are not proud of the incident.
you may know the white hussars by their "side," which is greater than
that of all the cavalry regiments on the roster. if this is not a
sufficient mark, you may know them by their old brandy. it has been sixty
years in the mess and is worth going far to taste. ask for the "mcgaire"
old brandy, and see that you get it. if the mess sergeant thinks that you
are uneducated, and that the genuine article will be lost on you, he will
treat you accordingly. he is a good man. but, when you are at mess, you
must never talk to your hosts about forced marches or long-distance rides.
the mess are very sensitive; and, if they think that you are laughing at
them, will tell you so.
as the white hussars say, it was all the colonel's fault. he was a new
man, and he ought never to have taken the command. he said that the
regiment was not smart enough. this to the white hussars, who knew that
they could walk round any horse and through any guns, and over any foot on
the face of the earth! that insult was the first cause of offence.
then the colonel cast the drum-horse—the drum-horse of the white
hussars! perhaps you do not see what an unspeakable crime he had
committed. i will try to make it clear. the soul of the regiment lives in
the drum-horse who carries the silver kettle-drums. he is nearly always a
big piebald waler. that is a point of honor; and a regiment will spend
anything you please on a piebald. he is beyond the ordinary laws of
casting. his work is very light, and he only manoeuvres at a foot-pace.
wherefore, so long as he can step out and look handsome, his well-being is
assured. he knows more about the regiment than the adjutant, and could not
make a mistake if he tried.
the drum-horse of the white hussars was only eighteen years old, and
perfectly equal to his duties. he had at least six years' more work in
him, and carried himself with all the pomp and dignity of a drum-major of
the guards. the regiment had paid rs. for him.
but the colonel said that he must go, and he was cast in due form and
replaced by a washy, bay beast, as ugly as a mule, with a ewe-neck,
rat-tail, and cow-hocks. the drummer detested that animal, and the best of
the band-horses put back their ears and showed the whites of their eyes at
the very sight of him. they knew him for an upstart and no gentleman. i
fancy that the colonel's ideas of smartness extended to the band, and that
he wanted to make it take part in the regular parade movements. a cavalry
band is a sacred thing. it only turns out for commanding officers'
parades, and the band master is one degree more important than the
colonel. he is a high priest and the "keel row" is his holy song. the
"keel row" is the cavalry trot; and the man who has never heard that tune
rising, high and shrill, above the rattle of the regiment going past the
saluting-base, has something yet to hear and understand.
when the colonel cast the drum-horse of the white hussars, there was
nearly a mutiny.
the officers were angry, the regiment were furious, and the bandsmen
swore—like troopers. the drum-horse was going to be put up to
auction—public auction—to be bought, perhaps, by a parsee and
put into a cart! it was worse than exposing the inner life of the regiment
to the whole world, or selling the mess plate to a jew—a black
jew.
the colonel was a mean man and a bully. he knew what the regiment
thought about his action; and, when the troopers offered to buy the
drum-horse, he said that their offer was mutinous and forbidden by the
regulations.
but one of the subalterns—hogan-yale, an irishman—bought
the drum-horse for rs.  at the sale, and the colonel was wroth. yale
professed repentance—he was unnaturally submissive—and said
that, as he had only made the purchase to save the horse from possible
ill-treatment and starvation, he would now shoot him and end the business.
this appeared to soothe the colonel, for he wanted the drum-horse disposed
of. he felt that he had made a mistake, and could not of course
acknowledge it. meantime, the presence of the drum-horse was an annoyance
to him.
yale took to himself a glass of the old brandy, three cheroots, and his
friend martyn; and they all left the mess together. yale and martyn
conferred for two hours in yale's quarters; but only the bull-terrier who
keeps watch over yale's boot-trees knows what they said. a horse, hooded
and sheeted to his ears, left yale's stables and was taken, very
unwillingly, into the civil lines. yale's groom went with him. two men
broke into the regimental theatre and took several paint-pots and some
large scenery-brushes. then night fell over the cantonments, and there was
a noise as of a horse kicking his loose-box to pieces in yale's stables.
yale had a big, old, white waler trap-horse.
the next day was a thursday, and the men, hearing that yale was going
to shoot the drum-horse in the evening, determined to give the beast a
regular regimental funeral—a finer one than they would have given
the colonel had he died just then. they got a bullock-cart and some
sacking, and mounds and mounds of roses, and the body, under sacking, was
carried out to the place where the anthrax cases were cremated; two-thirds
of the regiment following. there was no band, but they all sang "the place
where the old horse died" as something respectful and appropriate to the
occasion. when the corpse was dumped into the grave and the men began
throwing down armfuls of roses to cover it, the farrier-sergeant ripped
out an oath and said aloud, "why, it ain't the drum-horse any more than
it's me!" the troop sergeant-majors asked him whether he had left his head
in the canteen. the farrier-sergeant said that he knew the drum-horse's
feet as well as he knew his own; but he was silenced when he saw the
regimental number burned in on the poor stiff, upturned near-fore.
thus was the drum-horse of the white hussars buried; the
farrier-sergeant grumbling. the sacking that covered the corpse was
smeared in places with black paint; and the farrier-sergeant drew
attention to this fact. but the troop sergeant-major of e troop kicked him
severely on the shin, and told him that he was undoubtedly drunk.
on the monday following the burial, the colonel sought revenge on the
white hussars. unfortunately, being at that time temporarily in command of
the station, he ordered a brigade field-day. he said that he wished to
make the regiment "sweat for their damned insolence," and he carried out
his notion thoroughly. that monday was one of the hardest days in the
memory of the white hussars. they were thrown against a skeleton-enemy,
and pushed forward, and withdrawn, and dismounted, and "scientifically
handled" in every possible fashion over dusty country, till they sweated
profusely. their only amusement came late in the day when they fell upon
the battery of horse artillery and chased it for two miles. this was a
personal question, and most of the troopers had money on the event; the
gunners saying openly that they had the legs of the white hussars. they
were wrong. a march-past concluded the campaign, and when the regiment got
back to their lines, the men were coated with dirt from spur to
chin-strap.
the white hussars have one great and peculiar privilege. they won it at
fontenoy, i think.
many regiments possess special rights such as wearing collars with
undress uniform, or a bow of riband between the shoulders, or red and
white roses in their helmets on certain days of the year. some rights are
connected with regimental saints, and some with regimental successes. all
are valued highly; but none so highly as the right of the white hussars to
have the band playing when their horses are being watered in the lines.
only one tune is played, and that tune never varies. i don't know its real
name, but the white hussars call it, "take me to london again." it sounds
very pretty. the regiment would sooner be struck off the roster than
forego their distinction.
after the "dismiss" was sounded, the officers rode off home to prepare
for stables; and the men filed into the lines riding easy. that is to say,
they opened their tight buttons, shifted their helmets, and began to joke
or to swear as the humor took them; the more careful slipping off and
easing girths and curbs. a good trooper values his mount exactly as much
as he values himself, and believes, or should believe, that the two
together are irresistible where women or men, girls or guns, are
concerned.
then the orderly-officer gave the order, "water horses," and the
regiment loafed off to the squadron-troughs which were in rear of the
stables and between these and the barracks. there were four huge troughs,
one for each squadron, arranged en èchelon, so that the
whole regiment could water in ten minutes if it liked. but it lingered for
seventeen, as a rule, while the band played.
the band struck up as the squadrons filed off to the troughs, and the
men slipped their feet out of the stirrups and chaffed each other. the sun
was just setting in a big, hot bed of red cloud, and the road to the civil
lines seemed to run straight into the sun's eye. there was a little dot on
the road. it grew and grew till it showed as a horse, with a sort of
gridiron-thing on his back. the red cloud glared through the bars of the
gridiron. some of the troopers shaded their eyes with their hands and
said—"what the mischief 'as that there 'orse got on 'im?"
in another minute they heard a neigh that every soul—horse and
man—in the regiment knew, and saw, heading straight toward the band,
the dead drum-horse of the white hussars!
on his withers banged and bumped the kettledrums draped in crape, and
on his back, very stiff and soldierly, sat a bareheaded skeleton.
the band stopped playing, and, for a moment, there was a hush.
then some one in e troop—men said it was the
troop-sergeant-major—swung his horse round and yelled. no one can
account exactly for what happened afterward; but it seems that, at least,
one man in each troop set an example of panic, and the rest followed like
sheep. the horses that had barely put their muzzles into the troughs
reared and capered; but as soon as the band broke, which it did when the
ghost of the drum-horse was about a furlong distant, all hooves followed
suit, and the clatter of the stampede—quite different from the
orderly throb and roar of a movement on parade, or the rough horse-play of
watering in camp—made them only more terrified. they felt that the
men on their backs were afraid of something. when horses once know that,
all is over except the butchery.
troop after troop turned from the troughs and ran—anywhere and
everywhere—like spilled quicksilver. it was a most extraordinary
spectacle, for men and horses were in all stages of easiness, and the
carbine-buckets flopping against their sides urged the horses on. men were
shouting and cursing, and trying to pull clear of the band which was being
chased by the drum-horse whose rider had fallen forward and seemed to be
spurring for a wager.
the colonel had gone over to the mess for a drink. most of the officers
were with him, and the subaltern of the day was preparing to go down to
the lines, and receive the watering reports from the
troop-sergeant-majors. when "take me to london again" stopped, after
twenty bars, every one in the mess said, "what on earth has happened?" a
minute later, they heard unmilitary noises, and saw, far across the plain,
the white hussars scattered, and broken, and flying.
the colonel was speechless with rage, for he thought that the regiment
had risen against him or was unanimously drunk. the band, a disorganized
mob, tore past, and at its heels labored the drum-horse—the dead and
buried drum-horse—with the jolting, clattering skeleton, hogan-yale
whispered softly to martyn—"no wire will stand that treatment," and
the band, which had doubled like a hare, came back again. but the rest of
the regiment was gone, was rioting all over the province, for the dusk had
shut in and each man was howling to his neighbor that the drum-horse was
on his flank. troop-horses are far too tenderly treated as a rule. they
can, on emergencies, do a great deal, even with seventeen stone on their
backs. as the troopers found out.
how long this panic lasted i cannot say. i believe that when the moon
rose the men saw they had nothing to fear, and, by twos and threes and
half-troops, crept back into cantonments very much ashamed of themselves.
meantime, the drum-horse, disgusted at his treatment by old friends,
pulled up, wheeled round, and trotted up to the mess veranda-steps for
bread. no one liked to run; but no one cared to go forward till the
colonel made a movement and laid hold of the skeleton's foot. the band had
halted some distance away, and now came back slowly. the colonel called
it, individually and collectively, every evil name that occurred to him at
the time; for he had set his hand on the bosom of the drum-horse and found
flesh and blood. then he beat the kettle-drums with his clenched fist, and
discovered that they were but made of silvered paper and bamboo. next,
still swearing, he tried to drag the skeleton out of the saddle, but found
that it had been wired into the cantle. the sight of the colonel, with his
arms round the skeleton's pelvis and his knee in the old drum-horse's
stomach, was striking. not to say amusing. he worried the thing off in a
minute or two, and threw it down on the ground, saying to the
band—"here, you curs, that's what you're afraid of." the skeleton
did not look pretty in the twilight the band-sergeant seemed to recognize
it, for he began to chuckle and choke. "shall i take it away, sir?" said
the band-sergeant. "yes," said the colonel, "take it to hell, and ride
there yourselves!"
the band-sergeant saluted, hoisted the skeleton across his saddle-bow,
and led off to the stables. then the colonel began to make inquiries for
the rest of the regiment, and the language he used was wonderful, he would
disband the regiment—he would court-martial every soul in
it—he would not command such a set of rabble, and so on, and so on.
as the men dropped in, his language grew wilder, until at last it exceeded
the utmost limits of free speech allowed even to a colonel of horse.
martyn took hogan-yale aside and suggested compulsory retirement from
the service as a necessity when all was discovered. martyn was the weaker
man of the two. hogan-yale put up his eyebrows and remarked, firstly, that
he was the son of a lord, and, secondly, that he was as innocent as the
babe unborn of the theatrical resurrection of the drum-horse.
"my instructions," said yale, with a singularly sweet smile, "were that
the drum-horse should be sent back as impressively as possible. i ask you,
am i responsible if a mule-headed friend sends him back in such a
manner as to disturb the peace of mind of a regiment of her majesty's
cavalry?"
martyn said, "you are a great man, and will in time become a general;
but i'd give my chance of a troop to be safe out of this affair."
providence saved martyn and hogan-yale. the second-in-command led the
colonel away to the little curtained alcove wherein the subalterns of the
white hussars were accustomed to play poker of nights; and there, after
many oaths on the colonel's part, they talked together in low tones. i
fancy that the second-in-command must have represented the scare as the
work of some trooper whom it would be hopeless to detect; and i know that
he dwelt upon the sin and the shame of making a public laughing-stock of
the scare.
"they will call us," said the second-in-command, who had really a fine
imagination—"they will call us the 'fly-by-nights'; they will call
us the 'ghost hunters'; they will nickname us from one end of the army
list to the other. all the explanation in the world won't make outsiders
understand that the officers were away when the panic began. for the honor
of the regiment and for your own sake keep this thing quiet."
the colonel was so exhausted with anger that soothing him down was not
so difficult as might be imagined. he was made to see, gently and by
degrees, that it was obviously impossible to court-martial the whole
regiment and equally impossible to proceed against any subaltern who, in
his belief, had any concern in the hoax.
"but the beast's alive! he's never been shot at all!" shouted the
colonel. "it's flat flagrant disobedience! i've known a man broke for
less—dam sight less. they're mocking me, i tell you, mutman! they're
mocking me!"
once more, the second-in-command set himself to soothe the colonel, and
wrestled with him for half an hour. at the end of that time, the
regimental sergeant-major reported himself. the situation was rather novel
to him; but he was not a man to be put out by circumstances. he saluted
and said, "regiment all comeback, sir." then, to propitiate the
colonel—"an' none of the 'orses any the worse, sir,"
the colonel only snorted and answered—"you'd better tuck the men
into their cots, then, and see that they don't wake up and cry in the
night" the sergeant withdrew.
his little stroke of humor pleased the colonel, and, further, he felt
slightly ashamed of the language he had been using. the second-in-command
worried him again, and the two sat talking far into the night.
next day but one, there was a commanding officer's parade, and the
colonel harangued the white hussars vigorously. the pith of his speech was
that, since the drum-horse in his old age had proved himself capable of
cutting up the whole regiment, he should return to his post of pride at
the head of the band, but the regiment were a set of ruffians with
bad consciences.
the white hussars shouted, and threw everything movable about them into
the air, and when the parade was over, they cheered the colonel till they
couldn't speak. no cheers were put up for lieutenant hogan-yale, who
smiled very sweetly in the background.
said the second-in-command to the colonel, unofficially—
"these little things ensure popularity, and do not the least affect
discipline."
"but i went back on my word," said the colonel.
"never mind," said the second-in-command. "the white hussars will
follow you anywhere from to-day. regiments are just like women. they will
do anything for trinketry."
a week later, hogan-yale received an extraordinary letter from some one
who signed himself "secretary, charity and zeal, , e. c.," and
asked for "the return of our skeleton which we have reason to believe is
in your possession."
"who the deuce is this lunatic who trades in bones?" said
hogan-yale.
"beg your pardon, sir," said the band-sergeant, "but the skeleton is
with me, an' i'll return it if you'll pay the carriage into the civil
lines. there's a coffin with it, sir."
hogan-yale smiled and handed two rupees to the band-sergeant, saying,
"write the date on the skull, will you?"
if you doubt this story, and know where to go, you can see the date on
the skeleton. but don't mention the matter to the white hussars.
i happened to know something about it, because i prepared the
drum-horse for his resurrection. he did not take kindly to the skeleton at
all.
narrow as the womb, deep as the pit, and dark as the heart
of a man.—sonthal miner's proverb.
"a weaver went out to reap but stayed to unravel the corn-stalks. ha!
ha! ha! is there any sense in a weaver?"
janki meah glared at kundoo, but, as janki meah was blind, kundoo was
not impressed. he had come to argue with janki meah, and, if chance
favored, to make love to the old man's pretty young wife.
this was kundoo's grievance, and he spoke in the name of all the five
men who, with janki meah, composed the gang in number seven gallery of
twenty-two. janki meah had been blind for the thirty years during which he
had served the jimahari collieries with pick and crowbar. all through
those thirty years he had regularly, every morning before going down,
drawn from the overseer his allowance of lamp-oil—just as if he had
been an eyed miner. what kundoo's gang resented, as hundreds of gangs had
resented before, was janki meah's selfishness. he would not add the oil to
the common stock of his gang, but would save and sell it.
"i knew these workings before you were born," janki meah used to reply;
"i don't want the light to get my coal out by, and i am not going to help
you. the oil is mine, and i intend to keep it."
a strange man in many ways was janki meah, the white-haired, hot
tempered, sightless weaver who had turned pitman. all day
long—except on sundays and mondays when he was usually
drunk—he worked in the twenty-two shaft of the jimahari colliery as
cleverly as a man with all the senses. at evening he went up in the great
steam-hauled cage to the pit-bank, and there called for his pony—a
rusty, coal-dusty beast, nearly as old as janki meah. the pony would come
to his side, and janki meah would clamber on to its back and be taken at
once to the plot of land which he, like the other miners, received from
the jimahari company. the pony knew that place, and when, after six years,
the company changed all the allotments to prevent the miners from
acquiring proprietary rights, janki meah represented, with tears in his
eyes, that were his holdings shifted, he would never be able to find his
way to the new one. "my horse only knows that place," pleaded janki meah,
and so he was allowed to keep his land.
on the strength of this concession and his accumulated oil-savings,
janki meah took a second wife—a girl of the jolaha main stock of the
meahs, and singularly beautiful. janki meah could not see her beauty;
wherefore he took her on trust, and forbade her to go down the pit. he had
not worked for thirty years in the dark without knowing that the pit was
no place for pretty women. he loaded her with ornaments—not brass or
pewter, but real silver ones—and she rewarded him by flirting
outrageously with kundoo of number seven gallery gang. kundoo was really
the gang-head, but janki meah insisted upon all the work being entered in
his own name, and chose the men that he worked with. custom—stronger
even than the jimahari company—dictated that janki, by right of his
years, should manage these things, and should, also, work despite his
blindness. in indian mines where they cut into the solid coal with the
pick and clear it out from floor to ceiling, he could come to no great
harm. at home, where they undercut the coal and bring it down in crashing
avalanches from the roof, he would never have been allowed to set foot in
a pit. he was not a popular man, because of his oil-savings; but all the
gangs admitted that janki knew all the khads, or workings, that had
ever been sunk or worked since the jimahari company first started
operations on the tarachunda fields.
pretty little unda only knew that her old husband was a fool who could
be managed. she took no interest in the collieries except in so far as
they swallowed up kundoo five days out of the seven, and covered him with
coal-dust. kundoo was a great workman, and did his best not to get drunk,
because, when he had saved forty rupees, unda was to steal everything that
she could find in janki's house and run with kundoo to a land where there
were no mines, and every one kept three fat bullocks and a milch-buffalo.
while this scheme ripened it was his custom to drop in upon janki and
worry him about the oil savings. unda sat in a corner and nodded approval.
on the night when kundoo had quoted that objectionable proverb about
weavers, janki grew angry.
"listen, you pig," said he, "blind i am, and old i am, but, before ever
you were born, i was grey among the coal. even in the days when the
twenty-two khad was unsunk and there were not two thousand men
here, i was known to have all knowledge of the pits. what khad is
there that i do not know, from the bottom of the shaft to the end of the
last drive? is it the baromba khad, the oldest, or the twenty-two
where tibu's gallery runs up to number five?"
"hear the old fool talk!" said kundoo, nodding to unda. "no gallery of
twenty-two will cut into five before the end of the rains. we have a
month's solid coal before us. the babuji says so."
"babuji! pigji! dogji! what do these fat slugs from calcutta know? he
draws and draws and draws, and talks and talks and talks, and his maps are
all wrong. i, janki, know that this is so. when a man has been shut up in
the dark for thirty years, god gives him knowledge. the old gallery that
tibu's gang made is not six feet from number five."
"without doubt god gives the blind knowledge," said kundoo, with a look
at unda. "let it be as you say. i, for my part, do not know where lies the
gallery of tibu's gang, but i am not a withered monkey who needs
oil to grease his joints with."
kundoo swung out of the hut laughing, and unda giggled. janki turned
his sightless eyes toward his wife and swore. "i have land, and i have
sold a great deal of lamp-oil," mused janki; "but i was a fool to marry
this child."
a week later the rains set in with a vengeance, and the gangs paddled
about in coal-slush at the pit-banks. then the big mine-pumps were made
ready, and the manager of the colliery ploughed through the wet toward the
tarachunda river swelling between its soppy banks. "lord send that this
beastly beck doesn't misbehave," said the manager, piously, and he went to
take counsel with his assistant about the pumps.
but the tarachunda misbehaved very much indeed. after a fall of three
inches of rain in an hour it was obliged to do something. it topped its
bank and joined the flood water that was hemmed between two low hills just
where the embankment of the colliery main line crossed. when a large part
of a rain-fed river, and a few acres of flood-water, made a dead set for a
nine-foot culvert, the culvert may spout its finest, but the water cannot
all get out. the manager pranced upon one leg with excitement, and
his language was improper.
he had reason to swear, because he knew that one inch of water on land
meant a pressure of one hundred tons to the acre; and here were about five
feet of water forming, behind the railway embankment, over the shallower
workings of twenty-two. you must understand that, in a coal-mine, the coal
nearest the surface is worked first from the central shaft. that is to
say, the miners may clear out the stuff to within ten, twenty, or thirty
feet of the surface, and, when all is worked out, leave only a skin of
earth upheld by some few pillars of coal. in a deep mine where they know
that they have any amount of material at hand, men prefer to get all their
mineral out at one shaft, rather than make a number of little holes to tap
the comparatively unimportant surface-coal.
and the manager watched the flood.
the culvert spouted a nine-foot gush; but the water still formed, and
word was sent to clear the men out of twenty-two. the cages came up
crammed and crammed again with the men nearest the pit-eye, as they call
the place where you can see daylight from the bottom of the main shaft.
all away and away up the long black galleries the flare-lamps were winking
and dancing like so many fireflies, and the men and the women waited for
the clanking, rattling, thundering cages to come down and fly up again.
but the outworkings were very far off, and word could not be passed
quickly, though the heads of the gangs and the assistant shouted and swore
and tramped and stumbled. the manager kept one eye on the great troubled
pool behind the embankment, and prayed that the culvert would give way and
let the water through in time. with the other eye he watched the cages
come up and saw the headmen counting the roll of the gangs. with all his
heart and soul he swore at the winder who controlled the iron drum that
wound up the wire rope on which hung the cages.
in a little time there was a down-draw in the water behind the
embankment—a sucking whirlpool, all yellow and yeasty. the water had
smashed through the skin of the earth and was pouring into the old shallow
workings of twenty-two.
deep down below, a rush of black water caught the last gang waiting for
the cage, and as they clambered in, the whirl was about their waists. the
cage reached the pit-bank, and the manager called the roll. the gangs were
all safe except gang janki, gang mogul, and gang rahim, eighteen men, with
perhaps ten basket-women who loaded the coal into the little iron
carriages that ran on the tramways of the main galleries. these gangs were
in the out-workings, three-quarters of a mile away, on the extreme fringe
of the mine. once more the cage went down, but with only two english men
in it, and dropped into a swirling, roaring current that had almost
touched the roof of some of the lower side-galleries. one of the wooden
balks with which they had propped the old workings shot past on the
current, just missing the cage.
"if we don't want our ribs knocked out, we'd better go," said the
manager. "we can't even save the company's props."
the cage drew out of the water with a splash, and a few minutes later,
it was officially reported that there were at least ten feet of water in
the pit's eye. now ten feet of water there meant that all other places in
the mine were flooded except such galleries as were more than ten feet
above the level of the bottom of the shaft. the deep workings would be
full, the main galleries would be full, but in the high workings reached
by inclines from the main roads, there would be a certain amount of air
cut off, so to speak, by the water and squeezed up by it. the little
science-primers explain how water behaves when you pour it down
test-tubes. the flooding of twenty-two was an illustration on a large
scale.
"by the holy grove, what has happened to the air!" it was a sonthal
gangman of gang mogul in number nine gallery, and he was driving a
six-foot way through the coal. then there was a rush from the other
galleries, and gang janki and gang rahim stumbled up with their
basket-women.
"water has come in the mine," they said, "and there is no way of
getting out."
"i went down," said janki—"down the slope of my gallery, and i
felt the water."
"there has been no water in the cutting in our time," clamored the
women, "why cannot we go away?"
"be silent!" said janki, "long ago, when my father was here, water came
to ten—no, eleven—cutting, and there was great trouble. let us
get away to where the air is better."
the three gangs and the basket-women left number nine gallery and went
further up number sixteen. at one turn of the road they could see the
pitchy black water lapping on the coal. it had touched the roof of a
gallery that they knew well—a gallery where they used to smoke their
huqas and manage their flirtations. seeing this, they called aloud
upon their gods, and the mehas, who are thrice bastard muhammadans, strove
to recollect the name of the prophet. they came to a great open square
whence nearly all the coal had been extracted. it was the end of the
out-workings, and the end of the mine.
far away down the gallery a small pumping-engine, used for keeping dry
a deep working and fed with steam from above, was throbbing faithfully.
they heard it cease.
"they have cut off the steam," said kundoo, hopefully. "they have given
the order to use all the steam for the pit-bank pumps. they will clear out
the water."
"if the water has reached the smoking-gallery," said janki, "all the
company's pumps can do nothing for three days."
"it is very hot," moaned jasoda, the meah basket-woman. "there is a
very bad air here because of the lamps."
"put them out," said janki; "why do you want lamps?" the lamps were put
out and the company sat still in the utter dark. somebody rose quietly and
began walking over the coals. it was janki, who was touching the walls
with his hands. "where is the ledge?" he murmured to himself.
"sit, sit!" said kundoo. "if we die, we die. the air is very bad."
but janki still stumbled and crept and tapped with his pick upon the
walls. the women rose to their feet.
"stay all where you are. without the lamps you cannot see, and
i—i am always seeing," said janki. then he paused, and called out:
"oh, you who have been in the cutting more than ten years, what is the
name of this open place? i am an old man and i have forgotten."
"bullia's room," answered the sonthal, who had complained of the
vileness of the air.
"again," said janki.
"bullia's room."
"then i have found it," said janki. "the name only had slipped my
memory. tibu's gang's gallery is here."
"a lie," said kundoo. "there have been no galleries in this place since
my day."
"three paces was the depth of the ledge," muttered janki, without
heeding—"and—oh, my poor bones!—i have found it! it is
here, up this ledge, come all you, one by one, to the place of my voice,
and i will count you,"
there was a rush in the dark, and janki felt the first man's face hit
his knees as the sonthal scrambled up the ledge.
"who?" cried janki.
"i, sunua manji."
"sit you down," said janki, "who next?"
one by one the women and the men crawled up the ledge which ran along
one side of "bullia's room." degraded muhammadan, pig-eating musahr and
wild sonthal, janki ran his hand over them all.
"now follow after," said he, "catching hold of my heel, and the women
catching the men's clothes." he did not ask whether the men had brought
their picks with them. a miner, black or white, does not drop his pick.
one by one, janki leading, they crept into the old gallery—a
six-foot way with a scant four feet from hill to roof.
"the air is better here," said jasoda. they could hear her heart
beating in thick, sick bumps.
"slowly, slowly," said janki. "i am an old man, and i forget many
things. this is tibu's gallery, but where are the four bricks where they
used to put their huqa fire on when the sahibs never saw? slowly,
slowly, o you people behind."
they heard his hands disturbing the small coal on the floor of the
gallery and then a dull sound. "this is one unbaked brick, and this is
another and another. kundoo is a young man—let him come forward. put
a knee upon this brick and strike here. when tibu's gang were at dinner on
the last day before the good coal ended, they heard the men of five on the
other side, and five worked their gallery two sundays
later—or it may have been one. strike there, kundoo, but give me
room to go back."
kundoo, doubting, drove the pick, but the first soft crush of the coal
was a call to him. he was fighting for his life and for unda—pretty
little unda with rings on all her toes—for unda and the forty
rupees. the women sang the song of the pick—the terrible, slow,
swinging melody with the muttered chorus that repeats the sliding of the
loosened coal, and, to each cadence, kundoo smote in the black dark. when
he could do no more, sunua manji took the pick, and struck for his life
and his wife, and his village beyond the blue hills over the tarachunda
river. an hour the men worked, and then the women cleared away the
coal.
"it is farther than i thought," said janki. "the air is very bad; but
strike, kundoo, strike hard,"
for the fifth time kundoo took up the pick as the sonthal crawled back.
the song had scarcely recommenced when it was broken by a yell from kundoo
that echoed down the gallery: "par hua! par hua! we are through, we
are through!" the imprisoned air in the mine shot through the opening, and
the women at the far end of the gallery heard the water rush through the
pillars of "bullia's room" and roar against the ledge. having fulfilled
the law under which it worked, it rose no farther. the women screamed and
pressed forward, "the water has come—we shall be killed! let us
go."
kundoo crawled through the gap and found himself in a propped gallery
by the simple process of hitting his head against a beam.
"do i know the pits or do i not?" chuckled janki. "this is the number
five; go you out slowly, giving me your names. ho! rahim, count your gang!
now let us go forward, each catching hold of the other as before."
they formed a line in the darkness and janki led them—for a
pit-man in a strange pit is only one degree less liable to err than an
ordinary mortal underground for the first time. at last they saw a
flare-lamp, and gangs janki, mogul, and rahim of twenty-two stumbled dazed
into the glare of the draught-furnace at the bottom of five; janki feeling
his way and the rest behind.
"water has come into twenty-two. god knows where are the others. i have
brought these men from tibu's gallery in our cutting; making connection
through the north side of the gallery. take us to the cage," said janki
meah.
at the pit-bank of twenty-two, some thousand people clamored and wept
and shouted. one hundred men—one thousand men—had been drowned
in the cutting. they would all go to their homes to-morrow. where were
their men? little unda, her cloth drenched with the rain, stood at the
pit-mouth calling down the shaft for kundoo. they had swung the cages
clear of the mouth, and her only answer was the murmur of the flood in the
pit's eye two hundred and sixty feet below.
"look after that woman! she'll chuck herself down the shaft in a
minute," shouted the manager.
but he need not have troubled; unda was afraid of death. she wanted
kundoo. the assistant was watching the flood and seeing how far he could
wade into it. there was a lull in the water, and the whirlpool had
slackened. the mine was full, and the people at the pit-bank howled.
"my faith, we shall be lucky if we have five hundred hands on the place
to-morrow!" said the manager. "there's some chance yet of running a
temporary dam across that water. shove in anything—tubs and
bullock-carts if you haven't enough bricks. make them work now if
they never worked before. hi! you gangers, make them work."
little by little the crowd was broken into detachments, and pushed
toward the water with promises of overtime. the dam-making began, and when
it was fairly under way, the manager thought that the hour had come for
the pumps. there was no fresh inrush into the mine. the tall, red,
iron-clamped pump-beam rose and fell, and the pumps snored and guttered
and shrieked as the first water poured out of the pipe.
"we must run her all to-night," said the manager, wearily, "but there's
no hope for the poor devils down below. look here, gur sahai, if you are
proud of your engines, show me what they can do now."
gur sahai grinned and nodded, with his right hand upon the lever and an
oil-can in his left. he could do no more than he was doing, but he could
keep that up till the dawn. were the company's pumps to be beaten by the
vagaries of that troublesome tarachunda river? never, never! and the pumps
sobbed and panted: "never, never!" the manager sat in the shelter of the
pit-bank roofing, trying to dry himself by the pump-boiler fire, and, in
the dreary dusk, he saw the crowds on the dam scatter and fly.
"that's the end," he groaned. "'twill take us six weeks to persuade 'em
that we haven't tried to drown their mates on purpose. oh, for a decent,
rational geordie!"
but the flight had no panic in it. men had run over from five with
astounding news, and the foremen could not hold their gangs together.
presently, surrounded by a clamorous crew, gangs rahim, mogul, and janki,
and ten basket-women, walked up to report themselves, and pretty little
unda stole away to janki's hut to prepare his evening meal.
"alone i found the way," explained janki meah, "and now will the
company give me pension?"
the simple pit-folk shouted and leaped and went back to the dam,
reassured in their old belief that, whatever happened, so great was the
power of the company whose salt they ate, none of them could be killed.
but gur sahai only bared his white teeth and kept his hand upon the lever
and proved his pumps to the uttermost.
"i say," said the assistant to the manager, a week later, "do you
recollect germinal?"
"yes. 'queer thing, i thought of it in the cage when that balk went by.
why?"
"oh, this business seems to be germinal upside down. janki was
in my veranda all this morning, telling me that kundoo had eloped with his
wife—unda or anda, i think her name was."
"hillo! and those were the cattle that you risked your life to clear
out of twenty-two!"
"no—i was thinking of the company's props, not the company's
men."
"sounds better to say so now; but i don't believe you, old
fellow."
what did the colonel's lady think?
nobody never knew.
somebody asked the sergeant's wife
an' she told 'em true.
when you git to a man in the case
they're like a row o' pins,
for the colonel's lady an' judy o'grady
are sisters under their skins.
barrack room ballad.
all day i had followed at the heels of a pursuing army engaged on one
of the finest battles that ever camp of exercise beheld. thirty thousand
troops had by the wisdom of the government of india been turned loose over
a few thousand square miles of country to practice in peace what they
would never attempt in war. consequently cavalry charged unshaken infantry
at the trot. infantry captured artillery by frontal attacks delivered in
line of quarter columns, and mounted infantry skirmished up to the wheels
of an armored train which carried nothing more deadly than a twenty-five
pounder armstrong, two nordenfeldts, and a few score volunteers all cased
in three-eighths-inch boiler-plate. yet it was a very lifelike camp.
operations did not cease at sundown; nobody knew the country and nobody
spared man or horse. there was unending cavalry scouting and almost
unending forced work over broken ground. the army of the south had finally
pierced the centre of the army of the north, and was pouring through the
gap hot-foot to capture a city of strategic importance. its front extended
fanwise, the sticks being represented by regiments strung out along the
line of route backward to the divisional transport columns and all the
lumber that trails behind an army on the move. on its right the broken
left of the army of the north was flying in mass, chased by the southern
horse and hammered by the southern guns till these had been pushed far
beyond the limits of their last support. then the flying sat down to rest,
while the elated commandant of the pursuing force telegraphed that he held
all in check and observation.
unluckily he did not observe that three miles to his right flank a
flying column of northern horse with a detachment of ghoorkhas and british
troops had been pushed round, as fast as the failing light allowed, to cut
across the entire rear of the southern army, to break, as it were, all the
ribs of the fan where they converged by striking at the transport, reserve
ammunition, and artillery supplies. their instructions were to go in,
avoiding the few scouts who might not have been drawn off by the pursuit,
and create sufficient excitement to impress the southern army with the
wisdom of guarding their own flank and rear before they captured cities.
it was a pretty manoeuvre, neatly carried out.
speaking for the second division of the southern army, our first
intimation of the attack was at twilight, when the artillery were laboring
in deep sand, most of the escort were trying to help them out, and the
main body of the infantry had gone on. a noah's ark of elephants, camels,
and the mixed menagerie of an indian transport-train bubbled and squealed
behind the guns, when there appeared from nowhere in particular british
infantry to the extent of three companies, who sprang to the heads of the
gun-horses and brought all to a standstill amid oaths and cheers.
"how's that, umpire?" said the major commanding the attack, and with
one voice the drivers and limber gunners answered "hout!" while the
colonel of artillery sputtered.
"all your scouts are charging our main body," said the major. "your
flanks are unprotected for two miles. i think we've broken the back of
this division. and listen,—there go the ghoorkhas!"
a weak fire broke from the rear-guard more than a mile away, and was
answered by cheerful howlings. the ghoorkhas, who should have swung clear
of the second division, had stepped on its tail in the dark, but drawing
off hastened to reach the next line of attack, which lay almost parallel
to us five or six miles away.
our column swayed and surged irresolutely,—three batteries, the
divisional ammunition reserve, the baggage, and a section of the hospital
and bearer corps. the commandant ruefully promised to report himself "cut
up" to the nearest umpires and commending his cavalry and all other
cavalry to the special care of eblis, toiled on to resume touch with the
rest of the division.
"we'll bivouac here to-night," said the major, "i have a notion that
the ghoorkhas will get caught. they may want us to re-form on. stand easy
till the transport gets away,"
a hand caught my beast's bridle and led him out of the choking dust; a
larger hand deftly canted me out of the saddle; and two of the hugest
hands in the world received me sliding. pleasant is the lot of the special
correspondent who falls into such hands as those of privates mulvaney,
ortheris, and learoyd.
"an' that's all right," said the irishman, calmly. "we thought we'd
find you somewheres here by. is there anything av yours in the transport?
orth'ris 'll fetch ut out."
ortheris did "fetch ut out," from under the trunk of an elephant, in
the shape of a servant and an animal both laden with medical comforts. the
little man's eyes sparkled.
"if the brutil an' licentious soldiery av these parts gets sight av the
thruck," said mulvaney, making practiced investigation, "they'll loot
ev'rything. they're bein' fed on iron-filin's an' dog-biscuit these days,
but glory's no compensation for a belly-ache. praise be, we're here to
protect you, sorr. beer, sausage, bread (soft an' that's a cur'osity),
soup in a tin, whisky by the smell av ut, an' fowls! mother av moses, but
ye take the field like a confectioner! 'tis scand'lus."
"'ere's a orficer," said ortheris, significantly. "when the sergent's
done lushin' the privit may clean the pot."
i bundled several things into mulvaney's haversack before the major's
hand fell on my shoulder and he said, tenderly, "requisitioned for the
queen's service. wolseley was quite wrong about special correspondents:
they are the soldier's best friends. come and take pot-luck with us
to-night."
and so it happened amid laughter and shoutings that my well-considered
commissariat melted away to reappear later at the mess-table, which was a
waterproof sheet spread on the ground. the flying column had taken three
days' rations with it, and there be few things nastier than government
rations—especially when government is experimenting with german
toys. erbsenwurst, tinned beef of surpassing tinniness, compressed
vegetables, and meat-biscuits may be nourishing, but what thomas atkins
needs is bulk in his inside. the major, assisted by his brother officers,
purchased goats for the camp and so made the experiment of no effect. long
before the fatigue-party sent to collect brushwood had returned, the men
were settled down by their valises, kettles and pots had appeared from the
surrounding country and were dangling over fires as the kid and the
compressed vegetable bubbled together; there rose a cheerful clinking of
mess-tins; outrageous demands for "a little more stuffin' with that there
liver-wing;" and gust on gust of chaff as pointed as a bayonet and as
delicate as a gun-butt.
"the boys are in a good temper," said the major. "they'll be singing
presently. well, a night like this is enough to keep them happy."
over our heads burned the wonderful indian stars, which are not all
pricked in on one plane, but, preserving an orderly perspective, draw the
eye through the velvet darkness of the void up to the barred doors of
heaven itself. the earth was a grey shadow more unreal than the sky. we
could hear her breathing lightly in the pauses between the howling of the
jackals, the movement of the wind in the tamarisks, and the fitful mutter
of musketry-fire leagues away to the left. a native woman from some unseen
hut began to sing, the mail-train thundered past on its way to delhi, and
a roosting crow cawed drowsily. then there was a belt-loosening silence
about the fires, and the even breathing of the crowded earth took up the
story.
the men, full fed, turned to tobacco and song,—their officers
with them. the subaltern is happy who can win the approval of the musical
critics in his regiment, and is honored among the more intricate
step-dancers. by him, as by him who plays cricket cleverly, thomas atkins
will stand in time of need, when he will let a better officer go on alone.
the ruined tombs of forgotten mussulman saints heard the ballad of agra
town, the buffalo battery, marching to kabul, the long, long indian day,
the place where the punkah-coolie died, and that crashing chorus which
announces,
youth's daring spirit, manhood's fire,
firm hand and eagle eye,
must he acquire who would aspire
to see the grey boar die.
to-day, of all those jovial thieves who appropriated my commissariat
and lay and laughed round that waterproof sheet, not one remains. they
went to camps that were not of exercise and battles without umpires.
burmah, the soudan, and the frontier,—fever and fight,—took
them in their time.
i drifted across to the men's fires in search of mulvaney, whom i found
strategically greasing his feet by the blaze. there is nothing
particularly lovely in the sight of a private thus engaged after a long
day's march, but when you reflect on the exact proportion of the "might,
majesty, dominion, and power" of the british empire which stands on those
feet you take an interest in the proceedings.
"there's a blister, bad luck to ut, on the heel," said mulvaney. "i
can't touch ut. prick ut out, little man,"
ortheris took out his house-wife, eased the trouble with a needle,
stabbed mulvaney in the calf with the same weapon, and was swiftly kicked
into the fire.
"i've bruk the best av my toes over you, ye grinnin' child av
disruption," said mulvaney, sitting cross-legged and nursing his feet;
then seeing me, "oh, ut's you, sorr! be welkim, an' take that maraudin'
scutt's place, jock, hold him down on the cindhers for a bit."
but ortheris escaped and went elsewhere, as i took possession of the
hollow he had scraped for himself and lined with his greatcoat. learoyd on
the other side of the fire grinned affably and in a minute fell fast
asleep.
"there's the height av politeness for you," said mulvaney, lighting his
pipe with a flaming branch. "but jock's eaten half a box av your sardines
at wan gulp, an' i think the tin too. what's the best wid you, sorr, an'
how did you happen to be on the losin' side this day whin we captured
you?"
"the army of the south is winning all along the line," i said.
"then that line's the hangman's rope, savin' your presence. you'll
learn to-morrow how we rethreated to dhraw thim on before we made thim
trouble, an' that's what a woman does. by the same tokin, we'll be
attacked before the dawnin' an' ut would be betther not to slip your
boots. how do i know that? by the light av pure reason. here are three
companies av us ever so far inside av the enemy's flank an' a crowd av
roarin', tarin', squealin' cavalry gone on just to turn out the whole
hornet's nest av them. av course the enemy will pursue, by brigades like
as not, an' thin we'll have to run for ut. mark my words. i am av the
opinion av polonius whin he said, 'don't fight wid ivry scutt for the pure
joy av fightin', but if you do, knock the nose av him first an'
frequint.'. we ought to ha' gone on an' helped the ghoorkhas."
"but what do you know about polonius?" i demanded. this was a new side
of mulvaney's character.
"all that shakespeare iver wrote an' a dale more that the gallery
shouted," said the man of war, carefully lacing his boots. "did i not tell
you av silver's theatre in dublin, whin i was younger than i am now an' a
patron av the drama? ould silver wud never pay actor-man or woman their
just dues, an' by consequince his comp'nies was collapsible at the last
minut. thin the bhoys wud clamor to take a part, an' oft as not ould
silver made them pay for the fun. faith, i've seen hamlut played wid a new
black eye an' the queen as full as a cornucopia. i remimber wanst hogin
that 'listed in the black tyrone an' was shot in south africa, he sejuced
ould silver into givin' him hamlut's part instid av me that had a fine
fancy for rhetoric in those days. av course i wint into the gallery an'
began to fill the pit wid other people's hats, an' i passed the time av
day to hogin walkin' through denmark like a hamstrung mule wid a pall on
his back, 'hamlut,' sez i, 'there's a hole in your heel. pull up your
shtockin's, hamlut,' sez i, 'hamlut, hamlut, for the love av decincy dhrop
that skull an' pull up your shtockin's.' the whole house begun to tell him
that. he stopped his soliloquishms mid-between. 'my shtockin's may be
comin' down or they may not,' sez he, screwin' his eye into the gallery,
for well he knew who i was. 'but afther this performince is over me an'
the ghost 'll trample the tripes out av you, terence, wid your ass's
bray!' an' that's how i come to know about hamlut. eyah! those days, those
days! did you iver have onendin' devilmint an' nothin' to pay for it in
your life, sorr?"
"never, without having to pay," i said.
"that's thrue! 'tis mane whin you considher on ut; but ut's the same
wid horse or fut. a headache if you dhrink, an' a belly-ache if you eat
too much, an' a heart-ache to kape all down. faith, the beast only gets
the colic, an' he's the lucky man."
he dropped his head and stared into the fire, fingering his moustache
the while. from the far side of the bivouac the voice of corbet-nolan,
senior subaltern of b company, uplifted itself in an ancient and much
appreciated song of sentiment, the men moaning melodiously behind him.
the north wind blew coldly, she dropped from that hour,
my own little kathleen, my sweet little kathleen,
kathleen, my kathleen, kathleen o'moore!
with forty-five o's in the last word: even at that distance you might
have cut the soft south irish accent with a shovel.
"for all we take we must pay, but the price is cruel high," murmured
mulvaney when the chorus had ceased.
"what's the trouble?" i said gently, for i knew that he was a man of an
inextinguishable sorrow.
"hear now," said he. "ye know what i am now. i know what i mint
to be at the beginnin' av my service. i've tould you time an' again, an'
what i have not dinah shadd has. an' what am i? oh, mary mother av hiven,
an ould dhrunken, untrustable baste av a privit that has seen the reg'ment
change out from colonel to drummer-boy, not wanst or twice, but scores av
times! ay, scores! an' me not so near gettin' promotion as in the first!
an' me livin' on an' kapin' clear av clink, not by my own good conduck,
but the kindness av some orf'cer-bhoy young enough to be son to me! do i
not know ut? can i not tell whin i'm passed over at p'rade, tho' i'm
rockin' full av liquor an' ready to fall all in wan piece, such as even a
suckin' child might see, bekaze, 'oh, 'tis only ould mulvaney!' an' whin
i'm let off in ord'ly-room through some thrick of the tongue an' a ready
answer an' the ould man's mercy, is ut smilin' i feel whin i fall away an'
go back to dinah shadd, thryin' to carry ut all off as a joke? not i! 'tis
hell to me, dumb hell through ut all; an' next time whin the fit comes i
will be as bad again. good cause the reg'ment has to know me for the best
soldier in ut. better cause have i to know mesilf for the worst man. i'm
only fit to tache the new drafts what i'll niver learn mesilf; an' i am
sure, as tho' i heard ut, that the minut wan av these pink-eyed recruities
gets away from my 'mind ye now,' an' 'listen to this, jim,
bhoy,'—sure i am that the sergint houlds me up to him for a warnin'.
so i tache, as they say at musketry-instruction, by direct and ricochet
fire. lord be good to me, for i have stud some throuble!"
"lie down and go to sleep," said i, not being able to comfort or
advise. "you're the best man in the regiment, and, next to ortheris, the
biggest fool. lie down and wait till we're attacked. what force will they
turn out? guns, think you?"
"try that wid your lorrds an' ladies, twistin' an' turnin' the talk,
tho' you mint ut well. ye cud say nothin' to help me, an' yet ye niver
knew what cause i had to be what i am."
"begin at the beginning and go on to the end," i said, royally. "but
rake up the fire a bit first."
i passed ortheris's bayonet for a poker.
"that shows how little we know what we do," said mulvaney, putting it
aside. "fire takes all the heart out av the steel, an' the next time, may
be, that our little man is fighting for his life his bradawl 'll break,
an' so you'll ha' killed him, manin' no more than to kape yourself warm.
'tis a recruity's thrick that. pass the clanin'-rod, sorr."
i snuggled down abased; and after an interval the voice of mulvaney
began.
"did i iver tell you how dinah shadd came to be wife av mine?"
i dissembled a burning anxiety that i had felt for some
months—ever since dinah shadd, the strong, the patient, and the
infinitely tender, had of her own good love and free will washed a shirt
for me, moving in a barren land where washing was not.
"i can't remember," i said, casually. "was it before or after you made
love to annie bragin, and got no satisfaction?"
the story of annie bragin is written in another place. it is one of the
many less respectable episodes in mulvaney's checkered career.
"before—before—long before, was that business av annie
bragin an' the corp'ril's ghost. niver woman was the worse for me whin i
had married dinah. there's a time for all things, an' i know how to kape
all things in place—barrin' the dhrink, that kapes me in my place
wid no hope av comin' to be aught else."
"begin at the beginning," i insisted. "mrs. mulvaney told me that you
married her when you were quartered in krab bokhar barracks."
"an' the same is a cess-pit," said mulvaney, piously. "she spoke thrue,
did dinah. 'twas this way. talkin' av that, have ye iver fallen in love,
sorr?"
i preserved the silence of the damned. mulvaney continued—
"thin i will assume that ye have not. i did. in the days av my
youth, as i have more than wanst tould you, i was a man that filled the
eye an' delighted the sowl av women. niver man was hated as i have bin.
niver man was loved as i—no, not within half a day's march av ut!
for the first five years av my service, whin i was what i wud give my sowl
to be now, i tuk whatever was within my reach an' digested ut—an'
that's more than most men can say. dhrink i tuk, an' ut did me no harm. by
the hollow av hiven, i cud play wid four women at wanst, an' kape them
from findin' out anythin' about the other three, an' smile like a
fullblown marigold through ut all. dick coulhan, av the battery we'll have
down on us to-night, could drive his team no better than i mine, an' i
hild the worser cattle! an' so i lived, an' so i was happy till afther
that business wid annie bragin—she that turned me off as cool as a
meat-safe, an' taught me where i stud in the mind av an honest woman.
'twas no sweet dose to swallow.
"afther that i sickened awhile an' tuk thought to my reg'mental work;
conceiting mesilf i wud study an' be a sargint, an' a major-gineral twinty
minutes afther that. but on top av my ambitiousness there was an empty
place in my sowl, an' me own opinion av mesilf cud not fill ut. sez i to
mesilf, 'terence, you're a great man an' the best set-up in the reg'mint.
go on an' get promotion.' sez mesilf to me, 'what for?' sez i to mesilf,
'for the glory av ut!' sez mesilf to me, 'will that fill these two strong
arrums av yours, terence?' 'go to the devil,' sez i to mesilf, 'go to the
married lines,' sez mesilf to me. 'tis the same thing,' sez i to mesilf.
'av you're the same man, ut is,' said mesilf to me; an' wid that i
considhered on ut a long while. did you iver feel that way, sorr?"
i snored gently, knowing that if mulvaney were uninterrupted he would
go on. the clamor from the bivouac fires beat up to the stars, as the
rival singers of the companies were pitted against each other.
"so i felt that way an' a bad time ut was. wanst, bein' a fool, i wint
into the married lines more for the sake av spakin' to our ould
color-sergint shadd than for any thruck wid womenfolk. i was a corp'ril
then—rejuced aftherward, but a corp'ril then. i've got a photograft
av mesilf to prove ut. 'you'll take a cup av tay wid us?' sez shadd. 'i
will that,' i sez, 'tho' tay is not my divarsion.'
"''twud be better for you if ut were,' sez ould mother shadd, an' she
had ought to know, for shadd, in the ind av his service, dhrank bung-full
each night.
"wid that i tuk off my gloves—there was pipe-clay in thim, so
that they stud alone—an' pulled up my chair, lookin' round at the
china ornaments an' bits av things in the shadds' quarters. they were
things that belonged to a man, an' no camp-kit, here to-day an' dishipated
next. 'you're comfortable in this place, sergint,' sez i. ''tis the wife
that did ut, boy,' sez he, pointin' the stem av his pipe to ould mother
shadd, an' she smacked the top av his bald head apon the compliment. 'that
manes you want money,' sez she.
"an' thin—an' thin whin the kettle was to be filled, dinah came
in—my dinah—her sleeves rowled up to the elbow an' her hair in
a winkin' glory over her forehead, the big blue eyes beneath twinklin'
like stars on a frosty night, an' the tread av her two feet lighter than
wastepaper from the colonel's basket in ord'ly-room whin ut's emptied.
bein' but a shlip av a girl she went pink at seein' me, an' i twisted me
moustache an' looked at a picture forninst the wall. niver show a woman
that ye care the snap av a finger for her, an' begad she'll come bleatin'
to your boot-heels!"
"i suppose that's why you followed annie bragin till everybody in the
married quarters laughed at you," said i, remembering that unhallowed
wooing and casting off the disguise of drowsiness.
"i'm layin' down the gin'ral theory av the attack," said mulvaney,
driving his boot into the dying fire. "if you read the soldier's pocket
book, which niver any soldier reads, you'll see that there are
exceptions. whin dinah was out av the door (an' 'twas as tho' the sunlight
had shut too)—'mother av hiven, sergint,' sez i, 'but is that your
daughter?'—'i've believed that way these eighteen years,' sez ould
shadd, his eyes twinklin'; 'but mrs. shadd has her own opinion, like iv'ry
woman,'—'tis wid yours this time, for a mericle,' sez mother shadd.
'thin why in the name av fortune did i niver see her before?' sez i.
'bekaze you've been thrapesin' round wid the married women these three
years past. she was a bit av a child till last year, an' she shot up wid
the spring,' sez ould mother shadd, 'i'll thrapese no more,' sez i. 'd'you
mane that?' sez ould mother shadd, lookin' at me side-ways like a hen
looks at a hawk whin the chickens are runnin' free. 'try me, an' tell,'
sez i. wid that i pulled on my gloves, dhrank off the tay, an' went out av
the house as stiff as at gin'ral p'rade, for well i knew that dinah
shadd's eyes were in the small av my back out av the scullery window.
faith! that was the only time i mourned i was not a cav'lry man for the
pride av the spurs to jingle.
"i wint out to think, an' i did a powerful lot av thinkin', but ut all
came round to that shlip av a girl in the dotted blue dhress, wid the blue
eyes an' the sparkil in them. thin i kept off canteen, an' i kept to the
married quarthers, or near by, on the chanst av meetin' dinah. did i meet
her? oh, my time past, did i not; wid a lump in my throat as big as my
valise an' my heart goin' like a farrier's forge on a saturday morning?
'twas 'good day to ye, miss dinah,' an' 'good day t'you, corp'ril,' for a
week or two, and divil a bit further could i get bekaze av the respect i
had to that girl that i cud ha' broken betune finger an' thumb."
here i giggled as i recalled the gigantic figure of dinah shadd when
she handed me my shirt.
"ye may laugh," grunted mulvaney. "but i'm speakin' the trut', an' 'tis
you that are in fault. dinah was a girl that wud ha' taken the
imperiousness out av the duchess av clonmel in those days. flower hand,
foot av shod air, an' the eyes av the livin' mornin' she had that is my
wife to-day—ould dinah, and niver aught else than dinah shadd to
me.
"'twas after three weeks standin' off an' on, an' niver makin' headway
excipt through the eyes, that a little drummer boy grinned in me face whin
i had admonished him wid the buckle av my belt for riotin' all over the
place, 'an' i'm not the only wan that doesn't kape to barricks,' sez he. i
tuk him by the scruff av his neck,—my heart was hung on a
hair-thrigger those days, you will onderstand—an' 'out wid ut,' sez
i, 'or i'll lave no bone av you unbreakable,'—'speak to dempsey,'
sez he howlin'. 'dempsey which?' sez i, 'ye unwashed limb av
satan.'—'av the bob-tailed dhragoons,' sez he, 'he's seen her home
from her aunt's house in the civil lines four times this
fortnight,'—'child!' sez i, dhroppin' him, 'your tongue's stronger
than your body. go to your quarters. i'm sorry i dhressed you down.'
"at that i went four ways to wanst huntin' dempsey. i was mad to think
that wid all my airs among women i shud ha' been chated by a basin-faced
fool av a cav'lryman not fit to trust on a trunk. presintly i found him in
our lines—the bobtails was quartered next us—an' a tallowy,
topheavy son av a she-mule he was wid his big brass spurs an' his
plastrons on his epigastrons an' all. but he niver flinched a hair.
"'a word wid you, dempsey,' sez i. 'you've walked wid dinah shadd four
times this fortnight gone.'
"'what's that to you?' sez he. 'i'll walk forty times more, an' forty
on top av that, ye shovel-futted clod-breakin' infantry
lance-corp'ril.'
"before i cud gyard he had his gloved fist home on my cheek an' down i
went full-sprawl. 'will that content you?' sez he, blowin' on his knuckles
for all the world like a scots greys orf'cer. 'content!' sez i. 'for your
own sake, man, take off your spurs, peel your jackut, an' onglove. 'tis
the beginnin' av the overture; stand up!'
"he stud all he know, but he niver peeled his jacket, an' his shoulders
had no fair play. i was fightin' for dinah shadd an' that cut on my cheek.
what hope had he forninst me? 'stand up,' sez i, time an' again whin he
was beginnin' to quarter the ground an' gyard high an' go large. 'this
isn't ridin'-school,' i sez. 'o man, stand up an' let me get in at ye.'
but whin i saw he wud be runnin' about, i grup his shtock in my left an'
his waist-belt in my right an' swung him clear to my right front, head
undher, he hammerin' my nose till the wind was knocked out av him on the
bare ground. 'stand up,' sez i, 'or i'll kick your head into your chest!'
and i wud ha' done ut too, so ragin' mad i was.
"'my collar-bone's bruk,' sez he. 'help me back to lines. i'll walk wid
her no more.' so i helped him back."
"and was his collar-bone broken?" i asked, for i fancied that only
learoyd could neatly accomplish that terrible throw.
"he pitched on his left shoulder point. ut was. next day the news was
in both barricks, an' whin i met dinah shadd wid a cheek on me like all
the reg'mintal tailor's samples there was no 'good mornin', corp'ril,' or
aught else. 'an' what have i done, miss shadd,' sez i, very bould,
plantin' mesilf forninst her, 'that ye should not pass the time of
day?'
"'ye've half-killed rough-rider dempsey,' sez she, her dear blue eyes
fillin' up.
"'may be,' sez i. 'was he a friend av yours that saw ye home four times
in the fortnight?'
"'yes,' sez she, but her mouth was down at the corners, 'an'—an'
what's that to you?' she sez.
"'ask dempsey,' sez i, purtendin' to go away.
"'did you fight for me then, ye silly man?' she sez, tho' she knew ut
all along.
"'who else?' sez i, an' i tuk wan pace to the front.
"'i wasn't worth ut,' sez she, fingerin' in her apron.
"'that's for me to say,' sez i. 'shall i say ut?'
"'yes,' sez she, in a saint's whisper, an' at that i explained mesilf;
and she tould me what ivry man that is a man, an' many that is a woman,
hears wanst in his life.
"'but what made ye cry at startin', dinah, darlin'?' sez i.
"'your—your bloody cheek,' sez she, duckin' her little head down
on my sash (i was on duty for the day) an' whimperin' like a sorrowful
angil.
"now a man cud take that two ways. i tuk ut as pleased me best an' my
first kiss wid ut. mother av innocence! but i kissed her on the tip av the
nose and undher the eye; an' a girl that let's a kiss come tumble-ways
like that has never been kissed before. take note av that, sorr. thin we
wint hand in hand to ould mother shadd like two little childher, an' she
said 'twas no bad thing, an' ould shadd nodded behind his pipe, an' dinah
ran away to her own room. that day i throd on rollin' clouds. all earth
was too small to hould me. begad, i cud ha' hiked the sun out av the sky
for a live coal to my pipe, so magnificent i was. but i tuk recruities at
squad-drill instid, an' began wid general battalion advance whin i shud
ha' been balance-steppin' them. eyah! that day! that day!"
a very long pause. "well?" said i.
"'twas all wrong," said mulvaney, with an enormous sigh. "an' i know
that ev'ry bit av ut was my own foolishness. that night i tuk maybe the
half av three pints—not enough to turn the hair of a man in his
natural senses. but i was more than half drunk wid pure joy, an' that
canteen beer was so much whisky to me, i can't tell how it came about, but
bekaze i had no thought for anywan except dinah, bekaze i
hadn't slipped her little white arms from my neck five minuts,
bekaze the breath of her kiss was not gone from my mouth, i must go
through the married lines on my way to quarters an' i must stay talkin' to
a red-headed mullingar heifer av a girl, judy sheehy, that was daughter to
mother sheehy, the wife of nick sheehy, the canteen-sergint—the
black curse av shielygh be on the whole brood that are above groun' this
day!
"'an' what are ye houldin' your head that high for, corp'ril?' sez
judy. 'come in an' thry a cup av tay,' she sez, standin' in the doorway.
bein' an ontrustable fool, an' thinkin' av anything but tay, i wint.
"'mother's at canteen,' sez judy, smoothin' the hair av hers that was
like red snakes, an' lookin' at me corner-ways out av her green cats'
eyes. 'ye will not mind, corp'ril?'
"'i can endure,' sez i; ould mother sheehy bein' no divarsion av mine,
nor her daughter too. judy fetched the tea things an' put thim on the
table, leanin' over me very close to get thim square. i dhrew back,
thinkin' av dinah.
"'is ut afraid you are av a girl alone?' sez judy.
"'no,' sez i. 'why should i be?'
"'that rests wid the girl,' sez judy, dhrawin' her chair next to
mine.
"'thin there let ut rest,' sez i; an' thinkin' i'd been a trifle
onpolite, i sez, 'the tay's not quite sweet enough for my taste. put your
little finger in the cup, judy. 'twill make ut necthar.'
"'what's necthar?' sez she.
"'somethin' very sweet,' sez i; an' for the sinful life av me i cud not
help lookin' at her out av the corner av my eye, as i was used to look at
a woman.
"'go on wid ye, corp'ril,' sez she. 'you're a flirrt.'
"'on me sowl i'm not,' sez i.
"'then you're a cruel handsome man, an' that's worse,' sez she, heaving
big sighs an' lookin' crossways.
"'you know your own mind,' sez i.
"''twud be better for me if i did not,' she sez.
"'there's a dale to be said on both sides av that,' sez i,
unthinkin'.
"'say your own part av ut, then, terence, darlin',' sez she; 'for begad
i'm thinkin' i've said too much or too little for an honest girl,' an' wid
that she put her arms round my neck an' kissed me.
"'there's no more to be said afther that,' sez i, kissin' her back
again—oh the mane scutt that i was, my head ringin' wid dinah shadd!
how does ut come about, sorr, that when a man has put the comether on wan
woman, he's sure bound to put it on another? 'tis the same thing at
musketry, wan day ivry shot goes wide or into the bank, an' the next, lay
high lay low, sight or snap, ye can't get off the bull's-eye for ten shots
runnin'."
"that only happens to a man who has had a good deal of experience. he
does it without thinking," i replied.
"thankin' you for the complimint, sorr, ut may be so. but i'm doubtful
whether you mint ut for a complimint. hear now; i sat there wid judy on my
knee tellin' me all manner av nonsinse an' only sayin' 'yes' an' 'no,'
when i'd much better ha' kept tongue betune teeth. an' that was not an
hour afther i had left dinah! what i was thinkin' av i cannot say,
presintly. quiet as a cat, ould mother sheehy came in velvet-dhrunk. she
had her daughter's red hair, but 'twas bald in patches, an' i cud see in
her wicked ould face, clear as lightnin', what judy wud be twenty years to
come. i was for jumpin' up, but judy niver moved.
"'terence has promust, mother,' sez she, an' the could sweat bruk out
all over me. ould mother sheehy sat down of a heap an' began playin' wid
the cups. 'thin you're a well-matched pair,' she sez, very thick. 'for
he's the biggest rogue that iver spoiled the queen's shoe-leather,'
an'—
"'i'm off, judy,' sez i. 'ye should not talk nonsinse to your mother.
get her to bed, girl.'
"'nonsinse!' sez the ould woman, prickin' up her ears like a cat an'
grippin' the table-edge. ''twill be the most nonsinsical nonsinse for you,
ye grinnin' badger, if nonsinse 'tis. git clear, you. i'm goin' to
bed.'
"i ran out into the dhark, my head in a stew an' my heart sick, but i
had sinse enough to see that i'd brought ut all on mysilf. 'it's this to
pass the time av day to a panjandhrum av hellcats,' sez i. 'what i've
said, an' what i've not said do not matther. judy an' her dam will hould
me for a promust man, an' dinah will give me the go, an' i desarve ut. i
will go an' get dhrunk,' sez i, 'an' forget about ut, for 'tis plain i'm
not a marrin' man.'
"on my way to canteen i ran against lascelles, color-sergeant that was
av e comp'ny, a hard, hard man, wid a torment av a wife. 'you've the head
av a drowned man on your shoulders,' sez he; 'an' you're goin' where
you'll get a worse wan. 'come back,' sez he. 'let me go,' sez i. 'i've
thrown my luck over the wall wid my own hand!'—'then that's not the
way to get ut back again,' sez he. 'have out wid your throuble, ye
fool-bhoy.' an' i tould him how the matther was.
"he sucked in his lower lip. 'you've been thrapped,' sez he. 'ju sheehy
wud be the betther for a man's name to hers as soon as can. an' ye thought
ye'd put the comether on her,—that's the natural vanity of the
baste. terence, you're a big born fool, but you're not bad enough to marry
into that comp'ny. if you said anythin', an' for all your protestations
i'm sure ye did—or did not, which is worse,—eat ut
all—lie like the father of all lies, but come out av ut free av
judy. do i not know what ut is to marry a woman that was the very spit an'
image av judy whin she was young? i'm gettin' old an' i've larnt patience,
but you, terence, you'd raise hand on judy an' kill her in a year. never
mind if dinah gives you the go, you've desarved ut; never mind if the
whole reg'mint laughs you all day. get shut av judy an' her mother. they
can't dhrag you to church, but if they do, they'll dhrag you to hell. go
back to your quarters and lie down,' sez he. thin over his shoulder, 'you
must ha' done with thim,'
"next day i wint to see dinah, but there was no tucker in me as i
walked. i knew the throuble wud come soon enough widout any handlin' av
mine, an' i dreaded ut sore.
"i heard judy callin' me, but i hild straight on to the shadds'
quarthers, an' dinah wud ha' kissed me but i put her back.
"'whin all's said, darlin',' sez i, 'you can give ut me if ye will,
tho' i misdoubt 'twill be so easy to come by then.'
"i had scarce begun to put the explanation into shape before judy an'
her mother came to the door. i think there was a veranda, but i'm
forgettin'.
"'will ye not step in?' sez dinah, pretty and polite, though the shadds
had no dealin's with the sheehys. old mother shadd looked up quick, an'
she was the fust to see the throuble; for dinah was her daughter.
"'i'm pressed for time to-day,' sez judy as bould as brass; 'an' i've
only come for terence,—my promust man. tis strange to find him here
the day afther the day.'
"dinah looked at me as though i had hit her, an' i answered
straight.
"'there was some nonsinse last night at the sheehys' quarthers, an'
judy's carryin' on the joke, darlin',' sez i.
"'at the sheehys' quarthers?' sez dinah very slow, an' judy cut in wid:
'he was there from nine till ten, dinah shadd, an' the betther half av
that time i was sittin' on his knee, dinah shadd. ye may look and ye may
look an' ye may look me up an' down, but ye won't look away that terence
is my promust man, terence, darlin', 'tis time for us to be comin'
home.'
"dinah shadd niver said word to judy. 'ye left me at half-past eight,'
she sez to me, 'an' i niver thought that ye'd leave me for
judy,—promises, or no promises. go back wid her, you that have to be
fetched by a girl! i'm done with you,' sez she, and she ran into her own
room, her mother followin'. so i was alone wid those two women and at
liberty to spake my sentiments.
"'judy sheehy,' sez i, 'if you made a fool av me betune the lights you
shall not do ut in the day. i niver promised you words or lines.'
"'you lie,' sez ould mother sheehy, 'an' may ut choke you waere you
stand!' she was far gone in dhrink.
"'an' tho' ut choked me where i stud i'd not change,' sez i. 'go home,
judy. i take shame for a decent girl like you dhraggin' your mother out
bareheaded on this errand. hear now, and have ut for an answer. i gave my
word to dinah shadd yesterday, an', more blame to me, i was wid you last
night talkin' nonsinse but nothin' more. you've chosen to thry to hould me
on ut. i will not be held thereby for anythin' in the world. is that
enough?'
"judy wint pink all over. 'an' i wish you joy av the perjury,' sez she,
duckin' a curtsey. 'you've lost a woman that would ha' wore her hand to
the bone for your pleasure; an' 'deed, terence, ye were not thrapped....'
lascelles must ha' spoken plain to her. 'i am such as dinah is—'deed
i am! ye've lost a fool av a girl that'll niver look at you again, an'
ye've lost what ye niver had,—your common honesty. if you manage
your men as you manage your love-makin', small wondher they call you the
worst corp'ril in the comp'ny. come away, mother,' sez she.
"but divil a fut would the ould woman budge! 'd'you hould by that?' sez
she, peerin' up under her thick grey eyebrows.
"'ay, an wud,' sez i, 'tho' dinah give me the go twinty times. i'll
have no thruck with you or yours,' sez i. 'take your child away, ye
shameless woman.'
"'an' am i shameless?' sez she, bringin' her hands up above her head.
'thin what are you, ye lyin', schamin', weak-kneed, dhirty-souled son av a
sutler? am i shameless? who put the open shame on me an' my child
that we shud go beggin' through the lines in the broad daylight for the
broken word of a man? double portion of my shame be on you, terence
mulvaney, that think yourself so strong! by mary and the saints, by blood
and water an' by ivry sorrow that came into the world since the beginnin',
the black blight fall on you and yours, so that you may niver be free from
pain for another when ut's not your own! may your heart bleed in your
breast drop by drop wid all your friends laughin' at the bleedin'! strong
you think yourself? may your strength be a curse to you to dhrive you into
the divil's hands against your own will! clear-eyed you are? may your eyes
see dear evry step av the dark path you take till the hot cindhers av hell
put thim out! may the ragin' dry thirst in my own ould bones go to you
that you shall niver pass bottle full nor glass empty. god preserve the
light av your onder-standin' to you, my jewel av a bhoy, that ye may niver
forget what you mint to be an' do, whin you're wallowin' in the muck! may
ye see the betther and follow the worse as long as there's breath in your
body; an' may ye die quick in a strange land; watchin' your death before
ut takes you, an' onable to stir hand or foot!'
"i heard a scufflin' in the room behind, and thin dinah shadd's hand
dhropped into mine like a rose-leaf into a muddy road.
"'the half av that i'll take,' sez she, 'an' more too if i can. go
home, ye silly talkin' woman,—go home an' confess.'
"'come away! come away!' sez judy, pullin' her mother by the shawl.
''twas none av terence's fault. for the love av mary stop the
talkin'!'
"'an' you!' said ould mother sheehy, spinnin' round forninst dinah.
'will ye take the half av that man's load? stand off from him, dinah
shadd, before he takes you down too—you that look to be a
quarther-master-sergeant's wife in five years. you look too high, child.
you shall wash for the quarther-master-sergeant, whin he plases to
give you the job out av charity; but a privit's wife you shall be to the
end, an' evry sorrow of a privit's wife you shall know and nivir a joy but
wan, that shall go from you like the running tide from a rock. the pain av
bearin' you shall know but niver the pleasure av giving the breast; an'
you shall put away a man-child into the common ground wid never a priest
to say a prayer over him, an' on that man-child ye shall think ivry day av
your life. think long, dinah shadd, for you'll niver have another tho' you
pray till your knees are bleedin'. the mothers av childer shall mock you
behind your back when you're wringing over the washtub. you shall know
what ut is to help a dhrunken husband home an' see him go to the
gyard-room. will that plase you, dinah shadd, that won't be seen talkin'
to my daughter? you shall talk to worse than judy before all's over. the
sergints' wives shall look down on you contemptuous, daughter av a
sergint, an' you shall cover ut all up wid a smiling face when your
heart's burstin'. stand off av him, dinah shadd, for i've put the black
curse of shielygh upon him an' his own mouth shall make ut good."
"she pitched forward on her head an' began foamin' at the mouth. dinah
shadd ran out wid water, an' judy dhragged the ould woman into the veranda
till she sat up.
"'i'm old an' forlore,' she sez, thremblin' an' cryin', 'and 'tis like
i say a dale more than i mane.'
"'when you're able to walk,—go,' says ould mother shadd. 'this
house has no place for the likes av you that have cursed my daughter.'
"'eyah!' said the ould woman. 'hard words break no bones, an' dinah
shadd 'll keep the love av her husband till my bones are green corn, judy
darlin', i misremember what i came here for. can you lend us the bottom av
a taycup av tay, mrs. shadd?'
"but judy dhragged her off cryin' as tho' her heart wud break. an'
dinah shadd an' i, in ten minutes we had forgot ut all."
"then why do you remember it now?" said i.
"is ut like i'd forget? ivry word that wicked ould woman spoke fell
thrue in my life aftherward, an' i cud ha' stud ut all—stud ut
all—excipt when my little shadd was born. that was on the line av
march three months afther the regiment was taken with cholera. we were
betune umballa an' kalka thin, an' i was on picket. whin i came off duty
the women showed me the child, an' ut turned on uts side an' died as i
looked. we buried him by the road, an' father victor was a day's march
behind wid the heavy baggage, so the comp'ny captain read a prayer. an'
since then i've been a childless man, an' all else that ould mother sheehy
put upon me an' dinah shadd. what do you think, sorr?"
i thought a good deal, but it seemed better then to reach out for
mulvaney's hand. the demonstration nearly cost me the use of three
fingers. whatever he knows of his weaknesses, mulvaney is entirely
ignorant of his strength.
"but what do you think?" he repeated, as i was straightening out the
crushed fingers.
my reply was drowned in yells and outcries from the next fire, where
ten men were shouting for "orth'ris," "privit orth'ris," "mistah
or—ther—ris!" "deah boy," "cap'n orth'ris," "field-marshal
orth'ris," "stanley, you pen'north o' pop, come 'ere to your own comp'ny!"
and the cockney, who had been delighting another audience with recondite
and rabelaisian yarns, was shot down among his admirers by the major
force.
"you've crumpled my dress-shirt 'orrid," said he, "an' i shan't sing no
more to this 'ere bloomin' drawin'-room."
learoyd, roused by the confusion, uncoiled himself, crept behind
ortheris, and slung him aloft on his shoulders.
"sing, ye bloomin' hummin' bird!" said he, and ortheris, beating time
on learoyd's skull, delivered himself, in the raucous voice of the
ratcliffe highway, of this song:—
my girl she give me the go onst,
when i was a london lad,
an' i went on the drink for a fortnight,
an' then i went to the bad.
the queen she give me a shillin'
to fight for 'er over the seas;
but guv'ment built me a fever-trap,
an' injia give me disease.
chorus.
ho! don't you 'eed what a girl says,
an' don't you go for the beer;
but i was an ass when i was at grass,
an' that is why i'm here.
i fired a shot at a afghan,
the beggar 'e fired again,
an' i lay on my bed with a 'ole in my 'ed,
an' missed the next campaign!
i up with my gun at a burman
who carried a bloomin' dah,
but the cartridge stuck and the bay'nit bruk,
an' all i got was the scar.
chorus.
ho! don't you aim at a afghan
when you stand on the sky-line clear;
an' don't you go for a burman
if none o' your friends is near.
i served my time for a corp'ral,
an' wetted my stripes with pop,
for i went on the bend with a intimate friend,
an' finished the night in the "shop."
i served my time for a sergeant;
the colonel 'e sez "no!
the most you'll see is a full c.b." []
an' ... very next night 'twas so.
[footnote : confined to barracks.]
chorus.
ho! don't you go for a corp'ral
unless your 'ed is clear;
but i was an ass when i was at grass,
an' that is why i'm 'ere.
i've tasted the luck o' the army
in barrack an' camp an' clink,
an' i lost my tip through the bloomin' trip
along o' the women an' drink.
i'm down at the heel o' my service
an' when i am laid on the shelf,
my very wust friend from beginning to end
by the blood of a mouse was myself!
chorus.
ho! don't you 'eed what a girl says,
an' don't you go for the beer:
but i was an ass when i was at grass,
an' that is why i'm 'ere,
"ay, listen to our little man now, singin' an' shoutin' as tho' trouble
had niver touched him. d' you remember when he went mad with the
homesickness?" said mulvaney, recalling a never-to-be-forgotten season
when ortheris waded through the deep waters of affliction and behaved
abominably. "but he's talkin' bitter truth, though. eyah!
 "my very worst frind from beginnin' to ind by the blood av a mouse
was mesilf!"
when i woke i saw mulvaney, the night-dew gemming his moustache,
leaning on his rifle at picket, lonely as prometheus on his rock, with i
know not what vultures tearing his liver.
who is the happy man? he that sees in his own house at
home, little children crowned with dust, leaping and falling and
crying.
—munichandra, translated by professor
peterson.
the polo-ball was an old one, scarred, chipped, and dinted. it stood on
the mantelpiece among the pipe-stems which imam din, khitmatgar,
was cleaning for me.
"does the heaven-born want this ball?" said imam din,
deferentially.
the heaven-born set no particular store by it; but of what use was a
polo-ball to a khitmatgar?
"by your honor's favor, i have a little son. he has seen this ball, and
desires it to play with. i do not want it for myself."
no one would for an instant accuse portly old imam din of wanting to
play with polo-balls. he carried out the battered thing into the veranda;
and there followed a hurricane of joyful squeaks, a patter of small feet,
and the thud-thud-thud of the ball rolling along the ground.
evidently the little son had been waiting outside the door to secure his
treasure. but how had he managed to see that polo-ball?
next day, coming back from office half an hour earlier than usual, i
was aware of a small figure in the dining-room—a tiny, plump figure
in a ridiculously inadequate shirt which came, perhaps, half-way down the
tubby stomach. it wandered round the room, thumb in mouth, crooning to
itself as it took stock of the pictures. undoubtedly this was the "little
son."
he had no business in my room, of course; but was so deeply absorbed in
his discoveries that he never noticed me in the doorway. i stepped into
the room and startled him nearly into a fit. he sat down on the ground
with a gasp. his eyes opened, and his mouth followed suit. i knew what was
coming, and fled, followed by a long, dry howl which reached the servants'
quarters far more quickly than any command of mine had ever done. in ten
seconds imam din was in the dining-room. then despairing sobs arose, and i
returned to find imam din admonishing the small sinner who was using most
of his shirt as a handkerchief.
"this boy," said imam din, judicially, "is a budmash—a big
budmash. he will, without doubt, go to the jail-khana for
his behavior." renewed yells from the penitent, and an elaborate apology
to myself from imam din.
"tell the baby," said i, "that the sahib is not angry, and take
him away." imam din conveyed my forgiveness to the offender, who had now
gathered all his shirt round his neck, stringwise, and the yell subsided
into a sob. the two set off for the door. "his name," said imam din, as
though the name were part of the crime, "is muhammad din, and he is a
budmash." freed from present danger, muhammad din turned round in
his father's arms, and said gravely, "it is true that my name is muhammad
din, tahib, but i am not a budmash. i am a man!"
from that day dated my acquaintance with muhammad din. never again did
he come into my dining-room, but on the neutral ground of the garden, we
greeted each other with much state, though our conversation was confined
to "talaam, tahib" from his side, and "salaam, muhammad din"
from mine. daily on my return from office, the little white shirt, and the
fat little body used to rise from the shade of the creeper-covered trellis
where they had been hid; and daily i checked my horse here, that my
salutation might not be slurred over or given unseemly.
muhammad din never had any companions. he used to trot about the
compound, in and out of the castor-oil bushes, on mysterious errands of
his own. one day i stumbled upon some of his handiwork far down the
grounds. he had half buried the polo-ball in dust, and stuck six shriveled
old marigold flowers in a circle round it.
outside that circle again was a rude square, traced out in bits of red
brick alternating with fragments of broken china; the whole bounded by a
little bank of dust. the water-man from the well-curb put in a plea for
the small architect, saying that it was only the play of a baby and did
not much disfigure my garden.
heaven knows that i had no intention of touching the child's work then
or later; but, that evening, a stroll through the garden brought me
unawares full on it; so that i trampled, before i knew, marigold-heads,
dust-bank, and fragments of broken soap-dish into confusion past all hope
of mending. next morning, i came upon muhammad din crying softly to
himself over the ruin i had wrought. some one had cruelly told him that
the sahib was very angry with him for spoiling the garden, and had
scattered his rubbish, using bad language the while. muhammad din labored
for an hour at effacing every trace of the dust-bank and pottery
fragments, and it was with a tearful and apologetic face that he said
"talaam, tahib," when i came home from office. a hasty inquiry
resulted in imam din informing muhammad din that, by my singular favor, he
was permitted to disport himself as he pleased. whereat the child took
heart and fell to tracing the ground-plan of an edifice which was to
eclipse the marigold-polo-ball creation.
for some months, the chubby little eccentricity revolved in his humble
orbit among the castor-oil bushes and in the dust; always fashioning
magnificent palaces from stale flowers thrown away by the bearer, smooth
water-worn pebbles, bits of broken glass, and feathers pulled, i fancy,
from my fowls—always alone, and always crooning to himself.
a gaily-spotted sea-shell was dropped one day close to the last of his
little buildings; and i looked that muhammad din should build something
more than ordinarily splendid on the strength of it. nor was i
disappointed. he meditated for the better part of an hour, and his
crooning rose to a jubilant song. then he began tracing in the dust. it
would certainly be a wondrous palace, this one, for it was two yards long
and a yard broad in ground-plan. but the palace was never completed.
next day there was no muhammad din at the head of the carriage-drive,
and no "talaam, tahib" to welcome my return. i had grown accustomed
to the greeting, and its omission troubled me. next day imam din told me
that the child was suffering slightly from fever and needed quinine. he
got the medicine, and an english doctor.
"they have no stamina, these brats," said the doctor, as he left imam
din's quarters.
a week later, though i would have given much to have avoided it, i met
on the road to the mussulman burying-ground imam din, accompanied by one
other friend, carrying in his arms, wrapped in a white cloth, all that was
left of little muhammad din.
tweed said tae till:
"what gars ye rin sae still?"
till said tae tweed:
"though ye rin wi' speed
an' i rin slaw—
yet where ye droon ae man
i droon twa."
there is no getting over the river to-night, sahib. they say that a
bullock-cart has been washed down already, and the ekka that went
over a half hour before you came, has not yet reached the far side. is the
sahib in haste? i will drive the ford-elephant in to show him.
ohè, mahout there in the shed! bring out ram pershad, and if
he will face the current, good. an elephant never lies, sahib, and ram
pershad is separated from his friend kala nag. he, too, wishes to cross to
the far side. well done! well done! my king! go half way across,
mahoutji, and see what the river says. well done, ram pershad!
pearl among elephants, go into the river! hit him on the head, fool! was
the goad made only to scratch thy own fat back with, bastard? strike!
strike! what are the boulders to thee, ram pershad, my rustum, my mountain
of strength? go in! go in!
no, sahib! it is useless. you can hear him trumpet. he is telling kala
nag that he cannot come over. see! he has swung round and is shaking his
head. he is no fool. he knows what the barhwi means when it is angry. aha!
indeed, thou art no fool, my child! salaam, ram pershad, bahadur!
take him under the trees, mahout, and see that he gets his spices.
well done, thou chiefest among tuskers. salaam to the sirkar and go
to sleep.
what is to be done? the sahib must wait till the river goes down. it
will shrink to-morrow morning, if god pleases, or the day after at the
latest. now why does the sahib get so angry? i am his servant. before god,
i did not create this stream! what can i do? my hut and all that is
therein is at the service of the sahib, and it is beginning to rain. come
away, my lord, how will the river go down for your throwing abuse at it?
in the old days the english people were not thus. the fire-carriage has
made them soft. in the old days, when they drave behind horses by day or
by night, they said naught if a river barred the way, or a carriage sat
down in the mud. it was the will of god—not like a fire-carriage
which goes and goes and goes, and would go though all the devils in the
land hung on to its tail. the fire-carriage hath spoiled the english
people. after all, what is a day lost, or, for that matter, what are two
days? is the sahib going to his own wedding, that he is so mad with haste?
ho! ho! ho! i am an old man and see few sahibs. forgive me if i have
forgotten the respect that is due to them. the sahib is not angry?
his own wedding! ho! ho! ho! the mind of an old man is like the
numah-tree. fruit, bud, blossom, and the dead leaves of all the
years of the past flourish together. old and new and that which is gone
out of remembrance, all three are there! sit on the bedstead, sahib, and
drink milk. or—would the sahib in truth care to drink my tobacco? it
is good. it is the tobacco of nuklao. my son, who is in service there sent
it to me. drink, then, sahib, if you know how to handle the tube. the
sahib takes it like a musalman. wah! wah! where did he learn that? his own
wedding! ho! ho! ho! the sahib says that there is no wedding in the matter
at all? now is it likely that the sahib would speak true talk to me
who am only a black man? small wonder, then, that he is in haste. thirty
years have i beaten the gong at this ford, but never have i seen a sahib
in such haste. thirty years, sahib! that is a very long time. thirty years
ago this ford was on the track of the bunjaras, and i have seen two
thousand pack-bullocks cross in one night. now the rail has come, and the
fire-carriage says buz-buz-buz, and a hundred lakhs of maunds slide
across that big bridge. it is very wonderful; but the ford is lonely now
that there are no bunjaras to camp under the trees.
nay, do not trouble to look at the sky without. it will rain till the
dawn. listen! the boulders are talking to-night in the bed of the river.
hear them! they would be husking your bones, sahib, had you tried to
cross. see, i will shut the door and no rain can enter. wahi! ahi!
ugh! thirty years on the banks of the ford! an old man am i
and—where is the oil for the lamp?
your pardon, but, because of my years, i sleep no sounder than a dog;
and you moved to the door. look then, sahib. look and listen. a full half
kos from bank to bank is the stream now—you can see it under
the stars—and there are ten feet of water therein. it will not
shrink because of the anger in your eyes, and it will not be quiet on
account of your curses. which is louder, sahib—your voice or the
voice of the river? call to it—perhaps it will be ashamed. lie down
and sleep afresh, sahib. i know the anger of the barhwi when there has
fallen rain in the foot-hills. i swam the flood, once, on a night tenfold
worse than this, and by the favor of god i was released from death when i
had come to the very gates thereof.
may i tell the tale? very good talk. i will fill the pipe anew.
thirty years ago it was, when i was a young man and had but newly come
to the ford. i was strong then, and the bunjaras had no doubt when
i said "this ford is clear." i have toiled all night up to my
shoulder-blades in running water amid a hundred bullocks mad with fear,
and have brought them across losing not a hoof. when all was done i
fetched the shivering men, and they gave me for reward the pick of their
cattle—the bell-bullock of the drove. so great was the honor in
which i was held! but, to-day when the rain falls and the river rises, i
creep into my hut and whimper like a dog. my strength is gone from me. i
am an old man and the fire-carriage has made the ford desolate. they were
wont to call me the strong one of the barhwi.
behold my face, sahib—it is the face of a monkey. and my
arm—it is the arm of an old woman. i swear to you, sahib, that a
woman has loved this face and has rested in the hollow of this arm. twenty
years ago, sahib. believe me, this was true talk—twenty years
ago.
come to the door and look across. can you see a thin fire very far away
down the stream? that is the temple-fire, in the shrine of hanuman, of the
village of pateera. north, under the big star, is the village itself, but
it is hidden by a bend of the river. is that far to swim, sahib? would you
take off your clothes and adventure? yet i swam to pateera—not once
but many times; and there are muggers in the river too.
love knows no caste; else why should i, a musalman and the son of a
musalman, have sought a hindu woman—a widow of the hindus—the
sister of the headman of pateera? but it was even so. they of the
headman's household came on a pilgrimage to muttra when she was but newly
a bride. silver tires were upon the wheels of the bullock-cart, and silken
curtains hid the woman. sahib, i made no haste in their conveyance, for
the wind parted the curtains and i saw her. when they returned from
pilgrimage the boy that was her husband had died, and i saw her again in
the bullock-cart. by god, these hindus are fools! what was it to me
whether she was hindu or jain—scavenger, leper, or whole? i would
have married her and made her a home by the ford. the seventh of the nine
bars says that a man may not marry one of the idolaters? is that truth?
both shiahs and sunnis say that a musalman may not marry one of the
idolaters? is the sahib a priest, then, that he knows so much? i will tell
him something that he does not know. there is neither shiah nor sunni,
forbidden nor idolater, in love; and the nine bars are but nine little
fagots that the flame of love utterly burns away. in truth, i would have
taken her; but what could i do? the headman would have sent his men to
break my head with staves. i am not—i was not—afraid of any
five men; but against half a village who can prevail?
therefore it was my custom, these things having been arranged between
us twain, to go by night to the village of pateera, and there we met among
the crops; no man knowing aught of the matter. behold, now! i was wont to
cross here, skirting the jungle to the river bend where the railway bridge
is, and thence across the elbow of land to pateera. the light of the
shrine was my guide when the nights were dark. that jungle near the river
is very full of snakes—little karaits that sleep on the
sand—and moreover, her brothers would have slain me had they found
me in the crops. but none knew—none knew save she and i; and the
blown sand of the river-bed covered the track of my feet. in the hot
months it was an easy thing to pass from the ford to pateera, and in the
first rains, when the river rose slowly, it was an easy thing also. i set
the strength of my body against the strength of the stream, and nightly i
ate in my hut here and drank at pateera yonder. she had said that one
hirnam singh, a thief, had sought her, and he was of a village up the
river but on the same bank. all sikhs are dogs, and they have refused in
their folly that good gift of god—tobacco. i was ready to destroy
hirnam singh that ever he had come nigh her; and the more because he had
sworn to her that she had a lover, and that he would lie in wait and give
the name to the headman unless she went away with him. what curs are these
sikhs!
after that news, i swam always with a little sharp knife in my belt,
and evil would it have been for a man had he stayed me, i knew not the
face of hirnam singh, but i would have killed any who came between me and
her.
upon a night in the beginning of the rains, i was minded to go across
to pateera, albeit the river was angry. now the nature of the barhwi is
this, sahib. in twenty breaths it comes down from the hills, a wall three
feet high, and i have seen it, between the lighting of a fire and the
cooking of a chupatty, grow from a runnel to a sister of the
jumna.
when i left this bank there was a shoal a half mile down, and i made
shift to fetch it and draw breath there ere going forward; for i felt the
hands of the river heavy upon my heels. yet what will a young man not do
for love's sake? there was but little light from the stars, and midway to
the shoal a branch of the stinking deodar tree brushed my mouth as i swam.
that was a sign of heavy rain in the foot-hills and beyond, for the deodar
is a strong tree, not easily shaken from the hillsides. i made haste, the
river aiding me, but ere i had touched the shoal, the pulse of the stream
beat, as it were, within me and around, and, behold, the shoal was gone
and i rode high on the crest of a wave that ran from bank to bank. has the
sahib ever been cast into much water that fights and will not let a man
use his limbs? to me, my head upon the water, it seemed as though there
were naught but water to the world's end, and the river drave me with its
driftwood. a man is a very little thing in the belly of a flood. and
this flood, though i knew it not, was the great flood about which
men talk still. my liver was dissolved and i lay like a log upon my back
in the fear of death. there were living things in the water, crying and
howling grievously—beasts of the forest and cattle, and once the
voice of a man asking for help. but the rain came and lashed the water
white, and i heard no more save the roar of the boulders below and the
roar of the rain above. thus i was whirled down-stream, wrestling for the
breath in me. it is very hard to die when one is young. can the sahib,
standing here, see the railway bridge? look, there are the lights of the
mail-train going to peshawur! the bridge is now twenty feet above the
river, but upon that night the water was roaring against the lattice-work
and against the lattice came i feet first, but much driftwood was piled
there and upon the piers, and i took no great hurt. only the river pressed
me as a strong man presses a weaker. scarcely could i take hold of the
lattice-work and crawl to the upper boom. sahib, the water was foaming
across the rails a foot deep! judge therefore what manner of flood it must
have been. i could not hear, i could not see. i could but lie on the boom
and pant for breath.
after a while the rain ceased and there came out in the sky certain new
washed stars, and by their light i saw that there was no end to the black
water as far as the eye could travel, and the water had risen upon the
rails. there were dead beasts in the driftwood on the piers, and others
caught by the neck in the lattice-work, and others not yet drowned who
strove to find a foothold on the lattice-work—buffaloes and kine,
and wild pig, and deer one or two, and snakes and jackals past all
counting. their bodies were black upon the left side of the bridge, but
the smaller of them were forced through the lattice-work and whirled
down-stream.
thereafter the stars died and the rain came down afresh and the river
rose yet more, and i felt the bridge begin to stir under me as a man stirs
in his sleep ere he wakes. but i was not afraid, sahib. i swear to you
that i was not afraid, though i had no power in my limbs. i knew that i
should not die till i had seen her once more. but i was very cold, and i
felt that the bridge must go.
there was a trembling in the water, such a trembling as goes before the
coming of a great wave, and the bridge lifted its flank to the rush of
that coming so that the right lattice dipped under water and the left rose
clear. on my beard, sahib, i am speaking god's truth! as a mirzapore
stone-boat careens to the wind, so the barhwi bridge turned. thus and in
no other manner.
i slid from the boom into deep water, and behind me came the wave of
the wrath of the river. i heard its voice and the scream of the middle
part of the bridge as it moved from the piers and sank, and i knew no more
till i rose in the middle of the great flood. i put forth my hand to swim,
and lo! it fell upon the knotted hair of the head of a man. he was dead,
for no one but i, the strong one of barhwi, could have lived in that race.
he had been dead full two days, for he rode high, wallowing, and was an
aid to me, i laughed then, knowing for a surety that i should yet see her
and take no harm; and i twisted my fingers in the hair of the man, for i
was far spent, and together we went down the stream—he the dead and
i the living. lacking that help i should have sunk: the cold was in my
marrow, and my flesh was ribbed and sodden on my bones. but he had
no fear who had known the uttermost of the power of the river; and i let
him go where he chose. at last we came into the power of a side-current
that set to the right bank, and i strove with my feet to draw with it. but
the dead man swung heavily in the whirl, and i feared that some branch had
struck him and that he would sink. the tops of the tamarisk brushed my
knees, so i knew we were come into flood-water above the crops, and,
after, i let down my legs and felt bottom—the ridge of a
field—and, after, the dead man stayed upon a knoll under a fig-tree,
and i drew my body from the water rejoicing.
does the sahib know whither the backwash of the flood had borne me? to
the knoll which is the eastern boundary-mark of the village of pateera! no
other place. i drew the dead man up on the grass for the service that he
had done me, and also because i knew not whether i should need him again.
then i went, crying thrice like a jackal, to the appointed place which was
near the byre of the headman's house. but my love was already there,
weeping. she feared that the flood had swept my hut at the barhwi ford.
when i came softly through the ankle-deep water, she thought it was a
ghost and would have fled, but i put my arms round her, and—i was no
ghost in those days, though i am an old man now. ho! ho! dried corn, in
truth. maize without juice. ho! ho! [footnote: i grieve to say that the
warden of barhwi ford is responsible here for two very bad puns in the
vernacular.—r.k.]
i told her the story of the breaking of the barhwi bridge, and she said
that i was greater than mortal man, for none may cross the barhwi in full
flood, and i had seen what never man had seen before. hand in hand we went
to the knoll where the dead lay, and i showed her by what help i had made
the ford. she looked also upon the body under the stars, for the latter
end of the night was clear, and hid her face in her hands, crying: "it is
the body of hirnam singh!" i said: "the swine is of more use dead than
living, my beloved," and she said: "surely, for he has saved the dearest
life in the world to my love. none the less, he cannot stay here, for that
would bring shame upon me." the body was not a gunshot from her door.
then said i, rolling the body with my hands: "god hath judged between
us, hirnam singh, that thy blood might not be upon my head. now, whether i
have done thee a wrong in keeping thee from the burning-ghat, do thou and
the crows settle together." so i cast him adrift into the flood-water, and
he was drawn out to the open, ever wagging his thick black beard like a
priest under the pulpit-board. and i saw no more of hirnam singh.
before the breaking of the day we two parted, and i moved toward such
of the jungle as was not flooded. with the full light i saw what i had
done in the darkness, and the bones of my body were loosened in my flesh,
for there ran two kos of raging water between the village of
pateera and the trees of the far bank, and, in the middle, the piers of
the barhwi bridge showed like broken teeth in the jaw of an old man. nor
was there any life upon the waters—neither birds nor boats, but only
an army of drowned things—bullocks and horses and men—and the
river was redder than blood from the clay of the foot-hills. never had i
seen such a flood—never since that year have i seen the
like—and, o sahib, no man living had done what i had done. there was
no return for me that day. not for all the lands of the headman would i
venture a second time without the shield of darkness that cloaks danger. i
went a kos up the river to the house of a blacksmith, saying that
the flood had swept me from my hut, and they gave me food. seven days i
stayed with the blacksmith, till a boat came and i returned to my house.
there was no trace of wall, or roof, or floor—naught but a patch of
slimy mud. judge, therefore, sahib, how far the river must have risen.
it was written that i should not die either in my house, or in the
heart of the barhwi, or under the wreck of the barhwi bridge, for god sent
down hirnam singh two days dead, though i know not how the man died, to be
my buoy and support. hirnam singh has been in hell these twenty years, and
the thought of that night must be the flower of his torment.
listen, sahib! the river has changed its voice. it is going to sleep
before the dawn, to which there is yet one hour. with the light it will
come down afresh. how do i know? have i been here thirty years without
knowing the voice of the river as a father knows the voice of his son?
every moment it is talking less angrily. i swear that there will be no
danger for one hour or, perhaps, two. i cannot answer for the morning. be
quick, sahib! i will call ram pershad, and he will not turn back this
time. is the paulin tightly corded upon all the baggage? ohè,
mahout with a mud head, the elephant for the sahib, and tell them on
the far side that there will be no crossing after daylight.
money? nay, sahib. i am not of that kind. no, not even to give
sweetmeats to the baby-folk. my house, look you, is empty, and i am an old
man.
dutt, ram pershad! dutt! dutt! dutt! good luck go with
you, sahib.
as i came through the desert thus it was—
as i came through the desert.
—the city of dreadful night.
somewhere in the other world, where there are books and pictures and
plays and shop-windows to look at, and thousands of men who spend their
lives in building up all four, lives a gentleman who writes real stories
about the real insides of people; and his name is mr. walter besant. but
he will insist upon treating his ghosts—he has published half a
workshopful of them—with levity. he makes his ghost-seers talk
familiarly, and, in some cases, flirt outrageously, with the phantoms. you
may treat anything, from a viceroy to a vernacular paper, with levity; but
you must behave reverently toward a ghost, and particularly an indian
one.
there are, in this land, ghosts who take the form of fat, cold, pobby
corpses, and hide in trees near the roadside till a traveler passes. then
they drop upon his neck and remain. there are also terrible ghosts of
women who have died in child-bed. these wander along the pathways at dusk,
or hide in the crops near a village, and call seductively. but to answer
their call is death in this world and the next. their feet are turned
backward that all sober men may recognize them. there are ghosts of little
children who have been thrown into wells. these haunt well-curbs and the
fringes of jungles, and wail under the stars, or catch women by the wrist
and beg to be taken up and carried. these and the corpse-ghosts, however,
are only vernacular articles and do not attack sahibs. no native ghost has
yet been authentically reported to have frightened an englishman; but many
english ghosts have scared the life out of both white and black.
nearly every other station owns a ghost. there are said to be two at
simla, not counting the woman who blows the bellows at syree
dâk-bungalow on the old road; mussoorie has a house haunted of a
very lively thing; a white lady is supposed to do night-watchman round a
house in lahore; dalhousie says that one of her houses "repeats" on autumn
evenings all the incidents of a horrible horse-and-precipice accident;
murree has a merry ghost, and, now that she has been swept by cholera,
will have room for a sorrowful one; there are officers quarters in mian
mir whose doors open without reason, and whose furniture is guaranteed to
creak, not with the heat of june but with the weight of invisibles who
come to lounge in the chair; peshawur possesses houses that none will
willingly rent; and there is something—not fever—wrong with a
big bungalow in allahabad. the older provinces simply bristle with haunted
houses, and march phantom armies along their main thoroughfares.
some of the dâk-bungalows on the grand trunk road have handy
little cemeteries in their compound—witnesses to the "changes and
chances of this mortal life" in the days when men drove from calcutta to
the northwest. these bungalows are objectionable places to put up in. they
are generally very old, always dirty, while the khansamah is as
ancient as the bungalow. he either chatters senilely, or falls into the
long trances of age. in both moods he is useless. if you get angry with
him, he refers to some sahib dead and buried these thirty years, and says
that when he was in that sahib's service not a khansamah in the
province could touch him. then he jabbers and mows and trembles and
fidgets among the dishes, and you repent of your irritation.
in these dâk-bungalows, ghosts are most likely to be found, and
when found, they should be made a note of. not long ago it was my business
to live in dâk-bungalows. i never inhabited the same house for three
nights running, and grew to be learned in the breed. i lived in
government-built ones with red brick walls and rail ceilings, an inventory
of the furniture posted in every room, and an excited snake at the
threshold to give welcome. i lived in "converted" ones—old houses
officiating as dâk-bungalows—where nothing was in its proper
place and there wasn't even a fowl for dinner. i lived in second-hand
palaces where the wind blew through open-work marble tracery just as
uncomfortably as through a broken pane. i lived in dâk-bungalows
where the last entry in the visitors' book was fifteen months old, and
where they slashed off the curry-kid's head with a sword. it was my
good-luck to meet all sorts of men, from sober traveling missionaries and
deserters flying from british regiments, to drunken loafers who threw
whiskey bottles at all who passed; and my still greater good-fortune just
to escape a maternity case. seeing that a fair proportion of the tragedy
of our lives out here acted itself in dâk-bungalows, i wondered that
i had met no ghosts. a ghost that would voluntarily hang about a
dâk-bungalow would be mad of course; but so many men have died mad
in dâk-bungalows that there must be a fair percentage of lunatic
ghosts.
in due time i found my ghost, or ghosts rather, for there were two of
them. up till that hour i had sympathized with mr. besant's method of
handling them, as shown in "the strange case of mr. lucraft and other
stories." i am now in the opposition.
we will call the bungalow katmal dâk-bungalow. but that
was the smallest part of the horror. a man with a sensitive hide has no
right to sleep in dâk-bungalows. he should marry. katmal
dâk-bungalow was old and rotten and unrepaired. the floor was of
worn brick, the walls were filthy, and the windows were nearly black with
grime. it stood on a bypath largely used by native sub-deputy assistants
of all kinds, from finance to forests; but real sahibs were rare. the
khansamah, who was nearly bent double with old age, said so.
when i arrived, there was a fitful, undecided rain on the face of the
land, accompanied by a restless wind, and every gust made a noise like the
rattling of dry bones in the stiff toddy-palms outside. the
khansamah completely lost his head on my arrival. he had served a
sahib once. did i know that sahib? he gave me the name of a well-known man
who has been buried for more than a quarter of a century, and showed me an
ancient daguerreotype of that man in his prehistoric youth. i had seen a
steel engraving of him at the head of a double volume of memoirs a month
before, and i felt ancient beyond telling.
the day shut in and the khansamah went to get me food. he did
not go through the pretence of calling it "khana"—man's
victuals. he said "ratub," and that means, among other things,
"grub"—dog's rations. there was no insult in his choice of the term.
he had forgotten the other word, i suppose.
while he was cutting up the dead bodies of animals, i settled myself
down, after exploring the dâk-bungalow. there were three rooms,
beside my own, which was a corner kennel, each giving into the other
through dingy white doors fastened with long iron bars. the bungalow was a
very solid one, but the partition-walls of the rooms were almost
jerry-built in their flimsiness. every step or bang of a trunk echoed from
my room down the other three, and every footfall came back tremulously
from the far walls. for this reason i shut the door. there were no
lamps—only candles in long glass shades. an oil wick was set in the
bath-room.
for bleak, unadulterated misery that dâk-bungalow was the worst
of the many that i had ever set foot in. there was no fireplace, and the
windows would not open; so a brazier of charcoal would have been useless.
the rain and the wind splashed and gurgled and moaned round the house, and
the toddy-palms rattled and roared. half a dozen jackals went through the
compound singing, and a hyena stood afar off and mocked them. a hyena
would convince a sadducee of the resurrection of the dead—the worst
sort of dead. then came the ratub—a curious meal, half native
and half english in composition—with the old khansamah
babbling behind my chair about dead and gone english people, and the
wind-blown candles playing shadow-bo-peep with the bed and the
mosquito-curtains. it was just the sort of dinner and evening to make a
man think of every single one of his past sins, and of all the others that
he intended to commit if he lived.
sleep, for several hundred reasons, was not easy. the lamp in the
bath-room threw the most absurd shadows into the room, and the wind was
beginning to talk nonsense.
just when the reasons were drowsy with blood-sucking i heard the
regular—"let-us-take-and-heave-him-over" grunt of doolie-bearers in
the compound. first one doolie came in, then a second, and then a third. i
heard the doolies dumped on the ground, and the shutter in front of my
door shook. "that's some one trying to come in," i said. but no one spoke,
and i persuaded myself that it was the gusty wind. the shutter of the room
next to mine was attacked, flung back, and the inner door opened, "that's
some sub-deputy assistant," i said, "and he has brought his friends with
him. now they'll talk and spit and smoke for an hour."
but there were no voices and no footsteps, no one was putting his
luggage into the next room. the door shut, and i thanked providence that i
was to be left in peace. but i was curious to know where the doolies had
gone. i got out of bed and looked into the darkness. there was never a
sign of a doolie. just as i was getting into bed again, i heard, in the
next room, the sound that no man in his senses can possibly
mistake—the whir of a billiard ball down the length of the slates
when the striker is stringing for break. no other sound is like it. a
minute afterward there was another whir, and i got into bed. i was not
frightened—indeed i was not. i was very curious to know what had
become of the doolies. i jumped into bed for that reason.
next minute i heard the double click of a cannon and my hair sat up. it
is a mistake to say that hair stands up. the skin of the head tightens and
you can feel a faint, prickly bristling all ever the scalp. that is the
hair sitting up.
there was a whir and a click, and both sounds could only have been made
by one thing—a billiard ball. i argued the matter out at great
length with myself; and the more i argued the less probable it seemed that
one bed, one table, and two chairs—all the furniture of the room
next to mine—could so exactly duplicate the sounds of a game of
billiards. after another cannon, a three-cushion one to judge by the whir,
i argued no more. i had found my ghost and would have given worlds to have
escaped from that dâk-bungalow. i listened, and with each listen the
game grew clearer. there was whir on whir and click on click. sometimes
there was a double click and a whir and another click. beyond any sort of
doubt, people were playing billiards in the next room. and the next room
was not big enough to hold a billiard table!
between the pauses of the wind i heard the game go forward—stroke
after stroke. i tried to believe that i could not hear voices; but that
attempt was a failure.
do you know what fear is? not ordinary fear of insult, injury or death,
but abject, quivering dread of something that you cannot see—fear
that dries the inside of the mouth and half of the throat—fear that
makes you sweat on the palms of the hands, and gulp in order to keep the
uvula at work? this is a fine fear—a great cowardice, and must be
felt to be appreciated. the very improbability of billiards in a
dâk-bungalow proved the reality of the thing. no man—drunk or
sober—could imagine a game a billiards, or invent the spitting crack
of a "screw-cannon."
a severe course of dâk-bungalows has this disadvantage—it
breeds infinite credulity. if a man said to a confirmed
dâk-bungalow-haunter:—"there is a corpse in the next room, and
there's a mad girl in the next but one, and the woman and man on that
camel have just eloped from a place sixty miles away," the hearer would
not disbelieve because he would know that nothing is too wild, grotesque,
or horrible to happen in a dâk-bungalow.
this credulity, unfortunately extends to ghosts. a rational person
fresh from his own house would have turned on his side and slept. i did
not. so surely as i was given up as a bad carcass by the scores of things
in the bed because the bulk of my blood was in my heart, so surely did i
hear every stroke of a long game at billiards played in the echoing room
behind the iron-barred door. my dominant fear was that the players might
want a marker. it was an absurd fear; because creatures who could play in
the dark would be above such superfluities. i only know that that was my
terror; and it was real.
after a long long while, the game stopped, and the door banged, i slept
because i was dead tired. otherwise i should have preferred to have kept
awake. not for everything in asia would i have dropped the door-bar and
peered into the dark of the next room.
when the morning came, i considered that i had done well and wisely,
and inquired for the means of departure.
"by the way, khansamah," i said, "what were those three doolies
doing in my compound in the night?"
"there were no doolies," said the khansamah.
i went into the next room and the daylight streamed through the open
door. i was immensely brave. i would, at that hour, have played black pool
with the owner of the big black pool down below.
"has this place always been a dâk-bungalow?" i asked.
"no," said the khansamah. "ten or twenty years ago, i have
forgotten how long, it was a billiard-room."
"a how much?"
"a billiard-room for the sahibs who built the railway. i was
khansamah then in the big house where all the railway-sahibs lived,
and i used to come across with brandy-shrab. these three rooms were
all one, and they held a big table on which the sahibs played every
evening. but the sahibs are all dead now, and the railway runs, you say,
nearly to kabul."
"do you remember anything about the sahibs?"
"it is long ago, but i remember that one sahib, a fat man and always
angry, was playing here one night, and he said to me:—'mangal khan,
brandy-pani do,' and i filled the glass, and he bent over the table
to strike, and his head fell lower and lower till it hit the table, and
his spectacles came off, and when we—the sahibs and i
myself—ran to lift him he was dead. i helped to carry him out. aha,
he was a strong sahib! but he is dead and i, old mangal khan, am still
living, by your favor."
that was more than enough! i had my ghost—a first-hand,
authenticated article. i would write to the society for psychical
research—i would paralyze the empire with the news! but i would,
first of all, put eighty miles of assessed crop-land between myself and
that dâk-bungalow before nightfall. the society might send their
regular agent to investigate later on.
i went into my own room and prepared to pack after noting down the
facts of the case. as i smoked i heard the game begin again—with a
miss in balk this time, for the whir was a short one.
the door was open and i could see into the room. click-click!
that was a cannon. i entered the room without fear, for there was sunlight
within and a fresh breeze without. the unseen game was going on at a
tremendous rate. and well it might, when a restless little rat was running
to and fro inside the dingy ceiling-cloth, and a piece of loose
window-sash was making fifty breaks off the window-bolt as it shook in the
breeze!
impossible to mistake the sound of billiard balls! impossible to
mistake the whir of a ball over the slate! but i was to be excused. even
when i shut my enlightened eyes the sound was marvelously like that of a
fast game.
entered angrily the faithful partner of my sorrows, kadir baksh.
"this bungalow is very bad and low-caste! no wonder the presence was
disturbed and is speckled. three sets of doolie-bearers came to the
bungalow late last night when i was sleeping outside, and said that it was
their custom to rest in the rooms set apart for the english people! what
honor has the khansamah? they tried to enter, but i told them to
go. no wonder, if these oorias have been here, that the presence is
sorely spotted. it is shame, and the work of a dirty man!"
kadir baksh did not say that he had taken from each gang two annas for
rent in advance, and then, beyond my earshot, had beaten them with the big
green umbrella whose use i could never before divine. but kadir baksh has
no notions of morality.
there was an interview with the khansamah, but as he promptly
lost his head, wrath gave place to pity, and pity led to a long
conversation, in the course of which he put the fat engineer-sahib's
tragic death in three separate stations—two of them fifty miles
away. the third shift was to calcutta, and there the sahib died while
driving a dog-cart.
if i had encouraged him the khansamah would have wandered all
through bengal with his corpse.
i did not go away as soon as i intended. i stayed for the night, while
the wind and the rat and the sash and the window-bolt played a ding-dong
"hundred and fifty up." then the wind ran out and the billiards stopped,
and i felt that i had ruined my one genuine, hall-marked ghost story.
had i only stopped at the proper time, i could have made
anything out of it.
that was the bitterest thought of all!
we're goin' 'ome, we're goin' 'ome—
our ship is at the shore,
an' you mus' pack your 'aversack,
for we won't come back no more.
ho, don't you grieve for me,
my lovely mary ann,
for i'll marry you yet on a fourp'ny bit,
as a time-expired ma-a-an!
barrack room ballad.
an awful thing has happened! my friend, private mulvaney, who went home
in the serapis, time-expired, not very long ago, has come back to
india as a civilian! it was all dinah shadd's fault. she could not stand
the poky little lodgings, and she missed her servant abdullah more than
words could tell. the fact was that the mulvaneys had been out here too
long, and had lost touch of england.
mulvaney knew a contractor on one of the new central india lines, and
wrote to him for some sort of work. the contractor said that if mulvaney
could pay the passage he would give him command of a gang of coolies for
old sake's sake. the pay was eighty-five rupees a month, and dinah shadd
said that if terence did not accept she would make his life a "basted
purgathory." therefore the mulvaneys came out as "civilians," which was a
great and terrible fall; though mulvaney tried to disguise it, by saying
that he was "ker'nel on the railway line, an' a consequinshal man."
he wrote me an invitation, on a tool-indent form, to visit him; and i
came down to the funny little "construction" bungalow at the side of the
line. dinah shadd had planted peas about and about, and nature had spread
all manner of green stuff round the place. there was no change in mulvaney
except the change of clothing, which was deplorable, but could not be
helped. he was standing upon his trolly, haranguing a gang-man, and his
shoulders were as well drilled, and his big, thick chin was as
clean-shaven as ever.
"i'm a civilian now," said mulvaney. "cud you tell that i was iver a
martial man? don't answer, sorr, av you're strainin' betune a complimint
an' a lie. there's no houldin' dinah shadd now she's got a house av her
own. go inside, an' dhrink tay out av chiny in the drrrrawin'-room, an'
thin we'll dhrink like christians undher the tree here. scutt, ye
naygur-folk! there's a sahib come to call on me, an' that's more than
he'll iver do for you onless you run! get out, an' go on pilin' up the
earth, quick, till sundown."
when we three were comfortably settled under the big sisham in
front of the bungalow, and the first rush of questions and answers about
privates ortheris and learoyd and old times and places had died away,
mulvaney said, reflectively—"glory be there's no p'rade to-morrow,
an' no bun-headed corp'ril-bhoy to give you his lip. an' yit i don't know.
tis harrd to be something ye niver were an' niver meant to be, an' all the
ould days shut up along wid your papers. eyah! i'm growin' rusty, an' 'tis
the will av god that a man mustn't serve his quane for time an' all."
he helped himself to a fresh peg, and sighed furiously.
"let your beard grow, mulvaney," said i, "and then you won't be
troubled with those notions. you'll be a real civilian."
dinah shadd had told me in the drawing-room of her desire to coax
mulvaney into letting his beard grow. "twas so civilian-like," said poor
dinah, who hated her husband's hankering for his old life.
"dinah shadd, you're a dishgrace to an honust, clane-scraped man!" said
mulvaney, without replying to me. "grow a beard on your own chin, darlint,
and lave my razors alone. they're all that stand betune me and
dis-ris-pect-ability. av i didn't shave, i wud be torminted wid an
outrajis thurrst; for there's nothin' so dhryin' to the throat as a big
billy-goat beard waggin' undher the chin. ye wudn't have me dhrink
always, dinah shadd? by the same token, you're kapin' me crool dhry
now. let me look at that whiskey."
the whiskey was lent and returned, but dinah shadd, who had been just
as eager as her husband in asking after old friends, rent me
with—
"i take shame for you, sorr, coming down here—though the saints
know you're as welkim as the daylight whin you do come—an'
upsettin' terence's head wid your nonsense about—about fwhat's much
better forgotten. he bein' a civilian now, an' you niver was aught else.
can you not let the arrmy rest? 'tis not good for terence."
i took refuge by mulvaney, for dinah shadd has a temper of her own.
"let be—let be," said mulvaney, "'tis only wanst in a way i can
talk about the ould days." then to me:—"ye say dhrumshticks is well,
an' his lady tu? i niver knew how i liked the grey garron till i was shut
av him an' asia."—"dhrumshticks" was the nickname of the colonel
commanding mulvaney's old regiment.—"will you be seein' him again?
you will. thin tell him"—mulvaney's eyes began to
twinkle—"tell him wid privit"—"mister, terence,"
interrupted dinah shadd.
"now the divil an' all his angils an' the firmament av hiven fly away
wid the 'mister,' an' the sin av making me swear be on your confession,
dinah shadd! privit, i tell ye. wid privit mulvaney's best
obedience, that but for me the last time-expired wud be still pullin' hair
on their way to the sea."
he threw himself back in the chair, chuckled, and was silent.
"mrs. mulvaney," i said, "please take up the whiskey, and don't let him
have it until he has told the story."
dinah shadd dexterously whipped the bottle away, saying at the same
time, "'tis nothing to be proud av," and thus captured by the enemy,
mulvaney spake:—
"'twas on chuseday week. i was behaderin' round wid the gangs on the
'bankmint—i've taught the hoppers how to kape step an' stop
screechin'—whin a head-gangman comes up to me, wid about two inches
av shirt-tail hanging round his neck an' a disthressful light in his oi.
'sahib,' sez he, 'there's a reg'mint an' a half av soldiers up at the
junction, knockin' red cinders out av ivrything an' ivrybody! they thried
to hang me in my cloth,' he sez, 'an' there will be murder an' ruin an'
rape in the place before nightfall! they say they're comin' down here to
wake us up. what will we do wid our womenfolk?'
"'fetch my throlly!' sez i; 'my heart's sick in my ribs for a wink at
anything wid the quane's uniform on ut, fetch my throlly, an' six av the
jildiest men, and run me up in shtyle.'"
"he tuk his best coat," said dinah shadd, reproachfully.
"'twas to do honor to the widdy. i cud ha' done no less, dinah shadd.
you and your digresshins interfere wid the coorse av the narrative. have
you iver considhered fwhat i wud look like wid me head shaved as
well as my chin? you bear that in your mind, dinah darlin'.
"i was throllied up six miles, all to get a shquint at that draf'. i
knew 'twas a spring draf' goin' home, for there's no rig'mint
hereabouts, more's the pity."
"praise the virgin!" murmured dinah shadd. but mulvaney did not
hear.
"whin i was about three-quarters av a mile off the rest-camp,
powtherin' along fit to burrst, i heard the noise av the men an', on my
sowl, sorr, i cud catch the voice av peg barney bellowin' like a bison wid
the belly-ache. you remimber peg barney that was in d comp'ny—a red,
hairy scraun, wid a scar on his jaw? peg barney that cleared out the blue
lights' jubilee meeting wid the cook-room mop last year?
"thin i knew ut was a draf' of the ould rig'mint, an' i was conshumed
wid sorrow for the bhoy that was in charge. we was harrd scrapin's at any
time. did i iver tell you how horker kelley went into clink nakid as
phoebus apollonius, wid the shirts av the corp'ril an' file undher his
arrum? an' he was a moild man! but i'm digreshin'. 'tis a shame
both to the rig'mints and the arrmy sendin' down little orf'cer bhoys wid
a draf' av strong men mad wid liquor an' the chanst av gettin' shut av
india, an' niver a punishment that's fit to be given right down an'
away from cantonmints to the dock! 'tis this nonsince. whin i am
servin' my time, i'm undher the articles av war, an' can be whipped on the
peg for thim. but whin i've served my time, i'm a reserve
man, an' the articles av war haven't any hould on me. an orf'cer
can't do anythin' to a time-expired savin' confinin' him to
barricks. 'tis a wise rig'lation bekaze a time-expired does not have any
barricks; bein' on the move all the time. 'tis a solomon av a rig'lation,
is that. i wud like to be inthroduced to the man that made ut. 'tis easier
to get colts from a kibbereen horse-fair into galway than to take a bad
draf' over ten miles av country. consiquintly that rig'lation—for
fear that the men wud be hurt by the little orf'cer bhoy. no matther. the
nearer my throlly came to the rest-camp, the woilder was the shine, an'
the louder was the voice av peg barney. ''tis good i am here,' thinks i to
myself, 'for peg alone is employment for two or three.' he bein', i well
knew, as copped as a dhrover.
"faith, that rest-camp was a sight! the tent-ropes was all skew-nosed,
an' the pegs looked as dhrunk as the men—fifty av thim—the
scourin's, an' rinsin's, an' divil's lavin's av the ould rig'mint. i tell
you, sorr, they were dhrunker than any men you've ever seen in your
mortial life. how does a draf' get dhrunk? how does a frog get fat?
they suk ut in through their shkins.
"there was peg barney sittin' on the groun' in his shirt—wan shoe
off an' wan shoe on—whackin' a tent-peg over the head wid his boot,
an' singin' fit to wake the dead. 'twas no clane song that he sung,
though. 'twas the divil's mass."
"what's that?" i asked.
"whin a bad egg is shut av the army, he sings the divil's mass for a
good riddance; an' that manes swearin' at ivrything from the
commandher-in-chief down to the room-corp'ril, such as you niver in your
days heard. some men can swear so as to make green turf crack! have you
iver heard the curse in an orange lodge? the divil's mass is ten times
worse, an' peg barney was singin' ut, whackin' the tent-peg on the head
wid his boot for each man that he cursed. a powerful big voice had peg
barney, an' a hard swearer he was whin sober. i stood forninst him, an'
'twas not me oi alone that cud tell peg was dhrunk as a coot.
"'good mornin', peg,' i sez, whin he dhrew breath afther cursin' the
adj'tint gen'ral; 'i've put on my best coat to see you, peg barney,' sez
"'thin take ut off again,' sez peg barney, latherin' away wid the boot;
'take ut off an' dance, ye lousy civilian!'
"wid that he begins cursin' ould dhrumshticks, being so full he clean
disremimbers the brigade-major an' the judge advokit gen'ral.
"'do you not know me, peg?' sez i, though me blood was hot in me wid
being called a civilian."
"an' him a decent married man!" wailed dinah shadd.
"'i do not,' sez peg, 'but dhrunk or sober i'll tear the hide off your
back wid a shovel whin i've stopped singin'.'
"'say you so, peg barney?' sez i. 'tis clear as mud you've forgotten
me. i'll assist your autobiography.' wid that i stretched peg barney, boot
an' all, an' wint into the camp. an awful sight ut was!
"'where's the orf'cer in charge av the detachment?' sez i to scrub
greene—the manest little worm that ever walked.
"'there's no orf'cer, ye ould cook,' sez scrub; 'we're a bloomin'
republic.'
"'are you that?' sez i; 'thin i'm o'connell the dictator, an' by this
you will larn to kape a civil tongue in your rag-box.'
"wid that i stretched scrub greene an' wint to the orf'cer's tent.
'twas a new little bhoy—not wan i'd iver seen before. he was sittin'
in his tent, purtendin' not to 'ave ear av the racket.
"i saluted—but for the life av me! mint to shake hands whin i
went in. twas the sword hangin' on the tent-pole changed my will.
"'can't i help, sorr?' sez i; ''tis a strong man's job they've given
you, an' you'll be wantin' help by sundown.' he was a bhoy wid bowils,
that child, an' a rale gintleman.
"'sit down,' sez he.
"'not before my orf'cer,' sez i; an' i tould him fwhat my service
was.
"'i've heard av you,' sez he. 'you tuk the town av lungtungpen
nakid.'
"'faith,' thinks i, 'that's honor an' glory, for 'twas lift'nint
brazenose did that job. 'i'm wid ye, sorr,' sez i, 'if i'm av use. they
shud niver ha' sent you down wid the draf'. savin' your presince, sorr,' i
sez, 'tis only lift'nint hackerston in the ould rig'mint can manage a home
draf'.'
"'i've niver had charge of men like this before,' sez he, playin' wid
the pens on the table; 'an' i see by the rig'lations'—
"'shut your oi to the rig'lations, sorr,' i sez, 'till the throoper's
into blue wather. by the rig'lations you've got to tuck thim up for the
night, or they'll be runnin' foul av my coolies an' makin' a shiverarium
half through the country. can you trust your noncoms, sorr?'
"'yes,' sez he.
"'good,' sez i; 'there'll be throuble before the night. are you
marchin', sorr?'
"'to the next station,' sez he.
"'better still,' sez i; 'there'll be big throuble.'
"'can't be too hard on a home draf',' sez he; 'the great thing is to
get thim in-ship.'
"'faith you've larnt the half av your lesson, sorr,' sez i, 'but av you
shtick to the rig'lations you'll niver get thim in-ship at all, at all. or
there won't be a rag av kit betune thim whin you do.'
"'twas a dear little orf'cer bhoy, an' by way av kapin' his heart up, i
tould him fwhat i saw wanst in a draf' in egypt."
"what was that, mulvaney?" said i.
"sivin an' fifty men sittin' on the bank av a canal, laughin' at a poor
little squidgereen av an orf'cer that they'd made wade into the slush an'
pitch the things out av the boats for their lord high mightinesses. that
made me orf'cer bhoy woild wid indignation.
"'soft an' aisy, sorr,' sez i; 'you've niver had your draf' in hand
since you left cantonmints. wait till the night, an' your work will be
ready to you. wid your permission, sorr, i will investigate the camp, an'
talk to my ould friends. tis no manner av use thryin' to shtop the
divilmint now.'
"wid that i wint out into the camp an' inthrojuced mysilf to ivry man
sober enough to remimber me. i was some wan in the ould days, an' the
bhoys was glad to see me—all excipt peg barney wid a eye like a
tomata five days in the bazar, an' a nose to match. they come round me an'
shuk me, an' i tould thim i was in privit employ wid an income av me own,
an' a drrrawin'-room fit to bate the quane's; an' wid me lies an' me
shtories an' nonsinse gin'rally, i kept 'em quiet in wan way an' another,
knockin' roun' the camp. twas bad even thin whin i was the angil av
peace.
"i talked to me ould non-coms—they was sober—an'
betune me an' thim we wore the draf' over into their tents at the proper
time. the little orf'cer bhoy he comes round, decint an' civil-spoken as
might be.
"'rough quarters, men,' sez he, 'but you can't look to be as
comfortable as in barricks. we must make the best av things. i've shut my
eyes to a dale av dog's tricks to-day, an' now there must be no more av
ut.'
"'no more we will. come an' have a dhrink, me son,' sez peg barney,
staggerin' where he stud. me little orf'cer bhoy kep' his timper.
"'you're a sulky swine, you are,' sez peg barney, an' at that the men
in the tent began to laugh.
"i tould you me orf'cer bhoy had bowils. he cut peg barney as near as
might be on the oi that i'd squshed whin we first met. peg wint spinnin'
acrost the tent.
"'peg him out, sorr,' sez i, in a whishper.
"'peg him out!' sez me orf'cer bhoy, up loud, just as if 'twas
battalion-p'rade an' he pickin' his wurrds from the sargint.
"the non-coms tuk peg barney—a howlin' handful he was—an'
in three minuts he was pegged out—chin down, tight-dhrawn—on
his stummick, a tent-peg to each arm an' leg, swearin' fit to turn a
naygur white.
"i tuk a peg an' jammed ut into his ugly jaw.—'bite on that, peg
barney,' i sez; 'the night is settin' frosty, an' you'll be wantin'
divarsion before the mornin'. but for the rig'lations you'd be bitin' on a
bullet now at the thriangles, peg barney,' sez i.
"all the draf' was out av their tents watchin' barney bein' pegged.
"''tis agin the rig'lations! he strook him!' screeches out scrub
greene, who was always a lawyer; an' some of the men tuk up the
shoutin'.
"'peg out that man!' sez my orf'cer bhoy, niver losin' his timper; an'
the non-coms wint in and pegged out scrub greene by the side av peg
barney.
"i cud see that the draf' was comin' roun'. the men stud not knowin'
fwhat to do.
"'get to your tents!' sez me orf'cer bhoy. 'sargint, put a sintry over
these two men.'
"the men wint back into the tents like jackals, an' the rest av the
night there was no noise at all excipt the stip av the sintry over the
two, an' scrub greene blubberin' like a child. 'twas a chilly night, an'
faith, ut sobered peg barney.
"just before revelly, my orf'cer bhoy comes out an' sez: 'loose those
men an' send thim to their tents!' scrub greene wint away widout a word,
but peg barney, stiff wid the cowld, stud like a sheep, thryin' to make
his orf'cer understhand he was sorry for playin' the goat.
"there was no tucker in the draf' whin ut fell in for the march, an'
divil a wurrd about 'illegality' cud i hear.
"i wint to the ould color sargint and i sez:—'let me die in
glory,' sez i. 'i've seen a man this day!'
"'a man he is,' sez ould hother; 'the draf's as sick as a herrin'.
they'll all go down to the sea like lambs. that bhoy has the bowils av a
cantonmint av gin'rals.'
"'amin,' sez i, 'an' good luck go wid him, wheriver he be, by land or
by sea. let me know how the draf' gets clear.'
"an' do you know how they did? that bhoy, so i was tould by
letter from bombay, bullydamned 'em down to the dock, till they cudn't
call their sowls their own. from the time they left me oi till they was
'tween decks, not wan av thim was more than dacintly dhrunk. an', by the
holy articles av war, whin they wint aboard they cheered him till they
cudn't spake, an' that, mark you, has not come about wid a draf' in
the mim'ry av livin' man! you look to that little orf'cer bhoy. he has
bowils. 'tis not ivry child that wud chuck the rig'lations to flanders an'
stretch peg barney on a wink from a brokin an' dilapidated ould carkiss
like mesilf. i'd be proud to serve"—
"terrence, you're a civilian," said dinah shadd, warningly.
"so i am—so i am. is ut likely i wud forget ut? but he was a
gran' bhoy all the same, an' i'm only a mudtipper wid a hod on my
shoulthers. the whiskey's in the heel av your hand, sorr. wid your good
lave we'll dhrink to the ould rig'mint—three fingers—standin'
up!"
and we drank.
not though you die to-night, o sweet, and wail,
a spectre at my door,
shall mortal fear make love immortal fail—
i shall but love you more,
who, from death's house returning, give me still
one moment's comfort in my matchless ill.
—shadow houses.
this tale may be explained by those who know how souls are made, and
where the bounds of the possible are put down. i have lived long enough in
this india to know that it is best to know nothing, and can only write the
story as it happened.
dumoise was our civil surgeon at meridki, and we called him "dormouse,"
because he was a round little, sleepy little man. he was a good doctor and
never quarreled with any one, not even with our deputy commissioner who
had the manners of a bargee and the tact of a horse. he married a girl as
round and as sleepy-looking as himself. she was a miss hillardyce,
daughter of "squash" hillardyce of the berars, who married his chief's
daughter by mistake. but that is another story.
a honeymoon in india is seldom more than a week long; but there is
nothing to hinder a couple from extending it over two or three years.
india is a delightful country for married folk who are wrapped up in one
another. they can live absolutely alone and without
interruption—just as the dormice did. those two little people
retired from the world after their marriage, and were very happy. they
were forced, of course, to give occasional dinners, but they made no
friends thereby, and the station went its own way and forgot them; only
saying, occasionally, that dormouse was the best of good fellows though
dull. a civil surgeon who never quarrels is a rarity, appreciated as
such.
few people can afford to play robinson crusoe anywhere—least of
all in india, where we are few in the land and very much dependent on each
other's kind offices. dumoise was wrong in shutting himself from the world
for a year, and he discovered his mistake when an epidemic of typhoid
broke out in the station in the heart of the cold weather, and his wife
went down. he was a shy little man, and five days were wasted before he
realized that mrs. dumoise was burning with something worse than simple
fever, and three days more passed before he ventured to call on mrs.
shute, the engineer's wife, and timidly speak about his trouble.
nearly every household in india knows that doctors are very helpless in
typhoid. the battle must be fought out between death and the nurses minute
by minute and degree by degree. mrs. shute almost boxed dumoise's ears for
what she called his "criminal delay," and went off at once to look after
the poor girl. we had seven cases of typhoid in the station that winter
and, as the average of death is about one in every five cases, we felt
certain that we should have to lose somebody. but all did their best. the
women sat up nursing the women, and the men turned to and tended the
bachelors who were down, and we wrestled with those typhoid cases for
fifty-six days, and brought them through the valley of the shadow in
triumph. but, just when we thought all was over, and were going to give a
dance to celebrate the victory, little mrs. dumoise got a relapse and died
in a week and the station went to the funeral. dumoise broke down utterly
at the brink of the grave, and had to be taken away.
after the death, dumoise crept into his own house and refused to be
comforted. he did his duties perfectly, but we all felt that he should go
on leave, and the other men of his own service told him so. dumoise was
very thankful for the suggestion—he was thankful for anything in
those days—and went to chini on a walking-tour. chini is some twenty
marches from simla, in the heart of the hills, and the scenery is good if
you are in trouble. you pass through big, still deodar-forests, and under
big, still cliffs, and over big, still grass-downs swelling like a woman's
breasts; and the wind across the grass, and the rain among the deodars
says—"hush—hush—hush." so little dumoise was packed off
to chini, to wear down his grief with a full-plate camera and a rifle. he
took also a useless bearer, because the man had been his wife's favorite
servant. he was idle and a thief, but dumoise trusted everything to
him.
on his way back from chini, dumoise turned aside to bagi, through the
forest reserve which is on the spur of mount huttoo. some men who have
traveled more than a little say that the march from kotegarh to bagi is
one of the finest in creation. it runs through dark wet forest, and ends
suddenly in bleak, nipped hillside and black rocks. bagi
dâk-bungalow is open to all the winds and is bitterly cold. few
people go to bagi. perhaps that was the reason why dumoise went there. he
halted at seven in the evening, and his bearer went down the hillside to
the village to engage coolies for the next day's march. the sun had set,
and the night-winds were beginning to croon among the rocks. dumoise
leaned on the railing of the veranda, waiting for his bearer to return.
the man came back almost immediately after he had disappeared, and at such
a rate that dumoise fancied he must have crossed a bear. he was running as
hard as he could up the face of the hill.
but there was no bear to account for his terror. he raced to the
veranda and fell down, the blood spurting from his nose and his face
iron-grey. then he gurgled—"i have seen the memsahib! i have
seen the memsahib!"
"where?" said dumoise.
"down there, walking on the road to the village. she was in a blue
dress, and she lifted the veil of her bonnet and said—'ram dass,
give my salaams to the sahib, and tell him that i shall meet
him next month at nuddea.' then i ran away, because i was afraid."
what dumoise said or did i do not know. ram dass declares that he said
nothing, but walked up and down the veranda all the cold night, waiting
for the memsahib to come up the hill and stretching out his arms
into the dark like a madman. but no memsahib came, and, next day,
he went on to simla cross-questioning the bearer every hour.
ram dass could only say that he had met mrs. dumoise and that she had
lifted up her veil and given him the message which he had faithfully
repeated to dumoise. to this statement ram dass adhered. he did not know
where nuddea was, had no friends at nuddea, and would most certainly never
go to nuddea; even though his pay were doubled,
nuddea is in bengal and has nothing whatever to do with a doctor
serving in the punjab. it must be more than twelve hundred miles south of
meridki.
dumoise went through simla without halting, and returned to meridki,
there to take over charge from the man who had been officiating for him
during his tour. there were some dispensary accounts to be explained, and
some recent orders of the surgeon-general to be noted, and, altogether,
the taking-over was a full day's work, in the evening, dumoise told his
locum tenens, who was an old friend of his bachelor days, what had
happened at bagi; and the man said that ram dass might as well have chosen
tuticorin while he was about it.
at that moment, a telegraph-peon came in with a telegram from simla,
ordering dumoise not to take over charge at meridki, but to go at once to
nuddea on special duty. there was a nasty outbreak of cholera at nuddea,
and the bengal government, being short-handed, as usual, had borrowed a
surgeon from the punjab.
dumoise threw the telegram across the table and said—"well?"
the other doctor said nothing. it was all that he could say.
then he remembered that dumoise had passed through simla on his way
from bagi; and thus might, possibly, have heard first news of the
impending transfer.
he tried to put the question, and the implied suspicion into words, but
dumoise stopped him with—"if i had desired that, i should
never have come back from chini. i was shooting there. i wish to live, for
i have things to do ... but i shall not be sorry."
the other man bowed his head, and helped, in the twilight, to pack up
dumoise's just opened trunks. ram dass entered with the lamps.
"where is the sahib going?" he asked.
"to nuddea," said dumoise, softly.
ram dass clawed dumoise's knees and boots and begged him not to go. ram
dass wept and howled till he was turned out of the room. then he wrapped
up all his belongings and came back to ask for a character. he was not
going to nuddea to see his sahib die and, perhaps, to die
himself.
so dumoise gave the man his wages and went down to nuddea alone; the
other doctor bidding him good-bye as one under sentence of death.
eleven days later he had joined his memsahib; and the bengal
government had to borrow a fresh doctor to cope with that epidemic at
nuddea, the first importation lay dead in chooadanga dâk
bungalow.
"and a little child shall lead them."
in the army list they still stand as "the fore and fit princess
hohenzollern-sigmaringen-auspach's merther-tydfilshire own royal loyal
light infantry, regimental district a," but the army through all its
barracks and canteens knows them now as the "fore and aft." they may in
time do something that shall make their new title honorable, but at
present they are bitterly ashamed, and the man who calls them "fore and
aft" does so at the risk of the head which is on his shoulders.
two words breathed into the stables of a certain cavalry regiment will
bring the men out into the streets with belts and mops and bad language;
but a whisper of "fore and aft" will bring out this regiment with
rifles.
their one excuse is that they came again and did their best to finish
the job in style. but for a time all their world knows that they were
openly beaten, whipped, dumb-cowed, shaking and afraid. the men know it;
their officers know it; the horse guards know it, and when the next war
comes the enemy will know it also. there are two or three regiments of the
line that have a black mark against their names which they will then wipe
out, and it will be excessively inconvenient for the troops upon whom they
do their wiping.
the courage of the british soldier is officially supposed to be above
proof, and, as a general rule, it is so. the exceptions are decently
shoveled out of sight, only to be referred to in the freshet of unguarded
talk that occasionally swamps a mess-table at midnight. then one hears
strange and horrible stories of men not following their officers, of
orders being given by those who had no right to give them, and of disgrace
that, but for the standing luck of the british army, might have ended in
brilliant disaster. these are unpleasant stories to listen to, and the
messes tell them under their breath, sitting by the big wood fires, and
the young officer bows his head and thinks to himself, please god, his men
shall never behave unhandily,
the british soldier is not altogether to be blamed for occasional
lapses; but this verdict he should not know. a moderately intelligent
general will waste six months in mastering the craft of the particular war
that he may be waging; a colonel may utterly misunderstand the capacity of
his regiment for three months after it has taken the field; and even a
company commander may err and be deceived as to the temper and temperament
of his own handful: wherefore the soldier, and the soldier of to-day more
particularly, should not be blamed for falling back. he should be shot or
hanged afterward—pour encourager les autres; but he should
not be vilified in newspapers, for that is want of tact and waste of
space.
he has, let us say, been in the service of the empress for, perhaps,
four years. he will leave in another two years. he has no inherited
morals, and four years are not sufficient to drive toughness into his
fibre, or to teach him how holy a thing is his regiment. he wants to
drink, he wants to enjoy himself—in india he wants to save
money—and he does not in the least like getting hurt. he has
received just sufficient education to make him understand half the purport
of the orders he receives, and to speculate on the nature of clean,
incised, and shattering wounds. thus, if he is told to deploy under fire
preparatory to an attack, he knows that he runs a very great risk of being
killed while he is deploying, and suspects that he is being thrown away to
gain ten minutes' time. he may either deploy with desperate swiftness, or
he may shuffle, or bunch, or break, according to the discipline under
which he has lain for four years.
armed with imperfect knowledge, cursed with the rudiments of an
imagination, hampered by the intense selfishness of the lower classes, and
unsupported, by any regimental associations, this young man is suddenly
introduced to an enemy who in eastern lands is always ugly, generally tall
and hairy, and frequently noisy. if he looks to the right and the left and
sees old soldiers—men of twelve years' service, who, he knows, know
what they are about—taking a charge, rush, or demonstration without
embarrassment, he is consoled and applies his shoulder to the butt of his
rifle with a stout heart. his peace is the greater if he hears a senior,
who has taught him his soldiering and broken his head on occasion,
whispering:—"they'll shout and carry on like this for five minutes.
then they'll rush in, and then we've got 'em by the short hairs!"
but, on the other hand, if he sees only men of his own term of service,
turning white and playing with their triggers and saying:—"what the
hell's up now?" while the company commanders are sweating into their
sword-hilts and shouting:—"front-rank, fix bayonets. steady
there—steady! sight for three hundred—no, for five! lie down,
all! steady! front-rank, kneel!" and so forth, he becomes unhappy; and
grows acutely miserable when he hears a comrade turn over with the rattle
of fire-irons falling into the fender, and the grunt of a pole-axed ox. if
he can be moved about a little and allowed to watch the effect of his own
fire on the enemy he feels merrier, and may be then worked up to the blind
passion of fighting, which is, contrary to general belief, controlled by a
chilly devil and shakes men like ague. if he is not moved about, and
begins to feel cold at the pit of the stomach, and in that crisis is badly
mauled and hears orders that were never given, he will break, and he will
break badly; and of all things under the sight of the sun there is nothing
more terrible than a broken british regiment. when the worst comes to the
worst and the panic is really epidemic, the men must be e'en let go, and
the company commanders had better escape to the enemy and stay there for
safety's sake. if they can be made to come again they are not pleasant men
to meet, because they will not break twice.
about thirty years from this date, when we have succeeded in
half-educating everything that wears trousers, our army will be a
beautifully unreliable machine. it will know too much and it will do too
little. later still, when all men are at the mental level of the officer
of to-day it will sweep the earth. speaking roughly, you must employ
either blackguards or gentlemen, or, best of all, blackguards commanded by
gentlemen, to do butcher's work with efficiency and despatch. the ideal
soldier should, of course, think for himself—the pocketbook
says so. unfortunately, to attain this virtue, he has to pass through the
phase of thinking of himself, and that is misdirected genius. a blackguard
may be slow to think for himself, but he is genuinely anxious to kill, and
a little punishment teaches him how to guard his own skin and perforate
another's. a powerfully prayerful highland regiment, officered by rank
presbyterians, is, perhaps, one degree more terrible in action than a
hard-bitten thousand of irresponsible irish ruffians led by most improper
young unbelievers. but these things prove the rule—which is that the
midway men are not to be trusted alone. they have ideas about the value of
life and an upbringing that has not taught them to go on and take the
chances. they are carefully unprovided with a backing of comrades who have
been shot over, and until that backing is re-introduced, as a great many
regimental commanders intend it shall be, they are more liable to disgrace
themselves than the size of the empire or the dignity of the army allows.
their officers are as good as good can be, because their training begins
early, and god has arranged that a clean-run youth of the british middle
classes shall, in the matter of backbone, brains, and bowels, surpass all
other youths. for this reason a child of eighteen will stand up, doing
nothing, with a tin sword in his hand and joy in his heart until he is
dropped. if he dies, he dies like a gentleman. if he lives, he writes home
that he has been "potted," "sniped," "chipped" or "cut over," and sits
down to besiege government for a wound-gratuity until the next little war
breaks out, when he perjures himself before a medical board, blarneys his
colonel, burns incense round his adjutant, and is allowed to go to the
front once more.
which homily brings me directly to a brace of the most finished little
fiends that ever banged drum or tootled fife in the band of a british
regiment. they ended their sinful career by open and flagrant mutiny and
were shot for it. their names were jakin and lew—piggy lew—and
they were bold, bad drummer-boys, both of them frequently birched by the
drum-major of the fore and aft.
jakin was a stunted child of fourteen, and lew was about the same age.
when not looked after, they smoked and drank. they swore habitually after
the manner of the barrack-room, which is cold-swearing and comes from
between clinched teeth; and they fought religiously once a week. jakin had
sprung from some london gutter and may or may not have passed through dr.
barnado's hands ere he arrived at the dignity of drummer-boy. lew could
remember nothing except the regiment and the delight of listening to the
band from his earliest years. he hid somewhere in his grimy little soul a
genuine love for music, and was most mistakenly furnished with the head of
a cherub: insomuch that beautiful ladies who watched the regiment in
church were wont to speak of him as a "darling." they never heard his
vitriolic comments on their manners and morals, as he walked back to
barracks with the band and matured fresh causes of offence against
jakin.
the other drummer-boys hated both lads on account of their illogical
conduct. jakin might be pounding lew, or lew might be rubbing jakin's head
in the dirt, but any attempt at aggression on the part of an outsider was
met by the combined forces of lew and jakin; and the consequences were
painful. the boys were the ishmaels of the corps, but wealthy ishmaels,
for they sold battles in alternate weeks for the sport of the barracks
when they were not pitted against other boys; and thus amassed money.
on this particular day there was dissension in the camp. they had just
been convicted afresh of smoking, which is bad for little boys who use
plug-tobacco, and lew's contention was that jakin had "stunk so 'orrid bad
from keepin' the pipe in pocket," that he and he alone was responsible for
the birching they were both tingling under.
"i tell you i 'id the pipe back o' barricks," said jakin,
pacifically.
"you're a bloomin' liar," said lew, without heat.
"you're a bloomin' little barstard," said jakin, strong in the
knowledge that his own ancestry was unknown.
now there is one word in the extended vocabulary of barrack-room abuse
that cannot pass without comment. you may call a man a thief and risk
nothing. you may even call him a coward without finding more than a boot
whiz past your ear, but you must not call a man a bastard unless you are
prepared to prove it on his front teeth.
"you might ha' kep' that till i wasn't so sore," said lew, sorrowfully,
dodging round jakin's guard.
"i'll make you sorer," said jakin, genially, and got home on lew's
alabaster forehead. all would have gone well and this story, as the books
say, would never have been written, had not his evil fate prompted the
bazar-sergeant's son, a long, employless man of five and twenty, to put in
an appearance after the first round. he was eternally in need of money,
and knew that the boys had silver.
"fighting again," said he. "i'll report you to my father, and he'll
report you to the color-sergeant."
"what's that to you?" said jakin, with an unpleasant dilation of the
nostrils.
"oh! nothing to me. you'll get into trouble, and you've been up
too often to afford that."
"what the hell do you know about what we've done?" asked lew the
seraph. "you aren't in the army, you lousy, cadging civilian."
he closed in on the man's left flank.
"jes' 'cause you find two gentlemen settlin' their differences with
their fistes you stick in your ugly nose where you aren't wanted. run 'ome
to your 'arf-caste slut of a ma—or we'll give you what-for," said
jakin.
the man attempted reprisals by knocking the boys' heads together. the
scheme would have succeeded had not jakin punched him vehemently in the
stomach, or had lew refrained from kicking his shins. they fought
together, bleeding and breathless, for half an hour, and after heavy
punishment, triumphantly pulled down their opponent as terriers pull down
a jackal.
"now," gasped jakin, "i'll give you what-for." he proceeded to pound
the man's features while lew stamped on the outlying portions of his
anatomy. chivalry is not a strong point in the composition of the average
drummer-boy. he fights, as do his betters, to make his mark.
ghastly was the ruin that escaped, and awful was the wrath of the
bazar-sergeant. awful too was the scene in orderly-room when the two
reprobates appeared to answer the charge of half-murdering a "civilian."
the bazar-sergeant thirsted for a criminal action, and his son lied. the
boys stood to attention while the black clouds of evidence
accumulated.
"you little devils are more trouble than the rest of the regiment put
together," said the colonel, angrily. "one might as well admonish
thistledown, and i can't well put you in cells or under stoppages. you
must be flogged again."
"beg y' pardon, sir. can't we say nothin' in our own defence, sir?"
shrilled jakin.
"hey! what? are you going to argue with me?" said the colonel.
"no, sir," said lew. "but if a man come to you, sir, and said he was
going to report you, sir, for 'aving a bit of a turn-up with a friend,
sir, an' wanted to get money out o' you, sir"—
the orderly-room exploded in a roar of laughter. "well?" said the
colonel.
"that was what that measly jarnwar there did, sir, and 'e'd 'a'
done it, sir, if we 'adn't prevented 'im. we didn't 'it 'im much,
sir. 'e 'adn't no manner o' right to interfere with us, sir. i don't mind
bein' flogged by the drum-major, sir, nor yet reported by any
corp'ral, but i'm—but i don't think it's fair, sir, for a civilian
to come an' talk over a man in the army."
a second shout of laughter shook the orderly-room, but the colonel was
grave.
"what sort of characters have these boys?" he asked of the regimental
sergeant-major.
"accordin' to the bandmaster, sir," returned that revered
official—the only soul in the regiment whom the boys
feared—"they do everything but lie, sir."
"is it like we'd go for that man for fun, sir?" said lew, pointing to
the plaintiff.
"oh, admonished,—admonished!" said the colonel, testily, and when
the boys had gone he read the bazar-sergeant's son a lecture on the sin of
unprofitable meddling, and gave orders that the bandmaster should keep the
drums in better discipline.
"if either of you come to practice again with so much as a scratch on
your two ugly little faces," thundered the bandmaster, "i'll tell the
drum-major to take the skin off your backs. understand that, you young
devils."
then he repented of his speech for just the length of time that lew,
looking like a seraph in red worsted embellishments, took the place of one
of the trumpets—in hospital—and rendered the echo of a
battle-piece. lew certainly was a musician, and had often in his more
exalted moments expressed a yearning to master every instrument of the
band.
"there's nothing to prevent your becoming a bandmaster, lew," said the
bandmaster, who had composed waltzes of his own, and worked day and night
in the interests of the band.
"what did he say?" demanded jakin, after practice.
"'said i might be a bloomin' bandmaster, an' be asked in to 'ave a
glass o' sherry-wine on mess-nights."
"ho! 'said you might be a bloomin' non-combatant, did 'e! that's just
about wot 'e would say. when i've put in my boy's service—it's a
bloomin' shame that doesn't count for pension—i'll take on a privit.
then i'll be a lance in a year—knowin' what i know about the ins an'
outs o' things. in three years i'll be a bloomin' sergeant. i won't marry
then, not i! i'll 'old on and learn the orf'cers' ways an' apply for
exchange into a reg'ment that doesn't know all about me. then i'll be a
bloomin' orf'cer. then i'll ask you to 'ave a glass o' sherry-wine,
mister lew, an' you'll bloomin' well 'ave to stay in the hanty-room
while the mess-sergeant brings it to your dirty 'ands."
"'s'pose i'm going to be a bandmaster? not i, quite. i'll be a
orf'cer too. there's nothin' like taking to a thing an' stickin' to it,
the schoolmaster says. the reg'ment don't go 'ome for another seven years.
i'll be a lance then or near to."
thus the boys discussed their futures, and conducted themselves with
exemplary piety for a week. that is to say, lew started a flirtation with
the color-sergeant's daughter, aged thirteen,—"not," as he explained
to jakin, "with any intention o' matrimony, but by way o' keepin' my 'and
in." and the black-haired cris delighan enjoyed that flirtation more than
previous ones, and the other drummer-boys raged furiously together, and
jakin preached sermons on the dangers of "bein' tangled along o'
petticoats."
but neither love nor virtue would have held lew long in the paths of
propriety had not the rumor gone abroad that the regiment was to be sent
on active service, to take part in a war which, for the sake of brevity,
we will call "the war of the lost tribes."
the barracks had the rumor almost before the mess-room, and of all the
nine hundred men in barracks not ten had seen a shot fired in anger. the
colonel had, twenty years ago, assisted at a frontier expedition; one of
the majors had seen service at the cape; a confirmed deserter in e company
had helped to clear streets in ireland; but that was all. the regiment had
been put by for many years. the overwhelming mass of its rank and file had
from three to four years' service; the non-commissioned officers were
under thirty years old; and men and sergeants alike had forgotten to speak
of the stories written in brief upon the colors—the new colors that
had been formally blessed by an archbishop in england ere the regiment
came away.
they wanted to go to the front—they were enthusiastically anxious
to go—but they had no knowledge of what war meant, and there was
none to tell them. they were an educated regiment, the percentage of
school-certificates in their ranks was high, and most of the men could do
more than read and write. they had been recruited in loyal observance of
the territorial idea; but they themselves had no notion of that idea. they
were made up of drafts from an over-populated manufacturing district. the
system had put flesh and muscle upon their small bones, but it could not
put heart into the sons of those who for generations had done overmuch
work for overscanty pay, had sweated in drying-rooms, stooped over looms,
coughed among white-lead and shivered on lime-barges. the men had found
food and rest in the army, and now they were going to fight
"niggers"—people who ran away if you shook a stick at them.
wherefore they cheered lustily when the rumor ran, and the shrewd,
clerkly non-commissioned officers speculated on the chances of batta and
of saving their pay. at headquarters, men said:—"the fore and fit
have never been under fire within the last generation. let us, therefore,
break them in easily by setting them to guard lines of communication." and
this would have been done but for the fact that british regiments were
wanted—badly wanted—at the front, and there were doubtful
native regiments that could fill the minor duties, "brigade 'em with two
strong regiments," said headquarters. "they may be knocked about a bit,
but they'll learn their business before they come through. nothing like a
night-alarm and a little cutting-up of stragglers to make a regiment smart
in the field. wait till they've had half a dozen sentries' throats
cut."
the colonel wrote with delight that the temper of his men was
excellent, that the regiment was all that could be wished and as sound as
a bell. the majors smiled with a sober joy, and the subalterns waltzed in
pairs down the mess-room after dinner and nearly shot themselves at
revolver practice. but there was consternation in the hearts of jakin and
lew. what was to be done with the drums? would the band go to the front?
how many of the drums would accompany the regiment?
they took council together, sitting in a tree and smoking.
"it's more than a bloomin' toss-up they'll leave us be'ind at the depot
with the women. you'll like that," said jakin, sarcastically.
"'cause o' cris, y' mean? wot's a woman, or a 'ole bloomin' depôt
o' women, 'longside o' the chanst of field-service? you know i'm as keen
on goin' as you," said lew.
"wish i was a bloomin' bugler," said jakin, sadly. "they'll take tom
kidd along, that i can plaster a wall with, an' like as not they won't
take us."
"then let's go an' make tom kidd so bloomin' sick 'e can't bugle no
more. you 'old 'is 'ands an' i'll kick him," said lew, wriggling on the
branch.
"that ain't no good neither. we ain't the sort o' characters to presoom
on our rep'tations—they're bad. if they have the band at the depot
we don't go, and no error there. if they take the band we may get
cast for medical unfitness. are you medical fit, piggy?" said jakin,
digging lew in the ribs with force.
"yus," said lew, with an oath. "the doctor says your 'eart's weak
through smokin' on an empty stummick. throw a chest an' i'll try yer."
jakin threw out his chest, which lew smote with all his might, jakin
turned very pale, gasped, crowed, screwed up his eyes and
said,—"that's all right."
"you'll do," said lew. "i've 'eard o' men dyin' when you 'it 'em fair
on the breast-bone."
"don't bring us no nearer goin', though," said jakin. "do you know
where we're ordered?"
"gawd knows, an' 'e won't split on a pal. somewheres up to the front to
kill paythans—hairy big beggars that turn you inside out if they get
'old o' you. they say their women are good-looking, too."
"any loot?" asked the abandoned jakin.
"not a bloomin' anna, they say, unless you dig up the ground an' see
what the niggers 'ave 'id. they're a poor lot." jakin stood upright on the
branch and gazed across the plain.
"lew," said he, "there's the colonel coming, 'colonel's a good old
beggar. let's go an' talk to 'im."
lew nearly fell out of the tree at the audacity of the suggestion. like
jakin he feared not god neither regarded he man, but there are limits even
to the audacity of drummer-boy, and to speak to a colonel was ...
but jakin had slid down the trunk and doubled in the direction of the
colonel. that officer was walking wrapped in thought and visions of a c.
b.—yes, even a k.c.b., for had he not at command one of the best
regiments of the line—the fore and fit? and he was aware of two
small boys charging down upon him. once before it had been solemnly
reported to him that "the drums were in a state of mutiny"; jakin and lew
being the ringleaders. this looked like an organized conspiracy.
the boys halted at twenty yards, walked to the regulation four paces,
and saluted together, each as well set-up as a ramrod and little
taller.
the colonel was in a genial mood; the boys appeared very forlorn and
unprotected on the desolate plain, and one of them was handsome.
"well!" said the colonel, recognizing them. "are you going to pull me
down in the open? i'm sure i never interfere with you, even
though"—he sniffed suspiciously—"you have been smoking."
it was time to strike while the iron was hot. their hearts beat
tumultuously.
"beg y' pardon, sir," began jakin. "the reg'ment's ordered on active
service, sir?"
"so i believe," said the colonel, courteously.
"is the band goin', sir?" said both together. then, without pause,
"we're goin', sir, ain't we?"
"you!" said the colonel, stepping back the more fully to take in the
two small figures. "you! you'd die in the first march."
"no, we wouldn't, sir. we can march with the regiment
anywheres—p'rade an' anywhere else," said jakin.
"if tom kidd goes 'ell shut up like a clasp-knife," said lew, "tom 'as
very close veins in both 'is legs, sir."
"very how much?"
"very close veins, sir. that's why they swells after long p'rade, sir,
if 'e can go, we can go, sir."
again the colonel looked at them long and intently.
"yes, the band is going," he said, as gravely as though, he had been
addressing a brother officer. "have you any parents, either of you
two?"
"no, sir," rejoicingly from lew and jakin. "we're both orphans, sir.
there's no one to be considered of on our account, sir."
"you poor little sprats, and you want to go up to the front with the
regiment, do you? why?"
"i've wore the queen's uniform for two years," said jakin. "it's very
'ard, sir, that a man don't get no recompense for doin' 'is dooty,
sir."
"an'—an' if i don't go, sir," interrupted lew, "the bandmaster 'e
says 'e'll catch an' make a bloo—a blessed musician o' me, sir.
before i've seen any service, sir."
the colonel made no answer for a long time. then he said
quietly:—"if you're passed by the doctor i dare say you can go. i
shouldn't smoke if i were you."
the boys saluted and disappeared. the colonel walked home and told the
story to his wife, who nearly cried over it. the colonel was well pleased.
if that was the temper of the children, what would not the men do?
jakin and lew entered the boys' barrack-room with great stateliness,
and refused to hold any conversation with their comrades for at least ten
minutes. then, bursting with pride, jakin drawled:—"i've bin
intervooin' the colonel. good old beggar is the colonel. says i to 'im,
'colonel,' says i, 'let me go the front, along o' the reg'ment.' 'to the
front you shall go,' says 'e, 'an' i only wish there was more like you
among the dirty little devils that bang the bloomin' drums.' kidd, if you
throw your 'coutrements at me for tellin' you the truth to your own
advantage, your legs 'll swell."
none the less there was a battle-royal in the barrack-room, for the
boys were consumed with envy and hate, and neither jakin nor lew behaved
in conciliatory wise.
"i'm goin' out to say adoo to my girl," said lew, to cap the climax.
"don't none o' you touch my kit because it's wanted for active service, me
bein' specially invited to go by the colonel"
he strolled forth and whistled in the clump of trees at the back of the
married quarters till cris came to him, and, the preliminary kisses being
given and taken, lew began to explain the situation.
"i'm goin' to the front with the reg'ment," he said, valiantly,
"piggy, you're a little liar," said cris, but her heart misgave her,
for lew was not in the habit of lying.
"liar yourself, cris," said lew. slipping an arm round her. "i'm goin'
when the reg'ment marches out you'll see me with 'em, all galliant and
gay. give us another kiss, cris, on the strength of it."
"if you'd on'y a-stayed at the depôt—where you ought
to ha' bin—you could get as many of 'em as—as you dam please,"
whimpered cris, putting up her mouth.
"it's 'ard, cris. i grant you it's 'ard. but what's a man to do? if i'd
a-stayed at the depôt, you wouldn't think anything of me,"
"like as not, but i'd 'ave you with me, piggy, an' all the thinkin' in
the world isn't like kissin'."
"an' all the kissin' in the world isn't like 'avin' a medal to wear on
the front o' your coat."
"you won't get no medal."
"oh, yus, i shall though. me an' jakin are the only acting-drummers
that'll be took along. all the rest is full men, an' we'll get our medals
with them."
"they might ha' taken anybody but you, piggy. you'll get
killed—you're so venturesome. stay with me, piggy, darlin', down at
the depôt, an' i'll love you true forever."
"ain't you goin' to do that now, cris? you said you was."
"o' course i am, but th' other's more comfortable. wait till you've
growed a bit, piggy. you aren't no taller than me now."
"i've bin in the army for two years an' i'm not goin' to get out of a
chanst o' seein' service an' don't you try to make me do so. i'll come
back, cris, an' when i take on as a man i'll marry you—marry you
when i'm a lance."
"promise, piggy?"
lew reflected on the future as arranged by jakin a short time
previously, but cris's mouth was very near to his own.
"i promise, s'elp me gawd!" said he.
cris slid an arm round his neck.
"i won't 'old you back no more, piggy. go away an' get your medal, an'
i'll make you a new button-bag as nice as i know how," she whispered.
"put some o' your 'air into it, cris, an' i'll keep it in my pocket so
long's i'm alive."
then cris wept anew, and the interview ended. public feeling among the
drummer-boys rose to fever pitch and the lives of jakin and lew became
unenviable. not only had they been permitted to enlist two years before
the regulation boy's age—fourteen—but, by virtue, it seemed,
of their extreme youth, they were allowed to go to the front—which
thing had not happened to acting-drummers within the knowledge of boy. the
band which was to accompany the regiment had been cut down to the
regulation twenty men, the surplus returning to the ranks. jakin and lew
were attached to the band as supernumeraries, though they would much have
preferred being company buglers.
"'don't matter much," said jakin, after the medical inspection, "be
thankful that we're 'lowed to go at all. the doctor 'e said that if we
could stand what we took from the bazar-sergeant's son we'd stand pretty
nigh anything."
"which we will," said lew, looking tenderly at the ragged and ill-made
house-wife that cris had given him, with a lock of her hair worked into a
sprawling "l" upon the cover.
"it was the best i could," she sobbed. "i wouldn't let mother nor the
sergeant's tailor 'elp me. keep it always, piggy, an' remember i love you
true."
they marched to the railway station, nine hundred and sixty strong, and
every soul in cantonments turned out to see them go. the drummers gnashed
their teeth at jakin and lew marching with the band, the married women
wept upon the platform, and the regiment cheered its noble self black in
the face.
"a nice level lot," said the colonel to the second-in-command, as they
watched the first four companies entraining.
"fit to do anything," said the second-in-command, enthusiastically.
"but it seems to me they're a thought too young and tender for the work in
hand. it's bitter cold up at the front now."
"they're sound enough," said the colonel. "we must take our chance of
sick casualties."
so they went northward, ever northward, past droves and droves of
camels, armies of camp followers, and legions of laden mules, the throng
thickening day by day, till with a shriek the train pulled up at a
hopelessly congested junction where six lines of temporary track
accommodated six forty-wagon trains; where whistles blew, babus sweated
and commissariat officers swore from dawn till far into the night amid the
wind-driven chaff of the fodder-bales and the lowing of a thousand
steers.
"hurry up—you're badly wanted at the front," was the message that
greeted the fore and aft, and the occupants of the red cross carriages
told the same tale.
"tisn't so much the bloomin' fighting," gasped a headbound trooper of
hussars to a knot of admiring fore and afts. "tisn't so much the bloomin'
fightin', though there's enough o' that. it's the bloomin' food an' the
bloomin' climate. frost all night 'cept when it hails, and biling sun all
day, and the water stinks fit to knock you down. i got my 'ead chipped
like a egg; i've got pneumonia too, an' my guts is all out o' order.
tain't no bloomin' picnic in those parts, i can tell you."
"wot are the niggers like?" demanded a private.
"there's some prisoners in that train yonder. go an' look at 'em.
they're the aristocracy o' the country. the common folk are a dashed sight
uglier. if you want to know what they fight with, reach under my seat an'
pull out the long knife that's there."
they dragged out and beheld for the first time the grim, bone-handled,
triangular afghan knife. it was almost as long as lew.
"that's the thing to jint ye," said the trooper, feebly.
"it can take off a man's arm at the shoulder as easy as slicing butter.
i halved the beggar that used that 'un, but there's more of his likes up
above. they don't understand thrustin', but they're devils to slice."
the men strolled across the tracks to inspect the afghan prisoners.
they were unlike any "niggers" that the fore and aft had ever
met—these huge, black-haired, scowling sons of the beni-israel. as
the men stared the afghans spat freely and muttered one to another with
lowered eyes.
"my eyes! wot awful swine!" said jakin, who was in the rear of the
procession. "say, old man, how you got puckrowed, eh?
kiswasti you wasn't hanged for your ugly face, hey?"
the tallest of the company turned, his leg-irons, clanking at the
movement, and stared at the boy. "see!" he cried to his fellows in pushto.
"they send children against us. what a people, and what fools!"
"hya!" said jakin, nodding his head cheerily. "you go
down-country. khana get, peenikapanee get—live like a
bloomin' raja ke marfik. that's a better bandobust than
baynit get it in your innards. good-bye, ole man. take care o' your
beautiful figure-'ed, an' try to look kushy."
the men laughed and fell in for their first march when they began to
realize that a soldier's life was not all beer and skittles. they were
much impressed with the size and bestial ferocity of the niggers whom they
had now learned to call "paythans," and more with the exceeding discomfort
of their own surroundings. twenty old soldiers in the corps would have
taught them how to make themselves moderately snug at night, but they had
no old soldiers, and, as the troops on the line of march said, "they lived
like pigs." they learned the heart-breaking cussedness of camp-kitchens
and camels and the depravity of an e.p. tent and a wither-wrung mule. they
studied animalculae in water, and developed a few cases of dysentery in
their study.
at the end of their third march they were disagreeably surprised by the
arrival in their camp of a hammered iron slug which, fired from a steady
rest at seven hundred yards, flicked out the brains of a private seated by
the fire. this robbed them of their peace for a night, and was the
beginning of a long-range fire carefully calculated to that end. in the
daytime they saw nothing except an occasional puff of smoke from a crag
above the line of march. at night there were distant spurts of flame and
occasional casualties, which set the whole camp blazing into the gloom,
and, occasionally, into opposite tents. then they swore vehemently and
vowed that this was magnificent but not war.
indeed it was not. the regiment could not halt for reprisals against
the franctireurs of the country side. its duty was to go forward
and make connection with the scotch and gurkha troops with which it was
brigaded. the afghans knew this, and knew too, after their first tentative
shots, that they were dealing with a raw regiment. thereafter they devoted
themselves to the task of keeping the fore and aft on the strain. not for
anything would they have taken equal liberties with a seasoned
corps—with the wicked little gurkhas, whose delight it was to lie
out in the open on a dark night and stalk their stalkers—with the
terrible, big men dressed in women's clothes, who could be heard praying
to their god in the night-watches, and whose peace of mind no amount of
"sniping" could shake—or with those vile sikhs, who marched so
ostentatiously unprepared and who dealt out such grim reward to those who
tried to profit by that unpreparedness. this white regiment was
different—quite different. it slept like a hog, and, like a hog,
charged in every direction when it was roused. its sentries walked with a
footfall that could be heard for a quarter of a mile; would fire at
anything that moved—even a driven donkey—and when they had
once fired, could be scientifically "rushed" and laid out a horror and an
offence against the morning sun. then there were camp-followers who
straggled and could be cut up without fear. their shrieks would disturb
the white boys, and the loss of their services would inconvenience them
sorely.
thus, at every march, the hidden enemy became bolder and the regiment
writhed and twisted under attacks it could not avenge. the crowning
triumph was a sudden night-rush ending in the cutting of many tent-ropes,
the collapse of the sodden canvas and a glorious knifing of the men who
struggled and kicked below. it was a great deed, neatly carried out, and
it shook the already shaken nerves of the fore and aft. all the courage
that they had been required to exercise up to this point was the "two
o'clock in the morning courage"; and they, so far, had only succeeded in
shooting their comrades and losing their sleep.
sullen, discontented, cold, savage, sick, with their uniforms dulled
and unclean, the "fore and aft" joined their brigade.
"i hear you had a tough time of it coming up," said the brigadier. but
when he saw the hospital-sheets his face fell.
"this is bad," said he to himself. "they're as rotten as sheep." and
aloud to the colonel,—"i'm afraid we can't spare you just yet. we
want all we have, else i should have given you ten days to recruit
in."
the colonel winced. "on my honor, sir," he returned, "there is not the
least necessity to think of sparing us. my men have been rather mauled and
upset without a fair return. they only want to go in somewhere where they
can see what's before them."
"'can't say i think much of the fore and fit," said the brigadier, in
confidence, to his brigade-major. "they've lost all their soldiering, and,
by the trim of them, might have marched through the country from the other
side. a more fagged-out set of men i never put eyes on."
"oh, they'll improve as the work goes on. the parade gloss has been
rubbed off a little, but they'll put on field polish before long," said
the brigade-major. "they've been mauled, and they don't quite understand
it."
they did not. all the hitting was on one side, and it was cruelly hard
hitting with accessories that made them sick. there was also the real
sickness that laid hold of a strong man and dragged him howling to the
grave. worst of all, their officers knew just as little of the country as
the men themselves, and looked as if they did. the fore and aft were in a
thoroughly unsatisfactory condition, but they believed that all would be
well if they could once get a fair go-in at the enemy. pot-shots up and
down the valleys were unsatisfactory, and the bayonet never seemed to get
a chance. perhaps it was as well, for a long-limbed afghan with a knife
had a reach of eight feet, and could carry away enough lead to disable
three englishmen, the fore and fit would like some rifle-practice at the
enemy—all seven hundred rifles blazing together. that wish showed
the mood of the men.
the gurkhas walked into their camp, and in broken, barrack-room english
strove to fraternize with them; offered them pipes of tobacco and stood
them treat at the canteen. but the fore and aft, not knowing much of the
nature of the gurkhas, treated them as they would treat any other
"niggers," and the little men in green trotted back to their firm friends
the highlanders, and with many grins confided to them:—"that dam
white, regiment no dam use. sulky—ugh! dirty—ugh! hya, any tot
for johnny?" whereat the highlanders smote the gurkhas as to the head, and
told them not to vilify a british regiment, and the gurkhas grinned
cavernously, for the highlanders were their elder brothers and entitled to
the privileges of kinship. the common soldier who touches a gurkha is more
than likely to have his head sliced open.
three days later the brigadier arranged a battle according to the rules
of war and the peculiarity of the afghan temperament. the enemy were
massing in inconvenient strength among the hills, and the moving of many
green standards warned him that the tribes were "up" in aid of the afghan
regular troops. a squadron and a half of bengal lancers represented the
available cavalry, and two screw-guns borrowed from a column thirty miles
away, the artillery at the general's disposal.
"if they stand, as i've a very strong notion that they will, i fancy we
shall see an infantry fight that will be worth watching," said the
brigadier. "we'll do it in style. each regiment shall be played into
action by its band, and we'll hold the cavalry in reserve."
"for all the reserve?" somebody asked.
"for all the reserve; because we're going to crumple them up," said the
brigadier, who was an extraordinary brigadier, and did not believe in the
value of a reserve when dealing with asiatics. and, indeed, when you come
to think of it, had the british army consistently waited for reserves in
all its little affairs, the boundaries of our empire would have stopped at
brighton beach.
that battle was to be a glorious battle.
the three regiments debouching from three separate gorges, after duly
crowning the heights above, were to converge from the centre, left and
right upon what we will call the afghan army, then stationed toward the
lower extremity of a flat-bottomed valley. thus it will be seen that three
sides of the valley practically belonged to the english, while the fourth
was strictly afghan property. in the event of defeat the afghans had the
rocky hills to fly to, where the fire from the guerilla tribes in aid
would cover their retreat. in the event of victory these same tribes would
rush down and lend their weight to the rout of the british.
the screw-guns were to shell the head of each afghan rush that was made
in close formation, and the cavalry, held in reserve in the right valley,
were to gently stimulate the break-up which would follow on the combined
attack. the brigadier, sitting upon a rock overlooking the valley, would
watch the battle unrolled at his feet. the fore and aft would debouch from
the central gorge, the gurkhas from the left, and the highlanders from the
right, for the reason that the left flank of the enemy seemed as though it
required the most hammering. it was not every day that an afghan force
would take ground in the open, and the brigadier was resolved to make the
most of it.
"if we only had a few more men," he said, plaintively, "we could
surround the creatures and crumble 'em up thoroughly. as it is, i'm afraid
we can only cut them up as they run. it's a great pity."
the fore and aft had enjoyed unbroken peace for five days, and were
beginning, in spite of dysentery, to recover their nerve. but they were
not happy, for they did not know the work in hand, and had they known,
would not have known how to do it. throughout those five days in which old
soldiers might have taught them the craft of the game, they discussed
together their misadventures in the past—how such an one was alive
at dawn and dead ere the dusk, and with what shrieks and struggles such
another had given up his soul under the afghan knife. death was a new and
horrible thing to the sons of mechanics who were used to die decently of
zymotic disease; and their careful conservation in barracks had done
nothing to make them look upon it with less dread.
very early in the dawn the bugles began to blow, and the fore and aft,
filled with a misguided enthusiasm, turned out without waiting for a cup
of coffee and a biscuit; and were rewarded by being kept under arms in the
cold while the other regiments leisurely prepared for the fray. all the
world knows that it is ill taking the breeks off a highlander. it is much
iller to try to make him stir unless he is convinced of the necessity for
haste.
the fore and aft awaited, leaning upon their rifles and listening to
the protests of their empty stomachs. the colonel did his best to remedy
the default of lining as soon as it was borne in upon him that the affair
would not begin at once, and so well did he succeed that the coffee was
just ready when—the men moved off, their band leading. even then
there had been a mistake in time, and the fore and aft came out into the
valley ten minutes before the proper hour. their band wheeled to the right
after reaching the open, and retired behind a little rocky knoll still
playing while the regiment went past.
it was not a pleasant sight that opened on the uninstructed view, for
the lower end of the valley appeared to be filled by an army in
position—real and actual regiments attired in red coats,
and—of this there was no doubt—firing martini-henri bullets
which cut up the ground a hundred yards in front of the leading company.
over that pock-marked ground the regiment had to pass, and it opened the
ball with a general and profound courtesy to the piping pickets; ducking
in perfect time, as though it had been brazed on a rod. being half-capable
of thinking for itself, it fired a volley by the simple process of
pitching its rifle into its shoulder and pulling the trigger. the bullets
may have accounted for some of the watchers on the hillside, but they
certainly did not affect the mass of enemy in front, while the noise of
the rifles drowned any orders that might have been given.
"good god!" said the brigadier, sitting on the rock high above all.
"that regiment has spoiled the whole show. hurry up the others, and let
the screw-guns get off."
but the screw-guns, in working round the heights, had stumbled upon a
wasp's nest of a small mud fort which they incontinently shelled at eight
hundred yards, to the huge discomfort of the occupants, who were
unaccustomed to weapons of such devilish precision.
the fore and aft continued to go forward but with shortened stride.
where were the other regiments, and why did these niggers use martinis?
they took open order instinctively, lying down and firing at random,
rushing a few paces forward and lying down again, according to the
regulations. once in this formation, each man felt himself desperately
alone, and edged in toward his fellow for comfort's sake.
then the crack of his neighbor's rifle at his ear led him to fire as
rapidly as he could—again for the sake of the comfort of the noise.
the reward was not long delayed. five volleys plunged the files in banked
smoke impenetrable to the eye, and the bullets began to take ground twenty
or thirty yards in front of the firers, as the weight of the bayonet
dragged down, and to the right arms wearied with holding the kick of the
leaping martini. the company commanders peered helplessly through the
smoke, the more nervous mechanically trying to fan it away with their
helmets.
"high and to the left!" bawled a captain till he was hoarse. "no good!
cease firing, and let it drift away a bit."
three and four times the bugles shrieked the order, and when it was
obeyed the fore and aft looked that their foe should be lying before them
in mown swaths of men. a light wind drove the smoke to leeward, and showed
the enemy still in position and apparently unaffected. a quarter of a ton
of lead had been buried a furlong in front of them, as the ragged earth
attested.
that was not demoralizing to the afghans, who have not european nerves.
they were waiting for the mad riot to die down, and were firing quietly
into the heart of the smoke. a private of the fore and aft spun up his
company shrieking with agony, another was kicking the earth and gasping,
and a third, ripped through the lower intestines by a jagged bullet, was
calling aloud on his comrades to put him out of his pain. these were the
casualties, and they were not soothing to hear or see. the smoke cleared
to a dull haze.
then the foe began to shout with a great shouting and a mass—a
black mass—detached itself from the main body, and rolled over the
ground at horrid speed. it was composed of, perhaps, three hundred men,
who would shout and fire and slash if the rush of their fifty comrades who
were determined to die carried home. the fifty were ghazis, half-maddened
with drugs and wholly mad with religious fanaticism. when they rushed the
british fire ceased, and in the lull the order was given to close ranks
and meet them with the bayonet.
any one who knew the business could have told the fore and aft that the
only way of dealing with a ghazi rush is by volleys at long ranges;
because a man who means to die, who desires to die, who will gain heaven
by dying, must, in nine cases out of ten, kill a man who has a lingering
prejudice in favor of life if he can close with the latter. where they
should have closed and gone forward, the fore and aft opened out and
skirmished, and where they should have opened out and fired, they closed
and waited.
a man dragged from his blankets half awake and unfed is never in a
pleasant frame of mind. nor does his happiness increase when he watches
the whites of the eyes of three hundred six-foot fiends upon whose beards
the foam is lying, upon whose tongues is a roar of wrath, and in whose
hands are three-foot knives.
the fore and aft heard the gurkha bugles bringing that regiment forward
at the double, while the neighing of the highland pipes came from the
left. they strove to stay where they were, though the bayonets wavered
down the line like the oars of a ragged boat. then they felt body to body
the amazing physical strength of their foes; a shriek of pain ended the
rush, and the knives fell amid scenes not to be told. the men clubbed
together and smote blindly—as often as not at their own fellows.
their front crumpled like paper, and the fifty ghazis passed on; their
backers, now drunk with success, fighting as madly as they.
then the rear-ranks were bidden to close up, and the subalterns dashed
into the stew—alone. for the rear-rank had heard the clamor in
front, the yells and the howls of pain, and had seen the dark stale blood
that makes afraid. they were not going to stay. it was the rushing of the
camps over again. let their officers go to hell, if they chose; they would
get away from the knives.
"come on!" shrieked the subalterns, and their men, cursing them, drew
back, each closing into his neighbor and wheeling round.
charteris and devlin, subalterns of the last company, faced their death
alone in the belief that their men would follow.
"you've killed me, you cowards," sobbed devlin and dropped, cut from
the shoulder-strap to the centre of the chest, and a fresh detachment of
his men retreating, always retreating, trampled him under foot as they
made for the pass whence they had emerged.
i kissed her in the kitchen and i kissed her in the hall.
child'un, child'un, follow me!
oh golly, said the cook, is he gwine to kiss us all?
halla-halla-halla hallelujah!
the gurkhas were pouring through the left gorge and over the heights at
the double to the invitation of their regimental quickstep. the black
rocks were crowned with dark green spiders as the bugles gave tongue
jubilantly:
in the morning! in the morning by the bright light!
when gabriel blows his trumpet in the morning!
the gurkha rear-companies tripped and blundered over loose stones. the
front-files halted for a moment to take stock of the valley and to settle
stray boot-laces. then a happy little sigh of contentment soughed down the
ranks, and it was as though the land smiled, for behold there below was
the enemy, and it was to meet them that the gurkhas had doubled so
hastily. there was much enemy. there would be amusement. the little men
hitched their kukris well to hand, and gaped expectantly at their
officers as terriers grin ere the stone is cast for them to fetch. the
gurkhas' ground sloped downward to the valley, and they enjoyed a fair
view of the proceedings. they sat upon the bowlders to watch, for their
officers were not going to waste their wind in assisting to repulse a
ghazi rush more than half a mile away. let the white men look to their own
front.
"hi! yi!" said the subadar-major, who was sweating profusely, "dam
fools yonder, stand close-order! this is no time for close order, it's the
time for volleys. ugh!"
horrified, amused, and, indignant, the gurkhas beheld the
retirement—let us be gentle—of the fore and aft with a running
chorus of oaths and commentaries.
"they run! the white men run! colonel sahib, may we also do a
little running?" murmured runbir thappa, the senior jemadar.
but the colonel would have none of it. "let the beggars be cut up a
little," said he wrathfully. "'serves 'em right they'll be prodded into
facing round in a minute." he looked through his field-glasses, and caught
the glint of an officer's sword.
"beating 'em with the flat—damned conscripts! how the ghazis are
walking into them!" said he.
the fore and aft, heading back, bore with them their officers. the
narrowness of the pass forced the mob into solid formation, and the
rear-rank delivered some sort of a wavering volley. the ghazis drew off,
for they did not know what reserves the gorge might hide. moreover, it was
never wise to chase white men too far. they returned as wolves return to
cover, satisfied with the slaughter that they had done, and only stopping
to slash at the wounded on the ground. a quarter of a mile had the fore
and aft retreated, and now, jammed in the pass, was quivering with pain,
shaken and demoralized with fear, while the officers, maddened beyond
control, smote the men with the hilts and the flats of their swords.
"get back! get back, you cowards—you women! right about
face—column of companies, form—you hounds!" shouted the
colonel, and the subalterns swore aloud. but the regiment wanted to
go—to go anywhere out of the range of those merciless knives. it
swayed to and fro irresolutely with shouts and outcries, while from the
right the gurkhas dropped volley after volley of cripple-stopper snider
bullets at long range into the mob of the ghazis returning to their own
troops.
the fore and aft band, though protected from direct fire by the rocky
knoll under which it had sat down, fled at the first rush. jakin and lew
would have fled also, but their short legs left them fifty yards in the
rear, and by the time the band had mixed with the regiment, they were
painfully aware that they would have to close in alone and
unsupported.
"get back to that rock," gasped jakin. "they won't see us there."
and they returned to the scattered instruments of the band; their
hearts nearly bursting their ribs.
"here's a nice show for us," said jakin, throwing himself full
length on the ground. "a bloomin' fine show for british infantry! oh, the
devils! they've gone an' left us alone here! wot 'll we do?"
lew took possession of a cast-off water bottle, which naturally was
full of canteen rum, and drank till he coughed again.
"drink," said he, shortly. "they'll come back in a minute or
two—you see."
jakin drank, but there was no sign of the regiment's return. they could
hear a dull clamor from the head of the valley of retreat, and saw the
ghazis slink back, quickening their pace as the gurkhas fired at them.
"we're all that's left of the band, an' we'll be cut up as sure as
death," said jakin.
"i'll die game, then," said lew, thickly, fumbling with his tiny
drummer's sword. the drink was working on his brain as it was on
jakin's.
"'old on! i know something better than fightin'," said jakin, stung by
the splendor of a sudden thought due chiefly to rum. "tip our bloomin'
cowards yonder the word to come back. the paythan beggars are well away.
come on, lew! we won't get hurt. take the fife an' give me the drum. the
old step for all your bloomin' guts are worth! there's a few of our men
coming back now. stand up, ye drunken little defaulter. by your
right—quick march!"
he slipped the drum-sling over his shoulder, thrust the fife into lew's
hand, and the two boys marched out of the cover of the rock into the open,
making a hideous hash of the first bars of the "british grenadiers."
as lew had said, a few of the fore and aft were coming back sullenly
and shamefacedly under the stimulus of blows and abuse; their red coats
shone at the head of the valley, and behind them were wavering bayonets.
but between this shattered line and the enemy, who with afghan suspicion
feared that the hasty retreat meant an ambush, and had not moved
therefore, lay half a mile of a level ground dotted only by the
wounded.
the tune settled into full swing and the boys kept shoulder to
shoulder, jakin banging the drum as one possessed. the one fife made a
thin and pitiful squeaking, but the tune carried far, even to the
gurkhas.
"come on, you dogs!" muttered jakin, to himself, "are we to play
forhever?" lew was staring straight in front of him and marching more
stiffly than ever he had done on parade.
and in bitter mockery of the distant mob, the old tune of the old line
shrilled and rattled:
some talk of alexander,
and some of hercules;
of hector and lysander,
and such great names as these!
there was a far-off clapping of hands from the gurkhas, and a roar from
the highlanders in the distance, but never a shot was fired by british or
afghan. the two little red dots moved forward in the open parallel to the
enemy's front.
but of all the world's great heroes
there's none that can compare,
with a tow-row-row-row-row-row
to the british grenadier!
the men of the fore and aft were gathering thick at the entrance into
the plain. the brigadier on the heights far above was speechless with
rage. still no movement from the enemy. the day stayed to watch the
children.
jakin halted and beat the long roll of the assembly, while the fife
squealed despairingly.
"right about face! hold up, lew, you're drunk," said jakin. they
wheeled and marched back:
those heroes of antiquity
ne'er saw a cannon-ball,
nor knew the force o' powder,
"here they come!" said jakin. "go on, lew:"
to scare their foes withal!
the fore and aft were pouring out of the valley. what officers had said
to men in that time of shame and humiliation will never be known; for
neither officers nor men speak of it now.
"they are coming anew!" shouted a priest among the afghans. "do not
kill the boys! take them alive, and they shall be of our faith."
but the first volley had been fired, and lew dropped on his face. jakin
stood for a minute, spun round and collapsed, as the fore and aft came
forward, the maledictions of their officers in their ears, and in their
hearts the shame of open shame.
half the men had seen the drummers die, and they made no sign. they did
not even shout. they doubled out straight across the plain in open order,
and they did not fire.
"this," said the colonel of gurkhas, softly, "is the real attack, as it
ought to have been delivered. come on, my children."
"ulu-lu-lu-lu!" squealed the gurkhas, and came down with a joyful
clicking of kukris—those vicious gurkha knives.
on the right there was no rush. the highlanders, cannily commending
their souls to god (for it matters as much to a dead man whether he has
been shot in a border scuffle or at waterloo) opened out and fired
according to their custom, that is to say without heat and without
intervals, while the screw-guns, having disposed of the impertinent mud
fort aforementioned, dropped shell after shell into the clusters round the
flickering green standards on the heights.
"charrging is an unfortunate necessity," murmured the color-sergeant of
the right company of the highlanders.
"it makes the men sweer so, but i am thinkin' that it will come to a
charrge if these black devils stand much longer. stewarrt, man, you're
firing into the eye of the sun, and he'll not take any harm for government
ammuneetion. a foot lower and a great deal slower! what are the english
doing? they're very quiet there in the centre. running again?"
the english were not running. they were hacking and hewing and
stabbing, for though one white man is seldom physically a match for an
afghan in a sheepskin or wadded coat, yet, through the pressure of many
white men behind, and a certain thirst for revenge in his heart, he
becomes capable of doing much with both ends of his rifle. the fore and
aft held their fire till one bullet could drive through five or six men,
and the front of the afghan force gave on the volley. they then selected
their men, and slew them with deep gasps and short hacking coughs, and
groanings of leather belts against strained bodies, and realized for the
first time that an afghan attacked is far less formidable than an afghan
attacking; which fact old soldiers might have told them.
but they had no old soldiers in their ranks.
the gurkhas' stall at the bazar was the noisiest, for the men were
engaged—to a nasty noise as of beef being cut on the
block—with the kukri, which they preferred to the bayonet;
well knowing how the afghan hates the half-moon blade.
as the afghans wavered, the green standards on the mountain moved down
to assist them in a last rally. which was unwise. the lancers chafing in
the right gorge had thrice despatched their only subaltern as galloper to
report on the progress of affairs. on the third occasion he returned, with
a bullet-graze on his knee, swearing strange oaths in hindoostani, and
saying that all things were ready. so that squadron swung round the right
of the highlanders with a wicked whistling of wind in the pennons of its
lances, and fell upon the remnant just when, according to all the rules of
war, it should have waited for the foe to show more signs of wavering.
but it was a dainty charge, deftly delivered, and it ended by the
cavalry finding itself at the head of the pass by which the afghans
intended to retreat; and down the track that the lances had made streamed
two companies of the highlanders, which was never intended by the
brigadier. the new development was successful. it detached the enemy from
his base as a sponge is torn from a rock, and left him ringed about with
fire in that pitiless plain. and as a sponge is chased round the bath-tub
by the hand of the bather, so were the afghans chased till they broke into
little detachments much more difficult to dispose of than large
masses.
"see!" quoth the brigadier. "everything has come as i arranged. we've
cut their base, and now we'll bucket 'em to pieces."
a direct hammering was all that the brigadier had dared to hope for,
considering the size of the force at his disposal; but men who stand or
fall by the errors of their opponents may be forgiven for turning chance
into design. the bucketing went forward merrily. the afghan forces were
upon the run—the run of wearied wolves who snarl and bite over their
shoulders. the red lances dipped by twos and threes, and, with a shriek,
up rose the lance-butt, like a spar on a stormy sea, as the trooper
cantering forward cleared his point. the lancers kept between their prey
and the steep hills, for all who could were trying to escape from the
valley of death. the highlanders gave the fugitives two hundred yards'
law, and then brought them down, gasping and choking ere they could reach
the protection of the bowlders above. the gurkhas followed suit; but the
fore and aft were killing on their own account, for they had penned a mass
of men between their bayonets and a wall of rock, and the flash of the
rifles was lighting the wadded coats.
"we cannot hold them, captain sahib!" panted a ressaldar of lancers.
"let us try the carbine. the lance is good, but it wastes time."
they tried the carbine, and still the enemy melted away—fled up
the hills by hundreds when there were only twenty bullets to stop them. on
the heights the screw-guns ceased firing—they had run out of
ammunition—and the brigadier groaned, for the musketry fire could
not sufficiently smash the retreat. long before the last volleys were
fired, the litters were out in force looking for the wounded. the battle
was over, and, but for want of fresh troops, the afghans would have been
wiped off the earth. as it was they counted their dead by hundreds, and
nowhere were the dead thicker than in the track of the fore and aft.
but the regiment did not cheer with the highlanders, nor did they dance
uncouth dances with the gurkhas among the dead. they looked under their
brows at the colonel as they leaned upon their rifles and panted.
"get back to camp, you. haven't you disgraced yourself enough for one
day! go and look to the wounded. it's all you're fit for," said the
colonel. yet for the past hour the fore and aft had been doing all that
mortal commander could expect. they had lost heavily because they did not
know how to set about their business with proper skill, but they had borne
themselves gallantly, and this was their reward.
a young and sprightly color-sergeant, who had begun to imagine himself
a hero, offered his water-bottle to a highlander, whose tongue was black
with thirst. "i drink with no cowards," answered the youngster, huskily,
and, turning to a gurkha, said, "hya, johnny! drink water got it?" the
gurkha grinned and passed his bottle. the fore and aft said no word.
they went back to camp when the field of strife had been a little
mopped up and made presentable, and the brigadier, who saw himself a
knight in three months, was the only soul who was complimentary to them.
the colonel was heart-broken and the officers were savage and sullen.
"well," said the brigadier, "they are young troops of course, and it
was not unnatural that they should retire in disorder for a bit."
"oh, my only aunt maria!" murmured a junior staff officer. "retire in
disorder! it was a bally run!"
"but they came again as we all know," cooed the brigadier, the
colonel's ashy-white face before him, "and they behaved as well as could
possibly be expected. behaved beautifully, indeed. i was watching them.
it's not a matter to take to heart, colonel. as some german general said
of his men, 'they wanted to be shooted over a little, that was all.' to
himself he said: 'now they're blooded i can give 'em responsible work.
it's as well that they got what they did. 'teach 'em more than half a
dozen rifle flirtations, that will—later—run alone and bite.
poor old colonel, though.'"
all that afternoon the heliograph winked and flickered on the hills,
striving to tell the good news to a mountain forty miles away. and in the
evening there arrived, dusty, sweating, and sore, a misguided
correspondent who had gone out to assist at a trumpery village-burning and
who had read off the message from afar, cursing his luck the while.
"let's have the details somehow—as full as ever you can, please.
it's the first time i've ever been left this campaign," said the
correspondent to the brigadier; and the brigadier, nothing loath, told him
how an army of communication had been crumpled up, destroyed, and all but
annihilated by the craft, strategy, wisdom, and foresight of the
brigadier,
but some say, and among these be the gurkhas who watched on the
hillside, that that battle was won by jakin and lew, whose little bodies
were borne up just in time to fit two gaps at the head of the big
ditch-grave for the dead under the heights of jagai.
when the devil rides on your chest remember the
chamar.—native proverb.
once upon a time, some people in india made a new heaven and a new
earth out of broken tea-cups, a missing brooch or two, and a hair-brush.
these were hidden under brushes, or stuffed into holes in the hillside,
and an entire civil service of subordinate gods used to find or mend them
again; and every one said: "there are more things in heaven and earth than
are dreamed of in our philosophy." several other things happened also, but
the religion never seemed to get much beyond its first manifestations;
though it added an air-line postal service, and orchestral effects in
order to keep abreast of the times, and choke off competition.
this religion was too elastic for ordinary use. it stretched itself and
embraced pieces of everything that the medicine-men of all ages have
manufactured. it approved of and stole from freemasonry; looted the
latter-day rosicrucians of half their pet words; took any fragments of
egyptian philosophy that it found in the encyclopaedia britannica;
annexed as many of the vedas as had been translated into french or
english, and talked of all the rest; built in the german versions of what
is left of the zend avesta; encouraged white, grey and black magic,
including spiritualism, palmistry, fortune-telling by cards, hot
chestnuts, double-kerneled nuts and tallow droppings; would have adopted
voodoo and oboe had it known anything about them, and showed itself, in
every way, one of the most accommodating arrangements that had ever been
invented since the birth of the sea.
when it was in thorough working order, with all the machinery, down to
the subscriptions, complete, dana da came from nowhere, with nothing in
his hands, and wrote a chapter in its history which has hitherto been
unpublished. he said that his first name was dana, and his second was da.
now, setting aside dana of the new york sun, dana is a bhil name,
and da fits no native of india unless you except the bengali dè as
the original spelling. da is lap or finnish; and dana da was neither finn,
chin, bhil, bengali, lap, nair, gond, romaney, magh, bokhariot, kurd,
armenian, levantine, jew, persian, punjabi, madrasi, parsee, nor anything
else known to ethnologists. he was simply dana da, and declined to give
further information. for the sake of brevity and as roughly indicating his
origin, he was called "the native." he might have been the original old
man of the mountains, who is said to be the only authorized head of the
tea-cup creed. some people said that he was; but dana da used to smile and
deny any connection with the cult; explaining that he was an "independent
experimenter."
as i have said, he came from nowhere, with his hands behind his back,
and studied the creed for three weeks; sitting at the feet of those best
competent to explain its mysteries. then he laughed aloud and went away,
but the laugh might have been either of devotion or derision.
when he returned he was without money, but his pride was unabated. he
declared that he knew more about the things in heaven and earth than those
who taught him, and for this contumacy was abandoned altogether.
his next appearance in public life was at a big cantonment in upper
india, and he was then telling fortunes with the help of three leaden
dice, a very dirty old cloth, and a little tin box of opium pills. he told
better fortunes when he was allowed half a bottle of whiskey; but the
things which he invented on the opium were quite worth the money. he was
in reduced circumstances. among other people's he told the fortune of an
englishman who had once been interested in the simla creed, but who, later
on, had married and forgotten all his old knowledge in the study of babies
and things. the englishman allowed dana da to tell a fortune for charity's
sake, and gave him five rupees, a dinner, and some old clothes. when he
had eaten, dana da professed gratitude, and asked if there were anything
he could do for his host—in the esoteric line.
"is there any one that you love?" said dana da. the englishman loved
his wife, but had no desire to drag her name into the conversation. he
therefore shook his head.
"is there any one that you hate?" said dana da. the englishman said
that there were several men whom he hated deeply.
"very good," said dana da, upon whom the whiskey and the opium were
beginning to tell. "only give me their names, and i will despatch a
sending to them and kill them."
now a sending is a horrible arrangement, first invented, they say, in
iceland. it is a thing sent by a wizard, and may take any form, but, most
generally, wanders about the land in the shape of a little purple cloud
till it finds the sendee, and him it kills by changing into the form of a
horse, or a cat, or a man without a face. it is not strictly a native
patent, though chamars of the skin and hide castes can, if
irritated, despatch a sending which sits on the breast of their enemy by
night and nearly kills him, very few natives care to irritate
chamars for this reason.
"let me despatch a sending," said dana da; "i am nearly dead now with
want, and drink, and opium; but i should like to kill a man before i die.
i can send a sending anywhere you choose, and in any form except in the
shape of a man."
the englishman had no friends that he wished to kill, but partly to
soothe dana da, whose eyes were rolling, and partly to see what would be
done, he asked whether a modified sending could not be arranged
for—such a sending as should make a man's life a burden to him, and
yet do him no harm. if this were possible, he notified his willingness to
give dana da ten rupees for the job.
"i am not what i was once," said dana da, "and i must take the money
because i am poor. to what englishman shall i send it?"
"send a sending to lone sahib," said the englishman, naming a man who
had been most bitter in rebuking him for his apostasy from the tea-cup
creed. dana da laughed and nodded.
"i could have chosen no better man myself," said he. "i will see that
he finds the sending about his path and about his bed."
he lay down on the hearth-rug, turned up the whites of his eyes,
shivered all over and began to snort. this was magic, or opium, or the
sending, or all three. when he opened his eyes he vowed that the sending
had started upon the war-path, and was at that moment flying up to the
town where lone sahib lives,
"give me my ten rupees," said dana da, wearily, "and write a letter to
lone sahib, telling him, and all who believe with him, that you and a
friend are using a power greater than theirs. they will see that you are
speaking the truth."
he departed unsteadily, with the promise of some more rupees if
anything came of the sending,
the englishman sent a letter to lone sahib, couched in what he
remembered of the terminology of the creed. he wrote: "i also, in the days
of what you held to be my backsliding, have obtained enlightenment, and
with enlightenment has come power." then he grew so deeply mysterious that
the recipient of the letter could make neither head nor tail of it, and
was proportionately impressed; for he fancied that his friend had become a
"fifth-rounder." when a man is a "fifth-rounder" he can do more than slade
and houdin combined,
lone sahib read the letter in five different fashions, and was
beginning a sixth interpretation when his bearer dashed in with the news
that there was a cat on the bed. now if there was one thing that lone
sahib hated more than another, it was a cat. he scolded the bearer for not
turning it out of the house. the bearer said that he was afraid. all the
doors of the bedroom had been shut throughout the morning, and no
real cat could possibly have entered the room. he would prefer not
to meddle with the creature.
lone sahib entered the room gingerly, and there, on the pillow of his
bed, sprawled and whimpered a wee white kitten; not a jumpsome, frisky
little beast, but a slug-like crawler with its eyes barely opened and its
paws lacking strength or direction—a kitten that ought to have been
in a basket with its mamma. lone sahib caught it by the scruff of its
neck, handed it over to the sweeper to be drowned, and fined the bearer
four annas.
that evening, as he was reading in his room, he fancied that he saw
something moving about on the hearth-rug, outside the circle of light from
his reading-lamp. when the thing began to myowl, he realized that it was a
kitten—a wee white kitten, nearly blind and very miserable. he was
seriously angry, and spoke bitterly to his bearer, who said that there was
no kitten in the room when he brought in the lamp, and real kittens
of tender age generally had mother-cats in attendance.
"if the presence will go out into the veranda and listen," said the
bearer, "he will hear no cats. how, therefore, can the kitten on the bed
and the kitten on the hearth-rug be real kittens?"
lone sahib went out to listen, and the bearer followed him, but there
was no sound of any one mewing for her children. he returned to his room,
having hurled the kitten down the hillside, and wrote out the incidents of
the day for the benefit of his co-religionists. those people were so
absolutely free from superstition that they ascribed anything a little out
of the common to agencies. as it was their business to know all about the
agencies, they were on terms of almost indecent familiarity with
manifestations of every kind. their letters dropped from the
ceiling—unstamped—and spirits used to squatter up and down
their staircases all night; but they had never come into contact with
kittens. lone sahib wrote out the facts, noting the hour and the minute,
as every psychical observer is bound to do, and appending the englishman's
letter because it was the most mysterious document and might have had a
bearing upon anything in this world or the next. an outsider would have
translated all the tangle thus: "look out! you laughed at me once, and now
i am going to make you sit up,"
lone sahib's co-religionists found that meaning in it; but their
translation was refined and full of four-syllable words. they held a
sederunt, and were filled with tremulous joy, for, in spite of their
familiarity with all the other worlds and cycles, they had a very human
awe of things sent from ghost-land. they met in lone sahib's room in
shrouded and sepulchral gloom, and their conclave was broken up by
clinking among the photo-frames on the mantelpiece. a wee white kitten,
nearly blind, was looping and writhing itself between the clock and the
candlesticks. that stopped all investigations or doubtings. here was the
manifestation in the flesh. it was, so far as could be seen, devoid of
purpose, but it was a manifestation of undoubted authenticity.
they drafted a round robin to the englishman, the backslider of old
days, adjuring him in the interests of the creed to explain whether there
was any connection between the embodiment of some egyptian god or other (i
have forgotten the name) and his communication. they called the kitten ra,
or toth, or tum, or some thing; and when lone sahib confessed that the
first one had, at his most misguided instance, been drowned by the
sweeper, they said consolingly that in his next life he would be a
"bounder," and not even a "rounder" of the lowest grade. these words may
not be quite correct, but they accurately express the sense of the
house.
when the englishman received the round robin—it came by
post—he was startled and bewildered. he sent into the bazar for dana
da, who read the letter and laughed, "that is my sending," said he. "i
told you i would work well. now give me another ten rupees."
"but what in the world is this gibberish about egyptian gods?" asked
the englishman,
"cats," said dana da, with a hiccough, for he had discovered the
englishman's whiskey bottle. "cats, and cats, and cats! never was such a
sending. a hundred of cats. now give me ten more rupees and write as i
dictate."
dana da's letter was a curiosity. it bore the englishman's signature,
and hinted at cats—at a sending of cats. the mere words on paper
were creepy and uncanny to behold.
"what have you done, though?" said the englishman; "i am as much in the
dark as ever. do you mean to say that you can actually send this absurd
sending you talk about?"
"judge for yourself," said dana da. "what does that letter mean? in a
little time they will all be at my feet and yours, and i—o
glory!—will be drugged or drunk all day long."
dana da knew his people.
when a man who hates cats wakes up in the morning and finds a little
squirming kitten on his breast, or puts his hands into his ulster-pocket
and finds a little half-dead kitten where his gloves should be, or opens
his trunk and finds a vile kitten among his dress-shirts, or goes for a
long ride with his mackintosh strapped on his saddle-bow and shakes a
little squawling kitten from its folds when he opens it, or goes out to
dinner and finds a little blind kitten under his chair, or stays at home
and finds a writhing kitten under the quilt, or wriggling among his boots,
or hanging, head downward, in his tobacco-jar, or being mangled by his
terrier in the veranda,—when such a man finds one kitten, neither
more nor less, once a day in a place where no kitten rightly could or
should be, he is naturally upset. when he dare not murder his daily trove
because he believes it to be a manifestation, an emissary, an embodiment,
and half a dozen other things all out of the regular course of nature, he
is more than upset. he is actually distressed. some of lone sahib's
co-religionists thought that he was a highly favored individual; but many
said that if he had treated the first kitten with proper respect—as
suited a toth-ra-tum-sennacherib embodiment—all this trouble would
have been averted. they compared him to the ancient mariner, but none the
less they were proud of him and proud of the englishman who had sent the
manifestation. they did not call it a sending because icelandic magic was
not in their programme.
after sixteen kittens, that is to say after one fortnight, for there
were three kittens on the first day to impress the fact of the sending,
the whole camp was uplifted by a letter—it came flying through a
window—from the old man of the mountains—the head of all the
creed—explaining the manifestation in the most beautiful language
and soaking up all the credit of it for himself. the englishman, said the
letter, was not there at all. he was a backslider without power or
asceticism, who couldn't even raise a table by force of volition, much
less project an army of kittens through space. the entire arrangement,
said the letter, was strictly orthodox, worked and sanctioned by the
highest authorities within the pale of the creed. there was great joy at
this, for some of the weaker brethren seeing that an outsider who had been
working on independent lines could create kittens, whereas their own
rulers had never gone beyond crockery—and broken at best—were
showing a desire to break line on their own trail. in fact, there was the
promise of a schism. a second round robin was drafted to the englishman,
beginning: "o scoffer," and ending with a selection of curses from the
rites of mizraim and memphis and the commination of jugana, who was a
"fifth-rounder," upon whose name an upstart "third-rounder" once traded. a
papal excommunication is a billet-doux compared to the commination
of jugana. the englishman had been proved, under the hand and seal of the
old man of the mountains, to have appropriated virtue and pretended to
have power which, in reality, belonged only to the supreme head. naturally
the round robin did not spare him.
he handed the letter to dana da to translate into decent english. the
effect on dana da was curious. at first he was furiously angry, and then
he laughed for five minutes.
"i had thought," he said, "that they would have come to me. in another
week i would have shown that i sent the sending, and they would have
discrowned the old man of the mountains who has sent this sending of mine.
do you do nothing. the time has come for me to act. write as i dictate,
and i will put them to shame. but give me ten more rupees."
at dana da's dictation the englishman wrote nothing less than a formal
challenge to the old man of the mountains. it wound up: "and if this
manifestation be from your hand, then let it go forward; but if it be from
my hand, i will that the sending shall cease in two days' time. on that
day there shall be twelve kittens and thenceforward none at all. the
people shall judge between us." this was signed by dana da, who added
pentacles and pentagrams, and a crux ansaia, and half a dozen
swastikas, and a triple tau to his name, just to show that he was
all he laid claim to be.
the challenge was read out to the gentlemen and ladies, and they
remembered then that dana da had laughed at them some years ago. it was
officially announced that the old man of the mountains would treat the
matter with contempt; dana da being an independent investigator without a
single "round" at the back of him. but this did not soothe his people.
they wanted to see a fight. they were very human for all their
spirituality. lone sahib, who was really being worn out with kittens,
submitted meekly to his fate. he felt that he was being "kittened to prove
the power of dana da," as the poet says.
when the stated day dawned, the shower of kittens began. some were
white and some were tabby, and all were about the same loathsome age.
three were on his hearth-rug, three in his bath-room, and the other six
turned up at intervals among the visitors who came to see the prophecy
break down. never was a more satisfactory sending. on the next day there
were no kittens, and the next day and all the other days were kittenless
and quiet. the people murmured and looked to the old man of the mountains
for an explanation. a letter, written on a palm-leaf, dropped from the
ceiling, but every one except lone sahib felt that letters were not what
the occasion demanded. there should have been cats, there should have been
cats,—full-grown ones. the letter proved conclusively that there had
been a hitch in the psychic current which, colliding with a dual identity,
had interfered with the percipient activity all along the main line. the
kittens were still going on, but owing to some failure in the developing
fluid, they were not materialized. the air was thick with letters for a
few days afterward. unseen hands played glück and beethoven on
finger-bowls and clock-shades; but all men felt that psychic life was a
mockery without materialized kittens. even lone sahib shouted with the
majority on this head. dana da's letters were very insulting, and if he
had then offered to lead a new departure, there is no knowing what might
not have happened.
but dana da was dying of whiskey and opium in the englishman's godown,
and had small heart for honors.
"they have been put to shame," said he. "never was such a sending. it
has killed me."
"nonsense," said the englishman, "you are going to die, dana da, and
that sort of stuff must be left behind. i'll admit that you have made some
queer things come about. tell me honestly, now, how was it done?"
"give me ten more rupees," said dana da, faintly, "and if i die before
i spend them, bury them with me." the silver was counted out while dana da
was fighting with death. his hand closed upon the money and he smiled a
grim smile.
"bend low," he whispered. the englishman bent.
"bunnia—mission—school—expelled—box-w
allah (peddler)—ceylon pearl-merchant—all mine english
education—out-casted, and made up name dana da—england with
american thought-reading man and—and—you gave me ten rupees
several times—i gave the sahib's bearer two-eight a month for
cats—little, little cats. i wrote, and he put them about—very
clever man. very few kittens now in the bazar. ask lone sahib's
sweeper's wife."
so saying, dana da gasped and passed away into a land where, if all be
true, there are no materializations and the making of new creeds is
discouraged.
but consider the gorgeous simplicity of it all!
then she let them down by a cord through the window; for
her house was upon the town-wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.
—joshua ii. .
lalun is a member of the most ancient profession in the world. lilith
was her very-great-grandmamma, and that was before the days of eve as
every one knows. in the west, people say rude things about lalun's
profession, and write lectures about it, and distribute the lectures to
young persons in order that morality may be preserved. in the east where
the profession is hereditary, descending from mother to daughter, nobody
writes lectures or takes any notice; and that is a distinct proof of the
inability of the east to manage its own affairs.
lalun's real husband, for even ladies of lalun's profession in the east
must have husbands, was a big jujube-tree. her mamma, who had married a
fig-tree, spent ten thousand rupees on lalun's wedding, which was blessed
by forty-seven clergymen of mamma's church, and distributed five thousand
rupees in charity to the poor. and that was the custom of the land. the
advantages of having a jujube-tree for a husband are obvious. you cannot
hurt his feelings, and he looks imposing.
lalun's husband stood on the plain outside the city walls, and lalun's
house was upon the east wall facing the river. if you fell from the broad
window-seat you dropped thirty feet sheer into the city ditch. but if you
stayed where you should and looked forth, you saw all the cattle of the
city being driven down to water, the students of the government college
playing cricket, the high grass and trees that fringed the river-bank, the
great sand bars that ribbed the river, the red tombs of dead emperors
beyond the river, and very far away through the blue heat-haze, a glint of
the snows of the himalayas.
wali dad used to lie in the window-seat for hours at a time watching
this view. he was a young muhammadan who was suffering acutely from
education of the english variety and knew it. his father had sent him to a
mission-school to get wisdom, and wali dad had absorbed more than ever his
father or the missionaries intended he should. when his father died, wali
dad was independent and spent two years experimenting with the creeds of
the earth and reading books that are of no use to anybody.
after he had made an unsuccessful attempt to enter the roman catholic
church and the presbyterian fold at the same time (the missionaries found
him out and called him names, but they did not understand his trouble), he
discovered lalun on the city wall and became the most constant of her few
admirers. he possessed a head that english artists at home would rave over
and paint amid impossible surroundings—a face that female novelists
would use with delight through nine hundred pages. in reality he was only
a clean-bred young muhammadan, with penciled eyebrows, small-cut nostrils,
little feet and hands, and a very tired look in his eyes. by virtue of his
twenty-two years he had grown a neat black beard which he stroked with
pride and kept delicately scented. his life seemed to be divided between
borrowing books from me and making love to lalun in the window-seat. he
composed songs about her, and some of the songs are sung to this day in
the city from the street of the mutton-butchers to the copper-smiths'
ward.
one song, the prettiest of all, says that the beauty of lalun was so
great that it troubled the hearts of the british government and caused
them to lose their peace of mind. that is the way the song is sung in the
streets; but, if you examine it carefully and know the key to the
explanation, you will find that there are three puns in it—on
"beauty," "heart," and "peace of mind,"—so that it runs: "by the
subtlety of lalun the administration of the government was troubled and it
lost such and such a man." when wali dad sings that song his eyes glow
like hot coals, and lalun leans back among the cushions and throws bunches
of jasmine-buds at wali dad.
but first it is necessary to explain something about the supreme
government which is above all and below all and behind all. gentlemen come
from england, spend a few weeks in india, walk round this great sphinx of
the plains, and write books upon its ways and its works, denouncing or
praising it as their own ignorance prompts. consequently all the world
knows how the supreme government conducts itself, but no one, not even the
supreme government, knows everything about the administration of the
empire. year by year england sends out fresh drafts for the first
fighting-line, which is officially called the indian civil service. these
die, or kill themselves by overwork, or are worried to death or broken in
health and hope in order that the land may be protected from death and
sickness, famine and war, and may eventually become capable of standing
alone. it will never stand alone, but the idea is a pretty one, and men
are willing to die for it, and yearly the work of pushing and coaxing and
scolding and petting the country into good living goes forward. if an
advance be made all credit is given to the native, while the englishmen
stand back and wipe their foreheads. if a failure occurs the englishmen
step forward and take the blame. overmuch tenderness of this kind has bred
a strong belief among many natives that the native is capable of
administering the country, and many devout englishmen believe this also,
because the theory is stated in beautiful english with all the latest
political color.
there be other men who, though uneducated, see visions and dream
dreams, and they, too, hope to administer the country in their own
way—that is to say, with a garnish of red sauce. such men must exist
among two hundred million people, and, if they are not attended to, may
cause trouble and even break the great idol called pax britannic,
which, as the newspapers say, lives between peshawur and cape comorin.
were the day of doom to dawn to-morrow, you would find the supreme
government "taking measures to allay popular excitement" and putting
guards upon the graveyards that the dead might troop forth orderly. the
youngest civilian would arrest gabriel on his own responsibility if the
archangel could not produce a deputy commissioner's permission to "make
music or other noises" as the license says.
whence it is easy to see that mere men of the flesh who would create a
tumult must fare badly at the hands of the supreme government. and they
do. there is no outward sign of excitement; there is no confusion; there
is no knowledge. when due and sufficient reasons have been given, weighed
and approved, the machinery moves forward, and the dreamer of dreams and
the seer of visions is gone from his friends and following. he enjoys the
hospitality of government; there is no restriction upon his movements
within certain limits; but he must not confer any more with his brother
dreamers. once in every six months the supreme government assures itself
that he is well and takes formal acknowledgment of his existence. no one
protests against his detention, because the few people who know about it
are in deadly fear of seeming to know him; and never a single newspaper
"takes up his case" or organizes demonstrations on his behalf, because the
newspapers of india have got behind that lying proverb which says the pen
is mightier than the sword, and can walk delicately.
so now you know as much as you ought about wali dad, the educational
mixture, and the supreme government.
lalun has not yet been described. she would need, so wali dad says, a
thousand pens of gold and ink scented with musk. she has been variously
compared to the moon, the dil sagar lake, a spotted quail, a gazelle, the
sun on the desert of kutch, the dawn, the stars, and the young bamboo.
these comparisons imply that she is beautiful exceedingly according to the
native standards, which are practically the same as those of the west. her
eyes are black and her hair is black, and her eyebrows are black as
leeches; her mouth is tiny and says witty things; her hands are tiny and
have saved much money; her feet are tiny and have trodden on the naked
hearts of many men. but, as wali dad sings: "lalun is lalun, and
when you have said that, you have only come to the beginnings of
knowledge."
the little house on the city wall was just big enough to hold lalun,
and her maid, and a pussy-cat with a silver collar. a big pink and blue
cut-glass chandelier hung from the ceiling of the reception room. a petty
nawab had given lalun the horror, and she kept it for politeness' sake.
the floor of the room was of polished chunam, white as curds. a latticed
window of carved wood was set in one wall; there was a profusion of
squabby pluffy cushions and fat carpets everywhere, and lalun's silver
huqa, studded with turquoises, had a special little carpet all to
its shining self. wali dad was nearly as permanent a fixture as the
chandelier. as i have said, he lay in the window-seat and meditated on
life and death and lalun—specially lalun. the feet of the young men
of the city tended to her doorways and then—retired, for lalun was a
particular maiden, slow of speech, reserved of mind, and not in the least
inclined to orgies which were nearly certain to end in strife. "if i am of
no value, i am unworthy of this honor," said lalun. "if i am of value,
they are unworthy of me," and that was a crooked sentence.
in the long hot nights of latter april and may all the city seemed to
assemble in lalun's little white room to smoke and to talk. shiahs of the
grimmest and most uncompromising persuasion; sufis who had lost all belief
in the prophet and retained but little in god; wandering hindu priests
passing southward on their way to the central india fairs and other
affairs; pundits in black gowns, with spectacles on their noses and
undigested wisdom in their insides; bearded headmen of the wards; sikhs
with all the details of the latest ecclesiastical scandal in the golden
temple; red-eyed priests from beyond the border, looking like trapped
wolves and talking like ravens; m.a.'s of the university, very superior
and very voluble—all these people and more also you might find in
the white room. wali dad lay in the window-seat and listened to the
talk.
"it is lalun's salon," said wali dad to me, "and it is electic—is
not that the word? outside of a freemason's lodge i have never seen such
gatherings. there i dined once with a jew—a yahoudi!" he spat
into the city ditch with apologies for allowing national feelings to
overcome him. "though i have lost every belief in the world," said he,
"and try to be proud of my losing, i cannot help hating a jew. lalun
admits no jews here."
"but what in the world do all these men do?" i asked.
"the curse of our country," said wali dad. "they talk. it is like the
athenians—always hearing and telling some new thing. ask the pearl
and she will show you how much she knows of the news of the city and the
province. lalun knows everything."
"lalun," i said at random—she was talking to a gentleman of the
kurd persuasion who had come in from god-knows-where—"when does the
th regiment go to agra?"
"it does not go at all," said lalun, without turning her head. "they
have ordered the th to go in its stead. that regiment goes to lucknow
in three months, unless they give a fresh order."
"that is so," said wali dad without a shade of doubt. "can you, with
your telegrams and your newspapers, do better? always hearing and telling
some new thing," he went on. "my friend, has your god ever smitten a
european nation for gossiping in the bazars? india has gossiped for
centuries—always standing in the bazars until the soldiers go by.
therefore—you are here to-day instead of starving in your own
country, and i am not a muhammadan—i am a product—a demnition
product. that also i owe to you and yours: that i cannot make an end to my
sentence without quoting from your authors." he pulled at the huqa
and mourned, half feelingly, half in earnest, for the shattered hopes of
his youth. wali dad was always mourning over something or other—the
country of which he despaired, or the creed in which he had lost faith, or
the life of the english which he could by no means understand.
lalun never mourned. she played little songs on the sitar, and
to hear her sing, "o peacock, cry again," was always a fresh
pleasure. she knew all the songs that have ever been sung, from the
war-songs of the south that make the old men angry with the young men and
the young men angry with the state, to the love-songs of the north where
the swords whinny-whicker like angry kites in the pauses between the
kisses, and the passes fill with armed men, and the lover is torn from his
beloved and cries, ai, ai, ai! evermore. she knew how to make up
tobacco for the huqa so that it smelled like the gates of paradise
and wafted you gently through them. she could embroider strange things in
gold and silver, and dance softly with the moonlight when it came in at
the window. also she knew the hearts of men, and the heart of the city,
and whose wives were faithful and whose untrue, and more of the secrets of
the government offices than are good to be set down in this place.
nasiban, her maid, said that her jewelry was worth ten thousand pounds,
and that, some night, a thief would enter and murder her for its
possession; but lalun said that all the city would tear that thief limb
from limb, and that he, whoever he was, knew it.
so she took her sitar and sat in the windowseat and sang a song
of old days that had been sung by a girl of her profession in an armed
camp on the eve of a great battle—the day before the fords of the
jumna ran red and sivaji fled fifty miles to delhi with a toorkh stallion
at his horse's tail and another lalun on his saddle-bow. it was what men
call a mahratta laonee, and it said:
their warrior forces chimnajee
before the peishwa led,
the children of the sun and fire
behind him turned and fled.
and the chorus said:
with them there fought who rides so free
with sword and turban red,
the warrior-youth who earns his fee
at peril of his head,
"at peril of his head," said wali dad in english to me, "thanks to your
government, all our heads are protected, and with the educational
facilities at my command"—his eyes twinkled wickedly—"i might
be a distinguished member of the local administration. perhaps, in time, i
might even be a member of a legislative council."
"don't speak english," said lalun, bending over her sitar
afresh. the chorus went out from the city wall to the blackened wall of
fort amara which dominates the city. no man knows the precise extent of
fort amara. three kings built it hundreds of years ago, and they say that
there are miles of underground rooms beneath its walls. it is peopled with
many ghosts, a detachment of garrison artillery and a company of infantry.
in its prime it held ten thousand men and filled its ditches with
corpses.
"at peril of his head," sang lalun, again and again.
a head moved on one of the ramparts—the grey head of an old
man—and a voice, rough as shark-skin on a sword-hilt, sent back the
last line of the chorus and broke into a song that i could not understand,
though lalun and wali dad listened intently.
"what is it?" i asked. "who is it?"
"a consistent man," said wali dad. "he fought you in ', when he was a
warrior-youth; refought you in ', and he tried to fight you in ', but
you had learned the trick of blowing men from guns too well. now he is
old; but he would still fight if he could."
"is he a wahabi, then? why should he answer to a mahratta laonee
if he be wahabi—or sikh?" said i.
"i do not know," said wali dad. "he has lost perhaps, his religion.
perhaps he wishes to be a king. perhaps he is a king. i do not know his
name."
"that is a lie, wali dad. if you know his career you must know his
name."
"that is quite true. i belong to a nation of liars. i would rather not
tell you his name. think for yourself."
lalun finished her song, pointed to the fort, and said simply: "khem
singh."
"hm," said wali dad. "if the pearl chooses to tell you the pearl is a
fool."
i translated to lalun, who laughed. "i choose to tell what i choose to
tell. they kept khem singh in burma," said she. "they kept him there for
many years until his mind was changed in him. so great was the kindness of
the government. finding this, they sent him back to his own country that
he might look upon it before he died. he is an old man, but when he looks
upon this his country his memory will come. moreover, there be many who
remember him."
"he is an interesting survival," said wali dad, pulling at the
huqa. "he returns to a country now full of educational and
political reform, but, as the pearl says, there are many who remember him.
he was once a great man. there will never he any more great men in india.
they will all, when they are boys, go whoring after strange gods, and they
will become citizens—'fellow-citizens'—'illustrious
fellow-citizens.' what is it that the native papers call them?"
wali dad seemed to be in a very bad temper. lalun looked out of the
window and smiled into the dust-haze. i went away thinking about khem
singh who had once made history with a thousand followers, and would have
been a princeling but for the power of the supreme government
aforesaid.
the senior captain commanding fort amara was away on leave, but the
subaltern, his deputy, drifted down to the club, where i found him and
inquired of him whether it was really true that a political prisoner had
been added to the attractions of the fort. the subaltern explained at
great length, for this was the first time that he had held command of the
fort, and his glory lay heavy upon him.
"yes," said he, "a man was sent in to me about a week ago from down the
line—a thorough gentleman whoever he is. of course i did all i could
for him. he had his two servants and some silver cooking-pots, and he
looked for all the world like a native officer. i called him subadar
sahib; just as well to be on the safe side, y'know. 'look here, subadar
sahib,' i said, 'you're handed over to my authority, and i'm supposed to
guard you. now i don't want to make your life hard, but you must make
things easy for me. all the fort is at your disposal, from the flagstaff
to the dry ditch, and i shall be happy to entertain you in any way i can,
but you mustn't take advantage of it. give me your word that you won't try
to escape, subadar sahib, and i'll give you my word that you shall have no
heavy guard put over you.' i thought the best way of getting him was by
going at him straight, y'know, and it was, by jove! the old man gave me
his word, and moved about the fort as contented as a sick crow. he's a
rummy chap—always asking to be told where he is and what the
buildings about him are. i had to sign a slip of blue paper when he turned
up, acknowledging receipt of his body and all that, and i'm responsible,
y'know, that he doesn't get away. queer thing, though, looking after a
johnnie old enough to be your grandfather, isn't it? come to the fort one
of these days and see him?"
for reasons which will appear, i never went to the fort while khem
singh was then within its walls. i knew him only as a grey head seen from
lalun's window—a grey head and a harsh voice. but natives told me
that, day by day, as he looked upon the fair lands round amara, his memory
came back to him and, with it, the old hatred against the government that
had been nearly effaced in far-off burma. so he raged up and down the west
face of the fort from morning till noon and from evening till the night,
devising vain things in his heart, and croaking war-songs when lalun sang
on the city wall. as he grew more acquainted with the subaltern he
unburdened his old heart of some of the passions that had withered it.
"sahib," he used to say, tapping his stick against the parapet, "when i
was a young man i was one of twenty thousand horsemen who came out of the
city and rode round the plain here. sahib, i was the leader of a hundred,
then of a thousand, then of five thousand, and now!"—he pointed to
his two servants. "but from the beginning to to-day i would cut the
throats of all the sahibs in the land if i could. hold me fast, sahib,
lest i get away and return to those who would follow me. i forgot them
when i was in burma, but now that i am in my own country again, i remember
everything."
"do you remember that you have given me your honor not to make your
tendance a hard matter?" said the subaltern.
"yes, to you, only to you, sahib," said khem singh. "to you, because
you are of a pleasant countenance. if my turn comes again, sahib, i will
not hang you nor cut your throat."
"thank you," said the subaltern, gravely, as he looked along the line
of guns that could pound the city to powder in half an hour. "let us go
into our own quarters, khem singh. come and talk with me after
dinner."
khem singh would sit on his own cushion at the subaltern's feet,
drinking heavy, scented anise-seed brandy in great gulps, and telling
strange stories of fort amara, which had been a palace in the old days, of
begums and ranees tortured to death—aye, in the very vaulted chamber
that now served as a mess-room; would tell stories of sobraon that made
the subaltern's cheeks flush and tingle with pride of race, and of the
kuka rising from which so much was expected and the foreknowledge of which
was shared by a hundred thousand souls. but he never told tales of '
because, as he said, he was the subaltern's guest, and ' is a year that
no man, black or white, cares to speak of. once only, when the anise-seed
brandy had slightly affected his head, he said: "sahib, speaking now of a
matter which lay between sobraon and the affair of the kukas, it was ever
a wonder to us that you stayed your hand at all, and that, having stayed
it, you did not make the land one prison. now i hear from without that you
do great honor to all men of our country and by your own hands are
destroying the terror of your name which is your strong rock and defence.
this is a foolish thing. will oil and water mix? now in '"—
"i was not born then, subadar sahib," said the subaltern, and khem
singh reeled to his quarters,
the subaltern would tell me of these conversations at the club, and my
desire to see khem singh increased. but wali dad, sitting in the
window-seat of the house on the city wall, said that it would be a cruel
thing to do, and lalun pretended that i preferred the society of a
grizzled old sikh to hers.
"here is tobacco, here is talk, here are many friends and all the news
of the city, and, above all, here is myself. i will tell you stories and
sing you songs, and wali dad will talk his english nonsense in your ears.
is that worse than watching the caged animal yonder? go to-morrow then, if
you must, but to-day such and such an one will be here, and he will speak
of wonderful things."
it happened that to-morrow never came, and the warm heat of the latter
rains gave place to the chill of early october almost before i was aware
of the flight of the year. the captain commanding the fort returned from
leave and took over charge of khem singh according to the laws of
seniority. the captain was not a nice man. he called all natives
"niggers," which, besides being extreme bad form, shows gross
ignorance.
"what's the use of telling off two tommies to watch that old nigger?"
said he.
"i fancy it soothes his vanity," said the subaltern. "the men are
ordered to keep well out of his way, but he takes them as a tribute to his
importance, poor old wretch."
"i won't have line men taken off regular guards in this way. put on a
couple of native infantry."
"sikhs?" said the subaltern, lifting his eyebrows.
"sikhs, pathans, dogras—they're all alike, these black vermin,"
and the captain talked to khem singh in a manner which hurt that old
gentleman's feelings. fifteen years before, when he had been caught for
the second time, every one looked upon him as a sort of tiger. he liked
being regarded in this light. but he forgot that the world goes forward in
fifteen years, and many subalterns are promoted to captaincies,
"the captain-pig is in charge of the fort?" said khem singh to his
native guard every morning. and the native guard said: "yes, subadar
sahib," in deference to his age and his air of distinction; but they did
not know who he was.
in those days the gathering in lalun's little white room was always
large and talked more than before,
"the greeks," said wali dad who had been borrowing my books, "the
inhabitants of the city of athens, where they were always hearing and
telling some new thing, rigorously secluded their women—who were
fools. hence the glorious institution of the heterodox women—is it
not?—who were amusing and not fools. all the greek
philosophers delighted in their company. tell me, my friend, how it goes
now in greece and the other places upon the continent of europe. are your
women-folk also fools?"
"wali dad," i said, "you never speak to us about your women-folk and we
never speak about ours to you. that is the bar between us."
"yes," said wali dad, "it is curious to think that our common
meeting-place should be here, in the house of a common—how do you
call her?" he pointed with the pipe-mouth to lalun.
"lalun is nothing but lalun," i said, and that was perfectly true. "but
if you took your place in the world, wali dad, and gave up dreaming
dreams"—
"i might wear an english coat and trouser. i might be a leading
muhammadan pleader. i might be received even at the commissioner's
tennis-parties where the english stand on one side and the natives on the
other, in order to promote social intercourse throughout the empire.
heart's heart," said he to lalun quickly, "the sahib says that i ought to
quit you."
"the sahib is always talking stupid talk," returned lalun, with a
laugh. "in this house i am a queen and thou art a king. the
sahib"—she put her arms above her head and thought for a
moment—"the sahib shall be our vizier—thine and mine, wali
dad—because he has said that thou shouldst leave me."
wali dad laughed immoderately, and i laughed too. "be it so," said he.
"my friend, are you willing to take this lucrative government appointment?
lalun, what shall his pay be?"
but lalun began to sing, and for the rest of the time there was no hope
of getting a sensible answer from her or wall dad. when the one stopped,
the other began to quote persian poetry with a triple pun in every other
line. some of it was not strictly proper, but it was all very funny, and
it only came to an end when a fat person in black, with gold
pince-nez, sent up his name to lalun, and wali dad dragged me into
the twinkling night to walk in a big rose-garden and talk heresies about
religion and governments and a man's career in life.
the mohurrum, the great mourning-festival of the muhammadans, was close
at hand, and the things that wali dad said about religious fanaticism
would have secured his expulsion from the loosest-thinking muslim sect.
there were the rose-bushes round us, the stars above us, and from every
quarter of the city came the boom of the big mohurrum drums, you must know
that the city is divided in fairly equal proportions between the hindus
and the musalmans, and where both creeds belong to the fighting races, a
big religious festival gives ample chance for trouble. when they
can—that is to say when the authorities are weak enough to allow
it—the hindus do their best to arrange some minor feast-day of their
own in time to clash with the period of general mourning for the martyrs
hasan and hussain, the heroes of the mohurrum. gilt and painted paper
presentations of their tombs are borne with shouting and wailing, music,
torches, and yells, through the principal thoroughfares of the city, which
fakements are called tazias. their passage is rigorously laid down
beforehand by the police, and detachments of police accompany each
tazias, lest the hindus should throw bricks at it and the peace of
the queen and the heads of her loyal subjects should thereby be broken.
mohurrum time in a "fighting" town means anxiety to all the officials,
because, if a riot breaks out, the officials and not the rioters are held
responsible. the former must foresee everything, and while not making
their precautions ridiculously elaborate, must see that they are at least
adequate.
"listen to the drums!" said wali dad. "that is the heart of the
people—empty and making much noise. how, think you, will the
mohurrum go this year? i think that there will be trouble."
he turned down a side-street and left me alone with the stars and a
sleepy police patrol. then i went to bed and dreamed that wali dad had
sacked the city and i was made vizier, with lalun's silver huqa for
mark of office.
all day the mohurrum drums beat in the city, and all day deputations of
tearful hindu gentlemen besieged the deputy commissioner with assurances
that they would be murdered ere next dawning by the muhammadans. "which,"
said the deputy commissioner, in confidence to the head of police, "is a
pretty fair indication that the hindus are going to make 'emselves
unpleasant. i think we can arrange a little surprise for them. i have
given the heads of both creeds fair warning. if they choose to disregard
it, so much the worse for them."
there was a large gathering in lalun's house that night, but of men
that i had never seen before, if i except the fat gentleman in black with
the gold pince-nez. wali dad lay in the window-seat, more bitterly
scornful of his faith and its manifestations than i had ever known him.
lalun's maid was very busy cutting up and mixing tobacco for the guests.
we could hear the thunder of the drums as the processions accompanying
each tazia marched to the central gathering-place in the plain
outside the city, preparatory to their triumphant reentry and circuit
within the walls. all the streets seemed ablaze with torches, and only
fort amara was black and silent.
when the noise of the drums ceased, no one in the white room spoke for
a time. "the first tazia has moved off," said wali dad, looking to
the plain.
"that is very early," said the man with the pince-nez.
"it is only half-past eight." the company rose and departed.
"some of them were men from ladakh," said lalun, when the last had
gone. "they brought me brick-tea such as the russians sell, and a tea-turn
from peshawur. show me, now, how the english memsahibs make
tea."
the brick-tea was abominable. when it was finished wali dad suggested
going into the streets. "i am nearly sure that there will be trouble
to-night," he said. "all the city thinks so, and vox populi is
vox dei, as the babus say. now i tell you that at the corner of the
padshahi gate you will find my horse all this night if you want to go
about and to see things. it is a most disgraceful exhibition. where is the
pleasure of saying 'ya hasan, ya hussain,' twenty thousand times in
a night?"
all the processions—there were two and twenty of them—were
now well within the city walls. the drums were beating afresh, the crowd
were howling "ya hasan! ya hussain!" and beating their breasts, the
brass bands were playing their loudest, and at every corner where space
allowed, muhammadan preachers were telling the lamentable story of the
death of the martyrs. it was impossible to move except with the crowd, for
the streets were not more than twenty feet wide. in the hindu quarters the
shutters of all the shops were up and cross-barred. as the first
tazia, a gorgeous erection ten feet high, was borne aloft on the
shoulders of a score of stout men into the semi-darkness of the gully of
the horsemen, a brickbat crashed through its talc and tinsel sides.
"into thy hands, o lord?" murmured wali dad. profanely, as a yell went
up from behind, and a native officer of police jammed his horse through
the crowd. another brickbat followed, and the tazia staggered and
swayed where it had stopped.
"go on! in the name of the sirkar, go forward!" shouted the
policeman; but there was an ugly cracking and splintering of shutters, and
the crowd halted, with oaths and growlings, before the house whence the
brickbat had been thrown.
then, without any warning, broke the storm—not only in the gully
of the horsemen, but in half a dozen other places. the tazias
rocked like ships at sea, the long pole-torches dipped and rose round them
while the men shouted: "the hindus are dishonoring the tazias!
strike! strike! into their temples for the faith!" the six or eight
policemen with each tazia drew their batons, and struck as long as
they could in the hope of forcing the mob forward, but they were
overpowered, and as contingents of hindus poured into the streets, the
fight became general. half a mile away where the tazias were yet
untouched the drums and the shrieks of "ya hasan! ya hussain!"
continued, but not for long. the priests at the corners of the streets
knocked the legs from the bedsteads that supported their pulpits and smote
for the faith, while stones fell from the silent houses upon friend and
foe, and the packed streets bellowed: "din! din! din!" a
tazia caught fire, and was dropped for a flaming barrier between
hindu and musalman at the corner of the gully. then the crowd surged
forward, and wali dad drew me close to the stone pillar of a well.
"it was intended from the beginning!" he shouted in my ear, with more
heat than blank unbelief should be guilty of. "the bricks were carried up
to the houses beforehand. these swine of hindus! we shall be gutting kine
in their temples to-night!"
tazia after tazia, some burning, others torn to pieces,
hurried past us and the mob with them, howling, shrieking, and striking at
the house doors in their flight. at last we saw the reason of the rush.
hugonin, the assistant district superintendent of police, a boy of twenty,
had got together thirty constables and was forcing the crowd through the
streets. his old grey police-horse showed no sign of uneasiness as it was
spurred breast-on into the crowd, and the long dog-whip with which he had
armed himself was never still.
"they know we haven't enough police to hold 'em," he cried as he passed
me, mopping a cut on his face, "they know we haven't! aren't any of
the men from the club coming down to help? get on, you sons of burned
fathers!" the dog-whip cracked across the writhing backs, and the
constables smote afresh with baton and gun-butt. with these passed the
lights and the shouting, and wali dad began to swear under his breath.
from fort amara shot up a single rocket; then two side by side. it was the
signal for troops.
petitt, the deputy commissioner, covered with dust and sweat, but calm
and gently smiling, cantered up the clean-swept street in rear of the main
body of the rioters, "no one killed yet," he shouted. "i'll keep 'em on
the run till dawn! don't let 'em halt, hugonin! trot 'em about till the
troops come."
the science of the defence lay solely in keeping the mob on the move.
if they had breathing-space they would halt and fire a house, and then the
work of restoring order would be more difficult, to say the least of it.
flames have the same effect on a crowd as blood has on a wild beast.
word had reached the club and men in evening-dress were beginning to
show themselves and lend a hand in heading off and breaking up the
shouting masses with stirrup-leathers, whips, or chance-found staves. they
were not very often attacked, for the rioters had sense enough to know
that the death of a european would not mean one hanging but many, and
possibly the appearance of the thrice-dreaded artillery. the clamor in the
city redoubled. the hindus had descended into the streets in real earnest
and ere long the mob returned. it was a strange sight. there were no
tazias—only their riven platforms—and there were no
police. here and there a city dignitary, hindu or muhammadan, was vainly
imploring his co-religionists to keep quiet and behave
themselves—advice for which his white beard was pulled. then a
native officer of police, unhorsed but still using his spurs with effect,
would be borne along, warning all the crowd of the danger of insulting the
government. everywhere men struck aimlessly with sticks, grasping each
other by the throat, howling and foaming with rage, or beat with their
bare hands on the doors of the houses.
"it is a lucky thing that they are fighting with natural weapons," i
said to wali dad, "else we should have half the city killed."
i turned as i spoke and looked at his face. his nostrils were
distended, his eyes were fixed, and he was smiting himself softly on the
breast. the crowd poured by with renewed riot—a gang of musalmans
hard-pressed by some hundred hindu fanatics. wali dad left my side with an
oath, and shouting: "ya hasan! ya hussain!" plunged into the thick
of the fight where i lost sight of him.
i fled by a side alley to the padshahi gate where i found wali dad's
house, and thence rode to the fort. once outside the city wall, the tumult
sank to a dull roar, very impressive under the stars and reflecting great
credit on the fifty thousand angry able-bodied men who were making it. the
troops who, at the deputy commissioner's instance, had been ordered to
rendezvous quietly near the fort, showed no signs of being impressed. two
companies of native infantry, a squadron of native cavalry and a company
of british infantry were kicking their heels in the shadow of the east
face, waiting for orders to march in. i am sorry to say that they were all
pleased, unholily pleased, at the chance of what they called "a little
fun." the senior officers, to be sure, grumbled at having been kept out of
bed, and the english troops pretended to be sulky, but there was joy in
the hearts of all the subalterns, and whispers ran up and down the line:
"no ball-cartridge—what a beastly shame!" "d'you think the beggars
will really stand up to us?" "'hope i shall meet my money-lender there. i
owe him more than i can afford." "oh, they won't let us even unsheathe
swords." "hurrah! up goes the fourth rocket. fall in, there!"
the garrison artillery, who to the last cherished a wild hope that they
might be allowed to bombard the city at a hundred yards' range, lined the
parapet above the east gateway and cheered themselves hoarse as the
british infantry doubled along the road to the main gate of the city. the
cavalry cantered on to the padshahi gate, and the native infantry marched
slowly to the gate of the butchers. the surprise was intended to be of a
distinctly unpleasant nature, and to come on top of the defeat of the
police who had been just able to keep the muhammadans from firing the
houses of a few leading hindus. the bulk of the riot lay in the north and
northwest wards. the east and southeast were by this time dark and silent,
and i rode hastily to lalun's house for i wished to tell her to send some
one in search of wali dad. the house was unlighted, but the door was open,
and i climbed upstairs in the darkness. one small lamp in the white room
showed lalun and her maid leaning half out of the window, breathing
heavily and evidently pulling at something that refused to come.
"thou art late—very late," gasped lalun, without turning her
head. "help us now, o fool, if thou hast not spent thy strength howling
among the tazias. pull! nasiban and i can do no more! o sahib, is
it you? the hindus have been hunting an old muhammadan round the ditch
with clubs. if they find him again they will kill him. help us to pull him
up."
i put my hands to the long red silk waist-cloth that was hanging out of
the window, and we three pulled and pulled with all the strength at our
command. there was something very heavy at the end, and it swore in an
unknown tongue as it kicked against the city wall.
"pull, oh, pull!" said lalun, at the last. a pair of brown hands
grasped the window-sill and a venerable muhammadan tumbled upon the floor,
very much out of breath. his jaws were tied up, his turban had fallen over
one eye, and he was dusty and angry.
lalun hid her face in her hands for an instant and said something about
wali dad that i could not catch,
then, to my extreme gratification, she threw her arms round my neck and
murmured pretty things. i was in no haste to stop her; and nasiban, being
a handmaiden of tact, turned to the big jewel-chest that stands in the
corner of the white room and rummaged among the contents. the muhammadan
sat on the floor and glared.
"one service more, sahib, since thou hast come so opportunely," said
lalun. "wilt thou"—it is very nice to be thou-ed by
lalun—"take this old man across the city—the troops are
everywhere, and they might hurt him for he is old—to the kumharsen
gate? there i think he may find a carriage to take him to his house. he is
a friend of mine, and thou art—more than a friend—therefore i
ask this."
nasiban bent over the old man, tucked something into his belt, and i
raised him up, and led him into the streets. in crossing from the east to
the west of the city there was no chance of avoiding the troops and the
crowd. long before i reached the gully of the horsemen i heard the shouts
of the british infantry crying cheeringly: "hutt, ye beggars! hutt, ye
devils! get along! go forward, there!" then followed the ringing of
rifle-butts and shrieks of pain. the troops were banging the bare toes of
the mob with their gun-butts—for not a bayonet had been fixed. my
companion mumbled and jabbered as we walked on until we were carried back
by the crowd and had to force our way to the troops. i caught him by the
wrist and felt a bangle there—the iron bangle of the sikhs—but
i had no suspicions, for lalun had only ten minutes before put her arms
round me. thrice we were carried back by the crowd, and when we made our
way past the british infantry it was to meet the sikh cavalry driving
another mob before them with the butts of their lances.
"what are these dogs?" said the old man.
"sikhs of the cavalry, father," i said, and we edged our way up the
line of horses two abreast and found the deputy commissioner, his helmet
smashed on his head, surrounded by a knot of men who had come down from
the club as amateur constables and had helped the police mightily.
"we'll keep 'em on the run till dawn," said petitt, "who's your
villainous friend?"
i had only time to say: "the protection of the sirkar!" when a
fresh crowd flying before the native infantry carried us a hundred yards
nearer to the kumharsen gate, and petitt was swept away like a shadow.
"i do not know—i cannot see—this is all new to me!" moaned
my companion. "how many troops are there in the city?"
"perhaps five hundred," i said.
"a lakh of men beaten by five hundred—and sikhs among them!
surely, surely, i am an old man, but—the kumharsen gate is new. who
pulled down the stone lions? where is the conduit? sahib, i am a very old
man, and, alas, i—i cannot stand." he dropped in the shadow of the
kumharsen gate where there was no disturbance. a fat gentleman wearing
gold pince-nez came out of the darkness.
"you are most kind to bring my old friend," he said, suavely. "he is a
landholder of akala. he should not be in a big city when there is
religious excitement. but i have a carriage here. you are quite truly
kind. will you help me to put him into the carriage? it is very late."
we bundled the old man into a hired victoria that stood close to the
gate, and i turned back to the house on the city wall. the troops were
driving the people to and fro, while the police shouted, "to your houses!
get to your houses!" and the dog-whip of the assistant district
superintendent cracked remorselessly. terror-stricken bunnias clung
to the stirrups of the cavalry, crying that their houses had been robbed
(which was a lie), and the burly sikh horsemen patted them on the
shoulder, and bade them return to those houses lest a worse thing should
happen. parties of five or six british soldiers, joining arms, swept down
the side-gullies, their rifles on their backs, stamping, with shouting and
song, upon the toes of hindu and musalman. never was religious enthusiasm
more systematically squashed; and never were poor breakers of the peace
more utterly weary and footsore. they were routed out of holes and
corners, from behind well-pillars and byres, and bidden to go to their
houses. if they had no houses to go to, so much the worse for their
toes.
on returning to lalun's door i stumbled over a man at the threshold. he
was sobbing hysterically and his arms flapped like the wings of a goose.
it was wali dad, agnostic and unbeliever, shoeless, turbanless, and
frothing at the mouth, the flesh on his chest bruised and bleeding from
the vehemence with which he had smitten himself. a broken torch-handle lay
by his side, and his quivering lips murmured, "ya hasan! ya hussain!" as i
stooped over him. i pushed him a few steps up the staircase, threw a
pebble at lalun's city window and hurried home.
most of the streets were very still, and the cold wind that comes
before the dawn whistled down them. in the centre of the square of the
mosque a man was bending over a corpse. the skull had been smashed in by
gun-butt or bamboo-stave.
"it is expedient that one man should die for the people," said petitt,
grimly, raising the shapeless head. "these brutes were beginning to show
their teeth too much."
and from afar we could hear the soldiers singing "two lovely black
eyes," as they drove the remnant of the rioters within doors.
of course you can guess what happened? i was not so clever. when the
news went abroad that khem singh had escaped from the fort, i did not,
since i was then living this story, not writing it, connect myself, or
lalun, or the fat gentleman of the gold pince-nez, with his
disappearance. nor did it strike me that wali dad was the man who should
have convoyed him across the city, or that lalun's arms round my neck were
put there to hide the money that nasiban gave to kehm singh, and that
lalun had used me and my white face as even a better safeguard than wali
dad who proved himself so untrustworthy. all that i knew at the time was
that, when fort amara was taken up with the riots, khem singh profited by
the confusion to get away, and that his two sikh guards also escaped.
but later on i received full enlightenment; and so did khem singh. he
fled to those who knew him in the old days, but many of them were dead and
more were changed, and all knew something of the wrath of the government.
he went to the young men, but the glamour of his name had passed away, and
they were entering native regiments of government offices, and khem singh
could give them neither pension, decorations, nor influence—nothing
but a glorious death with their backs to the mouth of a gun. he wrote
letters and made promises, and the letters fell into bad hands, and a
wholly insignificant subordinate officer of police tracked them down and
gained promotion thereby. moreover, khem singh was old, and anise-seed
brandy was scarce, and he had left his silver cooking-pots in fort amara
with his nice warm bedding, and the gentleman with the gold
pince-nez was told by those who had employed him that khem singh as
a popular leader was not worth the money paid.
"great is the mercy of these fools of english!" said khem singh when
the situation was put before him. "i will go back to fort amara of my own
free will and gain honor. give me good clothes to return in,"
so, at his own time, khem singh knocked at the wicket-gate of the fort
and walked to the captain and the subaltern, who were nearly grey-headed
on account of correspondence that daily arrived from simla marked
"private,"
"i have come back, captain sahib," said khem singh, "put no more guards
over me. it is no good out yonder."
a week later i saw him for the first time to my knowledge, and he made
as though there were an understanding between us.
"it was well done, sahib," said he, "and greatly i admired your
astuteness in thus boldly facing the troops when i, whom they would have
doubtless torn to pieces, was with you. now there is a man in fort
ooltagarh whom a bold man could with ease help to escape. this is the
position of the fort as i draw it on the sand"—
but i was thinking how i had become lalun's vizier after all.
while the snaffle holds, or the long-neck slings,
while the big beam tilts, or the last bell rings,
while horses are horses to train and to race.
then women and wine take a second place
for me—for me—
while a short "ten-three"
has a field to squander or fence to face!
—song of the. g. r.
there are more ways of running a horse to suit your book than pulling
his head off in the straight. some men forget this. understand clearly
that all racing is rotten—as everything connected with losing money
must be. in india, in addition to its inherent rottenness, it has the
merit of being two-thirds sham; looking pretty on paper only. every one
knows every one else far too well for business purposes. how on earth can
you rack and harry and post a man for his losings, when you are fond of
his wife, and live in the same station with him? he says, "on the monday
following," "i can't settle just yet." you say, "all right, old man," and
think yourself lucky if you pull off nine hundred out of a
two-thousand-rupee debt. any way you look at it, indian racing is immoral,
and expensively immoral. which is much worse. if a man wants your money,
he ought to ask for it, or send round a subscription-list, instead of
juggling about the country, with an australian larrikin; a "brumby," with
as much breed as the boy; a brace of chumars in gold-laced caps;
three or four ekka-ponies with hogged manes, and a switch-tailed
demirep of a mare called arab because she has a kink in her flag. racing
leads to the shroff quicker than anything else. but if you have no
conscience and no sentiments, and good hands, and some knowledge of pace,
and ten years' experience of horses, and several thousand rupees a month,
i believe that you can occasionally contrive to pay your
shoeing-bills.
did you ever know shackles—b. w. g., . -/—coarse,
loose, mule-like ears—barrel as long as a gatepost—tough as a
telegraph-wire—and the queerest brute that ever looked through a
bridle? he was of no brand, being one of an ear-nicked mob taken into the
bucephalus at £:s., a head to make up freight, and sold
raw and out of condition at calcutta for rs.. people who lost money on
him called him a "brumby"; but if ever any horse had harpoon's shoulders
and the gin's temper, shackles was that horse. two miles was his own
particular distance. he trained himself, ran himself, and rode himself;
and, if his jockey insulted him by giving him hints, he shut up at once
and bucked the boy off. he objected to dictation. two or three of his
owners did not understand this, and lost money in consequence. at last he
was bought by a man who discovered that, if a race was to be won,
shackles, and shackles only, would win it in his own way, so long as his
jockey sat still. this man had a riding-boy called brunt—a lad from
perth, west australia—and he taught brunt, with a trainer's whip,
the hardest thing a jock can learn—to sit still, to sit still, and
to keep on sitting still. when brunt fairly grasped this truth, shackles
devastated the country. no weight could stop him at his own distance; and
the fame of shackles spread from ajmir in the south, to chedputter in the
north. there was no horse like shackles, so long as he was allowed to do
his work in his own way. but he was beaten in the end; and the story of
his fall is enough to make angels weep.
at the lower end of the chedputter racecourse, just before the turn
into the straight, the track passes close to a couple of old brick-mounds
enclosing a funnel-shaped hollow. the big end of the funnel is not six
feet from the railings on the off-side. the astounding peculiarity of the
course is that, if you stand at one particular place, about half a mile
away, inside the course, and speak at ordinary pitch, your voice just hits
the funnel of the brick-mounds and makes a curious whining echo there. a
man discovered this one morning by accident while out training with a
friend. he marked the place to stand and speak from with a couple of
bricks, and he kept his knowledge to himself. every peculiarity of
a course is worth remembering in a country where rats play the mischief
with the elephant-litter, and stewards build jumps to suit their own
stables. this man ran a very fairish country-bred, a long, racking high
mare with the temper of a fiend, and the paces of an airy wandering
seraph—a drifty, glidy stretch. the mare was, as a delicate tribute
to mrs. reiver, called "the lady regula baddun"—or for short, regula
baddun.
shackles' jockey, brunt, was a quite well-behaved boy, but his nerve
had been shaken. he began his career by riding jump-races in melbourne,
where a few stewards want lynching, and was one of the jockeys who came
through the awful butchery—perhaps you will recollect it—of
the maribyrnong plate. the walls were colonial ramparts—logs of
jarrah spiked into masonry—with wings as strong as church
buttresses. once in his stride, a horse had to jump or fall. he couldn't
run out. in the maribyrnong plate, twelve horses were jammed at the second
wall. red hat, leading, fell this side, and threw out the gled, and the
ruck came up behind and the space between wing and wing was one
struggling, screaming, kicking shambles. four jockeys were taken out dead;
three were very badly hurt, and brunt was among the three. he told the
story of the maribyrnong plate sometimes; and when he described how
whalley on red hat, said, as the mare fell under him—"god ha' mercy,
i'm done for!" and how, next instant, sithee there and white otter had
crushed the life out of poor whalley, and the dust hid a small hell of men
and horses, no one marveled that brunt had dropped jump-races and
australia together. regula baddun's owner knew that story by heart. brunt
never varied it in the telling. he had no education.
shackles came to the chedputter autumn races one year, and his owner
walked about insulting the sportsmen of chedputter generally, till they
went to the honorary secretary in a body and said, "appoint handicappers,
and arrange a race which shall break shackles and humble the pride of his
owner." the districts rose against shackles and sent up of their best;
ousel, who was supposed to be able to do his mile in -; petard, the
stud-bred, trained by a cavalry regiment who knew how to train; gringalet,
the ewe-lamb of the th; bobolink, the pride of peshawar; and many
others.
they called that race the broken-link handicap, because it was to smash
shackles; and the handicappers piled on the weights, and the fund gave
eight hundred rupees, and the distance was "round the course for all
horses." shackles' owner said, "you can arrange the race with regard to
shackles only. so long as you don't bury him under weight-cloths, i don't
mind." regula baddun's owner said, "i throw in my mare to fret ousel. six
furlongs is regula's distance, and she will then lie down and die. so also
will ousel, for his jockey doesn't understand a waiting race." now, this
was a lie, for regula had been in work for two months at dehra, and her
chances were good, always supposing that shackles broke a
blood-vessel—or brunt moved on him.
the plunging in the lotteries was fine. they filled eight
thousand-rupee lotteries on the broken-link handicap, and the account in
the pioneer said that "favoritism was divided." in plain english,
the various contingents were wild on their respective horses; for the
handicappers had done their work well. the honorary secretary shouted
himself hoarse through the din; and the smoke of the cheroots was like the
smoke, and the rattling of the dice-boxes like the rattle of small-arm
fire.
ten horses started—very level—and regula baddun's owner
cantered out on his hack to a place inside the circle of the course, where
two bricks had been thrown. he faced toward the brick-mounds at the lower
end of the course and waited.
the story of the running is in the pioneer. at the end of the
first mile, shackles crept out of the ruck, well on the outside, ready to
get round the turn, lay hold of the bit and spin up the straight before
the others knew he had got away. brunt was sitting still, perfectly happy,
listening to the "drum-drum-drum" of the hoofs behind, and knowing that,
in about twenty strides, shackles would draw one deep breath and go up the
last half-mile like the "flying dutchman." as shackles went short to take
the turn and came abreast of the brick-mound, brunt heard, above the noise
of the wind in his ears, a whining, wailing voice on the offside,
saying—"god ha' mercy, i'm done for!" in one stride. brunt saw the
whole seething smash of the maribyrnong plate before him, started in his
saddle and gave a yell of terror. the start brought the heels into
shackles' side, and the scream hurt shackles' feelings. he couldn't stop
dead; but he put out his feet and slid along for fifty yards, and then,
very gravely and judicially, bucked off brunt—a shaking,
terror-stricken lump, while regula baddun made a neck-and-neck race with
bobolink up the straight, and won by a short head—petard a bad
third. shackles' owner, in the stand, tried to think that his
field-glasses had gone wrong. regula baddun's owner, waiting by the two
bricks, gave one deep sigh of relief, and cantered back to the stand. he
had won, in lotteries and bets, about fifteen thousand.
it was a broken-link handicap with a vengeance. it broke nearly all the
men concerned, and nearly broke the heart of shackles' owner. he went down
to interview brunt. the boy lay, livid and gasping with fright, where he
had tumbled off. the sin of losing the race never seemed to strike him.
all he knew was that whalley had "called" him, that the "call" was a
warning; and, were he cut in two for it, he would never get up again. his
nerve had gone altogether, and he only asked his master to give him a good
thrashing, and let him go. he was fit for nothing, he said. he got his
dismissal, and crept up to the paddock, white as chalk, with blue lips,
his knees giving way under him. people said nasty things in the paddock;
but brunt never heeded. he changed into tweeds, took his stick and went
down the road, still shaking with fright, and muttering over and over
again—"god ha' mercy, i'm done for!" to the best of my knowledge and
belief he spoke the truth.
so now you know how the broken-link handicap was run and won. of course
you don't believe it. you would credit anything about russia's designs on
india, or the recommendations of the currency commission; but a little bit
of sober fact is more than you can stand.
to love's low voice she lent a careless ear;
her hand within his rosy fingers lay,
a chilling weight. she would not turn or hear;
but with averted face went on her way.
but when pale death, all featureless and grim,
lifted his bony hand, and beckoning
held out his cypress-wreath, she followed him,
and love was left forlorn and wondering,
that she who for his bidding would not stay,
at death's first whisper rose and went away.
rivals,
"ohè, ahmed din! shafiz ulla ahoo! bahadur khan, where
are you? come out of the tents, as i have done, and fight against the
english. don't kill your own kin! come out to me!"
the deserter from a native corps was crawling round the outskirts of
the camp, firing at intervals, and shouting invitations to his old
comrades. misled by the rain and the darkness, he came to the english wing
of the camp, and with his yelping and rifle-practice disturbed the men.
they had been making roads all day, and were tired.
ortheris was sleeping at learoyd's feet. "wot's all that?" he said
thickly. learoyd snored, and a snider bullet ripped its way through the
tent wall. the men swore, "it's that bloomin' deserter from the
aurangabadis," said ortheris. "git up, some one, an' tell 'im 'e's come to
the wrong shop,"
"go to sleep, little man," said mulvaney, who was steaming nearest the
door. "i can't arise and expaytiate with him. tis rainin' entrenchin'
tools outside."
"'tain't because you bloomin' can't. it's 'cause you bloomin' won't, ye
long, limp, lousy, lazy beggar, you. 'ark to 'im 'owlin'!"
"wot's the good of argifying? put a bullet into the swine! 'e's keepin'
us awake!" said another voice.
a subaltern shouted angrily, and a dripping sentry whined from the
darkness—
"'tain't no good, sir. i can't see 'im. 'e's 'idin' somewhere down
'ill."
ortheris tumbled out of his blanket. "shall i try to get 'im, sir?"
said he.
"no," was the answer. "lie down. i won't have the whole camp shooting
all round the clock. tell him to go and pot his friends."
ortheris considered for a moment. then, putting his head under the tent
wall, he called, as a 'bus conductor calls in a block, "'igher up, there!
'igher up!"
the men laughed, and the laughter was carried down wind to the
deserter, who, hearing that he had made a mistake, went off to worry his
own regiment half a mile away. he was received with shots; the
aurangabadis were very angry with him for disgracing their colors.
"an' that's all right," said ortheris, withdrawing his head as he heard
the hiccough of the sniders in the distance. "s'elp me gawd, tho', that
man's not fit to live—messin' with my beauty-sleep this way."
"go out and shoot him in the morning, then," said the subaltern
incautiously. "silence in the tents now. get your rest, men."
ortheris lay down with a happy little sigh, and in two minutes there
was no sound except the rain on the canvas and the all-embracing and
elemental snoring of learoyd.
the camp lay on a bare ridge of the himalayas, and for a week had been
waiting for a flying column to make connection. the nightly rounds of the
deserter and his friends had become a nuisance.
in the morning the men dried themselves in hot sunshine and cleaned
their grimy accoutrements. the native regiment was to take its turn of
road-making that day while the old regiment loafed.
"i'm goin' to lay for a shot at that man," said ortheris, when he had
finished washing out his rifle, "'e comes up the watercourse every evenin'
about five o'clock. if we go and lie out on the north 'ill a bit this
afternoon we'll get 'im."
"you're a bloodthirsty little mosquito," said mulvaney, blowing blue
clouds into the air. "but i suppose i will have to come wid you. pwhere's
jock?"
"gone out with the mixed pickles, 'cause 'e thinks 'isself a bloomin'
marksman," said ortheris, with scorn,
the "mixed pickles" were a detachment of picked shots, generally
employed in clearing spurs of hills when the enemy were too impertinent.
this taught the young officers how to handle men, and did not do the enemy
much harm. mulvaney and ortheris strolled out of camp, and passed the
aurangabadis going to their road-making,
"you've got to sweat to-day," said ortheris, genially. "we're going to
get your man. you didn't knock 'im out last night by any chance, any of
you?"
"no. the pig went away mocking us. i had one shot at him," said a
private, "he's my cousin, and i ought to have cleared our dishonor.
but good luck to you."
they went cautiously to the north hill, ortheris leading, because, as
he explained, "this is a long-range show, an' i've got to do it." his was
an almost passionate devotion to his rifle, which, by barrack-room report,
he was supposed to kiss every night before turning in. charges and
scuffles he held in contempt, and, when they were inevitable, slipped
between mulvaney and learoyd, bidding them to fight for his skin as well
as their own. they never failed him. he trotted along, questing like a
hound on a broken trail, through the wood of the north hill. at last he
was satisfied, and threw himself down on the soft pine-needle slope that
commanded a clear view of the watercourse and a brown, bare hillside
beyond it. the trees made a scented darkness in which an army corps could
have hidden from the sun-glare without.
"'ere's the tail o' the wood," said ortheris. "'e's got to come up the
watercourse, 'cause it gives 'im cover. we'll lay 'ere. 'tain't not arf so
bloomin' dusty neither."
he buried his nose in a clump of scentless white violets. no one had
come to tell the flowers that the season of their strength was long past,
and they had bloomed merrily in the twilight of the pines.
"this is something like," he said, luxuriously. "wot a 'evinly clear
drop for a bullet acrost! how much d'you make it, mulvaney?"
"seven hunder. maybe a trifle less, bekaze the air's so thin."
wop! wop! wop! went a volley of musketry on the rear face of the
north hill.
"curse them mixed pickles firin' at nothin'! they'll scare arf the
country."
"thry a sightin' shot in the middle of the row," said mulvaney, the man
of many wiles. "there's a red rock yonder he'll be sure to pass.
quick!"
ortheris ran his sight up to six hundred yards and fired. the bullet
threw up a feather of dust by a clump of gentians at the base of the
rock.
"good enough!" said ortheris, snapping the scale down. "you snick your
sights to mine or a little lower. you're always firin' high. but remember,
first shot to me, o lordy! but it's a lovely afternoon."
the noise of the firing grew louder, and there was a tramping of men in
the wood. the two lay very quiet, for they knew that the british soldier
is desperately prone to fire at anything that moves or calls. then learoyd
appeared, his tunic ripped across the breast by a bullet, looking ashamed
of himself. he flung down on the pine-needles, breathing in snorts.
"one o' them damned gardeners o' th' pickles," said he, fingering the
rent. "firin' to th' right flank, when he knowed i was there. if i knew
who he was i'd 'a' rippen the hide offan him. look at ma tunic!"
"that's the spishil trustability av a marksman. train him to hit a fly
wid a stiddy rest at seven hunder, an' he loose on anythin' he sees or
hears up to th' mile. you're well out av that fancy-firin' gang, jock.
stay here."
"bin firin' at the bloomin' wind in the bloomin' treetops," said
ortheris, with a chuckle. "i'll show you some firin' later on."
they wallowed in the pine-needles, and the sun warmed them where they
lay. the mixed pickles ceased firing, and returned to camp, and left the
wood to a few scared apes. the watercourse lifted up its voice in the
silence, and talked foolishly to the rocks. now and again the dull thump
of a blasting charge three miles away told that the aurangabadis were in
difficulties with their road-making. the men smiled as they listened and
lay still, soaking in the warm leisure. presently learoyd, between the
whiffs of his pipe—
"seems queer—about 'im yonder—desertin' at all."
"'e'll be a bloomin' side queerer when i've done with 'im," said
ortheris. they were talking in whispers, for the stillness of the wood and
the desire of slaughter lay heavy upon them.
"i make no doubt he had his reasons for desertin'; but, my faith! i
make less doubt ivry man has good reason for killin' him," said
mulvaney.
"happen there was a lass tewed up wi'it. men do more than more for th'
sake of a lass."
"they make most av us 'list. they've no manner av right to make us
desert."
"ah; they make us 'list, or their fathers do," said learoyd, softly,
his helmet over his eyes.
ortheris's brows contracted savagely. he was watching the valley, "if
it's a girl i'll shoot the beggar twice over, an' second time for bein' a
fool. you're blasted sentimental all of a sudden, thinkin' o' your last
near shave?"
"nay, lad; ah was but thinkin' o' what had happened,"
"an' fwhat has happened, ye lumberin' child av calamity, that you're
lowing like a cow-calf at the back av the pasture, an' suggestin'
invidious excuses for the man stanley's goin' to kill. ye'll have to wait
another hour yet, little man. spit it out, jock, an' bellow melojus to the
moon. it takes an earthquake or a bullet graze to fetch aught out av you.
discourse, don juan! the a-moors av lotharius learoyd! stanley, kape a
rowlin' rig'mental eye on the valley."
"it's along o' yon hill there," said learoyd, watching the bare
sub-himalayan spur that reminded him of his yorkshire moors. he was
speaking more to himself than his fellows.
"ay," said he, "rumbolds moor stands up ower skipton town, an' greenhow
hill stands up ower pately brig. i reckon you've never heeard tell o'
greenhow hill, but yon bit o' bare stuff if there was nobbut a white road
windin' is like ut; strangely like. moors an' moors an' moors, wi' never a
tree for shelter, an' grey houses wi' flagstone rooves, and pewits cryin',
an' a windhover goin' to and fro just like these kites. and cold! a wind
that cuts you like a knife. you could tell greenhow hill folk by the
red-apple color o' their cheeks an' nose tips, and their blue eyes, driven
into pin-points by the wind. miners mostly, burrowin' for lead i' th'
hillsides, followin' the trail of th' ore vein same as a field-rat. it was
the roughest minin' i ever seen. yo'd come on a bit o' creakin' wood
windlass like a well-head, an' you was let down i' th' bight of a rope,
fendin' yoursen off the side wi' one hand, carryin' a candle stuck in a
lump o' clay with t'other, an' clickin' hold of a rope with t'other
hand."
"an' that's three of them," said mulvaney. "must be a good climate in
those parts."
learoyd took no heed.
"an' then yo' came to a level, where you crept on your hands and knees
through a mile o' windin' drift, 'an' you come out into a cave-place as
big as leeds townhall, with a engine pumpin' water from workin's 'at went
deeper still. it's a queer country, let alone minin', for the hill is full
of those natural caves, an' the rivers an' the becks drops into what they
call pot-holes, an' come out again miles away."
"wot was you doin' there?" said ortheris.
"i was a young chap then, an' mostly went wi' 'osses, leadin' coal and
lead ore; but at th' time i'm tellin' on i was drivin' the waggon-team i'
th' big sumph. i didn't belong to that countryside by rights. i went there
because of a little difference at home, an' at fust i took up wi' a rough
lot. one night we'd been drinkin', an' i must ha' hed more than i could
stand, or happen th' ale was none so good. though i' them days, by for
god, i never seed bad ale." he flung his arms over his head, and gripped a
vast handful of white violets. "nah," said he, "i never seed the ale i
could not drink, the bacca i could not smoke, nor the lass i could not
kiss. well, we mun have a race home, the lot on us. i lost all th' others,
an' when i was climbin' ower one of them walls built o' loose stones, i
comes down into the ditch, stones and all, an' broke my arm. not as i
knawed much about it, for i fell on th' back of my head, an' was knocked
stupid like. an' when i come to mysen it were mornin', an' i were lyin' on
the settle i' jesse roantree's house-place, an' 'liza roantree was settin'
sewin'. i ached all ower, and my mouth were like a limekiln. she gave me a
drink out of a china mug wi' gold letters—'a present from
leeds'—as i looked at many and many a time at after. 'yo're to lie
still while dr. warbottom comes, because your arm's broken, and father has
sent a lad to fetch him. he found yo' when he was goin' to work, an'
carried you here on his back,' sez she. 'oa!' sez i; an' i shet my eyes,
for i felt ashamed o' mysen. 'father's gone to his work these three hours,
an' he said he' tell 'em to get somebody to drive the tram.' the clock
ticked, an' a bee comed in the house, an' they rung i' my head like
mill-wheels. an' she give me another drink an' settled the pillow. 'eh,
but yo're young to be getten drunk an' such like, but yo' won't do it
again, will yo'?'—'noa,' sez i, 'i wouldn't if she'd not but stop
they mill-wheels clatterin'.'"
"faith, it's a good thing to be nursed by a woman when you're sick!"
said mulvaney. "dir' cheap at the price av twenty broken heads."
ortheris turned to frown across the valley. he had not been nursed by
many women in his life.
"an' then dr. warbottom comes ridin' up, an' jesse roantree along with
'im. he was a high-larned doctor, but he talked wi' poor folk same as
theirsens. 'what's ta bin agaate on naa?' he sings out. 'brekkin' tha
thick head?' an' he felt me all ovver. 'that's none broken. tha' nobbut
knocked a bit sillier than ordinary, an' that's daaft eneaf.' an' soa he
went on, callin' me all the names he could think on, but settin' my arm,
wi' jesse's help, as careful as could be. 'yo' mun let the big oaf bide
here a bit, jesse,' he says, when he hed strapped me up an' given me a
dose o' physic; 'an' you an' 'liza will tend him, though he's scarcelins
worth the trouble. an' tha'll lose tha work,' sez he, 'an' tha'll be upon
th' sick club for a couple o' months an' more. doesn't tha think tha's a
fool?'"
"but whin was a young man, high or low, the other av a fool, i'd like
to know?" said mulvaney, "sure, folly's the only safe way to wisdom, for
i've thried it."
"wisdom!" grinned ortheris, scanning his comrades with uplifted chin.
"you're bloomin' solomons, you two, ain't you?"
learoyd went calmly on, with a steady eye like an ox chewing the
cud.
"and that was how i come to know 'liza roantree. there's some tunes as
she used to sing—aw, she were always singin'—that fetches
greenhow hill before my eyes as fair as yon brow across there. and she
would learn me to sing bass, an' i was to go to th' chapel wi' 'em where
jesse and she led the singin', th' old man playin' the fiddle. he was a
strange chap, old jesse, fair mad wi' music, an' he made me promise to
learn the big fiddle when my arm was better. it belonged to him, and it
stood up in a big case alongside o' th' eight-day clock, but willie
satterthwaite, as played it in the chapel, had getten deaf as a door-post,
and it vexed jesse, as he had to rap him ower his head wi' th'
fiddle-stick to make him give ower sawin' at th' right time.
"but there was a black drop in it all, an' it was a man in a black coat
that brought it. when th' primitive methodist preacher came to greenhow,
he would always stop wi' jesse roantree, an' he laid hold of me from th'
beginning. it seemed i wor a soul to be saved, and he meaned to do it. at
th' same time i jealoused 'at he were keen o' savin' 'liza roantree's soul
as well, and i could ha' killed him many a time. an' this went on till one
day i broke out, an' borrowed th' brass for a drink from 'liza. after
fower days i come back, wi' my tail between my legs, just to see 'liza
again. but jesse were at home an' th' preacher—th' reverend amos
barraclough. 'liza said naught, but a bit o' red come into her face as
were white of a regular thing. says jesse, tryin' his best to be civil,
'nay, lad, it's like this. you've getten to choose which way it's goin' to
be. i'll ha' nobody across ma doorstep as goes a-drinkin', an' borrows my
lass's money to spend i' their drink. ho'd tha tongue, 'liza,' sez he,
when she wanted to put in a word 'at i were welcome to th' brass, and she
were none afraid that i wouldn't pay it back. then the reverend cuts in,
seein' as jesse were losin' his temper, an' they fair beat me among them.
but it were 'liza, as looked an' said naught, as did more than either o'
their tongues, an' soa i concluded to get converted."
"fwhat?" shouted mulvaney. then, checking himself, he said softly, "let
be! let be! sure the blessed virgin is the mother of all religion an' most
women; an' there's a dale av piety in a girl if the men would only let ut
stay there. i'd ha' been converted myself under the circumstances."
"nay, but," pursued learoyd with a blush, "i meaned it."
ortheris laughed as loudly as he dared, having regard to his business
at the time.
"ay, ortheris, you may laugh, but you didn't know yon preacher
barraclough—a little white-faced chap, wi' a voice as 'ud wile a
bird off an a bush, and a way o' layin' hold of folks as made them think
they'd never had a live man for a friend before. you never saw him,
an'—an'—you never seed 'liza roantree—never seed 'liza
roantree.... happen it was as much 'liza as th' preacher and her father,
but anyways they all meaned it, an' i was fair shamed o' mysen, an' so i
become what they call a changed character. and when i think on, it's hard
to believe as yon chap going to prayermeetin's, chapel, and class-meetin's
were me. but i never had naught to say for mysen, though there was a deal
o' shoutin', and old sammy strother, as were almost clemmed to death and
doubled up with the rheumatics, would sing out, 'joyful! joyful!' and 'at
it were better to go up to heaven in a coal-basket than down to hell i' a
coach an' six. and he would put his poor old claw on my shoulder, sayin',
'doesn't tha feel it, tha great lump? doesn't tha feel it?' an' sometimes
i thought i did, and then again i thought i didn't, an' how was that?"
"the iverlastin' nature av mankind," said mulvaney. "an', furthermore,
i misdoubt you were built for the primitive methodians. they're a new
corps anyways. i hold by the ould church, for she's the mother of them
all—ay, an' the father, too. i like her bekase she's most remarkable
regimental in her fittings. i may die in honolulu, nova zambra, or cape
cayenne, but wherever i die, me bein' fwhat i am, an' a priest handy, i go
under the same orders an' the same words an' the same unction as tho' the
pope himself come down from the roof av st. peter's to see me off. there's
neither high nor low, nor broad nor deep, nor betwixt nor between wid her,
an' that's what i like. but mark you, she's no manner av church for a wake
man, bekaze she takes the body and the soul av him, onless he has his
proper work to do. i remember when my father died that was three months
comin' to his grave; begad he'd ha' sold the shebeen above our heads for
ten minutes' quittance of purgathory. an' he did all he could. that's why
i say ut takes a strong man to deal with the ould church, an' for that
reason you'll find so many women go there. an' that same's a
conundrum."
"wot's the use o' worritin' 'bout these things?" said ortheris. "you're
bound to find all out quicker nor you want to, any'ow." he jerked the
cartridge out of the breech-block into the palm of his hand. "ere's my
chaplain," he said, and made the venomous black-headed bullet bow like a
marionette. "'e's goin' to teach a man all about which is which, an' wot's
true, after all, before sundown. but wot 'appened after that, jock?"
"there was one thing they boggled at, and almost shut th' gate i' my
face for, and that were my dog blast, th' only one saved out o' a litter
o' pups as was blowed up when a keg o' minin' powder loosed off in th'
storekeeper's hut. they liked his name no better than his business, which
were fightin' every dog he comed across; a rare good dog, wi' spots o'
black and pink on his face, one ear gone, and lame o' one side wi' being
driven in a basket through an iron roof, a matter of half a mile.
"they said i mun give him up 'cause he were worldly and low; and would
i let mysen be shut out of heaven for the sake on a dog? 'nay,' says i,
'if th' door isn't wide enough for th' pair on us, we'll stop outside, for
we'll none be parted.' and th' preacher spoke up for blast, as had a
likin' for him from th' first—i reckon that was why i come to like
th' preacher—and wouldn't hear o' changin' his name to bless, as
some o' them wanted. so th' pair on us became reg'lar chapel-members. but
it's hard for a young chap o' my build to cut traces from the world, th'
flesh, an' the devil all uv a heap. yet i stuck to it for a long time,
while th' lads as used to stand about th' town-end an' lean ower th'
bridge, spittin' into th' beck o' a sunday, would call after me, 'sitha,
learoyd, when's ta bean to preach, 'cause we're comin' to hear
tha.'—'ho'd tha jaw. he hasn't getten th' white choaker on ta morn,'
another lad would say, and i had to double my fists hard i' th' bottom of
my sunday coat, and say to mysen, 'if 'twere monday and i warn't a member
o' the primitive methodists, i'd leather all th' lot of yond'.' that was
th' hardest of all—to know that i could fight and i mustn't
fight."
sympathetic grunts from mulvaney.
"so what wi' singin', practicin', and class-meetin's, and th' big
fiddle, as he made me take between my knees, i spent a deal o' time i'
jesse roantree's house-place. but often as i was there, th' preacher fared
to me to go oftener, and both th' old man an' th' young woman were pleased
to have him. he lived i' pately brig, as were a goodish step off, but he
come. he come all the same. i liked him as well or better as any man i'd
ever seen i' one way, and yet i hated him wi' all my heart i' t'other, and
we watched each other like cat and mouse, but civil as you please, for i
was on my best behavior, and he was that fair and open that i was bound to
be fair with him. rare good company he was, if i hadn't wanted to wring
his cliver little neck half of the time. often and often when he was goin'
from jesse's i'd set him a bit on the road."
"see 'im 'ome, you mean?" said ortheris,
"ay. it's a way we have i' yorkshire o' seein' friends off. you was a
friend as i didn't want to come back, and he didn't want me to come back
neither, and so we'd walk together toward pately, and then he'd set me
back again, and there we'd be wal two o'clock i' the mornin' settin' each
other to an' fro like a blasted pair o' pendulums twixt hill and valley,
long after th' light had gone out i' 'liza's window, as both on us had
been looking at, pretending to watch the moon."
"ah!" broke in mulvaney, "ye'd no chanst against the maraudin'
psalm-singer. they'll take the airs an' the graces instid av the man nine
times out av ten, an' they only find the blunder later—the
wimmen."
"that's just where yo're wrong," said learoyd, reddening under the
freckled tan of his cheeks. "i was th' first wi' 'liza, an' yo'd think
that were enough. but th' parson were a steady-gaited sort o' chap, and
jesse were strong o' his side, and all th' women i' the congregation
dinned it to 'liza 'at she were fair fond to take up wi' a wastrel
ne'er-do-weel like me, as was scarcelins respectable an' a fighting dog at
his heels. it was all very well for her to be doing me good and saving my
soul, but she must mind as she didn't do herself harm. they talk o' rich
folk bein' stuck up an' genteel, but for cast-iron pride o' respectability
there's naught like poor chapel folk. it's as cold as th' wind o' greenhow
hill—ay, and colder, for 'twill never change. and now i come to
think on it, one at strangest things i know is 'at they couldn't abide th'
thought o' soldiering. there's a vast o' fightin' i' th' bible, and
there's a deal of methodists i' th' army; but to hear chapel folk talk
yo'd think that soldierin' were next door, an' t'other side, to hangin'.
i' their meetin's all their talk is o' fightin'. when sammy strother were
stuck for summat to say in his prayers, he'd sing out, 'th' sword o' th'
lord and o' gideon. they were allus at it about puttin' on th' whole armor
o' righteousness, an' fightin' the good fight o' faith. and then, atop o'
't all, they held a prayer-meetin' ower a young chap as wanted to 'list,
and nearly deafened him, till he picked up his hat and fair ran away. and
they'd tell tales in th' sunday-school o' bad lads as had been thumped and
brayed for bird-nesting o' sundays and playin' truant o' week days, and
how they took to wrestlin', dog-fightin', rabbit-runnin', and drinkin',
till at last, as if 'twere a hepitaph on a gravestone, they damned him
across th' moors wi', 'an' then he went and 'listed for a soldier,' an'
they'd all fetch a deep breath, and throw up their eyes like a hen
drinkin'."
"fwhy is ut?" said mulvaney, bringing down his hand on his thigh with a
crack, "in the name av god, fwhy is ut? i've seen ut, tu. they cheat an'
they swindle an' they lie an' they slander, an' fifty things fifty times
worse; but the last an' the worst by their reckonin' is to serve the widdy
honest. it's like the talk av childer—seein' things all round."
"plucky lot of fightin' good fights of whatsername they'd do if we
didn't see they had a quiet place to fight in. and such fightin' as theirs
is! cats on the tiles. t'other callin' to which to come on. i'd give a
month's pay to get some o' them broad-backed beggars in london sweatin'
through a day's road-makin' an' a night's rain. they'd carry on a deal
afterward—same as we're supposed to carry on. i've bin turned out of
a measly arf-license pub down lambeth way, full o' greasy kebmen, 'fore
now," said ortheris with an oath.
"maybe you were dhrunk," said mulvaney, soothingly.
"worse nor that. the forders were drunk. i was wearin' the
queen's uniform."
"i'd no particular thought to be a soldier i' them days," said learoyd,
still keeping his eye on the bare hill opposite, "but this sort o' talk
put it i' my head. they was so good, th' chapel folk, that they tumbled
ower t'other side. but i stuck to it for 'liza's sake, specially as she
was learning me to sing the bass part in a horotorio as jesse were gettin'
up. she sung like a throstle hersen, and we had practicin's night after
night for a matter of three months."
"i know what a horotorio is," said ortheris, pertly. "it's a sort of
chaplain's sing-song—words all out of the bible, and hullabaloojah
choruses."
"most greenhow hill folks played some instrument or t'other, an' they
all sung so you mignt have heard them miles away, and they were so pleased
wi' the noise they made they didn't fair to want anybody to listen. the
preacher sung high seconds when he wasn't playin' the flute, an' they set
me, as hadn't got far with big fiddle, again willie satterthwaite, to jog
his elbow when he had to get a' gate playin'. old jesse was happy if ever
a man was, for he were th' conductor an' th' first fiddle an' th' leadin'
singer, beatin' time wi' his fiddle-stick, till at times he'd rap with it
on the table, and cry out, 'now, you mun all stop; it's my turn,' and he'd
face round to his front, fair sweating wi' pride, to sing th' tenor solos.
but he were grandest i' th' choruses, waggin' his head, flinging his arms
round like a windmill, and singin' hisself black in the face. a rare
singer were jesse.
"yo' see, i was not o' much account wi' 'em all exceptin' to 'liza
roantree, and i had a deal o' time settin' quiet at meetings and horotorio
practices to hearken their talk, and if it were strange to me at
beginnin', it got stranger still at after, when i was shut on it, and
could study what it meaned.
"just after th' horotorios come off, 'liza, as had allus been weakly
like, was took very bad. i walked dr. warbottom's horse up and down a deal
of times while he were inside, where they wouldn't let me go, though i
fair ached to see her.
"'she'll be better i' noo, lad—better i' noo,' he used to say.
'tha mun ha' patience.' then they said if i was quiet i might go in, and
th' reverend amos barraclough used to read to her lyin' propped up among
th' pillows. then she began to mend a bit, and they let me carry her on to
th' settle, and when it got warm again she went about same as afore. th'
preacher and me and blast was a deal together i' them days, and i' one way
we was rare good comrades. but i could ha' stretched him time and again
with a good will. i mind one day he said he would like to go down into th'
bowels o' th' earth, and see how th' lord had builded th' framework o' th'
everlastin' hills. he were one of them chaps as had a gift o' sayin'
things. they rolled off the tip of his clever tongue, same as mulvaney
here, as would ha' made a rare good preacher if he had nobbut given his
mind to it. i lent him a suit o' miner's kit as almost buried th' little
man, and his white face down i' th' coat-collar and hat-flap looked like
the face of a boggart, and he cowered down i' th' bottom o' the waggon. i
was drivin' a tram as led up a bit of an incline up to th' cave where the
engine was pumpin', and where th' ore was brought up and put into th'
waggons as went down o' themselves, me puttin' th' brake on and th' horses
a-trottin' after. long as it was daylight we were good friends, but when
we got fair into th' dark, and could nobbut see th' day shinin' at the
hole like a lamp at a street-end, i feeled downright wicked. ma religion
dropped all away from me when i looked back at him as were always comin'
between me and 'liza. the talk was 'at they were to be wed when she got
better, an' i couldn't get her to say yes or nay to it. he began to sing a
hymn in his thin voice, and i came out wi' a chorus that was all cussin'
an' swearin' at my horses, an' i began to know how i hated him. he were
such a little chap, too. i could drop him wi' one hand down garstang's
copper-hole—a place where th' beck slithered ower th' edge on a
rock, and fell wi' a bit of a whisper into a pit as no rope i' greenhow
could plump."
again learoyd rooted up the innocent violets. "ay, he should see th'
bowels o' th' earth an' never naught else. i could take him a mile or two
along th' drift, and leave him wi' his candle doused to cry hallelujah,
wi' none to hear him and say amen. i was to lead him down th' ladder-way
to th' drift where jesse roantree was workin', and why shouldn't he slip
on th' ladder, wi' my feet on his fingers till they loosed grip, and i put
him down wi' my heel? if i went fust down th' ladder i could click hold on
him and chuck him over my head, so as he should go squshin' down the shaft
breakin' his bones at ev'ry timberin' as bill appleton did when he was
fresh, and hadn't a bone left when he wrought to th' bottom. niver a
blasted leg to walk from pately. niver an arm to put round 'liza
roantree's waist. niver no more—niver no more."
the thick lips curled back over the yellow teeth, and that flushed face
was not pretty to look upon. mulvaney nodded sympathy, and ortheris, moved
by his comrade's passion, brought up the rifle to his shoulder, and
searched the hillside for his quarry, muttering ribaldry about a sparrow,
a spout, and a thunderstorm. the voice of the watercourse supplied the
necessary small talk till learoyd picked up his story,
"but it's none so easy to kill a man like yon. when i'd given up my
horses to th' lad as took my place and i was showin' th' preacher th'
workin's, shoutin' into his ear across th' clang o' th' pumpin' engines, i
saw he were afraid o' naught; and when the lamplight showed his black
eyes, i could feel as he was masterin' me again. i were no better nor
blast chained up short and growlin' i' the depths of him while a strange
dog went safe past.
"'th' art a coward and a fool,' i said to mysen; an' i wrestled i' my
mind again' him till, when we come to garstang's copper-hole, i laid hold
o' the preacher and lifted him up over my head and held him into the
darkest on it. 'now, lad,' i says, 'it's to be one or t'other on
us—thee or me—for 'liza roantree. why, isn't thee afraid for
thysen?' i says, for he were still i' my arms as a sack. 'nay; i'm but
afraid for thee, my poor lad, as knows naught,' says he. i set him down on
th' edge, an' th' beck run stiller, an' there was no more buzzin' in my
head like when th' bee come through th' window o' jesse's house. 'what
dost tha mean?' says i.
"'i've often thought as thou ought to know,' says he, 'but 'twas hard
to tell thee. 'liza roantree's for neither on us, nor for nobody o' this
earth, dr. warbottom says—and he knows her, and her mother before
her—that she is in a decline, and she cannot live six months longer.
he's known it for many a day. steady, john! steady!' says he. and that
weak little man pulled me further back and set me again' him, and talked
it all over quiet and still, me turnin' a bunch o' candles in my hand, and
counting them ower and ower again as i listened. a deal on it were th'
regular preachin' talk, but there were a vast lot as made me begin to
think as he were more of a man than i'd ever given him credit for, till i
were cut as deep for him as i were for mysen.
"six candles we had, and we crawled and climbed all that day while they
lasted, and i said to mysen, ''liza roantree hasn't six months to live.'
and when we came into th' daylight again we were like dead men to look at,
an' blast come behind us without so much as waggin' his tail. when i saw
'liza again she looked at me a minute and says, 'who's telled tha? for i
see tha knows.' and she tried to smile as she kissed me, and i fair broke
down.
"yo' see, i was a young chap i' them days, and had seen naught o' life,
let alone death, as is allus a-waitin'. she telled me as dr. warbottom
said as greenhow air was too keen, and they were goin' to bradford, to
jesse's brother david, as worked i' a mill, and i mun hold up like a man
and a christian, and she'd pray for me. well, and they went away, and the
preacher that same back end o' th' year were appointed to another circuit,
as they call it, and i were left alone on greenhow hill.
"i tried, and i tried hard, to stick to th' chapel, but 'tweren't th'
same thing at after. i hadn't 'liza's voice to follow i' th' singin', nor
her eyes a-shinin' acrost their heads. and i' th' class-meetings they said
as i mun have some experiences to tell, and i hadn't a word to say for
mysen.
"blast and me moped a good deal, and happen we didn't behave ourselves
over well, for they dropped us and wondered however they'd come to take us
up. i can't tell how we got through th' time, while i' th' winter i gave
up my job and went to bradford. old jesse were at th' door o' th' house,
in a long street o' little houses. he'd been sendin' th' children 'way as
were clatterin' their clogs in th' causeway, for she were asleep.
"'is it thee?' he says; 'but you're not to see her. i'll none have her
wakened for a nowt like thee. she's goin' fast, and she mun go in peace.
thou 'lt never be good for naught i' th' world, and as long as thou lives
thou'll never play the big fiddle. get away, lad, get away!' so he shut
the door softly i' my face.
"nobody never made jesse my master, but it seemed to me he was about
right, and i went away into the town and knocked up against a recruiting
sergeant. the old tales o' th' chapel folk came buzzin' into my head. i
was to get away, and this were th' regular road for the likes o' me, i
listed there and then, took th' widow's shillin', and had a bunch o'
ribbons pinned i' my hat.
"but next day i found my way to david roantree's door, and jesse came
to open it. says he, 'thou's come back again wi' th' devil's colors
flyin'—thy true colors, as i always telled thee.'
"but i begged and prayed of him to let me see her nobbut to say
good-bye, till a woman calls down th' stairway, 'she says john learoyd's
to come up.' th' old man shifts aside in a flash, and lays his hand on my
arm, quite gentle like. 'but thou'lt be quiet, john,' says he, 'for she's
rare and weak. thou was allus a good lad.'
"her eyes were all alive wi' light, and her hair was thick on the
pillow round her, but her cheeks were thin—thin to frighten a man
that's strong. 'nay, father, yo mayn't say th' devil's colors. them
ribbons is pretty.' an' she held out her hands for th' hat, an' she put
all straight as a woman will wi' ribbons. 'nay, but what they're pretty,'
she says. 'eh, but i'd ha' liked to see thee i' thy red coat, john, for
thou was allus my own lad—my very own lad, and none else.'
"she lifted up her arms, and they come round my neck i' a gentle grip,
and they slacked away, and she seemed fainting. 'now yo' mun get away,
lad,' says jesse, and i picked up my hat and i came downstairs.
"th' recruiting sergeant were waitin' for me at th' corner
public-house. 'you've seen your sweetheart?' says he. 'yes, i've seen
her,' says i. 'well, we'll have a quart now, and you'll do your best to
forget her,' says he, bein' one o' them smart, bustlin' chaps. 'ay,
sergeant,' says i. 'forget her.' and i've been forgettin' her ever
since."
he threw away the wilted clump of white violets as he spoke. ortheris
suddenly rose to his knees, his rifle at his shoulder, and peered across
the valley in the clear afternoon light. his chin cuddled the stock, and
there was a twitching of the muscles of the right cheek as he sighted:
private stanley ortheris was engaged on his business, a speck of white
crawled up the watercourse.
"see that beggar? ... got 'im,"
seven hundred yards away, and a full two hundred down the hillside, the
deserter of the aurangabadis pitched forward, rolled down a red rock, and
lay very still, with his face in a clump of blue gentians, while a big
raven flapped out of the pine wood to make investigation.
"that's a clean shot, little man," said mulvaney.
learoyd thoughtfully watched the smoke clear away. "happen there was a
lass tewed up wi' him, too," said he.
ortheris did not reply. he was staring across the valley, with the
smile of the artist who looks on the completed work.
by the hoof of the wild goat up-tossed
from the cliff where she lay in the sun,
fell the stone
to the tarn where the daylight is lost;
so she fell from the light of the sun,
and alone.
now the fall was ordained from the first,
with the goat and the cliff and the tarn,
but the stone
knows only her life is accursed,
as she sinks in the depths of the tarn,
and alone.
oh, thou who hast builded the world!
oh, thou who hast lighted the sun!
oh, thou who hast darkened the tarn!
judge thou
the sin of the stone that was hurled
by the goat from the light of the sun,
as she sinks in the mire of the tarn,
even now—even now—even now!
 —from the unpublished papers of mcintosh jellaluidin.
"say is it dawn, is it dusk in thy bower, thou whom i long for, who
longest for me? oh, be it night—be it"—here he fell over a
little camel-colt that was sleeping in the serai where the horse-traders
and the best of the blackguards from central asia live; and, because he
was very drunk indeed and the night was dark, he could not rise again till
i helped him. that was the beginning of my acquaintance with mcintosh
jellaludin, when a loafer, and drunk, sings "the song of the bower," he
must be worth cultivating. he got off the camel's back and said, rather
thickly, "i—i—i'm a bit screwed, but a dip in loggerhead will
put me right again; and, i say, have you spoken to symonds about the
mare's knees?"
now loggerhead was six thousand weary miles away from us, close to
mesopotamia, where you mustn't fish and poaching is impossible, and
charley symonds' stable a half mile farther across the paddocks. it was
strange to hear all the old names, on a may night, among the horses and
camels of the sultan caravanserai. then the man seemed to remember himself
and sober down at the same time. we leaned against the camel and pointed
to a corner of the serai where a lamp was burning.
"i live there," said he, "and i should be extremely obliged if you
would be good enough to help my mutinous feet thither; for i am more than
usually drunk—most—most phenomenally tight but not in respect
to my head. 'my brain cries out against'—how does it go? but my head
rides on the—rolls on the dunghill i should have said, and controls
the qualm."
i helped him through the gangs of tethered horses and he collapsed on
the edge of the veranda in front of the line of native quarters.
"thanks—a thousand thanks! o moon and little, little stars! to
think that a man should so shamelessly ... infamous liquor too. ovid in
exile drank no worse. better. it was frozen. alas! i had no ice.
good-night. i would introduce you to my wife were i sober—or she
civilized."
a native woman came out of the darkness of the room, and began calling
the man names; so i went away. he was the most interesting loafer that i
had had the pleasure of knowing for a long time; and later on, he became a
friend of mine. he was a tall, well-built, fair man, fearfully shaken with
drink, and he looked nearer fifty than the thirty-five which, he said, was
his real age. when a man begins to sink in india, and is not sent home by
his friends as soon as may be, he falls very low from a respectable point
of view. by the time that he changes his creed, as did mcintosh, he is
past redemption.
in most big cities, natives will tell you of two or three
sahibs, generally low-caste, who have turned hindu or mussulman,
and who live more or less as such, but it is not often that you can get to
know them. as mcintosh himself used to say, "if i change my religion for
my stomach's sake, i do not seek to become a martyr to missionaries, nor
am i anxious for notoriety."
at the outset of acquaintance mcintosh warned me, "remember this. i am
not an object for charity, i require neither your money, your food, nor
your cast-off raiment. i am that rare animal, a self-supporting drunkard.
if you choose, i will smoke with you, for the tobacco of the bazars does
not, i admit, suit my palate; and i will borrow any books which you may
not specially value. it is more than likely that i shall sell them for
bottles of excessively filthy country liquors, in return, you shall share
such hospitality as my house affords. here is a charpoy on which two can
sit, and it is possible that there may, from time to time, be food in that
platter. drink, unfortunately, you will find on the premises at any hour:
and thus i make you welcome to all my poor establishment."
i was admitted to the mcintosh household—i and my good tobacco.
but nothing else. unluckily, one cannot visit a loafer in the serai by
day. friends buying horses would not understand it. consequently, i was
obliged to see mcintosh after dark. he laughed at this, and said simply,
"you are perfectly right. when i enjoyed a position in society, rather
higher than yours, i should have done exactly the same thing. good
heavens! i was once"—he spoke as though he had fallen from the
command of a regiment—"an oxford man!" this accounted for the
reference to charley symonds' stable.
"you," said mcintosh, slowly, "have not had that advantage; but, to
outward appearance, you do not seem possessed of a craving for strong
drinks. on the whole, i fancy that you are the luckier of the two. yet i
am not certain. you are—forgive my saying so even while i am smoking
your excellent tobacco—painfully ignorant of many things."
we were sitting together on the edge of his bedstead, for he owned no
chairs, watching the horses being watered for the night, while the native
woman was preparing dinner. i did not like being patronized by a loafer,
but i was his guest for the time being, though he owned only one very torn
alpaca-coat and a pair of trousers made out of gunny-bags. he took the
pipe out of his mouth, and went on judicially, "all things considered, i
doubt whether you are the luckier. i do not refer to your extremely
limited classical attainments, or your excruciating quantities, but to
your gross ignorance of matters more immediately under your notice. that,
for instance," he pointed to a woman cleaning a samovar near the well in
the centre of the serai. she was flicking the water out of the spout in
regular cadenced jerks.
"there are ways and ways of cleaning samovars. if you knew why she was
doing her work in that particular fashion, you would know what the spanish
monk meant when he said—
i the trinity illustrate,
drinking watered orange-pulp—
in three sips the arian frustrate,
while he drains his at one gulp—
and many other things which now are hidden from your eyes. however,
mrs. mcintosh has prepared dinner. let us come and eat after the fashion
of the people of the country—of whom, by the way, you know
nothing."
the native woman dipped her hand in the dish with us. this was wrong.
the wife should always wait until the husband has eaten. mcintosh
jellaludin apologized, saying—
"it is an english prejudice which i have not been able to overcome; and
she loves me. why, i have never been able to understand. i foregathered
with her at jullundur, three years ago, and she has remained with me ever
since. i believe her to be moral, and know her to be skilled in
cookery."
he patted the woman's head as he spoke, and she cooed softly. she was
not pretty to look at.
mcintosh never told me what position he had held before his fall. he
was, when sober, a scholar and a gentleman. when drunk, he was rather more
of the first than the second. he used to get drunk about once a week for
two days. on those occasions the native woman tended him while he raved in
all tongues except his own. one day, indeed, he began reciting atalanta
in calydon, and went through it to the end, beating time to the swing
of the verse with a bedstead-leg. but he did most of his ravings in greek
or german. the man's mind was a perfect rag-bag of useless things. once,
when he was beginning to get sober, he told me that i was the only
rational being in the inferno into which he had descended—a virgil
in the shades, he said—and that, in return for my tobacco, he would,
before he died, give me the materials of a new inferno that should make me
greater than dante. then he fell asleep on a horse-blanket and woke up
quite calm.
"man," said he, "when you have reached the uttermost depths of
degradation, little incidents which would vex a higher life, are to you of
no consequence. last night, my soul was among the gods; but i make no
doubt that my bestial body was writhing down here in the garbage."
"you were abominably drunk if that's what you mean," i said,
"i was drunk—filthily drunk. i who am the son of a man
with whom you have no concern—i who was once fellow of a college
whose buttery-hatch you have not seen. i was loathsomely drunk. but
consider how lightly i am touched. it is nothing to me. less than nothing;
for i do not even feel the headache which should be my portion. now, in a
higher life, how ghastly would have been my punishment, how bitter my
repentance! believe me my friend with the neglected education, the highest
is as the lowest—always supposing each degree extreme."
he turned round on the blanket, put his head between his fists and
continued—
"on the soul which i have lost and on the conscience which i have
killed, i tell you that i cannot feel! i am as the gods, knowing good and
evil, but untouched by either. is this enviable or is it not?"
when a man has lost the warning of "next morning's head," he must be in
a bad state. i answered, looking at mcintosh on the blanket, with his hair
over his eyes and his lips blue-white, that i did not think the
insensibility good enough.
"for pity's sake, don't say that! i tell you, it is good and
most enviable. think of my consolations!"
"have you so many, then, mcintosh?"
"certainly; your attempts at sarcasm which is essentially the weapon of
a cultured man, are crude. first, my attainments, my classical and
literary knowledge, blurred, perhaps, by immoderate drinking—which
reminds me that before my soul went to the gods last night, i sold the
pickering horace you so kindly loaned me. ditta mull the clothesman has
it. it fetched ten annas, and may be redeemed for a rupee—but still
infinitely superior to yours. secondly, the abiding affection of mrs.
mcintosh, best of wives. thirdly, a monument, more enduring than brass,
which i have built up in the seven years of my degradation."
he stopped here, and crawled across the room for a drink of water. he
was very shaky and sick.
he referred several times to his "treasure"—some great possession
that he owned—but i held this to be the raving of drink. he was as
poor and as proud as he could be. his manner was not pleasant, but he knew
enough about the natives, among whom seven years of his life had been
spent, to make his acquaintance worth having. he used actually to laugh at
strickland as an ignorant man—"ignorant west and east"—he
said. his boast was, first, that he was an oxford man of rare and shining
parts, which may or may not have been true—i did not know enough to
check his statements—and, secondly, that he "had his hand on the
pulse of native life"—which was a fact. as an oxford man, he struck
me as a prig: he was always throwing his education about. as a mohammedan
faquir—as mcintosh jellaludin—he was all that i wanted
for my own ends. he smoked several pounds of my tobacco, and taught me
several ounces of things worth knowing; but he would never accept any
gifts, not even when the cold weather came, and gripped the poor thin
chest under the poor thin alpaca-coat. he grew very angry, and said that i
had insulted him, and that he was not going into hospital. he had lived
like a beast and he would die rationally, like a man.
as a matter of fact, he died of pneumonia; and on the night of his
death sent over a grubby note asking me to come and help him to die.
the native woman was weeping by the side of the bed. mcintosh, wrapped
in a cotton cloth, was too weak to resent a fur coat being thrown over
him. he was very active as far as his mind was concerned, and his eyes
were blazing. when he had abused the doctor who came with me, so foully
that the indignant old fellow left, he cursed me for a few minutes and
calmed down.
then he told his wife to fetch out "the book" from a hole in the wall.
she brought out a big bundle, wrapped in the tail of a petticoat, of old
sheets of miscellaneous note-paper, all numbered and covered with fine
cramped writing. mcintosh ploughed his hand through the rubbish and
stirred it up lovingly.
"this," he said, "is my work—the book of mcintosh jellaludin,
showing what he saw and how he lived, and what befell him and others;
being also an account of the life and sins and death of mother maturin.
what mirza murad ali beg's book is to all other books on native life, will
my work be to mirza murad ali beg's!"
this, as will be conceded by any one who knows mirza murad ali beg's
book, was a sweeping statement. the papers did not look specially
valuable; but mcintosh handled them as if they were currency-notes. then
said he slowly—
"in despite the many weaknesses of your education, you have been good
to me. i will speak of your tobacco when i reach the gods. i owe you much
thanks for many kindnesses. but i abominate indebtedness. for this reason,
i bequeath to you now the monument more enduring than brass—my one
book—rude and imperfect in parts, but oh how rare in others! i
wonder if you will understand it. it is a gift more honorable than....
bah! where is my brain rambling to? you will mutilate it horribly. you
will knock out the gems you call latin quotations, you philistine, and you
will butcher the style to carve into your own jerky jargon; but you cannot
destroy the whole of it. i bequeath it to you. ethel.... my brain again!
... mrs. mcintosh, bear witness that i give the sahib all these
papers. they would be of no use to you, heart of my heart; and i lay it
upon you," he turned to me here, "that you do not let my book die in its
present form. it is yours unconditionally—the story of mcintosh
jellaludin, which is not the story of mcintosh jellaludin, but of a
greater man than he, and of a far greater woman. listen now! i am neither
mad nor drunk! that book will make you famous."
i said, "thank you," as the native woman put the bundle into my
arms.
"my only baby!" said mcintosh, with a smile. he was sinking fast, but
he continued to talk as long as breath remained. i waited for the end;
knowing that, in six cases out of ten a dying man calls for his mother. he
turned on his side and said—
"say how it came into your possession. no one will believe you, but my
name, at least, will live. you will treat it brutally, i know you will.
some of it must go; the public are fools and prudish fools. i was their
servant once. but do your mangling gently—very gently. it is a great
work, and i have paid for it in seven years' damnation."
his voice stopped for ten or twelve breaths, and then he began mumbling
a prayer of some kind in greek. the native woman cried very bitterly.
lastly, he rose in bed and said, as loudly as slowly—"not guilty, my
lord!"
then he fell back, and the stupor held him till he died. the native
woman ran into the serai among the horses, and screamed and beat her
breasts; for she had loved him.
perhaps his last sentence in life told what mcintosh had once gone
through; but, saving the big bundle of old sheets in the cloth, there was
nothing in his room to say who or what he had been.
the papers were in a hopeless muddle.
strickland helped me to sort them, and he said that the writer was
either an extreme liar or a most wonderful person. he thought the former.
one of these days, you may be able to judge for yourselves. the bundle
needed much expurgation and was full of greek nonsense, at the head of the
chapters, which has all been cut out.
if the thing is ever published, some one may perhaps remember this
story, now printed as a safeguard to prove that mcintosh jellaludin and
not i myself wrote the book of mother maturin.
i don't want the giant's robe to come true in my case.
"brother to a prince and fellow to a beggar if he be found
worthy."
the law, as quoted, lays down a fair conduct of life, and one not easy
to follow. i have been fellow to a beggar again and again under
circumstances which prevented either of us finding out whether the other
was worthy. i have still to be brother to a prince, though i once came
near to kinship with what might have been a veritable king and was
promised the reversion of a kingdom—army, law-courts, revenue and
policy all complete. but, to-day, i greatly fear that my king is dead, and
if i want a crown i must go and hunt it for myself.
the beginning of everything was in a railway train upon the road to
mhow from ajmir. there had been a deficit in the budget, which
necessitated traveling, not second-class, which is only half as dear as
first-class, but by intermediate, which is very awful indeed. there are no
cushions in the intermediate class, and the population are either
intermediate, which is eurasian, or native, which for a long night journey
is nasty, or loafer, which is amusing though intoxicated. intermediates do
not patronize refreshment-rooms. they carry their food in bundles and
pots, and buy sweets from the native sweetmeat-sellers, and drink the
roadside water. that is why in the hot weather intermediates are taken out
of the carriages dead, and in all weathers are most properly looked down
upon.
my particular intermediate happened to be empty till i reached
nasirabad, when a huge gentleman in shirt-sleeves entered, and, following
the custom of intermediates, passed the time of day. he was a wanderer and
a vagabond like myself, but with an educated taste for whiskey. he told
tales of things he had seen and done, of out-of-the-way corners of the
empire into which he had penetrated, and of adventures in which he risked
his life for a few days' food. "if india was filled with men like you and
me, not knowing more than the crows where they'd get their next day's
rations, it isn't seventy millions of revenue the land would be
paying—it's seven hundred millions," said he: and as i looked at his
mouth and chin i was disposed to agree with him. we talked
politics—the politics of loaferdom that sees things from the
underside where the lath and plaster is not smoothed off—and we
talked postal arrangements because my friend wanted to send a telegram
back from the next station to ajmir, which is the turning-off place from
the bombay to the mhow line as you travel westward. my friend had no money
beyond eight annas which he wanted for dinner, and i had no money at all,
owing to the hitch in the budget before mentioned. further, i was going
into a wilderness where, though i should resume touch with the treasury,
there were no telegraph offices. i was, therefore, unable to help him in
any way.
"we might threaten a station-master, and make him send a wire on tick,"
said my friend, "but that'd mean inquiries for you and for me, and i've
got my hands full these days. did you say you are traveling back along
this line within any days?"
"within ten," i said.
"can't you make it eight?" said he. "mine is rather urgent
business."
"i can send your telegram within ten days if that will serve you," i
said.
"i couldn't trust the wire to fetch him now i think of it. it's this
way. he leaves delhi on the d for bombay. that means he'll be running
through ajmir about the night of the d."
"but i'm going into the indian desert," i explained.
"well and good," said he. "you'll be changing at marwar junction
to get into jodhpore territory—you must do that—and he'll be
coming through marwar junction in the early morning of the th by the
bombay mail. can you be at marwar junction on that time? 'twon't be
inconveniencing you because i know that there's precious few pickings to
be got out of these central india states—even though you pretend to
be correspondent of the backwoodsman."
"have you ever tried that trick?" i asked.
"again and again, but the residents find you out, and then you get
escorted to the border before you've time to get your knife into them. but
about my friend here. i must give him a word o' mouth to tell him
what's come to me or else he won't know where to go. i would take it more
than kind of you if you was to come out of central india in time to catch
him at marwar junction, and say to him:—'he has gone south for the
week.' he'll know what that means. he's a big man with a red beard, and a
great swell he is. you'll find him sleeping like a gentleman with all his
luggage round him in a second-class compartment. but don't you be afraid.
slip down the window, and say:—'he has gone south for the week,' and
he'll tumble. it's only cutting your time of stay in those parts by two
days. i ask you as a stranger—going to the west," he said, with
emphasis.
"where have you come from?" said i.
"from the east," said he, "and i am hoping that you will give him the
message on the square—for the sake of my mother as well as your
own."
englishmen are not usually softened by appeals to the memory of their
mothers, but for certain reasons, which will be fully apparent, i saw fit
to agree.
"it's more than a little matter," said he, "and that's why i ask you to
do it—and now i know that i can depend on you doing it. a
second-class carriage at marwar junction, and a red-haired man asleep in
it. you'll be sure to remember. i get out at the next station, and i must
hold on there till he comes or sends me what i want."
"i'll give the message if i catch him," i said, "and for the sake of
your mother as well as mine i'll give you a word of advice. don't try to
run the central india states just now as the correspondent of the
backwoodsman. there's a real one knocking about here, and it might
lead to trouble."
"thank you," said he, simply, "and when will the swine be gone? i can't
starve because he's ruining my work. i wanted to get hold of the degumber
rajah down here about his father's widow, and give him a jump."
"what did he do to his father's widow then?"
"filled her up with red pepper and slippered her to death as she hung
from a beam. i found that out myself and i'm the only man that would dare
going into the state to get hush-money for it. they'll try to poison me,
same as they did in chortumna when i went on the loot there. but you'll
give the man at marwar junction my message?"
he got out at a little roadside station, and i reflected. i had heard,
more than once, of men personating correspondents of newspapers and
bleeding small native states with threats of exposure, but i had never met
any of the caste before. they lead a hard life, and generally die with
great suddenness. the native states have a wholesome horror of english
newspapers, which may throw light on their peculiar methods of government,
and do their best to choke correspondents with champagne, or drive them
out of their mind with four-in-hand barouches. they do not understand that
nobody cares a straw for the internal administration of native states so
long as oppression and crime are kept within decent limits, and the ruler
is not drugged, drunk, or diseased from one end of the year to the other.
native states were created by providence in order to supply picturesque
scenery, tigers, and tall-writing. they are the dark places of the earth,
full of unimaginable cruelty, touching the railway and the telegraph on
one side, and, on the other, the days of harun-al-raschid. when i left the
train i did business with divers kings, and in eight days passed through
many changes of life. sometimes i wore dress-clothes and consorted with
princes and politicals, drinking from crystal and eating from silver.
sometimes i lay out upon the ground and devoured what i could get, from a
plate made of a flapjack, and drank the running water, and slept under the
same rug as my servant. it was all in the day's work.
then i headed for the great indian desert upon the proper date, as i
had promised, and the night mail set me down at marwar junction, where a
funny little, happy-go-lucky, native-managed railway runs to jodhpore. the
bombay mail from delhi makes a short halt at marwar. she arrived as i got
in, and i had just time to hurry to her platform and go down the
carriages. there was only one second-class on the train. i slipped the
window and looked down upon a flaming red beard, half covered by a railway
rug. that was my man, fast asleep, and i dug him gently in the ribs. he
woke with a grunt and i saw his face in the light of the lamps. it was a
great and shining face.
"tickets again?" said he.
"no," said i. "i am to tell you that he is gone south for the week. he
is gone south for the week!"
the train had begun to move out. the red man rubbed his eyes. "he has
gone south for the week," he repeated. "now that's just like his
impidence. did he say that i was to give you anything?—'cause i
won't."
"he didn't," i said, and dropped away, and watched the red lights die
out in the dark. it was horribly cold because the wind was blowing off the
sands. i climbed into my own train—not an intermediate carriage this
time—and went to sleep.
if the man with the beard had given me a rupee i should have kept it as
a memento of a rather curious affair. but the consciousness of having done
my duty was my only reward.
later on i reflected that two gentlemen like my friends could not do
any good if they foregathered and personated correspondents of newspapers,
and might, if they "stuck up" one of the little rat-trap states of central
india or southern rajputana, get themselves into serious difficulties. i
therefore took some trouble to describe them as accurately as i could
remember to people who would be interested in deporting them: and
succeeded, so i was later informed, in having them headed back from the
degumber borders.
then i became respectable, and returned to an office where there were
no kings and no incidents except the daily manufacture of a newspaper. a
newspaper office seems to attract every conceivable sort of person, to the
prejudice of discipline. zenana-mission ladies arrive, and beg that the
editor will instantly abandon all his duties to describe a christian
prize-giving in a back-slum of a perfectly inaccessible village; colonels
who have been overpassed for commands sit down and sketch the outline of a
series of ten, twelve, or twenty-four leading articles on seniority
versus selection; missionaries wish to know why they have not been
permitted to escape from their regular vehicles of abuse and swear at a
brother-missionary under special patronage of the editorial we; stranded
theatrical companies troop up to explain that they cannot pay for their
advertisements, but on their return from new zealand or tahiti will do so
with interest; inventors of patent punkah-pulling machines, carriage
couplings and unbreakable swords and axle-trees call with specifications
in their pockets and hours at their disposal; tea-companies enter and
elaborate their prospectuses with the office pens; secretaries of
ball-committees clamor to have the glories of their last dance more fully
expounded; strange ladies rustle in and say:—"i want a hundred
lady's cards printed at once, please," which is manifestly part of
an editor's duty; and every dissolute ruffian that ever tramped the grand
trunk road makes it his business to ask for employment as a proofreader.
and, all the time, the telephone-bell is ringing madly, and kings are
being killed on the continent, and empires are saying—"you're
another," and mister gladstone is calling down brimstone upon the british
dominions, and the little black copy-boys are whining,
"kaa-pi-chay-ha-yeh" (copy wanted) like tired bees, and most of the
paper is as blank as modred's shield,
but that is the amusing part of the year. there are six other months
wherein none ever come to call, and the thermometer walks inch by inch up
to the top of the glass, and the office is darkened to just above
reading-light, and the press machines are red-hot of touch, and nobody
writes anything but accounts of amusements in the hill-stations or
obituary notices. then the telephone becomes a tinkling terror, because it
tells you of the sudden deaths of men and women that you knew intimately,
and the prickly-heat covers you as with a garment, and you sit down and
write:—"a slight increase of sickness is reported from the khuda
janta khan district. the outbreak is purely sporadic in its nature, and,
thanks to the energetic efforts of the district authorities, is now almost
at an end. it is, however, with deep regret we record the death, etc."
then the sickness really breaks out, and the less recording and
reporting the better for the peace of the subscribers. but the empires and
the kings continue to divert themselves as selfishly as before, and the
foreman thinks that a daily paper really ought to come out once in
twenty-four hours, and all the people at the hill-stations in the middle
of their amusements say:—"good gracious! why can't the paper be
sparkling? i'm sure there's plenty going on up here."
that is the dark half of the moon, and, as the advertisements say,
"must be experienced to be appreciated."
it was in that season, and a remarkably evil season, that the paper
began running the last issue of the week on saturday night, which is to
say sunday morning, after the custom of a london paper. this was a great
convenience, for immediately after the paper was put to bed, the dawn
would lower the thermometer from  to almost  for half an hour, and
in that chill—you have no idea how cold is  on the grass until
you begin to pray for it—a very tired man could set off to sleep ere
the heat roused him.
one saturday night it was my pleasant duty to put the paper to bed
alone. a king or courtier or a courtesan or a community was going to die
or get a new constitution, or do something that was important on the other
side of the world, and the paper was to be held open till the latest
possible minute in order to catch the telegram. it was a pitchy black
night, as stifling as a june night can be, and the loo, the red-hot
wind from the westward, was booming among the tinder-dry trees and
pretending that the rain was on its heels. now and again a spot of almost
boiling water would fall on the dust with the flop of a frog, but all our
weary world knew that was only pretence. it was a shade cooler in the
press-room than the office, so i sat there, while the type ticked and
clicked, and the night-jars hooted at the windows, and the all but naked
compositors wiped the sweat from their foreheads and called for water. the
thing that was keeping us back, whatever it was, would not come off,
though the loo dropped and the last type was set, and the whole
round earth stood still in the choking heat, with its finger on its lip,
to wait the event. i drowsed, and wondered whether the telegraph was a
blessing, and whether this dying man, or struggling people was aware of
the inconvenience the delay was causing. there was no special reason
beyond the heat and worry to make tension, but, as the clock hands crept
up to three o'clock and the machines spun their fly-wheels two and three
times to see that all was in order, before i said the word that would set
them off, i could have shrieked aloud.
then the roar and rattle of the wheels shivered the quiet into little
bits. i rose to go away, but two men in white clothes stood in front of
me. the first one said:—"it's him!" the second said:—"so it
is!" and they both laughed almost as loudly as the machinery roared, and
mopped their foreheads. "we see there was a light burning across the road
and we were sleeping in that ditch there for coolness, and i said to my
friend here, the office is open. let's come along and speak to him as
turned us back from the degumber state," said the smaller of the two. he
was the man i had met in the mhow train, and his fellow was the
red-bearded man of marwar junction. there was no mistaking the eyebrows of
the one or the beard of the other.
i was not pleased, because i wished to go to sleep, not to squabble
with loafers. "what do you want?" i asked.
"half an hour's talk with you cool and comfortable, in the office,"
said the red-bearded man. "we'd like some drink—the contrack
doesn't begin yet, peachey, so you needn't look—but what we really
want is advice. we don't want money. we ask you as a favor, because you
did us a bad turn about degumber."
i led from the press-room to the stifling office with the maps on the
walls, and the red-haired man rubbed his hands. "that's something like,"
said he, "this was the proper shop to come to. now, sir, let me introduce
to you brother peachey carnehan, that's him, and brother daniel dravot,
that is me, and the less said about our professions the better, for
we have been most things in our time. soldier, sailor, compositor,
photographer, proof-reader, street-preacher, and correspondents of the
backwoodsman when we thought the paper wanted one. carnehan is
sober, and so am i. look at us first and see that's sure. it will save you
cutting into my talk. we'll take one of your cigars apiece, and you shall
see us light."
i watched the test. the men were absolutely sober, so i gave them each
a tepid peg.
"well and good," said carnehan of the eyebrows, wiping the froth
from his moustache. "let me talk now, dan, we have been all over india,
mostly on foot. we have been boiler-fitters, engine-drivers, petty
contractors, and all that, and we have decided that india isn't big enough
for such as us."
they certainly were too big for the office. dravot's beard seemed to
fill half the room and carnehan's shoulders the other half, as they sat on
the big table. carnehan continued:—"the country isn't half worked
out because they that governs it won't let you touch it. they spend all
their blessed time in governing it, and you can't lift a spade, nor chip a
rock, nor look for oil, nor anything like that without all the government
saying—'leave it alone and let us govern.' therefore, such as it is,
we will let it alone, and go away to some other place where a man isn't
crowded and can come to his own. we are not little men, and there is
nothing that we are afraid of except drink, and we have signed a contrack
on that. therefore, we are going away to be kings."
"kings in our own right," muttered dravot.
"yes, of course," i said. "you've been tramping in the sun, and it's a
very warm night, and hadn't you better sleep over the notion? come
to-morrow."
"neither drunk nor sunstruck," said dravot. "we have slept over the
notion half a year, and require to see books and atlases, and we have
decided that there is only one place now in the world that two strong men
can sar-a-whack. they call it kafiristan. by my reckoning it's the
top right-hand corner of afghanistan, not more than three hundred miles
from peshawur. they have two and thirty heathen idols there, and we'll be
the thirty-third. it's a mountaineous country, and the women of those
parts are very beautiful."
"but that is provided against in the contrack," said carnehan. "neither
women nor liquor, daniel."
"and that's all we know, except that no one has gone there, and they
fight, and in any place where they fight a man who knows how to drill men
can always be a king. we shall go to those parts and say to any king we
find—'d'you want to vanquish your foes?' and we will show him how to
drill men; for that we know better than anything else. then we will
subvert that king and seize his throne and establish a dy-nasty."
"you'll be cut to pieces before you're fifty miles across the border,"
i said. "you have to travel through afghanistan to get to that country.
it's one mass of mountains and peaks and glaciers, and no englishman has
been through it. the people are utter brutes, and even if you reached them
you couldn't do anything."
"that's more like," said carnehan. "if you could think us a little more
mad we would be more pleased. we have come to you to know about this
country, to read a book about it, and to be shown maps. we want you to
tell us that we are fools and to show us your books." he turned to the
bookcases.
"are you at all in earnest?" i said.
"a little," said dravot, sweetly. "as big a map as you have got, even
if it's all blank where kafiristan is, and any books you've got. we can
read, though we aren't very educated."
i uncased the big thirty-two-miles-to-the-inch map of india, and two
smaller frontier maps, hauled down volume inf-kan of the encyclopaedia
britannica, and the men consulted them.
"see here!" said dravot, his thumb on the map. "up to jagdallak,
peachey and me know the road. we was there with roberts's army. we'll have
to turn off to the right at jagdallak through laghmann territory. then we
get among the hills—fourteen thousand feet—fifteen
thousand—it will be cold work there, but it don't look very far on
the map."
i handed him wood on the sources of the oxus. carnehan was deep
in the encyclopaedia.
"they're a mixed lot," said dravot, reflectively; "and it won't help us
to know the names of their tribes. the more tribes the more they'll fight,
and the better for us. from jagdallak to ashang. h'mm!"
"but all the information about the country is as sketchy and inaccurate
as can be," i protested. "no one knows anything about it really. here's
the file of the united services institute. read what bellew
says."
"blow bellew!" said carnehan. "dan, they're an all-fired lot of
heathens, but this book here says they think they're related to us
english."
i smoked while the men pored over raverty, wood, the maps
and the encyclopaedia.
"there is no use your waiting," said dravot, politely, "it's about four
o'clock now. we'll go before six o'clock if you want to sleep, and we
won't steal any of the papers. don't you sit up. we're two harmless
lunatics, and if you come, to-morrow evening, down to the serai we'll say
good-bye to you."
"you are two fools," i answered, "you'll be turned back at the
frontier or cut up the minute you set foot in afghanistan. do you want any
money or a recommendation down-country? i can help you to the chance of
work next week."
"next week we shall be hard at work ourselves, thank you," said dravot.
"it isn't so easy being a king as it looks. when we've got our kingdom in
going order we'll let you know, and you can come up and help us to govern
it."
"would two lunatics make a contrack like that?" said carnehan, with
subdued pride, showing me a greasy half-sheet of note-paper on which was
written the following. i copied it, then and there, as a curiosity:
 this contract between me and you persuing witnesseth in the name
of god—amen and so forth.
(one) that me and you will settle this matter together: i.e.,
to be kings of kafiristan.
(two) that you and me will not, while this matter is being settled,
look at any liquor, nor any woman, black, white or brown,
so
as to get mixed up with one or the other harmful.
(three) that we conduct ourselves with dignity and discretion, and
if one of us gets into trouble the other will stay by him.
signed by you and me this day.
peachey taliaferro carnehan.
daniel dravot.
both gentlemen at large.
"there was no need for the last article," said carnehan, blushing
modestly; "but it looks regular. now you know the sort of men that loafers
are—we are loafers, dan, until we get out of india—and
do you think that we would sign a contrack like that unless we was
in earnest? we have kept away from the two things that make life worth
having."
"you won't enjoy your lives much longer if you are going to try this
idiotic adventure. don't set the office on fire," i said, "and go away
before nine o'clock."
i left them still poring over the maps and making notes on the back of
the "contrack." "be sure to come down to the serai to-morrow," were their
parting words.
the kumharsen serai is the great four-square sink of humanity where the
strings of camels and horses from the north load and unload. all the
nationalities of central asia may be found there, and most of the folk of
india proper. balkh and bokhara there meet bengal and bombay, and try to
draw eye-teeth. you can buy ponies, turquoises, persian pussy-cats,
saddle-bags, fat-tailed sheep and musk in the kumharsen serai, and get
many strange things for nothing. in the afternoon i went down there to see
whether my friends intended to keep their word or were lying about
drunk.
a priest attired in fragments of ribbons and rags stalked up to me,
gravely twisting a child's paper whirligig. behind him was his servant
bending under the load of a crate of mud toys, the two were loading up two
camels, and the inhabitants of the serai watched them with shrieks of
laughter.
"the priest is mad," said a horse-dealer to me, "he is going up to
kabul to sell toys to the amir. he will either be raised to honor or have
his head cut off. he came in here this morning and has been behaving madly
ever since."
"the witless are under the protection of god," stammered a flat-cheeked
usbeg in broken hindi. "they foretell future events."
"would they could have foretold that my caravan would have been cut up
by the shinwaris almost within shadow of the pass!" grunted the eusufzai
agent of a rajputana trading-house whose goods had been feloniously
diverted into the hands of other robbers just across the border, and whose
misfortunes were the laughing-stock of the bazar. "ohè, priest,
whence come you and whither do you go?"
"from roum have i come," shouted the priest, waving his whirligig;
"from roum, blown by the breath of a hundred devils across the sea! o
thieves, robbers, liars, the blessing of pir khan on pigs, dogs, and
perjurers! who will take the protected of god to the north to sell charms
that are never still to the amir? the camels shall not gall, the sons
shall not fall sick, and the wives shall remain faithful while they are
away, of the men who give me place in their caravan. who will assist me to
slipper the king of the roos with a golden slipper with a silver heel? the
protection of pir khan be upon his labors!" he spread out the skirts of
his gaberdine and pirouetted between the lines of tethered horses.
"there starts a caravan from peshawur to kabul in twenty days,
huzrut," said the eusufzai trader, "my camels go therewith. do thou
also go and bring us good luck."
"i will go even now!" shouted the priest, "i will depart upon my winged
camels, and be at peshawur in a day! ho! hazar mir khan," he yelled to his
servant, "drive out the camels, but let me first mount my own."
he leaped on the back of his beast as it knelt, and, turning round to
me, cried:—"come thou also, sahib, a little along the road, and i
will sell thee a charm—an amulet that shall make thee king of
kafiristan."
then the light broke upon me, and i followed the two camels out of the
serai till we reached open road and the priest halted.
"what d' you think o' that?" said he in english. "carnehan can't talk
their patter, so i've made him my servant. he makes a handsome servant,
'tisn't for nothing that i've been knocking about the country for fourteen
years. didn't i do that talk neat? we'll hitch on to a caravan at peshawur
till we get to jagdallak, and then we'll see if we can get donkeys for our
camels, and strike into kafiristan. whirligigs for the amir, o lor! put
your hand under the camel-bags and tell me what you feel."
i felt the butt of a martini, and another and another.
"twenty of 'em," said dravot, placidly. "twenty of 'em, and ammunition
to correspond, under the whirligigs and the mud dolls."
"heaven help you if you are caught with those things!" i said. "a
martini is worth her weight in silver among the pathans."
"fifteen hundred rupees of capital—every rupee we could beg,
borrow, or steal—are invested on these two camels," said dravot. "we
won't get caught. we're going through the khaiber with a regular caravan.
who'd touch a poor mad priest?"
"have you got everything you want?" i asked, overcome with
astonishment.
"not yet, but we shall soon. give us a memento of your kindness,
brother. you did me a service yesterday, and that time in marwar.
half my kingdom shall you have, as the saying is." i slipped a small charm
compass from my watch-chain and handed it up to the priest.
"good-bye," said dravot, giving me hand cautiously. "it's the last time
we'll shake hands with an englishman these many days. shake hands with
him, carnehan," he cried, as the second camel passed me.
carnehan leaned down and shook hands. then the camels passed away along
the dusty road, and i was left alone to wonder. my eye could detect no
failure in the disguises. the scene in serai attested that they were
complete to the native mind. there was just the chance, therefore, that
carnehan and dravot would be able to wander through afghanistan without
detection. but, beyond, they would find death, certain and awful
death.
ten days later a native friend of mine, giving me the news of the day
from peshawur, wound up his letter with:—"there has been much
laughter here on account of a certain mad priest who is going in his
estimation to sell petty gauds and insignificant trinkets which he
ascribes as great charms to h.h. the amir of bokhara. he passed through
peshawur and associated himself to the second summer caravan that goes to
kabul. the merchants are pleased because through superstition they imagine
that such mad fellows bring good-fortune."
the two, then, were beyond the border. i would have prayed for them,
but, that night, a real king died in europe, and demanded on obituary
notice.
the wheel of the world swings through the same phases again and again.
summer passed and winter thereafter, and came and passed again. the daily
paper continued and i with it, and upon the third summer there fell a hot
night, a night-issue, and a strained waiting for something to be
telegraphed from the other side of the world, exactly as had happened
before. a few great men had died in the past two years, the machines
worked with more clatter, and some of the trees in the office garden were
a few feet taller. but that was all the difference.
i passed over to the press-room, and went through just such a scene as
i have already described. the nervous tension was stronger than it had
been two years before, and i felt the heat more acutely. at three o'clock
i cried, "print off," and turned to go, when there crept to my chair what
was left of a man. he was bent into a circle, his head was sunk between
his shoulders, and he moved his feet one over the other like a bear. i
could hardly see whether he walked or crawled—this rag-wrapped,
whining cripple who addressed me by name, crying that he was come back.
"can you give me a drink?" he whimpered. "for the lord's sake, give me a
drink!"
i went back to the office, the man following with groans of pain, and i
turned up the lamp.
"don't you know me?" he gasped, dropping into a chair, and he turned
his drawn face, surmounted by a shock of grey hair, to the light.
i looked at him intently. once before had i seen eyebrows that met over
the nose in an inch-broad black band, but for the life of me i could not
tell where.
"i don't know you," i said, handing him the whiskey. "what can i do for
you?"
he took a gulp of the spirit raw, and shivered in spite of the
suffocating heat.
"i've come back," he repeated; "and i was the king of
kafiristan—me and dravot—crowned kings we was! in this office
we settled it—you setting there and giving us the books. i am
peachey—peachey taliaferro carnehan, and you've been setting here
ever since—o lord!"
i was more than a little astonished, and expressed my feelings
accordingly,
"it's true," said carnehan, with a dry cackle, nursing his feet, which
were wrapped in rags. "true as gospel. kings we were, with crowns upon our
heads—me and dravot—poor dan—oh, poor, poor dan, that
would never take advice, not though i begged of him!"
"take the whiskey," i said, "and take your own time. tell me all you
can recollect of everything from beginning to end. you got across the
border on your camels, dravot dressed as a mad priest and you his servant.
do you remember that?"
"i ain't mad—yet, but i shall be that way soon. of course i
remember. keep looking at me, or maybe my words will go all to pieces.
keep looking at me in my eyes and don't say anything."
i leaned forward and looked into his face as steadily as i could. he
dropped one hand upon the table and i grasped it by the wrist. it was
twisted like a bird's claw, and upon the back was a ragged, red,
diamond-shaped scar.
"no, don't look there. look at me," said carnehan.
"that comes afterward, but for the lord's sake don't distrack me. we
left with that caravan, me and dravot playing all sorts of antics to amuse
the people we were with. dravot used to make us laugh in the evenings when
all the people was cooking their dinners—cooking their dinners, and
... what did they do then? they lit little fires with sparks that went
into dravot's beard, and we all laughed—fit to die. little red fires
they was, going into dravot's big red beard—so funny." his eyes left
mine and he smiled foolishly.
"you went as far as jagdallak with that caravan," i said, at a venture,
"after you had lit those fires. to jagdallak, where you turned off to try
to get into kafiristan."
"no, we didn't neither. what are you talking about? we turned off
before jagdallak, because we heard the roads was good. but they wasn't
good enough for our two camels—mine and dravot's. when we left the
caravan, dravot took off all his clothes and mine too, and said we would
be heathen, because the kafirs didn't allow mohammedans to talk to them.
so we dressed betwixt and between, and such a sight as daniel dravot i
never saw yet nor expect to see again. he burned half his beard, and slung
a sheep-skin over his shoulder, and shaved his head into patterns. he
shaved mine, too, and made me wear outrageous things to look like a
heathen. that was in a most mountaineous country, and our camels couldn't
go along any more because of the mountains. they were tall and black, and
coming home i saw them fight like wild goats—there are lots of goats
in kafiristan. and these mountains, they never keep still, no more than
the goats. always fighting they are, and don't let you sleep at
night."
"take some more whiskey," i said, very slowly. "what did you and daniel
dravot do when the camels could go no further because of the rough roads
that led into kafiristan?"
"what did which do? there was a party called peachey taliaferro
carnehan that was with dravot. shall i tell you about him? he died out
there in the cold. slap from the bridge fell old peachey, turning and
twisting in the air like a penny whirligig that you can sell to the
amir.—no; they was two for three ha'pence, those whirligigs, or i am
much mistaken and woful sore. and then these camels were no use, and
peachey said to dravot—'for the lord's sake, let's get out of this
before our heads are chopped off,' and with that they killed the camels
all among the mountains, not having anything in particular to eat, but
first they took off the boxes with the guns and the ammunition, till two
men came along driving four mules. dravot up and dances in front of them,
singing,—'sell me four mules.' says the first man,—'if you are
rich enough to buy, you are rich enough to rob;' but before ever he could
put his hand to his knife, dravot breaks his neck over his knee, and the
other party runs away. so carnehan loaded the mules with the rifles that
was taken off the camels, and together we starts forward into those bitter
cold mountaineous parts, and never a road broader than the back of your
hand."
he paused for a moment, while i asked him if he could remember the
nature of the country through which he had journeyed.
"i am telling you as straight as i can, but my head isn't as good as it
might be. they drove nails through it to make me hear better how dravot
died. the country was mountaineous and the mules were most contrary, and
the inhabitants was dispersed and solitary. they went up and up, and down
and down, and that other party, carnehan, was imploring of dravot not to
sing and whistle so loud, for fear of bringing down the tremenjus
avalanches. but dravot says that if a king couldn't sing it wasn't worth
being king, and whacked the mules over the rump, and never took no heed
for ten cold days. we came to a big level valley all among the mountains,
and the mules were near dead, so we killed them, not having anything in
special for them or us to eat. we sat upon the boxes, and played odd and
even with the cartridges that was jolted out,
"then ten men with bows and arrows ran down that valley, chasing twenty
men with bows and arrows, and the row was tremenjus. they was fair
men—fairer than you or me—with yellow hair and remarkable well
built. says dravot, unpacking the guns—'this is the beginning of the
business. we'll fight for the ten men,' and with that he fires two rifles
at the twenty men, and drops one of them at two hundred yards from the
rock where we was sitting. the other men began to run, but carnehan and
dravot sits on the boxes picking them off at all ranges, up and down the
valley. then we goes up to the ten men that had run across the snow too,
and they fires a footy little arrow at us. dravot he shoots above their
heads and they all falls down flat. then he walks over them and kicks
them, and then he lifts them up and shakes hands all round to make them
friendly like. he calls them and gives them the boxes to carry, and waves
his hand for all the world as though he was king already. they takes the
boxes and him across the valley and up the hill into a pine wood on the
top, where there was half a dozen big stone idols. dravot he goes to the
biggest—a fellow they call imbra—and lays a rifle and a
cartridge at his feet, rubbing his nose respectful with his own nose,
patting him on the head, and saluting in front of it. he turns round to
the men and nods his head, and says,—'that's all right. i'm in the
know too, and all these old jim-jams are my friends.' then he opens his
mouth and points down it, and when the first man brings him food, he
says—'no;' and when the second man brings him food, he
says—'no;' but when one of the old priests and the boss of the
village brings him food, he says—'yes;' very haughty, and eats it
slow. that was how we came to our first village, without any trouble, just
as though we had tumbled from the skies. but we tumbled from one of those
damned rope-bridges, you see, and you couldn't expect a man to laugh much
after that."
"take some more whiskey and go on," i said. "that was the first village
you came into. how did you get to be king?"
"i wasn't king," said carnehan. "dravot he was the king, and a handsome
man he looked with the gold crown on his head and all. him and the other
party stayed in that village, and every morning dravot sat by the side of
old imbra, and the people came and worshipped. that was dravot's order.
then a lot of men came into the valley, and carnehan and dravot picks them
off with the rifles before they knew where they was, and runs down into
the valley and up again the other side, and finds another village, same as
the first one, and the people all falls down flat on their faces, and
dravot says, 'now what is the trouble between you two villages?' and the
people points to a woman, as fair as you or me, that was carried off, and
dravot takes her back to the first village and counts up the
dead—eight there was. for each dead man dravot pours a little milk
on the ground and waves his arms like a whirligig and 'that's all right,'
says he. then he and carnehan takes the big boss of each village by the
arm and walks them down into the valley, and shows them how to scratch a
line with a spear right down the valley, and gives each a sod of turf from
both sides o' the line. then all the people comes down and shouts like the
devil and all, and dravot says,—'go and dig the land, and be
fruitful and multiply,' which they did, though they didn't understand.
then we asks the names of things in their lingo—bread and water and
fire and idols and such, and dravot leads the priest of each village up to
the idol, and says he must sit there and judge the people, and if anything
goes wrong he is to be shot.
"next week they was all turning up the land in the valley as quiet as
bees and much prettier, and the priests heard all the complaints and told
dravot in dumb show what it was about. 'that's just the beginning,' says
dravot. 'they think we're gods.' he and carnehan picks out twenty good men
and shows them how to click off a rifle, and form fours, and advance in
line, and they was very pleased to do so, and clever to see the hang of
it. then he takes out his pipe and his baccy-pouch and leaves one at one
village and one at the other, and off we two goes to see what was to be
done in the next valley. that was all rock, and there was a little village
there, and carnehan says,—'send 'em to the old valley to plant,' and
takes 'em there and gives 'em some land that wasn't took before. they were
a poor lot, and we blooded 'em with a kid before letting 'em into the new
kingdom. that was to impress the people, and then they settled down quiet,
and carnehan went back to dravot who had got into another valley, all snow
and ice and most mountaineous. there was no people there and the army got
afraid, so dravot shoots one of them, and goes on till he finds some
people in a village, and the army explains that unless the people wants to
be killed they had better not shoot their little matchlocks; for they had
matchlocks. we makes friends with the priest and i stays there alone with
two of the army, teaching the men how to drill, and a thundering big chief
comes across the snow with kettle-drums and horns twanging, because he
heard there was a new god kicking about. carnehan sights for the brown of
the men half a mile across the snow and wings one of them. then he sends a
message to the chief that, unless he wished to be killed, he must come and
shake hands with me and leave his arms behind. the chief comes alone
first, and carnehan shakes hands with him and whirls his arms about, same
as dravot used, and very much surprised that chief was, and strokes my
eyebrows. then carnehan goes alone to the chief, and asks him in dumb show
if he had an enemy he hated. 'i have,' says the chief. so carnehan weeds
out the pick of his men, and sets the two of the army to show them drill
and at the end of two weeks the men can manoeuvre about as well as
volunteers. so he marches with the chief to a great big plain on the top
of a mountain, and the chief's men rushes into a village and takes it; we
three martinis firing into the brown of the enemy. so we took that village
too, and i gives the chief a rag from my coat and says, 'occupy till i
come:' which was scriptural. by way of a reminder, when me and the army
was eighteen hundred yards away, i drops a bullet near him standing on the
snow, and all the people falls flat on their faces. then i sends a letter
to dravot, wherever he be by land or by sea."
at the risk of throwing the creature out of train i
interrupted,—"how could you write a letter up yonder?"
"the letter?—oh!—the letter! keep looking at me between the
eyes, please. it was a string-talk letter, that we'd learned the way of it
from a blind beggar in the punjab."
i remember that there had once come to the office a blind man with a
knotted twig and a piece of string which he wound round the twig according
to some cypher of his own. he could, after the lapse of days or hours,
repeat the sentence which he had reeled up. he had reduced the alphabet to
eleven primitive sounds; and tried to teach me his method, but failed.
"i sent that letter to dravot," said carnehan; "and told him to come
back because this kingdom was growing too big for me to handle, and then i
struck for the first valley, to see how the priests were working. they
called the village we took along with the chief, bashkai, and the first
village we took, er-heb. the priests at er-heb was doing all right, but
they had a lot of pending cases about land to show me, and some men from
another village had been firing arrows at night. i went out and looked for
that village and fired four rounds at it from a thousand yards. that used
all the cartridges i cared to spend, and i waited for dravot, who had been
away two or three months, and i kept my people quiet.
"one morning i heard the devil's own noise of drums and horns, and dan
dravot marches down the hill with his army and a tail of hundreds of men,
and, which was the most amazing—a great gold crown on his head. 'my
gord, carnehan,' says daniel, 'this is a tremenjus business, and we've got
the whole country as far as it's worth having. i am the son of alexander
by queen semiramis, and you're my younger brother and a god too! it's the
biggest thing we've ever seen. i've been marching and fighting for six
weeks with the army, and every footy little village for fifty miles has
come in rejoiceful; and more than that, i've got the key of the whole
show, as you'll see, and i've got a crown for you! i told 'em to make two
of 'em at a place called shu, where the gold lies in the rock like suet in
mutton. gold i've seen, and turquoise i've kicked out of the cliffs, and
there's garnets in the sands of the river, and here's a chunk of amber
that a man brought me. call up all the priests and, here, take your
crown.'
"one of the men opens a black hair bag and i slips the crown on. it was
too small and too heavy, but i wore it for the glory. hammered gold it
was—five pound weight, like a hoop of a barrel.
"'peachey,' says dravot, 'we don't want to fight no more. the craft's
the trick so help me!' and he brings forward that same chief that i left
at bashkai—billy fish we called him afterward, because he was so
like billy fish that drove the big tank-engine at mach on the bolan in the
old days. 'shake hands with him,' says dravot, and i shook hands and
nearly dropped, for billy fish gave me the grip. i said nothing, but tried
him with the fellow craft grip. he answers, all right, and i tried the
master's grip, but that was a slip. 'a fellow craft he is!' i says to dan.
'does he know the word?' 'he does,' says dan, 'and all the priests know.
it's a miracle! the chiefs and the priests can work a fellow craft lodge
in a way that's very like ours, and they've cut the marks on the rocks,
but they don't know the third degree, and they've come to find out. it's
gord's truth. i've known these long years that the afghans knew up to the
fellow craft degree, but this is a miracle. a god and a grand-master of
the craft am i, and a lodge in the third degree i will open, and we'll
raise the head priests and the chiefs of the villages.'
"'it's against all the law,' i says, 'holding a lodge without warrant
from any one; and we never held office in any lodge.'
"'it's a master-stroke of policy,' says dravot. 'it means running the
country as easy as a four-wheeled bogy on a down grade. we can't stop to
inquire now, or they'll turn against us. i've forty chiefs at my heel, and
passed and raised according to their merit they shall be. billet these men
on the villages and see that we run up a lodge of some kind. the temple of
imbra will do for the lodge-room. the women must make aprons as you show
them. i'll hold a levee of chiefs to-night and lodge to-morrow.'
"i was fair run off my legs, but i wasn't such a fool as not to see
what a pull this craft business gave us. i showed the priests' families
how to make aprons of the degrees, but for dravot's apron, the blue border
and marks was made of turquoise lumps on white hide, not cloth. we took a
great square stone in the temple for the master's chair, and little stones
for the officers' chairs, and painted the black pavement with white
squares, and did what we could to make things regular.
"at the levee which was held that night on the hillside with big
bonfires, dravot gives out that him and me were gods and sons of
alexander, and past grand-masters in the craft, and was come to make
kafiristan a country where every man should eat in peace and drink in
quiet, and specially obey us. then the chiefs come round to shake hands,
and they was so hairy and white and fair it was just shaking hands with
old friends. we gave them names according as they was like men we had
known in india—billy fish, holly dilworth, pikky kergan that was
bazar-master when i was at mhow, and so on and so on.
"the most amazing miracle was at lodge next night. one of the
old priests was watching us continuous, and i felt uneasy, for i knew we'd
have to fudge the ritual, and i didn't know what the men knew. the old
priest was a stranger come in from beyond the village of bashkai. the
minute dravot puts on the master's apron that the girls had made for him,
the priest fetches a whoop and a howl, and tries to overturn the stone
that dravot was sitting on. 'it's all up now,' i says. 'that comes of
meddling with the craft without warrant!' dravot never winked an eye, not
when ten priests took and tilted over the grand-master's chair—which
was to say the stone of imbra. the priest begins rubbing the bottom end of
it to clear away the black dirt, and presently he shows all the other
priests the master's mark, same as was on dravot's apron, cut into the
stone. not even the priests of the temple of imbra knew it was there. the
old chap falls flat on his face at dravot's feet and kisses 'em. 'luck
again,' says dravot, across the lodge to me, 'they say it's the missing
mark that no one could understand the why of. we're more than safe now.'
then he bangs the butt of his gun for a gavel and says:—'by virtue
of the authority vested in me by my own right hand and the help of
peachey, i declare myself grand-master of all freemasonry in kafiristan in
this the mother lodge o' the country, and king of kafiristan equally with
peachey!' at that he puts on his crown and i puts on mine—i was
doing senior warden—and we opens the lodge in most ample form. it
was a amazing miracle! the priests moved in lodge through the first two
degrees almost without telling, as if the memory was coming back to them.
after that, peachey and dravot raised such as was worthy—high
priests and chiefs of far-off villages. billy fish was the first, and i
can tell you we scared the soul out of him. it was not in any way
according to ritual, but it served our turn. we didn't raise more than ten
of the biggest men because we didn't want to make the degree common. and
they was clamoring to be raised.
"'in another six months,' says dravot, 'we'll hold another
communication and see how you are working.' then he asks them about their
villages, and learns that they was fighting one against the other and were
fair sick and tired of it. and when they wasn't doing that they was
fighting with the mohammedans. 'you can fight those when they come into
our country,' says dravot. 'tell off every tenth man of your tribes for a
frontier guard, and send two hundred at a time to this valley to be
drilled. nobody is going to be shot or speared any more so long as he does
well, and i know that you won't cheat me because you're white
people—sons of alexander—and not like common, black
mohammedans. you are my people and by god,' says he, running off
into english at the end—'i'll make a damned fine nation of you, or
i'll die in the making!'
"i can't tell all we did for the next six months because dravot did a
lot i couldn't see the hang of, and he learned their lingo in a way i
never could. my work was to help the people plough, and now and again go
out with some of the army and see what the other villages were doing, and
make 'em throw rope-bridges across the ravines which cut up the country
horrid. dravot was very kind to me, but when he walked up and down in the
pine wood pulling that bloody red beard of his with both fists i knew he
was thinking plans i could not advise him about, and i just waited for
orders.
"but dravot never showed me disrespect before the people. they were
afraid of me and the army, but they loved dan. he was the best of friends
with the priests and the chiefs; but any one could come across the hills
with a complaint and dravot would hear him out fair, and call four priests
together and say what was to be done. he used to call in billy fish from
bashkai, and pikky kergan from shu, and an old chief we called
kafuzelum—it was like enough to his real name—and hold
councils with 'em when there was any fighting to be done in small
villages. that was his council of war, and the four priests of bashkai,
shu, khawak, and madora was his privy council. between the lot of 'em they
sent me, with forty men and twenty rifles, and sixty men carrying
turquoises, into the ghorband country to buy those hand-made martini
rifles, that come out of the amir's workshops at kabul, from one of the
amir's herati regiments that would have sold the very teeth out of their
mouths for turquoises.
"i stayed in ghorband a month, and gave the governor there the pick of
my baskets for hush-money, and bribed the colonel of the regiment some
more, and, between the two and the tribespeople, we got more than a
hundred hand-made martinis, a hundred good kohat jezails that'll throw to
six hundred yards, and forty man-loads of very bad ammunition for the
rifles. i came back with what i had, and distributed 'em among the men
that the chiefs sent to me to drill. dravot was too busy to attend to
those things, but the old army that we first made helped me, and we turned
out five hundred men that could drill, and two hundred that knew how to
hold arms pretty straight. even those cork-screwed, hand-made guns was a
miracle to them. dravot talked big about powder-shops and factories,
walking up and down in the pine wood when the winter was coming on.
"'i won't make a nation,' says he. 'i'll make an empire! these men
aren't niggers; they're english! look at their eyes—look at their
mouths. look at the way they stand up. they sit on chairs in their own
houses. they're the lost tribes, or something like it, and they've grown
to be english. i'll take a census in the spring if the priests don't get
frightened. there must be a fair two million of 'em in these hills. the
villages are full o' little children. two million people—two hundred
and fifty thousand fighting men—and all english! they only want the
rifles and a little drilling. two hundred and fifty thousand men, ready to
cut in on russia's right flank when she tries for india! peachey, man,' he
says, chewing his beard in great hunks, 'we shall be
emperors—emperors of the earth! rajah brooke will be a suckling to
us. i'll treat with the viceroy on equal terms. i'll ask him to send me
twelve picked english—twelve that i know of—to help us govern
a bit. there's mackray, sergeant-pensioner at segowli—many's the
good dinner he's given me, and his wife a pair of trousers. there's
donkin, the warder of tounghoo jail; there's hundreds that i could lay my
hand on if i was in india. the viceroy shall do it for me. i'll send a man
through in the spring for those men, and i'll write for a dispensation
from the grand lodge for what i've done as grand-master. that—and
all the sniders that'll be thrown out when the native troops in india take
up the martini. they'll be worn smooth, but they'll do for fighting in
these hills. twelve english, a hundred thousand sniders run through the
amir's country in driblets—i'd be content with twenty thousand in
one year—and we'd be an empire. when everything was shipshape, i'd
hand over the crown—this crown i'm wearing now—to queen
victoria on my knees, and she'd say: "rise up, sir daniel dravot." oh,
it's big! it's big, i tell you! but there's so much to be done in every
place—bashkai, khawak, shu, and everywhere else.'
"'what is it?' i says. 'there are no more men coming in to be drilled
this autumn. look at those fat, black clouds. they're bringing the
snow.'
"'it isn't that,' says daniel, putting his hand very hard on my
shoulder; 'and i don't wish to say anything that's against you, for no
other living man would have followed me and made me what i am as you have
done. you're a first-class commander-in-chief, and the people know you;
but—it's a big country, and somehow you can't help me, peachey, in
the way i want to be helped.'
"'go to your blasted priests, then!' i said, and i was sorry when i
made that remark, but it did hurt me sore to find daniel talking so
superior when i'd drilled all the men, and done all he told me.
"'don't let's quarrel, peachey,' says daniel, without cursing. 'you're
a king too, and the half of this kingdom is yours; but can't you see,
peachey, we want cleverer men than us now—three or four of 'em, that
we can scatter about for our deputies. it's a hugeous great state, and i
can't always tell the right thing to do, and i haven't time for all i want
to do, and here's the winter coming on and all.' he put half his beard
into his mouth, and it was as red as the gold of his crown.
"'i'm sorry, daniel,' says i, 'i've done all i could. i've drilled the
men and shown the people how to stack their oats better; and i've brought
in those tinware rifles from ghorband—but i know what you're driving
at. i take it kings always feel oppressed that way.'
"'there's another thing too,' says dravot, walking up and down, 'the
winter's coming and these people won't be giving much trouble, and if they
do we can't move about. i want a wife.'
"'for gord's sake leave the women alone!' i says. 'we've both got all
the work we can, though i am a fool. remember the contrack, and
keep clear o' women.'
"'the contrack only lasted till such time as we was kings; and kings we
have been these months past,' says dravot, weighing his crown in his hand.
'you go get a wife too, peachey—a nice, strappin', plump girl
that'll keep you warm in the winter. they're prettier than english girls,
and we can take the pick of 'em. boil 'em once or twice in hot water, and
they'll come as fair as chicken and ham.'
"'don't tempt me!' i says. 'i will not have any dealings with a woman
not till we are a dam' side more settled than we are now. i've been doing
the work o' two men, and you've been doing the work o' three. let's lie
off a bit, and see if we can get some better tobacco from afghan country
and run in some good liquor; but no women.'
"'who's talking o' women?' says dravot. 'i said
wife—a queen to breed a king's son for the king. a queen out
of the strongest tribe, that'll make them your blood-brothers, and that'll
lie by your side and tell you all the people thinks about you and their
own affairs. that's what i want.'
"'do you remember that bengali woman i kept at mogul serai when i was a
plate-layer?' says i. 'a fat lot o' good she was to me. she taught me the
lingo and one or two other things; but what happened? she ran away with
the station master's servant and half my month's pay. then she turned up
at dadur junction in tow of a half-caste, and had the impidence to say i
was her husband—all among the drivers in the running-shed!'
"'we've done with that,' says dravot. 'these women are whiter than you
or me, and a queen i will have for the winter months.'
"'for the last time o' asking, dan, do not,' i says. 'it'll only bring
us harm. the bible says that kings ain't to waste their strength on women,
'specially when they've got a new raw kingdom to work over.'
"'for the last time of answering i will,' said dravot, and he went away
through the pine-trees looking like a big red devil. the low sun hit his
crown and beard on one side and the two blazed like hot coals.
"but getting a wife was not as easy as dan thought. he put it before
the council, and there was no answer till billy fish said that he'd better
ask the girls. dravot damned them all round. 'what's wrong with me?' he
shouts, standing by the idol imbra. 'am i a dog or am i not enough of a
man for your wenches? haven't i put the shadow of my hand over this
country? who stopped the last afghan raid?' it was me really, but dravot
was too angry to remember. 'who brought your guns? who repaired the
bridges? who's the grand-master of the sign cut in the stone?' and he
thumped his hand on the block that he used to sit on in lodge, and at
council, which opened like lodge always. billy fish said nothing and no
more did the others. 'keep your hair on, dan,' said i; 'and ask the girls.
that's how it's done at home, and these people are quite english.'
"'the marriage of the king is a matter of state,' says dan, in a
white-hot rage, for he could feel, i hope, that he was going against his
better mind. he walked out of the council-room, and the others sat still,
looking at the ground.
"'billy fish,' says i to the chief of bashkai, 'what's the difficulty
here? a straight answer to a true friend.' 'you know,' says billy fish.
'how should a man tell you who know everything? how can daughters of men
marry gods or devils? it's not proper.'
"i remembered something like that in the bible; but if, after seeing us
as long as they had, they still believed we were gods, it wasn't for me to
undeceive them.
"'a god can do anything,' says i. 'if the king is fond of a girl he'll
not let her die.' 'she'll have to,' said billy fish. 'there are all sorts
of gods and devils in these mountains, and now and again a girl marries
one of them and isn't seen any more. besides, you two know the mark cut in
the stone. only the gods know that. we thought you were men till you
showed the sign of the master.'
"i wished then that we had explained about the loss of the genuine
secrets of a master-mason at the first go-off; but i said nothing. all
that night there was a blowing of horns in a little dark temple half-way
down the hill, and i heard a girl crying fit to die. one of the priests
told us that she was being prepared to marry the king.
"'i'll have no nonsense of that kind,' says, dan. 'i don't want to
interfere with your customs, but i'll take my own wife.' 'the girl's a
little bit afraid,' says the priest. 'she thinks she's going to die, and
they are a-heartening of her up down in the temple.'
"'hearten her very tender, then,' says dravot, 'or i'll hearten you
with the butt of a gun so that you'll never want to be heartened again.'
he licked his lips, did dan, and stayed up walking about more than half
the night, thinking of the wife that he was going to get in the morning. i
wasn't any means comfortable, for i knew that dealings with a woman in
foreign parts, though you was a crowned king twenty times over, could not
but be risky. i got up very early in the morning while dravot was asleep,
and i saw the priests talking together in whispers, and the chiefs talking
together too, and they looked at me out of the corners of their eyes.
"'what is up, fish?' i says to the bashkai man, who was wrapped up in
his furs and looking splendid to behold.
"'i can't rightly say,' says he; 'but if you can induce the king to
drop all this nonsense about marriage, you'll be doing him and me and
yourself a great service.'
"'that i do believe,' says i. 'but sure, you know, billy, as well as
me, having fought against and for us, that the king and me are nothing
more than two of the finest men that god almighty ever made. nothing more,
i do assure you.'
"'that may be,' says billy fish, 'and yet i should be sorry if it was.'
he sinks his head upon his great fur cloak for a minute and thinks.
'king,' says he, 'be you man or god or devil, i'll stick by you to-day. i
have twenty of my men with me, and they will follow me. we'll go to
bashkai until the storm blows over.'
"a little snow had fallen in the night, and everything was white except
the greasy fat clouds that blew down and down from the north. dravot came
out with his crown on his head, swinging his arms and stamping his feet,
and looking more pleased than punch.
"'for the last time, drop it, dan,' says i, in a whisper. 'billy fish
here says that there will be a row.'
"'a row among my people!' says dravot. 'not much. peachey, you're a
fool not to get a wife too. where's the girl?' says he, with a voice as
loud as the braying of a jackass. 'call up all the chiefs and priests, and
let the emperor see if his wife suits him.'
"there was no need to call anyone. they were all there leaning on their
guns and spears round the clearing in the centre of the pine wood. a
deputation of priests went down to the little temple to bring up the girl,
and the horns blew up fit to wake the dead. billy fish saunters round and
gets as close to daniel as he could, and behind him stood his twenty men
with matchlocks. not a man of them under six feet. i was next to dravot,
and behind me was twenty men of the regular army. up comes the girl, and a
strapping wench she was, covered with silver and turquoises but white as
death, and looking back every minute at the priests.
"'she'll do,' said dan, looking her over. 'what's to be afraid of,
lass? come and kiss me.' he puts his arm round her. she shuts her eyes,
gives a bit of a squeak, and down goes her face in the side of dan's
flaming red beard.
"'the slut's bitten me!' says he, clapping his hand to his neck, and,
sure enough, his hand was red with blood. billy fish and two of his
matchlock-men catches hold of dan by the shoulders and drags him into the
bashkai lot, while the priests howls in their lingo,—'neither god
nor devil but a man!' i was all taken aback, for a priest cut at me in
front, and the army behind began firing into the bashkai men.
"'god a-mighty!' says dan, 'what is the meaning o' this?'
"'come back! come away!' says billy fish. 'ruin and mutiny is the
matter. we'll break for bashkai if we can.'
"i tried to give some sort of orders to my men—the men o' the
regular army—but it was no use, so i fired into the brown of 'em
with an english martini and drilled three beggars in a line. the valley
was full of shouting, howling creatures, and every soul was shrieking,
'not a god nor a devil but only a man!' the bashkai troops stuck to billy
fish all they were worth, but their matchlocks wasn't half as good as the
kabul breech-loaders, and four of them dropped. dan was bellowing like a
bull, for he was very wrathy; and billy fish had a hard job to prevent him
running out at the crowd.
"'we can't stand,' says billy fish. 'make a run for it down the valley!
the whole place is against us.' the matchlock-men ran, and we went down
the valley in spite of dravot's protestations. he was swearing horribly
and crying out that he was a king. the priests rolled great stones on us,
and the regular army fired hard, and there wasn't more than six men, not
counting dan, billy fish, and me, that came down to the bottom of the
valley alive.
"then they stopped firing and the horns in the temple blew again. 'come
away—for gord's sake come away!' says billy fish. 'they'll send
runners out to all the villages before ever we get to bashkai. i can
protect you there, but i can't do anything now.'
"my own notion is that dan began to go mad in his head from that hour.
he stared up and down like a stuck pig. then he was all for walking back
alone and killing the priests with his bare hands; which he could have
done. 'an emperor am i,' says daniel, 'and next year i shall be a knight
of the queen.'
"'all right, dan,' says i; 'but come along now while there's time.'
"'it's your fault,' says he, 'for not looking after your army better.
there was mutiny in the midst, and you didn't know—you damned
engine-driving, plate-laying, missionary's-pass-hunting hound!' he sat
upon a rock and called me every foul name he could lay tongue to. i was
too heart-sick to care, though it was all his foolishness that brought the
smash.
"'i'm sorry, dan,' says i, 'but there's no accounting for natives. this
business is our fifty-seven. maybe we'll make something out of it yet,
when we've got to bashkai.'
"'let's get to bashkai, then,' says dan, 'and, by god, when i come back
here again i'll sweep the valley so there isn't a bug in a blanket
left!'
"we walked all that day, and all that night dan was stumping up and
down on the snow, chewing his beard and muttering to himself.
"'there's no hope o' getting clear,' said billy fish. 'the priests will
have sent runners to the villages to say that you are only men. why didn't
you stick on as gods till things was more settled? i'm a dead man,' says
billy fish, and he throws himself down on the snow and begins to pray to
his gods.
"next morning we was in a cruel bad country—all up and down, no
level ground at all, and no food either. the six bashkai men looked at
billy fish hungry-wise as if they wanted to ask something, but they said
never a word. at noon we came to the top of a flat mountain all covered
with snow, and when we climbed up into it, behold, there was an army in
position waiting in the middle!
"'the runners have been very quick,' says billy fish, with a little bit
of a laugh. 'they are waiting for us.'
"three or four men began to fire from the enemy's side, and a chance
shot took daniel in the calf of the leg. that brought him to his senses.
he looks across the snow at the army, and sees the rifles that we had
brought into the country.
"'we're done for,' says he. 'they are englishmen, these
people,—and it's my blasted nonsense that has brought you to this.
get back, billy fish, and take your men away; you've done what you could,
and now cut for it. carnehan,' says he, 'shake hands with me and go along
with billy. maybe they won't kill you. i'll go and meet 'em alone. it's me
that did it. me, the king!'
"'go!' says i. 'go to hell, dan. i'm with you here. billy fish, you
clear out, and we two will meet those folk.'
"'i'm a chief,' says billy fish, quite quiet. 'i stay with you. my men
can go.'
"the bashkai fellows didn't wait for a second word but ran off, and dan
and me and billy fish walked across to where the drums were drumming and
the horns were horning, it was cold—awful cold. i've got that cold
in the back of my head now. there's a lump of it there."
the punkah-coolies had gone to sleep. two kerosene lamps were blazing
in the office, and the perspiration poured down my face and splashed on
the blotter as i leaned forward. carnehan was shivering, and i feared that
his mind might go. i wiped my face, took a fresh grip of the piteously
mangled hands, and said:—"what happened after that?"
the momentary shift of my eyes had broken the clear current.
"what was you pleased to say?" whined carnehan. "they took them without
any sound. not a little whisper all along the snow, not though the king
knocked down the first man that set hand on him—not though old
peachey fired his last cartridge into the brown of 'em. not a single
solitary sound did those swines make. they just closed up tight, and i
tell you their furs stunk. there was a man called billy fish, a good
friend of us all, and they cut his throat, sir, then and there, like a
pig; and the king kicks up the bloody snow and says:—'we've had a
dashed fine run for our money. what's coming next?' but peachey, peachey
taliaferro, i tell you, sir, in confidence as betwixt two friends, he lost
his head, sir. no, he didn't neither. the king lost his head, so he did,
all along o' one of those cunning rope-bridges. kindly let me have the
paper-cutter, sir. it tilted this way. they marched him a mile across that
snow to a rope-bridge over a ravine with a river at the bottom. you may
have seen such. they prodded him behind like an ox. 'damn your eyes!' says
the king. 'd'you suppose i can't die like a gentleman?' he turns to
peachey—peachey that was crying like a child. 'i've brought you to
this, peachey,' says he. 'brought you out of your happy life to be killed
in kafiristan, where you was late commander-in-chief of the emperor's
forces. say you forgive me, peachey.' 'i do,' says peachey. 'fully and
freely do i forgive you, dan.' 'shake hands, peachey,' says he. 'i'm going
now.' out he goes, looking neither right nor left, and when he was plumb
in the middle of those dizzy dancing ropes, 'cut, you beggars,' he shouts;
and they cut, and old dan fell, turning round and round and round twenty
thousand miles, for he took half an hour to fall till he struck the water,
and i could see his body caught on a rock with the gold crown close
beside.
"but do you know what they did to peachey between two pine trees? they
crucified him, sir, as peachey's hand will show. they used wooden pegs for
his hands and his feet; and he didn't die. he hung there and screamed, and
they took him down next day, and said it was a miracle that he wasn't
dead. they took him down—poor old peachey that hadn't done them any
harm—that hadn't done them any...."
he rocked to and fro and wept bitterly, wiping his eyes with the back
of his scarred hands and moaning like a child for some ten minutes.
"they was cruel enough to feed him up in the temple, because they said
he was more of a god than old daniel that was a man. then they turned him
out on the snow, and told him to go home, and peachey came home in about a
year, begging along the roads quite safe: for daniel dravot he walked
before and said:—'come along, peachey. it's a big thing we're
doing.' the mountains they danced at night, and the mountains they tried
to fall on peachey's head, but dan he held up his hand, and peachey came
along bent double. he never let go of dan's hand, and he never let go of
dan's head. they gave it to him as a present in the temple, to remind him
not to come again, and though the crown was pure gold, and peachey was
starving, never would peachey sell the same. you knew dravot, sir! you
knew right worshipful brother dravot! look at him now!"
he fumbled in the mass of rags round his bent waist; brought out a
black horsehair bag embroidered with silver thread; and shook therefrom on
to my table—the dried, withered head of daniel dravot! the morning
sun that had long been paling the lamps struck the red beard and blind
sunken eyes; struck, too, a heavy circlet of gold studded with raw
turquoises, that carnehan placed tenderly on the battered temples.
"you behold now," said carnehan, "the emperor in his habit as he
lived—the king of kafiristan with his crown upon his head. poor old
daniel that was a monarch once!"
i shuddered, for, in spite of defacements manifold, i recognized the
head of the man of marwar junction. carnehan rose to go. i attempted to
stop him. he was not fit to walk abroad. "let me take away the whiskey,
and give me a little money," he gasped, "i was a king once. i'll go to the
deputy commissioner and ask to set in the poorhouse till i get my health.
no, thank you, i can't wait till you get a carriage for me, i've urgent
private affairs—in the south—at marwar."
he shambled out of the office and departed in the direction of the
deputy commissioner's house. that day at noon i had occasion to go down
the blinding hot mall, and i saw a crooked man crawling along the white
dust of the roadside, his hat in his hand, quavering dolorously after the
fashion of street-singers at home. there was not a soul in sight, and he
was out of all possible earshot of the houses. and he sang through his
nose, turning his head from right to left:
"the son of man goes forth to war,
a golden crown to gain;
his blood-red banner streams afar—
who follows in his train?"
i waited to hear no more, but put the poor wretch into my carriage and
drove him off to the nearest missionary for eventual transfer to the
asylum. he repeated the hymn twice while he was with me whom he did not in
the least recognize, and i left him singing it to the missionary.
two days later i inquired after his welfare of the superintendent of
the asylum.
"he was admitted suffering from sunstroke. he died early yesterday
morning," said the superintendent. "is it true that he was half an hour
bareheaded in the sun at midday?"
"yes," said i, "but do you happen to know if he had anything upon him
by any chance when he died?"
"not to my knowledge," said the superintendent.
and there the matter rests.
if i can attain heaven for a pice, why should you be
envious?
—opium smoker's proverb.
this is no work of mine. my friend, gabral misquitta, the half-caste,
spoke it all, between moonset and morning, six weeks before he died; and i
took it down from his mouth as he answered my questions. so:
it lies between the coppersmith's gully and the pipe-stem sellers'
quarter, within a hundred yards, too, as the crow flies, of the mosque of
wazir khan. i don't mind telling any one this much, but i defy him to find
the gate, however well he may think he knows the city. you might even go
through the very gully it stands in a hundred times, and be none the
wiser. we used to call the gully, "the gully of the black smoke," but its
native name is altogether different of course. a loaded donkey couldn't
pass between the walls; and, at one point, just before you reach the gate,
a bulged house-front makes people go along all sideways.
it isn't really a gate though. it's a house. old fung-tching had it
first five years ago. he was a boot-maker in calcutta. they say that he
murdered his wife there when he was drunk. that was why he dropped
bazar-rum and took to the black smoke instead. later on, he came up north
and opened the gate as a house where you could get your smoke in peace and
quiet. mind you, it was a pukka, respectable opium-house, and not
one of those stifling, sweltering chandoo-khanas, that you can find
all over the city. no; the old man knew his business thoroughly, and he
was most clean for a chinaman. he was a one-eyed little chap, not much
more than five feet high, and both his middle fingers were gone. all the
same, he was the handiest man at rolling black pills i have ever seen.
never seemed to be touched by the smoke, either; and what he took day and
night, night and day, was a caution. i've been at it five years, and i can
do my fair share of the smoke with any one; but i was a child to
fung-tching that way. all the same, the old man was keen on his money:
very keen; and that's what i can't understand. i heard he saved a good
deal before he died, but his nephew has got all that now; and the old
man's gone back to china to be buried.
he kept the big upper room, where his best customers gathered, as neat
as a new pin. in one corner used to stand fung-tching's joss—almost
as ugly as fung-tching—and there were always sticks burning under
his nose; but you never smelled 'em when the pipes were going thick.
opposite the joss was fung-tching's coffin. he had spent a good deal of
his savings on that, and whenever a new man came to the gate he was always
introduced to it. it was lacquered black, with red and gold writings on
it, and i've heard that fung-tching brought it out all the way from china.
i don't know whether that's true or not, but i know that, if i came first
in the evening, i used to spread my mat just at the foot of it. it was a
quiet corner, you see, and a sort of breeze from the gully came in at the
window now and then. besides the mats, there was no other furniture in the
room—only the coffin, and the old joss all green and blue and purple
with age and polish.
fung-tching never told us why he called the place "the gate of the
hundred sorrows." (he was the only chinaman i know who used bad-sounding
fancy names. most of them are flowery. as you'll see in calcutta.) we used
to find that out for ourselves. nothing grows on you so much, if you're
white, as the black smoke. a yellow man is made different. opium doesn't
tell on him scarcely at all; but white and black suffer a good deal. of
course, there are some people that the smoke doesn't touch any more than
tobacco would at first. they just doze a bit, as one would fall asleep
naturally, and next morning they are almost fit for work. now, i was one
of that sort when i began, but i've been at it for five years pretty
steadily, and it's different now. there was an old aunt of mine, down agra
way, and she left me a little at her death. about sixty rupees a month
secured. sixty isn't much. i can recollect a time, 'seems hundreds and
hundreds of years ago, that i was getting my three hundred a month, and
pickings, when i was working on a big timber-contract in calcutta.
i didn't stick to that work for long. the black smoke does not allow of
much other business; and even though i am very little affected by it, as
men go i couldn't do a day's work now to save my life. after all, sixty
rupees is what i want. when old fung-tching was alive he used to draw the
money for me, give me about half of it to live on (i eat very little), and
the rest he kept himself. i was free of the gate at any time of the day
and night, and could smoke and sleep there when i liked, so i didn't care.
i know the old man made a good thing out of it; but that's no matter.
nothing matters much to me; and besides, the money always came fresh and
fresh each month.
there was ten of us met at the gate when the place was first opened.
me, and two baboos from a government office somewhere in anarkulli, but
they got the sack and couldn't pay (no man who has to work in the daylight
can do the black smoke for any length of time straight on); a chinaman
that was fung-tching's nephew; a bazar-woman that had got a lot of money
somehow; an english loafer—mac-somebody i think, but i have
forgotten,—that smoked heaps, but never seemed to pay anything (they
said he had saved fung-tching's life at some trial in calcutta when he was
a barrister); another eurasian, like myself, from madras; a half-caste
woman, and a couple of men who said they had come from the north. i think
they must have been persians or afghans or something. there are not more
than five of us living now, but we come regular. i don't know what
happened to the baboos; but the bazar-woman she died after six months of
the gate, and i think fung-tching took her bangles and nose-ring for
himself. but i'm not certain. the englishman, he drank as well as smoked,
and he dropped off. one of the persians got killed in a row at night by
the big well near the mosque a long time ago, and the police shut up the
well, because they said it was full of foul air. they found him dead at
the bottom of it. so you see, there is only me, the chinaman, the
half-caste woman that we call the memsahib (she used to live with
fung-tching), the other eurasian, and one of the persians. the
memsahib looks very old now. i think she was a young woman when the
gate was opened; but we are all old for the matter of that. hundreds and
hundreds of years old. it is very hard to keep count of time in the gate,
and, besides, time doesn't matter to me. i draw my sixty rupees fresh and
fresh every month. a very, very long while ago, when i used to be getting
three hundred and fifty rupees a month, and pickings, on a big
timber-contract at calcutta, i had a wife of sorts. but she's dead now.
people said that i killed her by taking to the black smoke. perhaps i did,
but it's so long since that it doesn't matter. sometimes when i first came
to the gate, i used to feel sorry for it; but that's all over and done
with long ago, and i draw my sixty rupees fresh and fresh every month, and
am quite happy. not drunk happy, you know, but always quiet and
soothed and contented.
how did i take to it? it began at calcutta. i used to try it in my own
house, just to see what it was like. i never went very far, but i think my
wife must have died then. anyhow, i found myself here, and got to know
fung-tching. i don't remember rightly how that came about; but he told me
of the gate and i used to go there, and, somehow, i have never got away
from it since. mind you, though, the gate was a respectable place in
fung-tching's time where you could be comfortable, and not at all like the
chandoo-khanas where the niggers go. no; it was clean and quiet,
and not crowded. of course, there were others beside us ten and the man;
but we always had a mat apiece, with a wadded woolen headpiece, all
covered with black and red dragons and things; just like the coffin in the
corner.
at the end of one's third pipe the dragons used to move about and
fight. i've watched 'em many and many a night through. i used to regulate
my smoke that way, and now it takes a dozen pipes to make 'em stir.
besides, they are all torn and dirty, like the mats, and old fung-tching
is dead. he died a couple of years ago, and gave me the pipe i always use
now—a silver one, with queer beasts crawling up and down the
receiver-bottle below the cup. before that, i think, i used a big bamboo
stem with a copper cup, a very small one, and a green jade mouthpiece. it
was a little thicker than a walking-stick stem, and smoked sweet, very
sweet. the bamboo seemed to suck up the smoke. silver doesn't, and i've
got to clean it out now and then, that's a great deal of trouble, but i
smoke it for the old man's sake. he must have made a good thing out of me,
but he always gave me clean mats and pillows, and the best stuff you could
get anywhere.
when he died, his nephew tsin-ling took up the gate, and he called it
the "temple of the three possessions"; but we old ones speak of it as the
"hundred sorrows," all the same. the nephew does things very shabbily, and
i think the memsahib must help him. she lives with him; same as she
used to do with the old man. the two let in all sorts of low people,
niggers and all, and the black smoke isn't as good as it used to be. i've
found burned bran in my pipe over and over again. the old man would have
died if that had happened in his time. besides, the room is never cleaned,
and all the mats are torn and cut at the edges. the coffin is
gone—gone to china again—with the old man and two ounces of
smoke inside it, in case he should want 'em on the way.
the joss doesn't get so many sticks burned under his nose as he used
to; that's a sign of ill-luck, as sure as death. he's all brown, too, and
no one ever attends to him. that's the memsahib's work, i know;
because, when tsin-ling tried to burn gilt paper before him, she said it
was a waste of money, and, if he kept a stick burning very slowly, the
joss wouldn't know the difference. so now we've got the sticks mixed with
a lot of glue, and they take half an hour longer to burn, and smell
stinky. let alone the smell of the room by itself. no business can get on
if they try that sort of thing. the joss doesn't like it. i can see that.
late at night, sometimes, he turns all sorts of queer colors—blue
and green and red—just as he used to do when old fung-tching was
alive; and he rolls his eyes and stamps his feet like a devil.
i don't know why i don't leave the place and smoke quietly in a little
room of my own in the bazar. most like, tsin-ling would kill me if i went
away—he draws my sixty rupees now—and besides, it's so much
trouble, and i've grown to be very fond of the gate. it's not much to look
at. not what it was in the old man's time, but i couldn't leave it. i've
seen so many come in and out. and i've seen so many die here on the mats
that i should be afraid of dying in the open now. i've seen some things
that people would call strange enough; but nothing is strange when you're
on the black smoke, except the black smoke. and if it was, it wouldn't
matter. fung-tching used to be very particular about his people, and never
got in any one who'd give trouble by dying messy and such. but the nephew
isn't half so careful. he tells everywhere that he keeps a "first-chop"
house. never tries to get men in quietly, and make them comfortable like
fung-tching did. that's why the gate is getting a little bit more known
than it used to be. among the niggers of course. the nephew daren't get a
white, or, for matter of that, a mixed skin into the place. he has to keep
us three of course—me and the memsahib and the other
eurasian. we're fixtures. but he wouldn't give us credit for a
pipeful—not for anything.
one of these days, i hope, i shall die in the gate. the persian and the
madras man are terribly shaky now. they've got a boy to light their pipes
for them. i always do that myself. most like, i shall see them carried out
before me. i don't think i shall ever outlive the memsahib or
tsin-ling. women last longer than men at the black smoke, and tsin-ling
has a deal of the old man's blood in him, though he does smoke cheap
stuff. the bazar-woman knew when she was going two days before her time;
and she died on a clean mat with a nicely wadded pillow, and the old man
hung up her pipe just above the joss. he was always fond of her, i fancy.
but he took her bangles just the same.
i should like to die like the bazar-woman—on a clean, cool mat
with a pipe of good stuff between my lips. when i feel i'm going, i shall
ask tsin-ling for them, and he can draw my sixty rupees a month, fresh and
fresh, as long as he pleases. then i shall lie back, quiet and
comfortable, and watch the black and red dragons have their last big fight
together; and then.... well, it doesn't matter. nothing matters much to
me—only i wish tsin-ling wouldn't put bran into the black smoke.
wohl auf, my bully cavaliers,
we ride to church to-day,
the man that hasn't got a horse
must steal one straight away.
be reverent, men, remember
this is a gottes haus.
du, conrad, cut along der aisle
and schenck der whiskey aus.
hans breitmann's ride to church.
once upon a time, very far from england, there lived three men who
loved each other so greatly that neither man nor woman could come between
them. they were in no sense refined, nor to be admitted to the outer-door
mats of decent folk, because they happened to be private soldiers in her
majesty's army; and private soldiers of our service have small time for
self-culture. their duty is to keep themselves and their accoutrements
specklessly clean, to refrain from getting drunk more often than is
necessary, to obey their superiors, and to pray for a war. all these
things my friends accomplished; and of their own motion threw in some
fighting-work for which the army regulations did not call. their fate sent
them to serve in india, which is not a golden country, though poets have
sung otherwise. there men die with great swiftness, and those who live
suffer many and curious things. i do not think that my friends concerned
themselves much with the social or political aspects of the east. they
attended a not unimportant war on the northern frontier, another one on
our western boundary, and a third in upper burma. then their regiment sat
still to recruit, and the boundless monotony of cantonment life was their
portion. they were drilled morning and evening on the same dusty
parade-ground. they wandered up and down the same stretch of dusty white
road, attended the same church and the same grog-shop, and slept in the
same lime-washed barn of a barrack for two long years. there was mulvaney,
the father in the craft, who had served with various regiments from
bermuda to halifax, old in war, scarred, reckless, resourceful, and in his
pious hours an unequalled soldier. to him turned for help and comfort six
and a half feet of slow-moving, heavy-footed yorkshireman, born on the
wolds, bred in the dales, and educated chiefly among the carriers' carts
at the back of york railway-station. his name was learoyd, and his chief
virtue an unmitigated patience which helped him to win fights. how
ortheris, a fox-terrier of a cockney, ever came to be one of the trio, is
a mystery which even to-day i cannot explain. "there was always three av
us," mulvaney used to say. "an' by the grace av god, so long as our
service lasts, three av us they'll always be. 'tis betther so."
they desired no companionship beyond their own, and it was evil for any
man of the regiment who attempted dispute with them. physical argument was
out of the question as regarded mulvaney and the yorkshireman; and assault
on ortheris meant a combined attack from these twain—a business
which no five men were anxious to have on their hands. therefore they
flourished, sharing their drinks, their tobacco, and their money; good
luck and evil; battle and the chances of death; life and the chances of
happiness from calicut in southern, to peshawur in northern india.
through no merit of my own it was my good fortune to be in a measure
admitted to their friendship—frankly by mulvaney from the beginning,
sullenly and with reluctance by learoyd, and suspiciously by ortheris, who
held to it that no man not in the army could fraternize with a red-coat.
"like to like," said he. "i'm a bloomin' sodger—he's a bloomin'
civilian. 'tain't natural—that's all."
but that was not all. they thawed progressively, and in the thawing
told me more of their lives and adventures than i am ever likely to
write.
omitting all else, this tale begins with the lamentable thirst that was
at the beginning of first causes. never was such a thirst—mulvaney
told me so. they kicked against their compulsory virtue, but the attempt
was only successful in the case of ortheris. he, whose talents were many,
went forth into the highways and stole a dog from a
"civilian"—videlicet, some one, he knew not who, not in the
army. now that civilian was but newly connected by marriage with the
colonel of the regiment, and outcry was made from quarters least
anticipated by ortheris, and, in the end, he was forced, lest a worse
thing should happen, to dispose at ridiculously unremunerative rates of as
promising a small terrier as ever graced one end of a leading string. the
purchase-money was barely sufficient for one small outbreak which led him
to the guard-room. he escaped, however, with nothing worse than a severe
reprimand, and a few hours of punishment drill. not for nothing had he
acquired the reputation of being "the best soldier of his inches" in the
regiment. mulvaney had taught personal cleanliness and efficiency as the
first articles of his companions' creed. "a dhirty man," he was used to
say, in the speech of his kind, "goes to clink for a weakness in the
knees, an' is coort-martialled for a pair av socks missin'; but a clane
man, such as is an ornament to his service—a man whose buttons are
gold, whose coat is wax upon him, an' whose 'coutrements are widout a
speck—that man may, spakin' in reason, do fwhat he likes an' dhrink
from day to divil. that's the pride av bein' dacint."
we sat together, upon a day, in the shade of a ravine far from the
barracks, where a watercourse used to run in rainy weather. behind us was
the scrub jungle, in which jackals, peacocks, the grey wolves of the
northwestern provinces, and occasionally a tiger estrayed from central
india, were supposed to dwell. in front lay the cantonment, glaring white
under a glaring sun; and on either side ran the broad road that led to
delhi.
it was the scrub that suggested to my mind the wisdom of mulvaney
taking a day's leave and going upon a shooting-tour. the peacock is a holy
bird throughout india, and he who slays one is in danger of being mobbed
by the nearest villagers; but on the last occasion that mulvaney had gone
forth, he had contrived, without in the least offending local religious
susceptibilities, to return with six beautiful peacock skins which he sold
to profit. it seemed just possible then—
"but fwhat manner av use is ut to me goin' out widout a dhrink? the
ground's powdher-dhry underfoot, an' ut gets unto the throat fit to kill,"
wailed mulvaney, looking at me reproachfully. "an' a peacock is not a bird
you can catch the tail av onless ye run. can a man run on wather—an'
jungle-wather too?"
ortheris had considered the question in all its bearings. he spoke,
chewing his pipe-stem meditatively the while:
"go forth, return in glory,
to clusium's royal 'ome:
an' round these bloomin' temples 'ang
the bloomin' shields o' rome.
you better go. you ain't like to shoot yourself—not while there's
a chanst of liquor. me an' learoyd 'll stay at 'ome an' keep
shop—'case o' anythin' turnin' up. but you go out with a gas-pipe
gun an' ketch the little peacockses or somethin'. you kin get one day's
leave easy as winkin'. go along an' get it, an' get peacockses or
somethin'."
"jock," said mulvaney, turning to learoyd, who was half asleep under
the shadow of the bank. he roused slowly.
"sitha, mulvaaney, go," said he.
and mulvaney went; cursing his allies with irish fluency and
barrack-room point.
"take note," said he, when he had won his holiday, and appeared dressed
in his roughest clothes with the only other regimental fowling piece in
his hand. "take note, jock, an' you orth'ris, i am goin' in the face av my
own will—all for to please you. i misdoubt anythin' will come av
permiscuous huntin' afther peacockses in a desolit lan'; an' i know that i
will lie down an' die wid thirrrst. me catch peacockses for you, ye lazy
scutts—an' be sacrificed by the peasanthry—ugh!"
he waved a huge paw and went away.
at twilight, long before the appointed hour, he returned empty-handed,
much begrimed with dirt.
"peacockses?" queried ortheris from the safe rest of a barrack-room
table whereon he was smoking cross-legged, learoyd fast asleep on a
bench.
"jock," said mulvaney, without answering, as he stirred up the sleeper.
"jock, can ye fight? will ye fight?"
very slowly the meaning of the words communicated itself to the
half-roused man. he understood—and again—what might these
things mean? mulvaney was shaking him savagely. meantime the men in the
room howled with delight. there was war in the confederacy at
last—war and the breaking of bonds.
barrack-room etiquette is stringent. on the direct challenge must
follow the direct reply. this is more binding than the ties of tried
friendship. once again mulvaney repeated the question. learoyd answered by
the only means in his power, and so swiftly that the irishman had barely
time to avoid the blow. the laughter around increased. learoyd looked
bewilderedly at his friend—himself as greatly bewildered. ortheris
dropped from the table because his world was falling.
"come outside," said mulvaney, and as the occupants of the barrack-room
prepared joyously to follow, he turned and said furiously, "there will be
no fight this night—onless any wan av you is wishful to assist. the
man that does, follows on."
no man moved. the three passed out into the moonlight, learoyd fumbling
with the buttons of his coat. the parade-ground was deserted except for
the scurrying jackals. mulvaney's impetuous rush carried his companions
far into the open ere learoyd attempted to turn round and continue the
discussion.
"be still now. 'twas my fault for beginnin' things in the middle av an
end, jock. i should ha' comminst wid an explanation; but jock, dear, on
your sowl are ye fit, think you, for the finest fight that iver
was—betther than fightin' me? considher before ye answer."
more than ever puzzled, learoyd turned round two or three times, felt
an arm, kicked tentatively, and answered, "ah'm fit." he was accustomed to
fight blindly at the bidding of the superior mind.
they sat them down, the men looking on from afar, and mulvaney
untangled himself in mighty words.
"followin' your fools' scheme i wint out into the thrackless desert
beyond the barricks. an' there i met a pious hindu dhriving a
bullock-kyart. i tuk ut for granted he wud be delighted for to convoy me a
piece, an' i jumped in"—
"you long, lazy, black-haired swine," drawled ortheris, who would have
done the same thing under similar circumstances.
"'twas the height av policy. that naygur-man dhruv miles an'
miles—as far as the new railway line they're buildin' now back av
the tavi river. ''tis a kyart for dhirt only,' says he now an' again
timoreously, to get me out av ut. 'dhirt i am,' sez i, 'an' the dhryest
that you iver kyarted. dhrive on, me son, an' glory be wid you.' at that i
wint to slape, an' took no heed till he pulled up on the embankmmt av the
line where the coolies were pilin' mud. there was a matther av two
thousand coolies on that line—you remimber that. prisintly a bell
rang, an' they throops off to a big pay-shed. 'where's the white man in
charge?' sez i to my kyart-dhriver. 'in the shed,' sez he, 'engaged on a
riffle,'—'a fwhat?' sez i. 'riffle,' sez he, 'you take ticket. he
take money. you get nothin'.—'oho!' sez i, 'that's fwhat the
shuperior an' cultivated man calls a raffle, me misbeguided child av
darkness an' sin. lead on to that raffle, though fwhat the mischief 'tis
doin' so far away from uts home—which is the charity-bazaar at
christmas, an' the colonel's wife grinnin' behind the tea-table—is
more than i know.' wid that i wint to the shed an' found 'twas payday
among the coolies. their wages was on a table forninst a big, fine, red
buck av a man—sivun fut high, four fut wide, an' three fut thick,
wid a fist on him like a corn-sack. he was payin' the coolies fair an'
easy, but he wud ask each man if he wud raffle that month, an' each man
sez, 'yes,' av course. thin he wud deduct from their wages accordin'. whin
all was paid, he filled an ould cigar-box full av gun-wads an' scatthered
ut among the coolies. they did not take much joy av that performince, an'
small wondher. a man close to me picks up a black gun-wad an' sings out,
'i have ut,'—'good may ut do you.' sez i. the coolie wint forward to
this big, fine, red man, who threw a cloth off av the most sumpshus,
jooled, enamelled an' variously bedivilled sedan-chair i iver saw."
"sedan-chair! put your 'ead in a bag. that was a palanquin. don't yer
know a palanquin when you see it?" said ortheris with great scorn.
"i chuse to call ut sedan chair, an' chair ut shall be, little man,"
continued the irishman. "twas a most amazin' chair—all lined wid
pink silk an' fitted wid red silk curtains. 'here ut is,' sez the red man.
'here ut is,' sez the coolie, an' he grinned weakly-ways. 'is ut any use
to you?' sez the red man. 'no,' sez the coolie; 'i'd like to make a
presint av ut to you.'—'i am graciously pleased to accept that
same,' sez the red man; an' at that all the coolies cried aloud in fwhat
was mint for cheerful notes, an' wint back to their diggin', lavin' me
alone in the shed. the red man saw me, an' his face grew blue on his big,
fat neck. 'fwhat d'you want here?' sez he. 'standin'-room an' no more,'
sez i, 'onless it may be fwhat ye niver had, an' that's manners, ye
rafflin' ruffian,' for i was not goin' to have the service throd upon.
'out of this,' sez he. 'i'm in charge av this section av
construction.'—'i'm in charge av mesilf,' sez i, 'an' it's like i
will stay a while. d'ye raffle much in these parts?'—'fwhat's that
to you?' sez he. 'nothin',' sez i, 'but a great dale to you, for begad i'm
thinkin' you get the full half av your revenue from that sedan-chair. is
ut always raffled so?' i sez, an' wid that i wint to a coolie to ask
questions. bhoys, that man's name is dearsley, an' he's been rafflin' that
ould sedan-chair monthly this matther av nine months. ivry coolie on the
section takes a ticket—or he gives 'em the go—wanst a month on
pay-day. ivry coolie that wins ut gives ut back to him, for 'tis too big
to carry away, an' he'd sack the man that thried to sell ut. that dearsley
has been makin' the rowlin' wealth av roshus by nefarious rafflin'. think
av the burnin' shame to the sufferin' coolie-man that the army in injia
are bound to protect an' nourish in their bosoms! two thousand coolies
defrauded wanst a month!"
"dom t' coolies. has't gotten t' cheer, man?" said learoyd.
"hould on. havin' onearthed this amazin' an' stupenjus fraud committed
by the man dearsley, i hild a council av war; he thryin' all the time to
sejuce me into a fight wid opprobrious language. that sedan-chair niver
belonged by right to any foreman av coolies. 'tis a king's chair or a
quane's. there's gold on ut an' silk an' all manner av trapesemints.
bhoys, 'tis not for me to countenance any sort av wrong-doin'—me
bein' the ould man—but—anyway he has had ut nine months, an'
he dare not make throuble av ut was taken from him. five miles away, or ut
may be six"—
there was a long pause, and the jackals howled merrily. learoyd bared
one arm, and contemplated it in the moonlight. then he nodded partly to
himself and partly to his friends. ortheris wriggled with suppressed
emotion.
"i thought ye wud see the reasonableness av ut," said mulvaney. "i make
bould to say as much to the man before. he was for a direct front
attack—fut, horse, an' guns—an' all for nothin', seein' that i
had no thransport to convey the machine away. 'i will not argue wid you,'
sez i, 'this day, but subsequintly, mister dearsley, me rafflin' jool, we
talk ut out lengthways. 'tis no good policy to swindle the naygur av his
hard-earned emolumints, an' by presint informa-shin'—'twas the kyart
man that tould me—'ye've been perpethrating that same for nine
months. but i'm a just man,' sez i, 'an' over-lookin' the presumpshin that
yondher settee wid the gilt top was not come by honust'—at that he
turned sky-green, so i knew things was more thrue than tellable—'not
come by honust. i'm willin' to compound the felony for this month's
winnin's.'"
"ah! ho!" from learoyd and ortheris.
"that man dearsley's rushin' on his fate," continued mulvaney, solemnly
wagging his head. "all hell had no name bad enough for me that tide.
faith, he called me a robber! me! that was savin' him from continuin' in
his evil ways widout a remonstrince—an' to a man av conscience a
remonstrince may change the chune av his life. ''tis not for me to argue,'
sez i, 'fwhatever ye are, mister dearsley, but, by my hand, i'll take away
the temptation for you that lies in that sedan-chair.'—'you will
have to fight me for ut,' sez he, 'for well i know you will never dare
make report to any one.'—'fight i will,' sez i, 'but not this day,
for i'm rejuced for want av nourishment.'—'ye're an ould bould
hand,' sez he, sizin' me up an' down; 'an' a jool av a fight we will have.
eat now an' dhrink, an' go your way.' wid that he gave me some hump an'
whisky—good whisky—an' we talked av this an' that the while.
'it goes hard on me now,' sez i, wipin' my mouth, 'to confiscate that
piece av furniture, but justice is justice.'—'ye've not got ut yet,'
sez he; 'there's the fight between.'—'there is,' sez i, 'an' a good
fight. ye shall have the pick av the best quality in my rigimint for the
dinner you have given this day.' thin i came hot-foot to you two. hould
your tongue, the both. 'tis this way. to-morrow we three will go there an'
he shall have his pick betune me an' jock. jock's a deceivin' fighter, for
he is all fat to the eye, an' he moves slow. now i'm all beef to the look,
an' i move quick. by my reckonin' the dearsley man won't take me; so me
an' orth'ris 'll see fair play. jock, i tell you, 'twill be big
fightin'—whipped, wid the cream above the jam. afther the business
'twill take a good three av us—jock 'll be very hurt—to haul
away that sedan-chair."
"palanquin." this from ortheris.
"fwhatever ut is, we must have ut. tis the only sellin' piece av
property widin reach that we can get so cheap. an' fwhat's a fight afther
all? he has robbed the naygur-man, dishonust. we rob him honust for the
sake av the whisky he gave me."
"but wot'll we do with the bloomin' article when we've got it? them
palanquins are as big as 'ouses, an' uncommon 'ard to sell, as mccleary
said when ye stole the sentry-box from the curragh."
"who's goin' to do t' fightin'?" said learoyd, and ortheris subsided.
the three returned to barracks without a word. mulvaney's last argument
clinched the matter. this palanquin was property, vendible, and to be
attained in the simplest and least embarrassing fashion. it would
eventually become beer. great was mulvaney.
next afternoon a procession of three formed itself and disappeared into
the scrub in the direction of the new railway line. learoyd alone was
without care, for mulvaney dived darkly into the future, and little
ortheris feared the unknown, what befell at that interview in the lonely
pay-shed by the side of the half-built embankment, only a few hundred
coolies know, and their tale is a confusing one, running thus—
"we were at work. three men in red coats came. they saw the
sahib—dearsley sahib. they made oration; and noticeably the small
man among the red-coats. dearsley sahib also made oration, and used many
very strong words, upon this talk they departed together to an open space,
and there the fat man in the red coat fought with dearsley sahib after the
custom of white men—with his hands, making no noise, and never at
all pulling dearsley sahib's hair. such of us as were not afraid beheld
these things for just so long a time as a man needs to cook the midday
meal. the small man in the red coat had possessed himself of dearsley
sahib's watch. no, he did not steal that watch. he held it in his hand,
and at certain seasons made outcry, and the twain ceased their combat,
which was like the combat of young bulls in spring. both men were soon all
red, but dearsley sahib was much more red than the other. seeing this, and
fearing for his life—because we greatly loved him—some fifty
of us made shift to rush upon the red-coats. but a certain man—very
black as to the hair, and in no way to be confused with the small man, or
the fat man who fought—that man, we affirm, ran upon us, and of us
he embraced some ten or fifty in both arms, and beat our heads together,
so that our livers turned to water, and we ran away. it is not good to
interfere in the fightings of white men. after that dearsley sahib fell
and did not rise, these men jumped upon his stomach and despoiled him of
all his money, and attempted to fire the pay-shed, and departed. is it
true that dearsley sahib makes no complaint of these latter things having
been done? we were senseless with fear, and do not at all remember. there
was no palanquin near the pay-shed. what do we know about palanquins? is
it true that dearsley sahib does not return to this place, on account of
his sickness, for ten days? this is the fault of those bad men in the red
coats, who should be severely punished; for dearsley sahib is both our
father and mother, and we love him much. yet, if dearsley sahib does not
return to this place at all, we will speak the truth. there was a
palanquin, for the up-keep of which we were forced to pay nine-tenths of
our monthly wage. on such mulctings dearsley sahib allowed us to make
obeisance to him before the palanquin. what could we do? we were poor men.
he took a full half of our wages. will the government repay us those
moneys? those three men in red coats bore the palanquin upon their
shoulders and departed. all the money that dearsley sahib had taken from
us was in the cushions of that palanquin. therefore they stole it.
thousands of rupees were there—all our money. it was our bank-box,
to fill which we cheerfully contributed to dearsley sahib three-sevenths
of our monthly wage. why does the white man look upon us with the eye of
disfavor? before god, there was a palanquin, and now there is no
palanquin; and if they send the police here to make inquisition, we can
only say that there never has been any palanquin. why should a palanquin
be near these works? we are poor men, and we know nothing."
such is the simplest version of the simplest story connected with the
descent upon dearsley. from the lips of the coolies i received it.
dearsley himself was in no condition to say anything, and mulvaney
preserved a massive silence, broken only by the occasional licking of the
lips. he had seen a fight so gorgeous that even his power of speech was
taken from him. i respected that reserve until, three days after the
affair, i discovered in a disused stable in my quarters a palanquin of
unchastened splendor—evidently in past days the litter of a queen.
the pole whereby it swung between the shoulders of the bearers was rich
with the painted papier-machè of cashmere. the shoulder-pads
were of yellow silk. the panels of the litter itself were ablaze with the
loves of all the gods and goddesses of the hindu pantheon—lacquer on
cedar. the cedar sliding doors were fitted with hasps of translucent
jaipur enamel and ran in grooves shod with silver. the cushions were of
brocaded delhi silk, and the curtains which once hid any glimpse of the
beauty of the king's palace were stiff with gold. closer investigation
showed that the entire fabric was everywhere rubbed and discolored by time
and wear; but even thus it was sufficiently gorgeous to deserve housing on
the threshold of a royal zenana. i found no fault with it, except that it
was in my stable. then, trying to lift it by the silver-shod
shoulder-pole, i laughed. the road from dearsley's pay-shed to the
cantonment was a narrow and uneven one, and, traversed by three very
inexperienced palanquin-bearers, one of whom was sorely battered about the
head, must have been a path of torment. still i did not quite recognize
the right of the three musketeers to turn me into a "fence" for stolen
property.
"i'm askin' you to warehouse ut," said mulvaney when he was brought to
consider the question. "there's no steal in ut. dearsley tould us we cud
have ut if we fought. jock fought—an', oh, sorr, when the throuble
was at uts finest an' jock was bleedin' like a stuck pig, an' little
orth'ris was shquealin' on one leg chewin' big bites out av dearsley's
watch, i wud ha' given my place at the fight to have had you see wan
round. he tuk jock, as i suspicioned he would, an' jock was deceptive.
nine roun's they were even matched, an' at the tenth—about that
palanquin now, there's not the least throuble in the world, or we wud not
ha' brought ut here. you will ondherstand that the queen—god bless
her!—does not reckon for a privit soldier to kape elephints an'
palanquins an' sich in barricks. afther we had dhragged ut down from
dearsley's through that cruel scrub that near broke orth'ris's heart, we
set ut in the ravine for a night; an' a thief av a porcupine an' a
civet-cat av a jackal roosted in ut, as well we knew in the mornin'. i put
ut to you, sorr, is an elegint palanquin, fit for the princess, the
natural abidin' place av all the vermin in cantonmints? we brought ut to
you, afther dhark, and put ut in your shtable. do not let your conscience
prick. think av the rejoicin' men in the pay-shed yonder—lookin' at
dearsley wid his head tied up in a towel—an' well knowin' that they
can dhraw their pay ivry month widout stoppages for riffles. indirectly,
sorr, you have rescued from an onprincipled son av a night-hawk the
peasanthry av a numerous village. an' besides, will i let that sedan-chair
rot on our hands? not i. tis not every day a piece av pure joolry comes
into the market. there's not a king widin these forty miles"—he
waved his hand round the dusty horizon—"not a king wud not be glad
to buy ut. some day meself, whin i have leisure, i'll take ut up along the
road an' dishpose av ut."
"how?" said i, for i knew the man was capable of anything.
"get into ut, av coorse, and keep wan eye open through the curtains.
whin i see a likely man av the native persuasion, i will descind blushin'
from my canopy and say, 'buy a palanquin, ye black scutt?' i will have to
hire four men to carry me first, though; and that's impossible till next
pay-day."
curiously enough, learoyd, who had fought for the prize, and in the
winning secured the highest pleasure life had to offer him, was altogether
disposed to undervalue it, while ortheris openly said it would be better
to break the thing up. dearsley, he argued, might be a many-sided man,
capable, despite his magnificent fighting qualities, of setting in motion
the machinery of the civil law—a thing much abhorred by the soldier.
under any circumstances their fun had come and passed; the next pay-day
was close at hand, when there would be beer for all. wherefore longer
conserve the painted palanquin?
"a first-class rifle-shot an' a good little man av your inches you
are," said mulvaney. "but you niver had a head worth a soft-boiled egg.
'tis me has to lie awake av nights schamin' an' plottin' for the three av
us. orth'ris, me son, 'tis no matther av a few gallons av beer—no,
nor twenty gallons—but tubs an' vats an' firkins in that
sedan-chair. who ut was, an' what ut was, an' how ut got there, we do not
know; but i know in my bones that you an' me an' jock wid his sprained
thumb will get a fortune thereby. lave me alone, an' let me think."
meantime the palanquin stayed in my stall, the key of which was in
mulvaney's hands.
pay-day came, and with it beer. it was not in experience to hope that
mulvaney, dried by four weeks' drought, would avoid excess. next morning
he and the palanquin had disappeared. he had taken the precaution of
getting three days' leave "to see a friend on the railway," and the
colonel, well knowing that the seasonal outburst was near, and hoping it
would spend its force beyond the limits of his jurisdiction, cheerfully
gave him all he demanded. at this point mulvaney's history, as recorded in
the mess-room, stopped.
ortheris carried it not much further. "no, 'e wasn't drunk," said the
little man loyally, "the liquor was no more than feelin' its way round
inside of 'im; but 'e went an' filled that 'ole bloomin' palanquin with
bottles 'fore 'e went off. 'e's gone an' 'ired six men to carry 'im, an' i
'ad to 'elp 'im into 'is nupshal couch, 'cause 'e wouldn't 'ear reason.
'e's gone off in 'is shirt an' trousies, swearin' tremenjus—gone
down the road in the palanquin, wavin' 'is legs out o' windy."
"yes," said i, "but where?"
"now you arx me a question. 'e said 'e was goin' to sell that
palanquin, but from observations what happened when i was stuffin' 'im
through the door, i fancy 'e's gone to the new embankment to mock at
dearsley. 'soon as jock's off duty i'm goin' there to see if 'e's
safe—not mulvaney, but t'other man. my saints, but i pity 'im as
'elps terence out o' the palanquin when 'e's once fair drunk!"
"he'll come back without harm," i said.
"'corse 'e will. on'y question is, what 'll 'e be doin' on the road?
killing dearsley, like as not. 'e shouldn't 'a gone without jock or
me."
reinforced by learoyd, ortheris sought the foreman of the coolie-gang.
dearsley's head was still embellished with towels. mulvaney, drunk or
sober, would have struck no man in that condition, and dearsley
indignantly denied that he would have taken advantage of the intoxicated
brave.
"i had my pick o' you two," he explained to learoyd, "and you got my
palanquin—not before i'd made my profit on it. why'd i do harm when
everything's settled? your man did come here—drunk as davy's
sow on a frosty night—came a-purpose to mock me—stuck his head
out of the door an' called me a crucified hodman. i made him drunker, an'
sent him along. but i never touched him."
to these things learoyd, slow to perceive the evidences of sincerity,
answered only, "if owt comes to mulvaaney 'long o' you, i'll gripple you,
clouts or no clouts on your ugly head, an' i'll draw t' throat twistyways,
man. see there now."
the embassy removed itself, and dearsley, the battered, laughed alone
over his supper that evening.
three days passed—a fourth and a fifth. the week drew to a close
and mulvaney did not return. he, his royal palanquin, and his six
attendants, had vanished into air. a very large and very tipsy soldier,
his feet sticking out of the litter of a reigning princess, is not a thing
to travel along the ways without comment. yet no man of all the country
round had seen any such wonder. he was, and he was not; and learoyd
suggested the immediate smashment of dearsley as a sacrifice to his ghost.
ortheris insisted that all was well, and in the light of past experience
his hopes seemed reasonable.
"when mulvaney goes up the road," said he, "'e's like to go a very long
ways up, specially when 'e's so blue drunk as 'e is now. but what gits me
is 'is not bein' 'eard of pullin' wool off the niggers somewheres about.
that don't look good. the drink must ha' died out in 'im by this, unless
e's broke a bank, an' then—why don't 'e come back? 'e didn't ought
to ha' gone off without us."
even ortheris's heart sank at the end of the seventh day, for half the
regiment were out scouring the countryside, and learoyd had been forced to
fight two men who hinted openly that mulvaney had deserted. to do him
justice, the colonel laughed at the notion, even when it was put forward
by his much-trusted adjutant.
"mulvaney would as soon think of deserting as you would," said he. "no;
he's either fallen into a mischief among the villagers—and yet that
isn't likely, for he'd blarney himself out of the pit; or else he is
engaged on urgent private affairs—some stupendous devilment that we
shall hear of at mess after it has been the round of the barrack-rooms.
the worst of it is that i shall have to give him twenty-eight days'
confinement at least for being absent without leave, just when i most want
him to lick the new batch of recruits into shape. i never knew a man who
could put a polish on young soldiers as quickly as mulvaney can. how does
he do it?"
"with blarney and the buckle-end of a belt, sir," said the adjutant.
"he is worth a couple of non-commissioned officers when we are dealing
with an irish draft, and the london lads seem to adore him. the worst of
it is that if he goes to the cells the other two are neither to hold nor
to bind till he comes out again. i believe ortheris preaches mutiny on
those occasions, and i know that the mere presence of learoyd mourning for
mulvaney kills all the cheerfulness of his room, the sergeants tell me
that he allows no man to laugh when he feels unhappy. they are a queer
gang."
"for all that, i wish we had a few more of them. i like a
well-conducted regiment, but these pasty-faced, shifty-eyed, mealy-mouthed
young slouchers from the depôt worry me sometimes with their
offensive virtue. they don't seem to have backbone enough to do anything
but play cards and prowl round the married quarters. i believe i'd forgive
that old villain on the spot if he turned up with any sort of explanation
that i could in decency accept."
"not likely to be much difficulty about that, sir," said the adjutant.
"mulvaney's explanations are only one degree less wonderful than his
performances. they say that when he was in the black tyrone, before he
came to us, he was discovered on the banks of the liffey trying to sell
his colonel's charger to a donegal dealer as a perfect lady's hack.
shackbolt commanded the tyrone then."
"shackbolt must have had apoplexy at the thought of his ramping
war-horses answering to that description. he used to buy unbacked devils,
and tame them on some pet theory of starvation. what did mulvaney
say?"
"that he was a member of the society for the prevention of cruelty to
animals, anxious to 'sell the poor baste where he would get something to
fill out his dimples.' shackbolt laughed, but i fancy that was why
mulvaney exchanged to ours."
"i wish he were back," said the colonel; "for i like him and believe he
likes me."
that evening, to cheer our souls, learoyd, ortheris, and i went into
the waste to smoke out a porcupine. all the dogs attended, but even their
clamor—and they began to discuss the shortcomings of porcupines
before they left cantonments—could not take us out of ourselves. a
large, low moon turned the tops of the plume-grass to silver, and the
stunted camel-thorn bushes and sour tamarisks into the likenesses of
trooping devils. the smell of the sun had not left the earth, and little
aimless winds blowing across the rose-gardens to the southward brought the
scent of dried roses and water. our fire once started, and the dogs
craftily disposed to wait the dash of the porcupine, we climbed to the top
of a rain-scarred hillock of earths and looked across the scrub seamed
with cattle paths, white with the long grass, and dotted with spots of
level pond-bottom, where the snipe would gather in winter.
"this," said ortheris, with a sigh, as he took in the unkempt
desolation of it all, "this is sanguinary. this is unusually sanguinary.
sort o' mad country. like a grate when the fire's put out by the sun." he
shaded his eyes against the moonlight. "an' there's a loony dancin' in the
middle of it all. quite right. i'd dance too if i wasn't so
downheart."
there pranced a portent in the face of the moon—a huge and ragged
spirit of the waste, that flapped its wings from afar. it had risen out of
the earth; it was coming toward us, and its outline was never twice the
same. the toga, table-cloth, or dressing-gown, whatever the creature wore,
took a hundred shapes. once it stopped on a neighboring mound and flung
all its legs and arms to the winds.
"my, but that scarecrow 'as got 'em bad!" said ortheris. "seems like if
'e comes any furder we'll 'ave to argify with 'im."
learoyd raised himself from the dirt as a bull clears his flanks of the
wallow. and as a bull bellows, so he, after a short minute at gaze, gave
tongue to the stars.
"mulvaaney! mulvaaney! a-hoo!"
oh then it was that we yelled, and the figure dipped into the hollow,
till, with a crash of rending grass, the lost one strode up to the light
of the fire, and disappeared to the waist in a wave of joyous dogs! then
learoyd and ortheris gave greeting, bass and falsetto together, both
swallowing a lump in the throat.
"you damned fool!" said they, and severally pounded him with their
fists.
"go easy!" he answered; wrapping a huge arm around each. "i would have
you to know that i am a god, to be treated as such—tho', by my
faith, i fancy i've got to go to the guardroom just like a privit
soldier."
the latter part of the sentence destroyed the suspicions raised by the
former. any one would have been justified in regarding mulvaney as mad. he
was hatless and shoeless, and his shirt and trousers were dropping off
him. but he wore one wondrous garment—a gigantic cloak that fell
from collar-bone to heel—of pale pink silk, wrought all over in
cunningest needlework of hands long since dead, with the loves of the
hindu gods. the monstrous figures leaped in and out of the light of the
fire as he settled the folds round him.
ortheris handled the stuff respectfully for a moment while i was trying
to remember where i had seen it before. then he screamed, "what
'ave you done with the palanquin? you're wearin' the linin'."
"i am," said the irishman, "an' by the same token the 'broidery is
scrapin' my hide off. i've lived in this sumpshus counterpane for four
days. me son, i begin to ondherstand why the naygur is no use, widout me
boots, an' me trousies like an openwork stocking on a gyurl's leg at a
dance, i begin to feel like a naygur-man—all fearful an' timoreous.
give me a pipe an' i'll tell on."
he lit a pipe, resumed his grip of his two friends, and rocked to and
fro in a gale of laughter.
"mulvaney," said ortheris sternly, "'tain't no time for laughin'.
you've given jock an' me more trouble than you're worth. you 'ave been
absent without leave an' you'll go into cells for that; an' you 'ave come
back disgustin'ly dressed an' most improper in the linin' o' that bloomin'
palanquin, instid of which you laugh. an' we thought you was dead all the
time."
"bhoys," said the culprit, still shaking gently, "whin i've done my
tale you may cry if you like, an' little orth'ris here can thrample my
inside out. ha' done an' listen. my performinces have been stupenjus: my
luck has been the blessed luck av the british army—an' there's no
betther than that. i went out dhrunk an' dhrinkin' in the palanquin, and i
have come back a pink god. did any of you go to dearsley afther my time
was up? he was at the bottom of ut all."
"ah said so," murmured learoyd. "tomorrow ah'll smash t' face in upon
his heead."
"ye will not. dearsley's a jool av a man. afther ortheris had put me
into the palanquin an' the six bearer-men were gruntin' down the road, i
tuk thought to mock dearsley for that fight. so i tould thim, 'go to the
embankmint,' and there, bein' most amazin' full, i shtuck my head out av
the concern an' passed compliments wid dearsley. i must ha' miscalled him
outrageous, for whin i am that way the power av the tongue comes on me. i
can bare remimber tellin' him that his mouth opened endways like the mouth
av a skate, which was thrue afther learoyd had handled ut; an' i clear
remimber his takin' no manner nor matter av offence, but givin' me a big
dhrink of beer. twas the beer did the thrick, for i crawled back into the
palanquin, steppin' on me right ear wid me left foot, an' thin slept like
the dead. wanst i half-roused, an' begad the noise in my head was
tremenjus—roarin' and rattlin' an' poundin', such as was quite new
to me. 'mother av mercy,' thinks i, 'phwat a concertina i will have on my
shoulders whin i wake!' an' wid that i curls mysilf up to sleep before ut
should get hould on me. bhoys, that noise was not dhrink, 'twas the rattle
av a thrain!"
there followed an impressive pause.
"yes, he had put me on a thrain—put me, palanquin an' all, an'
six black assassins av his own coolies that was in his nefarious
confidence, on the flat av a ballast-thruck, and we were rowlin' an'
bowlin' along to benares. glory be that i did not wake up thin an'
introjuce mysilf to the coolies. as i was sayin', i slept for the betther
part av a day an' a night. but remimber you, that that man dearsley had
packed me off on wan av his material-thrains to benares, all for to make
me overstay my leave an' get me into the cells."
the explanation was an eminently rational one. benares lay at least ten
hours by rail from the cantonments, and nothing in the world could have
saved mulvaney from arrest as a deserter had he appeared there in the
apparel of his orgies. dearsley had not forgotten to take revenge.
learoyd, drawing back a little, began to place soft blows over selected
portions of mulvaney's body. his thoughts were away on the embankment, and
they meditated evil for dearsley. mulvaney continued—
"whin i was full awake the palanquin was set down in a street, i
suspicioned, for i cud hear people passin' an' talkin'. but i knew well i
was far from home. there is a queer smell upon our cantonments—a
smell av dried earth and brick-kilns wid whiffs av cavalry stable-litter.
this place smelt marigold flowers an' bad water, an' wanst somethin' alive
came an' blew heavy with his muzzle at the chink av the shutter. 'it's in
a village i am,' thinks i to myself, 'an' the parochial buffalo is
investigatin' the palanquin.' but anyways i had no desire to move. only
lie still whin you're in foreign parts an' the standin' luck av the
british army will carry ye through. that is an epigram. i made ut.
"thin a lot av whishperin' divils surrounded the palanquin. 'take ut
up,' sez wan man. 'but who'll pay us?' sez another. 'the maharanee's
minister, av coorse,' sez the man. 'oho!' sez i to mysilf, 'i'm a quane in
me own right, wid a minister to pay me expenses. i'll be an emperor if i
lie still long enough; but this is no village i've found.' i lay quiet,
but i gummed me right eye to a crack av the shutters, an' i saw that the
whole street was crammed wid palanquins an' horses, an' a sprinklin' av
naked priests all yellow powder an' tigers' tails. but i may tell you,
orth'ris, an' you, learoyd, that av all the palanquins ours was the most
imperial an' magnificent now a palanquin means a native lady all the world
over, except whin a soldier av the quane happens to be takin' a ride.
'women an' priests!' sez i. 'your father's son is in the right pew this
time, terence. there will be proceedin's. six black divils in pink muslin
tuk up the palanquin, an' oh! but the rowlin' an' the rockin' made me
sick. thin we got fair jammed among the palanquins—not more than
fifty av them—an' we grated an' bumped like queenstown potato-smacks
in a runnin' tide. i cud hear the women gigglin' and squirkin' in their
palanquins, but mine was the royal equipage. they made way for ut, an',
begad, the pink muslin men o' mine were howlin', 'room for the maharanee
av gokral-seetarun.' do you know aught av the lady, sorr?"
"yes," said i, "she is a very estimable old queen of the central indian
states, and they say she is fat. how on earth could she go to benares
without all the city knowing her palanquin?"
"'twas the eternal foolishness av the naygur-man. they saw the
palanquin lying loneful an' forlornsome, an' the beauty av ut, after
dearsley's men had dhropped ut and gone away, an' they gave ut the best
name that occurred to thim. quite right too. for aught we know the ould
lady was travelin' incog—like me. i'm glad to hear she's fat.
i was no light weight mysilf, an' my men were mortial anxious to dhrop me
under a great big archway promiscuously ornamented wid the most improper
carvin's an' cuttin's i iver saw. begad! they made me blush—like
a—like a maharanee."
"the temple of prithi-devi," i murmured, remembering the monstrous
horrors of that sculptured archway at benares.
"pretty devilskins, savin' your presence, sorr! there was nothin'
pretty about ut, except me. twas all half dhark, an' whin the coolies left
they shut a big black gate behind av us, an' half a company av fat yellow
priests began pully-haulin' the palanquins into a dharker place
yet—a big stone hall full av pillars, an' gods, an' incense, an' all
manner av similar thruck. the gate disconcerted me, for i perceived i wud
have to go forward to get out, my retreat bein' cut off. by the same token
a good priest makes a bad palanquin-coolie. begad! they nearly turned me
inside out draggin' the palanquin to the temple. now the disposishin av
the forces inside was this way. the maharanee av
gokral-seetarun—that was me—lay by the favor av providence on
the far left flank behind the dhark av a pillar carved with elephints'
heads, the remainder av the palanquins was in a big half circle facing in
to the biggest, fattest, an' most amazin' she-god that iver i dreamed av.
her head ran up into the black above us, an' her feet stuck out in the
light av a little fire av melted butter that a priest was feedin' out av a
butter-dish. thin a man began to sing an' play on somethin' back in the
dhark, an' 'twas a queer song. ut made my hair lift on the back av my
neck, thin the doors av all the palanquins slid back, an' the women
bundled out, i saw what i'll niver see again. twas more glorious than
transformations at a pantomime, for they was in pink an' blue an' silver
an' red an' grass green, wid di'monds an' im'ralds an' great red rubies
all over thim. but that was the least part av the glory. o bhoys, they
were more lovely than the like av any loveliness in hiven; ay, their
little bare feet were better than the white hands av a lord's lady, an'
their mouths were like puckered roses, an' their eyes were bigger an'
dharker than the eyes av any livin' women i've seen. ye may laugh, but i'm
speakin' truth. i niver saw the like, an' niver i will again."
"seeing that in all probability you were watching the wives and
daughters of most of the kings of india, the chances are that you won't,"
i said, for it was dawning on me that mulvaney had stumbled upon a big
queens' praying at benares.
"i niver will," he said, mournfully. "that sight doesn't come twist to
any man. it made me ashamed to watch. a fat priest knocked at my door. i
didn't think he'd have the insolince to disturb the maharanee av
gokral-seetarun, so i lay still. 'the old cow's asleep,' sez he to
another. 'let her be,' sez that. ''twill be long before she has a calf!' i
might ha' known before he spoke that all a woman prays for in
injia—an' for matter o' that in england too—is childher. that
made me more sorry i'd come, me bein', as you well know, a childless
man."
he was silent for a moment, thinking of his little son, dead many years
ago.
"they prayed, an' the butter-fires blazed up an' the incense turned
everything blue, an' between that an' the fires the women looked as tho'
they were all ablaze an' twinklin'. they took hold av the she-god's knees,
they cried out an' they threw themselves about, an' that
world-without-end-amen music was dhrivin' thim mad. mother av hiven! how
they cried, an' the ould she-god grinnin' above thim all so scornful! the
dhrink was dyin' out in me fast, an' i was thinkin' harder than the
thoughts wud go through my head-thinkin' how to get out, an' all manner of
nonsense as well. the women were rockin' in rows, their di'mond belts
clickin', an' the tears runnin' out betune their hands, an' the lights
were goin' lower an' dharker. thin there was a blaze like lightnin' from
the roof, an' that showed me the inside av the palanquin, an' at the end
where my foot was, stood the livin' spit an' image o' mysilf worked on the
linin'. this man here, ut was."
he hunted in the folds of his pink cloak, ran a hand under one, and
thrust into the firelight a foot-long embroidered presentment of the great
god krishna, playing on a flute. the heavy jowl, the staring eye, and the
blue-black moustache of the god made up a far-off resemblance to
mulvaney.
"the blaze was gone in a wink, but the whole schame came to me thin, i
believe i was mad too. i slid the off-shutter open an' rowled out into the
dhark behind the elephint-head pillar, tucked up my trousies to my knees,
slipped off my boots an' tuk a general hould av all the pink linin' av the
palanquin. glory be, ut ripped out like a woman's dhriss whin you tread on
ut at a sergeants' ball, an' a bottle came with ut. i tuk the bottle an'
the next minut i was out av the dhark av the pillar, the pink linin'
wrapped round me most graceful, the music, thunderin' like kettledrums,
an' a could draft blowin' round my bare legs. by this hand that did ut, i
was khrishna tootlin' on the flute—the god that the rig'mental
chaplain talks about. a sweet sight i must ha' looked. i knew my eyes were
big, and my face was wax-white, an' at the worst i must ha' looked like a
ghost. but they took me for the livin' god. the music stopped, and the
women were dead dumb an' i crooked my legs like a shepherd on a china
basin, an' i did the ghost-waggle with my feet as i had done ut at the
rig'mental theatre many times, an' i slid acrost the width av that temple
in front av the she-god tootlin' on the beer bottle."
"wot did you toot?" demanded ortheris the practical.
"me? oh!" mulvaney sprang up, suiting the action to the word, and
sliding gravely in front of us, a dilapidated but imposing deity in the
half light. "i sang—
"only say
you'll be mrs. brallaghan.
don't say nay,
charmin' judy callaghan."
i didn't know me own voice when i sang. an' oh! 'twas pitiful to see
the women. the darlin's were down on their faces. whin i passed the last
wan i cud see her poor little fingers workin' one in another as if she
wanted to touch my feet. so i dhrew the tail av this pink overcoat over
her head for the greater honor, an' i slid into the dhark on the other
side av the temple, and fetched up in the arms av a big fat priest. all i
wanted was to get away clear. so i tak him by his greasy throat an' shut
the speech out av him, 'out!' sez i. 'which way, ye fat
heathen?'—'oh!' sez he. 'man,' sez i. 'white man, soldier man,
common soldier man. where in the name av confusion is the back door?' the
women in the temple were still on their faces, an' a young priest was
holdin' out his arms above their heads.
"'this way,' sez my fat friend, duckin' behind a big bull-god an'
divin' into a passage, thin i remimbered that i must ha' made the
miraculous reputation av that temple for the next fifty years. 'not so
fast,' i sez, an' i held out both my hands wid a wink. that ould thief
smiled like a father. i tuk him by the back av the neck in case he should
be wishful to put a knife into me unbeknownst, an' i ran him up an' down
the passage twice to collect his sensibilities! 'be quiet,' sez he, in
english. 'now you talk sense,' i sez. 'fwhat'll you give me for the use av
that most iligant palanquin i have no time to take away?'—'don't
tell,' sez he, 'is ut like?' sez i, 'but ye might give me my railway fare.
i'm far from my home an' i've done you a service.' bhoys, 'tis a good
thing to be a priest. the ould man niver throubled himself to dhraw from a
bank. as i will prove to you subsequint, he philandered all round the
slack av his clothes an' began dribblin' ten-rupee notes, old gold mohurs,
and rupees into my hand till i could hould no more."
"you lie!" said ortheris. "you're mad or sunstrook. a native don't give
coin unless you cut it out o' 'im. 'tain't nature."
"then my lie an' my sunstroke is concealed under that lump av sod
yonder," retorted mulvaney, unruffled, nodding across the scrub. "an'
there's a dale more in nature than your squidgy little legs have iver
taken you to, orth'ris, me son. four hundred an' thirty-four rupees by my
reckoning an' a big fat gold necklace that i took from him as a
remimbrancer, was our share in that business."
"an' 'e give it you for love?" said ortheris.
"we were alone in that passage. maybe i was a trifle too pressin', but
considher fwhat i had done for the good av the temple and the iverlastin'
joy av those women. twas cheap at the price. i wud ha' taken more if i cud
ha' found ut. i turned the ould man upside down at the last, but he was
milked dhry. thin he opened a door in another passage an' i found mysilf
up to my knees in benares river-water, an' bad smellin' ut is. more by
token i had come out on the river-line close to the burnin' ghat and
contagious to a cracklin' corpse. this was in the heart av the night, for
i had been four hours in the temple. there was a crowd av boats tied up,
so i tuk wan an' wint across the river, thin i came home acrost country,
lyin' up by day."
"how on earth did you manage?" i said.
"how did sir frederick roberts get from cabul to candahar? he marched
an' he niver tould how near he was to breakin' down. that's why he is
fwhat he is. an' now"—mulvaney yawned portentously, "now i will go
an' give myself up for absince widout leave. it's eight an' twenty days
an' the rough end of the colonel's tongue in orderly room, any way you
look at ut. but 'tis cheap at the price."
"mulvaney," said i, softly. "if there happens to be any sort of excuse
that the colonel can in any way accept, i have a notion that you'll get
nothing more than the dressing-down, the new recruits are in,
and"—
"not a word more, sorr. is ut excuses the old man wants? tis not my
way, but he shall have thim. i'll tell him i was engaged in financial
operations connected wid a church," and he flapped his way to cantonments
and the cells, singing lustily—
"so they sent a corp'ril's file,
and they put me in the gyard-room
for conduck unbecomin' of a soldier."
and when he was lost in the midst of the moonlight we could hear the
refrain—
"bang upon the big drum, bash upon the cymbals,
as we go marchin' along, boys, oh!
for although in this campaign
there's no whisky nor champagne,
we'll keep our spirits goin' with a song, boys!"
therewith he surrendered himself to the joyful and almost weeping
guard, and was made much of by his fellows. but to the colonel he said
that he had been smitten with sunstroke and had lain insensible on a
villager's cot for untold hours; and between laughter and good-will the
affair was smoothed over, so that he could, next day, teach the new
recruits how to "fear god, honor the queen, shoot straight, and keep
clean."
"where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may
say unto him—what doest thou?"
"yeth! and chimo to sleep at ve foot of ve bed, and ve pink pikky-book,
and ve bwead—'cause i will be hungwy in ve night—and vat's
all, miss biddums. and now give me one kiss and i'll go to
sleep.—so! kite quiet. ow! ve pink pikky-book has slidded under ve
pillow and ve bwead is cwumbling! miss biddums! miss biddums! i'm
so uncomfy! come and tuck me up, miss biddums."
his majesty the king was going to bed; and poor, patient miss biddums,
who had advertised herself humbly as a "young person, european, accustomed
to the care of little children," was forced to wait upon his royal
caprices. the going to bed was always a lengthy process, because his
majesty had a convenient knack of forgetting which of his many friends,
from the mehter's son to the commissioner's daughter, he had prayed
for, and, lest the deity should take offence, was used to toil through his
little prayers, in all reverence, five times in one evening. his majesty
the king believed in the efficacy of prayer as devoutly as he believed in
chimo the patient spaniel, or miss biddums, who could reach him down his
gun—"with cursuffun caps—reel ones"—from the
upper shelves of the big nursery cupboard.
at the door of the nursery his authority stopped. beyond lay the empire
of his father and mother—two very terrible people who had no time to
waste upon his majesty the king. his voice was lowered when he passed the
frontier of his own dominions, his actions were fettered, and his soul was
filled with awe because of the grim man who lived among a wilderness of
pigeon-holes and the most fascinating pieces of red tape, and the
wonderful woman who was always getting into or stepping out of the big
carriage.
to the one belonged the mysteries of the "duftar-room"; to the
other the great, reflected wilderness of the "memsahib's room" where the
shiny, scented dresses hung on pegs, miles and miles up in the air, and
the just-seen plateau of the toilet-table revealed an acreage of speckly
combs, broidered "hanafitch bags," and "white-headed" brushes.
there was no room for his majesty the king either in official reserve
or mundane gorgeousness. he had discovered that, ages and ages
ago—before even chimo came to the house, or miss biddums had ceased
grizzling over a packet of greasy letters which appeared to be her chief
treasure on earth. his majesty the king, therefore, wisely confined
himself to his own territories, where only miss biddums, and she feebly,
disputed his sway.
from miss biddums he had picked up his simple theology and welded it to
the legends of gods and devils that he had learned in the servants'
quarters.
to miss biddums he confided with equal trust his tattered garments and
his more serious griefs. she would make everything whole. she knew exactly
how the earth had been born, and had reassured the trembling soul of his
majesty the king that terrible time in july when it rained continuously
for seven days and seven nights, and—there was no ark ready and all
the ravens had flown away! she was the most powerful person with whom he
was brought into contact—always excepting the two remote and silent
people beyond the nursery door.
how was his majesty the king to know that, six years ago, in the summer
of his birth, mrs. austell, turning over her husband's papers, had come
upon the intemperate letter of a foolish woman who had been carried away
by the silent man's strength and personal beauty? how could he tell what
evil the overlooked slip of note-paper had wrought in the mind of a
desperately jealous wife? how could he, despite his wisdom, guess that his
mother had chosen to make of it excuse for a bar and a division between
herself and her husband, that strengthened and grew harder to break with
each year; that she, having unearthed this skeleton in the cupboard, had
trained it into a household god which should be about their path and about
their bed, and poison all their ways?
these things were beyond the province of his majesty the king. he only
knew that his father was daily absorbed in some mysterious work for a
thing called the sirkar and that his mother was the victim
alternately of the nautch and the burrakhana. to these
entertainments she was escorted by a captain-man for whom his majesty the
king had no regard.
"he doesn't laugh," he argued with miss biddums, who would fain
have taught him charity. "he only makes faces wiv his mouf, and when he
wants to o-muse me i am not o-mused." and his majesty the king
shook his head as one who knew the deceitfulness of this world.
morning and evening it was his duty to salute his father and
mother—the former with a grave shake of the hand, and the latter
with an equally grave kiss. once, indeed, he had put his arms round his
mother's neck, in the fashion he used toward miss biddums. the openwork of
his sleeve-edge caught in an earring, and the last stage of his majesty's
little overture was a suppressed scream and summary dismissal to the
nursery.
"it's w'ong," thought his majesty the king, "to hug memsahibs wiv fings
in veir ears. i will amember." he never repeated the experiment.
miss biddums, it must be confessed, spoiled him as much as his nature
admitted, in some sort of recompense for what she called "the hard ways of
his papa and mamma." she, like her charge, knew nothing of the trouble
between man and wife—the savage contempt for a woman's stupidity on
the one side, or the dull, rankling anger on the other. miss biddums had
looked after many little children in her time, and served in many
establishments. being a discreet woman, she observed little and said less,
and, when her pupils went over the sea to the great unknown which she,
with touching confidence in her hearers, called "home," packed up her
slender belongings and sought for employment afresh, lavishing all her
love on each successive batch of ingrates. only his majesty the king had
repaid her affection with interest; and in his uncomprehending ears she
had told the tale of nearly all her hopes, her aspirations, the hopes that
were dead, and the dazzling glories of her ancestral home in
"calcutta, close to wellington square."
everything above the average was in the eyes of his majesty the king
"calcutta good." when miss biddums had crossed his royal will, he reversed
the epithet to vex that estimable lady, and all things evil were, until
the tears of repentance swept away spite, "calcutta bad."
now and again miss biddums begged for him the rare pleasure of a day in
the society of the commissioner's child—the wilful four-year-old
patsie, who, to the intense amazement of his majesty the king, was
idolized by her parents. on thinking the question out at length, by roads
unknown to those who have left childhood behind, he came to the conclusion
that patsie was petted because she wore a big blue sash and yellow
hair.
this precious discovery he kept to himself. the yellow hair was
absolutely beyond his power, his own tousled wig being potato-brown; but
something might be done toward the blue sash. he tied a large knot in his
mosquito-curtains in order to remember to consult patsie on their next
meeting. she was the only child he had ever spoken to, and almost the only
one that he had ever seen. the little memory and the very large and ragged
knot held good.
"patsie, lend me your blue wiband," said his majesty the king.
"you'll bewy it," said patsie, doubtfully, mindful of certain fearful
atrocities committed on her doll.
"no, i won't—twoofanhonor. it's for me to wear."
"pooh!" said patsie. "boys don't wear sa-ashes. zey's only for
dirls."
"i didn't know." the face of his majesty the king fell.
"who wants ribands? are you playing horses, chickabiddies?" said the
commissioner's wife, stepping into the veranda.
"toby wanted my sash," explained patsie.
"i don't now," said his majesty the king, hastily, feeling that with
one of these terrible "grown-ups" his poor little secret would be
shamelessly wrenched from him, and perhaps—most burning desecration
of all—laughed at.
"i'll give you a cracker-cap," said the commissioner's wife. "come
along with me, toby, and we'll choose it."
the cracker-cap was a stiff, three-pointed vermilion-and-tinsel
splendor. his majesty the king fitted it on his royal brow. the
commissioner's wife had a face that children instinctively trusted, and
her action, as she adjusted the toppling middle spike, was tender.
"will it do as well?" stammered his majesty the king.
"as what, little one?"
"as ve wiban?"
"oh, quite. go and look at yourself in the glass."
the words were spoken in all sincerity and to help forward any absurd
"dressing-up" amusement that the children might take into their minds. but
the young savage has a keen sense of the ludicrous. his majesty the king
swung the great cheval-glass down, and saw his head crowned with the
staring horror of a fool's cap—a thing which his father would rend
to pieces if it ever came into his office. he plucked it off, and burst
into tears.
"toby," said the commissioner's wife, gravely, "you shouldn't give way
to temper. i am very sorry to see it. it's wrong."
his majesty the king sobbed inconsolably, and the heart of patsie's
mother was touched. she drew the child on to her knee. clearly it was not
temper alone.
"what is it, toby? won't you tell me? aren't you well?"
the torrent of sobs and speech met, and fought for a time, with
chokings and gulpings and gasps. then, in a sudden rush, his majesty the
king was delivered of a few inarticulate sounds, followed by the
words:—"go a—way you—dirty—little debbil!"
"toby! what do you mean?"
"it's what he'd say. i know it is! he said vat when vere was
only a little, little eggy mess, on my t-t-unic; and he'd say it again,
and laugh, if i went in wif vat on my head."
"who would say that?"
"m-m-my papa! and i fought if i had ve blue wiban, he'd let me play in
ve waste-paper basket under ve table."
"what blue riband, childie?"
"ve same vat patsie had—ve big blue wiban w-w-wound my
t-ttummy!"
"what is it, toby? there's something on your mind. tell me all about
it, and perhaps i can help."
"isn't anyfing," sniffed his majesty, mindful of his manhood, and
raising his head from the motherly bosom upon which it was resting. "i
only fought vat you—you petted patsie 'cause she had ve blue wiban,
and—and if i'd had ve blue wiban too, m-my papa w-would pet me."
the secret was out, and his majesty the king sobbed bitterly in spite
of the arms round him, and the murmur of comfort on his heated little
forehead.
enter patsie tumultuously, embarrassed by several lengths of the
commissioner's pet mahseer-rod. "tum along, toby! zere's a
chu-chu lizard in ze chick, and i've told chimo to watch him
till we turn. if we poke him wiz zis his tail will go wiggle-wiggle
and fall off. tum along! i can't weach."
"i'm comin'," said his majesty the king, climbing down from the
commissioner's wife's knee after a hasty kiss.
two minutes later, the chu-chu lizard's tail was wriggling on
the matting of the veranda, and the children were gravely poking it with
splinters from the chick, to urge its exhausted vitality into "just
one wiggle more, 'cause it doesn't hurt chu-chu."
the commissioner's wife stood in the doorway and watched:—"poor
little mite! a blue sash ... and my own precious patsie! i wonder if the
best of us, or we who love them best, ever understand what goes on in
their topsy-turvy little heads."
a big tear splashed on the commissioner's wife's wedding-ring, and she
went indoors to devise a tea for the benefit of his majesty the king.
"their souls aren't in their tummies at that age in this climate," said
the commissioner's wife, "but they are not far off. i wonder if i could
make mrs. austell understand. poor little fellow!"
with simple craft, the commissioner's wife called on mrs. austell and
spoke long and lovingly about children; inquiring specially for his
majesty the king.
"he's with his governess," said mrs. austell, and the tone intimated
that she was not interested.
the commissioner's wife, unskilled in the art of war, continued her
questionings. "i don't know," said mrs. austell. "these things are left to
miss biddums, and, of course, she does not ill-treat the child."
the commissioner's wife left hastily. the last sentence jarred upon her
nerves. "doesn't ill-treat the child! as if that were all! i wonder
what tom would say if i only 'didn't ill-treat' patsie!"
thenceforward, his majesty the king was an honored guest at the
commissioner's house, and the chosen friend of patsie, with whom he
blundered into as many scrapes as the compound and the servants' quarters
afforded. patsie's mamma was always ready to give counsel, help, and
sympathy, and, if need were and callers few, to enter into their games
with an abandon that would have shocked the sleek-haired subalterns
who squirmed painfully in their chairs when they came to call on her whom
they profanely nicknamed "mother bunch."
yet, in spite of patsie and patsie's mamma, and the love that these two
lavished upon him, his majesty the king fell grievously from grace, and
committed no less a sin than that of theft—unknown, it is true, but
burdensome.
there came a man to the door one day, when his majesty was playing in
the hall and the bearer had gone to dinner, with a packet for his
majesty's mamma. and he put it upon the hall-table, said that there was no
answer, and departed.
presently, the pattern of the dado ceased to interest his majesty,
while the packet, a white, neatly wrapped one of fascinating shape,
interested him very much indeed. his mamma was out, so was miss biddums,
and there was pink string round the packet. he greatly desired pink
string. it would help him in many of his little businesses—the
haulage across the floor of his small cane-chair, the torturing of chimo,
who could never understand harness—and so forth. if he took the
string it would be his own, and nobody would be any the wiser. he
certainly could not pluck up sufficient courage to ask mamma for it.
wherefore, mounting upon a chair, he carefully untied the string and,
behold, the stiff white paper spread out in four directions, and revealed
a beautiful little leather box with gold lines upon it! he tried to
replace the string, but that was a failure. so he opened the box to get
full satisfaction for his iniquity, and saw a most beautiful star that
shone and winked, and was altogether lovely and desirable.
"vat," said his majesty, meditatively, "is a 'parkle cwown, like what i
will wear when i go to heaven. i will wear it on my head—miss
biddums says so. i would like to wear it now. i would like to play
wiv it. i will take it away and play wiv it, very careful, until mamma
asks for it. i fink it was bought for me to play wiv—same as my
cart."
his majesty the king was arguing against his conscience, and he knew
it, for he thought immediately after: "never mind. i will keep it to play
wiv until mamma says where is it, and then i will say:—'i tookt it
and i am sorry.' i will not hurt it because it is a 'parkle cwown. but
miss biddums will tell me to put it back. i will not show it to miss
biddums."
if mamma had come in at that moment all would have gone well. she did
not, and his majesty the king stuffed paper, case, and jewel into the
breast of his blouse and marched to the nursery.
"when mamma asks i will tell," was the salve that he laid upon his
conscience. but mamma never asked, and for three whole days his majesty
the king gloated over his treasure. it was of no earthly use to him, but
it was splendid, and, for aught he knew, something dropped from the
heavens themselves. still mamma made no inquiries, and it seemed to him,
in his furtive peeps, as though the shiny stones grew dim. what was the
use of a 'parkle cwown if it made a little boy feel all bad in his inside?
he had the pink string as well as the other treasure, but greatly he
wished that he had not gone beyond the string. it was his first experience
of iniquity, and it pained him after the flush of possession and secret
delight in the "'parkle cwown" had died away.
each day that he delayed rendered confession to the people beyond the
nursery doors more impossible. now and again he determined to put himself
in the path of the beautifully attired lady as she was going out, and
explain that he and no one else was the possessor of a "'parkle cwown,"
most beautiful and quite uninquired for. but she passed hurriedly to her
carriage, and the opportunity was gone before his majesty the king could
draw the deep breath which clinches noble resolve. the dread secret cut
him off from miss biddums, patsie, and the commissioner's wife,
and—doubly hard fate—when he brooded over it patsie said, and
told her mother, that he was cross.
the days were very long to his majesty the king, and the nights longer
still. miss biddums had informed him, more than once, what was the
ultimate destiny of "fieves," and when he passed the interminable mud
flanks of the central jail, he shook in his little strapped shoes.
but release came after an afternoon spent in playing boats by the edge
of the tank at the bottom of the garden. his majesty the king went to tea,
and, for the first time in his memory, the meal revolted him. his nose was
very cold, and his cheeks were burning hot. there was a weight about his
feet, and he pressed his head several times to make sure that it was not
swelling as he sat.
"i feel vevy funny," said his majesty the king, rubbing his nose.
"vere's a buzz-buzz in my head."
he went to bed quietly. miss biddums was out and the bearer undressed
him.
the sin of the "'parkle cwown" was forgotten in the acuteness of the
discomfort to which he roused after a leaden sleep of some hours, he was
thirsty, and the bearer had forgotten to leave the drinking-water. "miss
biddums! miss biddums! i'm so kirsty!"
no answer, miss biddums had leave to attend the wedding of a calcutta
schoolmate. his majesty the king had forgotten that.
"i want a dwink of water!" he cried, but his voice was dried up in his
throat. "i want a dwink! vere is ve glass?"
he sat up in bed and looked round. there was a murmur of voices from
the other side of the nursery door. it was better to face the terrible
unknown than to choke in the dark. he slipped out of bed, but his feet
were strangely wilful, and he reeled once or twice. then he pushed the
door open and staggered—a puffed and purple-faced little
figure—into the brilliant light of the dining-room full of pretty
ladies.
"i'm vevy hot! i'm vevy uncomfitivle," moaned his majesty the king,
clinging to the portiére, "and vere's no water in ve glass, and i'm
so kirsty. give me a dwink of water."
an apparition in black and white—his majesty the king could
hardly see distinctly—lifted him up to the level of the table, and
felt his wrists and forehead. the water came, and he drank deeply, his
teeth chattering against the edge of the tumbler. then every one seemed to
go away—every one except the huge man in black and white, who
carried him back to his bed; the mother and father following. and the sin
of the "'parkle cwown" rushed back and took possession of the terrified
soul.
"i'm a fief!" he gasped. "i want to tell miss biddums vat i'm a fief.
vere is miss biddums?"
miss biddums had come and was bending over him. "i'm a fief," he
whispered. "a fief—like ve men in the pwison. but i'll tell now, i
tookt ... i tookt ve 'parkle cwown when the man that came left it in ve
hall. i bwoke ve paper and ve little bwown box, and it looked shiny, and i
tookt it to play wif, and i was afwaid. it's in ve dooly-box at ve bottom.
no one never asked for it, but i was afwaid. oh, go an' get ve
dooly-box!"
miss biddums obediently stooped to the lowest shelf of the
almirah and unearthed the big paper box in which his majesty the
king kept his dearest possessions. under the tin soldiers, and a layer of
mud pellets for a pellet-bow, winked and blazed a diamond star, wrapped
roughly in a half-sheet of note-paper whereon were a few words.
somebody was crying at the head of the bed, and a man's hand touched
the forehead of his majesty the king, who grasped the packet and spread it
on the bed.
"vat is ve 'parkle cwown," he said, and wept bitterly; for now that he
had made restitution he would fain have kept the shining splendor with
him.
"it concerns you too," said a voice at the head of the bed. "read the
note. this is not the time to keep back anything."
the note was curt, very much to the point, and signed by a single
initial. "if you wear this to-morrow night i shall know what to
expect." the date was three weeks old.
a whisper followed, and the deeper voice returned: "and you drifted as
far apart as that! i think it makes us quits now, doesn't it? oh,
can't we drop this folly once and for all? is it worth it, darling?"
"kiss me too," said his majesty the king, dreamily. "you isn't
vevy angwy, is you?"
the fever burned itself out, and his majesty the king slept.
when he waked, it was in a new world—peopled by his father and
mother as well as miss biddums: and there was much love in that world and
no morsel of fear, and more petting than was good for several little boys.
his majesty the king was too young to moralize on the uncertainty of
things human, or he would have been impressed with the singular advantages
of crime—ay, black sin. behold, he had stolen the "'parkle cwown,"
and his reward was love, and the right to play in the waste-paper basket
under the table "for always".
he trotted over to spend an afternoon with patsie, and the
commissioner's wife would have kissed him. "no, not vere," said his
majesty the king, with superb insolence, fencing one corner of his mouth
with his hand, "vat's my mamma's place—vere she kisses
me,"
"oh!" said the commissioner's wife, briefly. then to herself: "well, i
suppose i ought to be glad for his sake. children are selfish little grubs
and—i've got my patsie."
alive or dead—there is no other way.
—native proverb.
there is, as the conjurers say, no deception about this tale. jukes by
accident stumbled upon a village that is well known to exist, though he is
the only englishman who has been there. a somewhat similar institution
used to flourish on the outskirts of calcutta, and there is a story that
if you go into the heart of bikanir, which is in the heart of the great
indian desert, you shall come across not a village but a town where the
dead who did not die but may not live have established their headquarters.
and, since it is perfectly true that in the same desert is a wonderful
city where all the rich moneylenders retreat after they have made their
fortunes (fortunes so vast that the owners cannot trust even the strong
hand of the government to protect them, but take refuge in the waterless
sands), and drive sumptuous c-spring barouches, and buy beautiful girls
and decorate their palaces with gold and ivory and minton tiles and
mother-o'-pearl, i do not see why jukes's tale should not be true. he is a
civil engineer, with a head for plans and distances and things of that
kind, and he certainly would not take the trouble to invent imaginary
traps. he could earn more by doing his legitimate work. he never varies
the tale in the telling, and grows very hot and indignant when he thinks
of the disrespectful treatment he received. he wrote this quite
straightforwardly at first, but he has since touched it up in places and
introduced moral reflections, thus:
in the beginning it all arose from a slight attack of fever. my work
necessitated my being in camp for some months between pakpattan and
mubarakpur—a desolate sandy stretch of country as every one who has
had the misfortune to go there may know. my coolies were neither more nor
less exasperating than other gangs, and my work demanded sufficient
attention to keep me from moping, had i been inclined to so unmanly a
weakness.
on the d december, , i felt a little feverish. there was a full
moon at the time, and, in consequence, every dog near my tent was baying
it. the brutes assembled in twos and threes and drove me frantic. a few
days previously i had shot one loud-mouthed singer and suspended his
carcass in terrorem about fifty yards from my tent-door. but his
friends fell upon, fought for, and ultimately devoured the body: and, as
it seemed to me, sang their hymns of thanksgiving afterward with renewed
energy.
the light-headedness which accompanies fever acts differently on
different men. my irritation gave way, after a short time, to a fixed
determination to slaughter one huge black and white beast who had been
foremost in song and first in flight throughout the evening. thanks to a
shaking hand and a giddy head i had already missed him twice with both
barrels of my shotgun, when it struck me that my best plan would be to
ride him down in the open and finish him off with a hog-spear. this, of
course, was merely the semi-delirious notion of a fever patient; but i
remember that it struck me at the time as being eminently practical and
feasible.
i therefore ordered my groom to saddle pornic and bring him round
quietly to the rear of my tent. when the pony was ready, i stood at his
head prepared to mount and dash out as soon as the dog should again lift
up his voice. pornic, by the way, had not been out of his pickets for a
couple of days; the night air was crisp and chilly; and i was armed with a
specially long and sharp pair of persuaders with which i had been rousing
a sluggish cob that afternoon. you will easily believe, then, that when he
was let go he went quickly. in one moment, for the brute bolted as
straight as a die, the tent was left far behind, and we were flying over
the smooth sandy soil at racing speed. in another we had passed the
wretched dog, and i had almost forgotten why it was that i had taken horse
and hog-spear.
the delirium of fever and the excitement of rapid motion through the
air must have taken away the remnant of my senses. i have a faint
recollection of standing upright in my stirrups, and of brandishing my
hog-spear at the great white moon that looked down so calmly on my mad
gallop; and of shouting challenges to the camel-thorn bushes as they
whizzed past. once or twice, i believe, i swayed forward on pornic's neck,
and literally hung on by my spurs—as the marks next morning
showed.
the wretched beast went forward like a thing possessed, over what
seemed to be a limitless expanse of moonlit sand. next, i remember, the
ground rose suddenly in front of us, and as we topped the ascent i saw the
waters of the sutlej shining like a silver bar below. then pornic
blundered heavily on his nose, and we rolled together down some unseen
slope.
i must have lost consciousness, for when i recovered i was lying on my
stomach in a heap of soft white sand, and the dawn was beginning to break
dimly over the edge of the slope down which i had fallen. as the light
grew stronger i saw that i was at the bottom of a horseshoe-shaped crater
of sand, opening on one side directly on to the shoals of the sutlej. my
fever had altogether left me, and, with the exception of a slight
dizziness in the head, i felt no bad effects from the fall over night.
pornic, who was standing a few yards away, was naturally a good deal
exhausted, but had not hurt himself in the least. his saddle, a favorite
polo one, was much knocked about, and had been twisted under his belly. it
took me some time to put him to rights, and in the meantime i had ample
opportunities of observing the spot into which i had so foolishly
dropped.
at the risk of being considered tedious, i must describe it at length;
inasmuch as an accurate mental picture of its peculiarities will be of
material assistance in enabling the reader to understand what follows.
imagine then, as i have said before, a horseshoe-shaped crater of sand
with steeply graded sand walls about thirty-five feet high. (the slope, i
fancy, must have been about  .) this crater enclosed a level piece of
ground about fifty yards long by thirty at its broadest part, with a rude
well in the centre. round the bottom of the crater, about three feet from
the level of the ground proper, ran a series of eighty-three
semi-circular, ovoid, square, and multilateral holes, all about three feet
at the mouth. each hole on inspection showed that it was carefully shored
internally with driftwood and bamboos, and over the mouth a wooden
drip-board projected, like the peak of a jockey's cap, for two feet. no
sign of life was visible in these tunnels, but a most sickening stench
pervaded the entire amphitheatre—a stench fouler than any which my
wanderings in indian villages have introduced me to.
having remounted pornic, who was as anxious as i to get back to camp, i
rode round the base of the horseshoe to find some place whence an exit
would be practicable. the inhabitants, whoever they might be, had not
thought fit to put in an appearance, so i was left to my own devices. my
first attempt to "rush" pornic up the steep sand-banks showed me that i
had fallen into a trap exactly on the same model as that which the
ant-lion sets for its prey. at each step the shifting sand poured down
from above in tons, and rattled on the drip-boards of the holes like small
shot. a couple of ineffectual charges sent us both rolling down to the
bottom, half choked with the torrents of sand; and i was constrained to
turn my attention to the river-bank.
here everything seemed easy enough. the sand hills ran down to the
river edge, it is true, but there were plenty of shoals and shallows
across which i could gallop pornic, and find my way back to terra
firma by turning sharply to the right or the left. as i led pornic
over the sands i was startled by the faint pop of a rifle across the
river; and at the same moment a bullet dropped with a sharp "whit"
close to pornic's head.
there was no mistaking the nature of the missile—a regulation
martini-henry "picket." about five hundred yards away a country-boat was
anchored in midstream; and a jet of smoke drifting away from its bows in
the still morning air showed me whence the delicate attention had come.
was ever a respectable gentleman in such an impasse? the
treacherous sand slope allowed no escape from a spot which i had visited
most involuntarily, and a promenade on the river frontage was the signal
for a bombardment from some insane native in a boat. i'm afraid that i
lost my temper very much indeed.
another bullet reminded me that i had better save my breath to cool my
porridge; and i retreated hastily up the sands and back to the horseshoe,
where i saw that the noise of the rifle had drawn sixty-five human beings
from the badger-holes which i had up till that point supposed to be
untenanted. i found myself in the midst of a crowd of
spectators—about forty men, twenty women, and one child who could
not have been more than five years old. they were all scantily clothed in
that salmon-colored cloth which one associates with hindu mendicants, and,
at first sight, gave me the impression of a band of loathsome
fakirs. the filth and repulsiveness of the assembly were beyond all
description, and i shuddered to think what their life in the badger-holes
must be.
even in these days, when local self-government has destroyed the
greater part of a native's respect for a sahib, i have been accustomed to
a certain amount of civility from my inferiors, and on approaching the
crowd naturally expected that there would be some recognition of my
presence. as a matter of fact there was; but it was by no means what i had
looked for.
the ragged crew actually laughed at me—such laughter i hope i may
never hear again. they cackled, yelled, whistled, and howled as i walked
into their midst: some of them literally throwing themselves down on the
ground in convulsions of unholy mirth. in a moment i had let go pornic's
head, and, irritated beyond expression at the morning's adventure,
commenced cuffing those nearest to me with all the force i could. the
wretches dropped under my blows like nine-pins, and the laughter gave
place to wails for mercy; while those yet untouched clasped me round the
knees, imploring me in all sorts of uncouth tongues to spare them.
in the tumult, and just when i was feeling very much ashamed of myself
for having thus easily given way to my temper, a thin, high voice murmured
in english from behind my shoulder:—"sahib! sahib! do you not know
me? sahib, it is gunga dass, the telegraph-master."
i spun round quickly and faced the speaker.
gunga dass (i have, of course, no hesitation in mentioning the man's
real name) i had known four years before as a deccanee brahmin loaned by
the punjab government to one of the khalsia states. he was in charge of a
branch telegraph-office there, and when i had last met him was a jovial,
full-stomached, portly government servant with a marvelous capacity for
making bad puns in english—a peculiarity which made me remember him
long after i had forgotten his services to me in his official capacity. it
is seldom that a hindu makes english puns.
now, however, the man was changed beyond all recognition. caste-mark,
stomach, slate-colored continuations, and unctuous speech were all gone. i
looked at a withered skeleton, turbanless and almost naked, with long
matted hair and deep-set codfish-eyes. but for a crescent-shaped scar on
the left cheek—the result of an accident for which i was
responsible—i should never have known him. but it was indubitably
gunga dass, and—for this i was thankful—an english-speaking
native who might at least tell me the meaning of all that i had gone
through that day.
the crowd retreated to some distance as i turned toward the miserable
figure, and ordered him to show me some method of escaping from the
crater. he held a freshly plucked crow in his hand, and in reply to my
question climbed slowly on a platform of sand which ran in front of the
holes, and commenced lighting a fire there in silence. dried bents,
sand-poppies, and driftwood burn quickly; and i derived much consolation
from the fact that he lit them with an ordinary sulphur-match. when they
were in a bright glow, and the crow was neatly spitted in front thereof,
gunga dass began without a word of preamble:
"there are only two kinds of men, sar. the alive and the dead. when you
are dead, you are dead, but when you are alive you live." (here the crow
demanded his attention for an instant as it twirled before the fire in
danger of being burned to a cinder.) "if you die at home and do not die
when you come to the ghât to be burned you come here."
the nature of the reeking village was made plain now, and all that i
had known or read of the grotesque and the horrible paled before the fact
just communicated by the ex-brahmin. sixteen years ago, when i first
landed in bombay, i had been told by a wandering armenian of the
existence, somewhere in india, of a place to which such hindus as had the
misfortune to recover from trance or catalepsy were conveyed and kept, and
i recollect laughing heartily at what i was then pleased to consider a
traveler's tale. sitting at the bottom of the sand-trap, the memory of
watson's hotel, with its swinging punkahs, white-robed attendants, and the
sallow-faced armenian, rose up in my mind as vividly as a photograph, and
i burst into a loud fit of laughter. the contrast was too absurd!
gunga dass, as he bent over the unclean bird, watched me curiously.
hindus seldom laugh, and his surroundings were not such as to move gunga
dass to any undue excess of hilarity. he removed the crow solemnly from
the wooden spit and as solemnly devoured it. then he continued his story,
which i give in his own words:
"in epidemics of the cholera you are carried to be burned almost before
you are dead. when you come to the riverside the cold air, perhaps, makes
you alive, and then, if you are only little alive, mud is put on your nose
and mouth and you die conclusively. if you are rather more alive, more mud
is put; but if you are too lively they let you go and take you away. i was
too lively, and made protestation with anger against the indignities that
they endeavored to press upon me. in those days i was brahmin and proud
man. now i am dead man and eat"—here he eyed the well-gnawed breast
bone with the first sign of emotion that i had seen in him since we
met—"crows, and other things. they took me from my sheets when they
saw that i was too lively and gave me medicines for one week, and i
survived successfully. then they sent me by rail from my place to okara
station, with a man to take care of me; and at okara station we met two
other men, and they conducted we three on camels, in the night, from okara
station to this place, and they propelled me from the top to the bottom,
and the other two succeeded, and i have been here ever since two and a
half years. once i was brahmin and proud man, and now i eat crows."
"there is no way of getting out?"
"none of what kind at all. when i first came i made experiments
frequently and all the others also, but we have always succumbed to the
sand which is precipitated upon our heads."
"but surely," i broke in at this point, "the river-front is open, and
it is worth while dodging the bullets; while at night"—
i had already matured a rough plan of escape which a natural instinct
of selfishness forbade me sharing with gunga dass. he, however, divined my
unspoken thought almost as soon as it was formed; and, to my intense
astonishment, gave vent to a long low chuckle of derision—the
laughter, be it understood, of a superior or at least of an equal.
"you will not"—he had dropped the sir completely after his
opening sentence—"make any escape that way. but you can try. i have
tried. once only."
the sensation of nameless terror and abject fear which i had in vain
attempted to strive against overmastered me completely. my long
fast—it was now close upon ten o'clock, and i had eaten nothing
since tiffin on the previous day—combined with the violent and
unnatural agitation of the ride had exhausted me, and i verily believe
that, for a few minutes, i acted as one mad. i hurled myself against the
pitiless sand-slope. i ran round the base of the crater, blaspheming and
praying by turns. i crawled out among the sedges of the river-front, only
to be driven back each time in an agony of nervous dread by the
rifle-bullets which cut up the sand round me—for i dared not face
the death of a mad dog among that hideous crowd—and finally fell,
spent and raving, at the curb of the well. no one had taken the slightest
notice of an exhibition which makes me blush hotly even when i think of it
now.
two or three men trod on my panting body as they drew water, but they
were evidently used to this sort of thing, and had no time to waste upon
me. the situation was humiliating, gunga dass, indeed, when he had banked
the embers of his fire with sand, was at some pains to throw half a cupful
of fetid water over my head, an attention for which i could have fallen on
my knees and thanked him, but he was laughing all the while in the same
mirthless, wheezy key that greeted me on my first attempt to force the
shoals. and so, in a semi-comatose condition, i lay till noon. then, being
only a man after all, i felt hungry, and intimated as much to gunga dass,
whom i had begun to regard as my natural protector. following the impulse
of the outer world when dealing with natives, i put my hand into my pocket
and drew out four annas. the absurdity of the gift struck me at once, and
i was about to replace the money.
gunga dass, however, was of a different opinion, "give me the money,"
said he; "all you have, or i will get help, and we will kill you!" all
this as if it were the most natural thing in the world!
a briton's first impulse, i believe, is to guard the contents of his
pockets; but a moment's reflection convinced me of the futility of
differing with the one man who had it in his power to make me comfortable;
and with whose help it was possible that i might eventually escape from
the crater. i gave him all the money in my possession, rs.
--—nine rupees eight annas and five pie—for i always keep
small change as bakshish when i am in camp. gunga dass clutched the
coins, and hid them at once in his ragged loin-cloth, his expression
changing to something diabolical as he looked round to assure himself that
no one had observed us.
"now i will give you something to eat," said he.
what pleasure the possession of my money could have afforded him i am
unable to say; but inasmuch as it did give him evident delight i was not
sorry that i had parted with it so readily, for i had no doubt that he
would have had me killed if i had refused. one does not protest against
the vagaries of a den of wild beasts; and my companions were lower than
any beasts. while i devoured what gunga dass had provided, a coarse
chapatti and a cupful of the foul well-water, the people showed not
the faintest sign of curiosity—that curiosity which is so rampant,
as a rule, in an indian village.
i could even fancy that they despised me. at all events they treated me
with the most chilling indifference, and gunga dass was nearly as bad. i
plied him with questions about the terrible village, and received
extremely unsatisfactory answers. so far as i could gather, it had been in
existence from time immemorial—whence i concluded that it was at
least a century old—and during that time no one had ever been known
to escape from it. [i had to control myself here with both hands, lest the
blind terror should lay hold of me a second time and drive me raving round
the crater.] gunga dass took a malicious pleasure in emphasizing this
point and in watching me wince. nothing that i could do would induce him
to tell me who the mysterious "they" were.
"it is so ordered," he would reply, "and i do not yet know any one who
has disobeyed the orders."
"only wait till my servants find that i am missing," i retorted, "and i
promise you that this place shall be cleared off the face of the earth,
and i'll give you a lesson in civility, too, my friend."
"your servants would be torn in pieces before they came near this
place; and, besides, you are dead, my dear friend. it is not your fault,
of course, but none the less you are dead and buried."
at irregular intervals supplies of food, i was told, were dropped down
from the land side into the amphitheatre, and the inhabitants fought for
them like wild beasts. when a man felt his death coming on he retreated to
his lair and died there. the body was sometimes dragged out of the hole
and thrown on to the sand, or allowed to rot where it lay.
the phrase "thrown on to the sand" caught my attention, and i asked
gunga dass whether this sort of thing was not likely to breed a
pestilence.
"that," said he, with another of his wheezy chuckles, "you may see for
yourself subsequently. you will have much time to make observations."
whereat, to his great delight, i winced once more and hastily continued
the conversation:—"and how do you live here from day to day? what do
you do?" the question elicited exactly the same answer as
before—coupled with the information that "this place is like your
european heaven; there is neither marrying nor giving in marriage."
gunga dass has been educated at a mission school, and, as he himself
admitted, had he only changed his religion "like a wise man," might have
avoided the living grave which was now his portion. but as long as i was
with him i fancy he was happy.
here was a sahib, a representative of the dominant race, helpless as a
child and completely at the mercy of his native neighbors, in a deliberate
lazy way he set himself to torture me as a schoolboy would devote a
rapturous half-hour to watching the agonies of an impaled beetle, or as a
ferret in a blind burrow might glue himself comfortably to the neck of a
rabbit. the burden of his conversation was that there was no escape "of no
kind whatever," and that i should stay here till i died and was "thrown on
to the sand." if it were possible to forejudge the conversation of the
damned on the advent of a new soul in their abode, i should say that they
would speak as gunga dass did to me throughout that long afternoon. i was
powerless to protest or answer; all my energies being devoted to a
struggle against the inexplicable terror that threatened to overwhelm me
again and again. i can compare the feeling to nothing except the struggles
of a man against the overpowering nausea of the channel passage—only
my agony was of the spirit and infinitely more terrible.
as the day wore on, the inhabitants began to appear in full strength to
catch the rays or the afternoon sun, which were now sloping in at the
mouth of the crater. they assembled in little knots, and talked among
themselves without even throwing a glance in my direction. about four
o'clock, as far as i could judge, gunga dass rose and dived into his lair
for a moment, emerging with a live crow in his hands. the wretched bird
was in a most draggled and deplorable condition, but seemed to be in no
way afraid of its master. advancing cautiously to the river front, gunga
dass stepped from tussock to tussock until he had reached a smooth patch
of sand directly in the line of the boat's fire. the occupants of the boat
took no notice. here he stopped, and, with a couple of dexterous turns of
the wrist, pegged the bird on its back with outstretched wings. as was
only natural, the crow began to shriek at once and beat the air with its
claws. in a few seconds the clamor had attracted the attention of a bevy
of wild crows on a shoal a few hundred yards away, where they were
discussing something that looked like a corpse. half a dozen crows flew
over at once to see what was going on, and also, as it proved, to attack
the pinioned bird. gunga dass, who had lain down on a tussock, motioned to
me to be quiet, though i fancy this was a needless precaution. in a
moment, and before i could see how it happened, a wild crow, who had
grappled with the shrieking and helpless bird, was entangled in the
latter's claws, swiftly disengaged by gunga dass, and pegged down beside
its companion in adversity. curiosity, it seemed, overpowered the rest of
the flock, and almost before gunga dass and i had time to withdraw to the
tussock, two more captives were struggling in the upturned claws of the
decoys. so the chase—if i can give it so dignified a
name—continued until gunga dass had captured seven crows. five of
them he throttled at once, reserving two for further operations another
day. i was a good deal impressed by this, to me, novel method of securing
food, and complimented gunga dass on his skill.
"it is nothing to do," said he. "to-morrow you must do it for me. you
are stronger than i am."
this calm assumption of superiority upset me not a little, and i
answered peremptorily;—"indeed, you old ruffian! what do you think i
have given you money for?"
"very well," was the unmoved reply. "perhaps not to-morrow, nor the day
after, nor subsequently; but in the end, and for many years, you will
catch crows and eat crows, and you will thank your european god that you
have crows to catch and eat."
i could have cheerfully strangled him for this; but judged it best
under the circumstances to smother my resentment. an hour later i was
eating one of the crows; and, as gunga dass had said, thanking my god that
i had a crow to eat. never as long as i live shall i forget that evening
meal. the whole population were squatting on the hard sand platform
opposite their dens, huddled over tiny fires of refuse and dried rushes.
death, having once laid his hand upon these men and forborne to strike,
seemed to stand aloof from them now; for most of our company were old men,
bent and worn and twisted with years, and women aged to all appearance as
the fates themselves. they sat together in knots and talked—god only
knows what they found to discuss—in low equable tones, curiously in
contrast to the strident babble with which natives are accustomed to make
day hideous. now and then an access of that sudden fury which had
possessed me in the morning would lay hold on a man or woman; and with
yells and imprecations the sufferer would attack the steep slope until,
baffled and bleeding, he fell back on the platform incapable of moving a
limb. the others would never even raise their eyes when this happened, as
men too well aware of the futility of their fellows' attempts and wearied
with their useless repetition. i saw four such outbursts in the course of
that evening.
gunga dass took an eminently business-like view of my situation, and
while we were dining—i can afford to laugh at the recollection now,
but it was painful enough at the time—propounded the terms on which
he would consent to "do" for me. my nine rupees eight annas, he argued, at
the rate of three annas a day, would provide me with food for fifty-one
days, or about seven weeks; that is to say, he would be willing to cater
for me for that length of time. at the end of it i was to look after
myself. for a further consideration—videlicet my
boots—he would be willing to allow me to occupy the den next to his
own, and would supply me with as much dried grass for bedding as he could
spare.
"very well, gunga dass," i replied; "to the first terms i cheerfully
agree, but, as there is nothing on earth to prevent my killing you as you
sit here and taking everything that you have" (i thought of the two
invaluable crows at the time), "i flatly refuse to give you my boots and
shall take whichever den i please."
the stroke was a bold one, and i was glad when i saw that it had
succeeded, gunga dass changed his tone immediately, and disavowed all
intention of asking for my boots. at the time it did not strike me as at
all strange that i, a civil engineer, a man of thirteen years' standing in
the service, and, i trust, an average englishman, should thus calmly
threaten murder and violence against the man who had, for a consideration
it is true, taken me under his wing. i had left the world, it seemed, for
centuries. i was as certain then as i am now of my own existence, that in
the accursed settlement there was no law save that of the strongest; that
the living dead men had thrown behind them every canon of the world which
had cast them out; and that i had to depend for my own life on my strength
and vigilance alone. the crew of the ill-fated mignonette are the only men
who would understand my frame of mind. "at present," i argued to myself,
"i am strong and a match for six of these wretches. it is imperatively
necessary that i should, for my own sake, keep both health and strength
until the hour of my release comes—if it ever does."
fortified with these resolutions, i ate and drank as much as i could,
and made gunga dass understand that i intended to be his master, and that
the least sign of insubordination on his part would be visited with the
only punishment i had it in my power to inflict—sudden and violent
death. shortly after this i went to bed. that is to say, gunga dass gave
me a double armful of dried bents which i thrust down the mouth of the
lair to the right of his, and followed myself, feet foremost; the hole
running about nine feet into the sand with a slight downward inclination,
and being neatly shored with timbers. from my den, which faced the
river-front, i was able to watch the waters of the sutlej flowing past
under the light of a young moon and compose myself to sleep as best i
might.
the horrors of that night i shall never forget. my den was nearly as
narrow as a coffin, and the sides had been worn smooth and greasy by the
contact of innumerable naked bodies, added to which it smelled abominably.
sleep was altogether out of question to one in my excited frame of mind.
as the night wore on, it seemed that the entire amphitheatre was filled
with legions of unclean devils that, trooping up from the shoals below,
mocked the unfortunates in their lairs.
personally i am not of an imaginative temperament,—very few
engineers are,—but on that occasion i was as completely prostrated
with nervous terror as any woman. after half an hour or so, however, i was
able once more to calmly review my chances of escape. any exit by the
steep sand walls was, of course, impracticable. i had been thoroughly
convinced of this some time before. it was possible, just possible, that i
might, in the uncertain moonlight, safely run the gauntlet of the rifle
shots. the place was so full of terror for me that i was prepared to
undergo any risk in leaving it. imagine my delight, then, when after
creeping stealthily to the river-front i found that the infernal boat was
not there. my freedom lay before me in the next few steps!
by walking out to the first shallow pool that lay at the foot of the
projecting left horn of the horseshoe, i could wade across, turn the flank
of the crater, and make my way inland. without a moment's hesitation i
marched briskly past the tussocks where gunga dass had snared the crows,
and out in the direction of the smooth white sand beyond. my first step
from the tufts of dried grass showed me how utterly futile was any hope of
escape; for, as i put my foot down, i felt an indescribable drawing,
sucking motion of the sand below. another moment and my leg was swallowed
up nearly to the knee. in the moonlight the whole surface of the sand
seemed to be shaken with devilish delight at my disappointment. i
struggled clear, sweating with terror and exertion, back to the tussocks
behind me and fell on my face.
my only means of escape from the semicircle was protected with a
quicksand!
how long i lay i have not the faintest idea; but i was roused at last
by the malevolent chuckle of gunga dass at my ear. "i would advise you,
protector of the poor" (the ruffian was speaking english) "to return to
your house. it is unhealthy to lie down here. moreover, when the boat
returns, you will most certainly be rifled at." he stood over me in the
dim light, of the dawn, chuckling and laughing to himself.
suppressing my first impulse to catch the man by the neck and throw him
on to the quicksand, i rose sullenly and followed him to the platform
below the burrows.
suddenly, and futilely as i thought while i spoke, i
asked:—"gunga dass, what is the good of the boat if i can't get out
anyhow?" i recollect that even in my deepest trouble i had been
speculating vaguely on the waste of ammunition in guarding an already well
protected foreshore.
gunga dass laughed again and made answer:—"they have the boat
only in daytime. it is for the reason that there is a way. i hope
we shall have the pleasure of your company for much longer time. it is a
pleasant spot when you have been here some years and eaten roast crow long
enough."
i staggered, numbed and helpless, toward the fetid burrow allotted to
me, and fell asleep. an hour or so later i was awakened by a piercing
scream—the shrill, high-pitched scream of a horse in pain. those who
have once heard that will never forget the sound. i found some little
difficulty in scrambling out of the burrow. when i was in the open, i saw
pornic, my poor old pornic, lying dead on the sandy soil. how they had
killed him i cannot guess. gunga dass explained that horse was better than
crow, and "greatest good of greatest number is political maxim. we are now
republic, mister jukes, and you are entitled to a fair share of the beast.
if you like, we will pass a vote of thanks. shall i propose?"
yes, we were a republic indeed! a republic of wild beasts penned at the
bottom of a pit, to eat and fight and sleep till we died. i attempted no
protest of any kind, but sat down and stared at the hideous sight in front
of me. in less time almost than it takes me to write this, pornic's body
was divided, in some unclean way or other; the men and women had dragged
the fragments on to the platform and were preparing their morning meal.
gunga dass cooked mine. the almost irresistible impulse to fly at the sand
walls until i was wearied laid hold of me afresh, and i had to struggle
against it with all my might. gunga dass was offensively jocular till i
told him that if he addressed another remark of any kind whatever to me i
should strangle him where he sat. this silenced him till silence became
insupportable, and i bade him say something.
"you will live here till you die like the other feringhi," he said,
coolly, watching me over the fragment of gristle that he was gnawing.
"what other sahib, you swine? speak at once, and don't stop to tell me
a lie."
"he is over there," answered gunga dass, pointing to a burrow-mouth
about four doors to the left of my own. "you can see for yourself. he died
in the burrow as you will die, and i will die, and as all these men and
women and the one child will also die."
"for pity's sake tell me all you know about him. who was he? when did
he come, and when did he die?"
this appeal was a weak step on my part. gunga dass only leered and
replied:—"i will not—unless you give me something first."
then i recollected where i was, and struck the man between the eyes,
partially stunning him. he stepped down from the platform at once, and,
cringing and fawning and weeping and attempting to embrace my feet, led me
round to the burrow which he had indicated.
"i know nothing whatever about the gentleman, your god be my witness
that i do not he was as anxious to escape as you were, and he was shot
from the boat, though we all did all things to prevent him from
attempting. he was shot here." gunga dass laid his hand on his lean
stomach and bowed, to the earth.
"well, and what then? go on!"
"and then—and then, your honor, we carried him into his house and
gave him water, and put wet cloths on the wound, and he laid down in his
house and gave up the ghost."
"in how long? in how long?"
"about half an hour, after he received his wound. i call vishnu to
witness," yelled the wretched man, "that i did everything for him.
everything which was possible, that i did!"
he threw himself down on the ground and clasped my ankles. but i had my
doubts about gunga dass's benevolence, and kicked him off as he lay
protesting.
"i believe you robbed him of everything he had. but i can find out in a
minute or two. how long was the sahib here?"
"nearly a year and a half. i think he must have gone mad. but hear me
swear, protector of the poor! won't your honor hear me swear that i never
touched an article that belonged to him? what is your worship going to
do?"
i had taken gunga dass by the waist and had hauled him on to the
platform opposite the deserted burrow. as i did so i thought of my
wretched fellow-prisoner's unspeakable misery among all these horrors for
eighteen months, and the final agony of dying like a rat in a hole, with a
bullet-wound in the stomach. gunga dass fancied i was going to kill him
and howled pitifully. the rest of the population, in the plethora that
follows a full flesh meal, watched us without stirring.
"go inside, gunga dass," said i, "and fetch it out."
i was feeling sick and faint with horror now. gunga dass nearly rolled
off the platform and howled aloud.
"but i am brahmin, sahib—a high-caste brahmin. by your soul, by
your father's soul, do not make me do this thing!"
"brahmin or no brahmin, by my soul and my father's soul, in you go!" i
said, and, seizing him by the shoulders, i crammed his head into the mouth
of the burrow, kicked the rest of him in, and, sitting down, covered my
face with my hands.
at the end of a few minutes i heard a rustle and a creak; then gunga
dass in a sobbing, choking whisper speaking to himself; then a soft
thud—and i uncovered my eyes.
the dry sand had turned the corpse entrusted to its keeping into a
yellow-brown mummy. i told gunga dass to stand off while i examined it.
the body—clad in an olive-green hunting-suit much stained and worn,
with leather pads on the shoulders—was that of a man between thirty
and forty, above middle height, with light, sandy hair, long mustache, and
a rough unkempt beard. the left canine of the upper jaw was missing, and a
portion of the lobe of the right ear was gone. on the second finger of the
left hand was a ring—a shield-shaped bloodstone set in gold, with a
monogram that might have been either "b.k." or "b.l." on the third finger
of the right hand was a silver ring in the shape of a coiled cobra, much
worn and tarnished. gunga dass deposited a handful of trifles he had
picked out of the burrow at my feet, and, covering the face of the body
with my handkerchief, i turned to examine these. i give the full list in
the hope that it may lead to the identification of the unfortunate
man:
. bowl of a briarwood pipe, serrated at the edge; much worn and
blackened; bound with string at the screw.
. two patent-lever keys; wards of both broken.
. tortoise-shell-handled penknife, silver or nickel, name-plate,
marked with monogram "b.k."
. envelope, postmark undecipherable, bearing a victorian stamp,
addressed to "miss mon——" (rest
illegible)—"ham"—"nt."
. imitation crocodile-skin notebook with pencil. first forty-five
pages blank; four and a half illegible; fifteen others filled with private
memoranda relating chiefly to three persons—a mrs. l. singleton,
abbreviated several times to "lot single," "mrs. s. may," and "garmison,"
referred to in places as "jerry" or "jack."
. handle of small-sized hunting-knife. blade snapped short. buck's
horn, diamond cut, with swivel and ring on the butt; fragment of cotton
cord attached.
it must not be supposed that i inventoried all these things on the spot
as fully as i have here written them down. the notebook first attracted my
attention, and i put it in my pocket with a view to studying it later on.
the rest of the articles i conveyed to my burrow for safety's sake, and
there, being a methodical man, i inventoried them. i then returned to the
corpse and ordered gunga dass to help me to carry it out to the
river-front. while we were engaged in this, the exploded shell of an old
brown cartridge dropped out of one of the pockets and rolled at my feet.
gunga dass had not seen it; and i fell to thinking that a man does not
carry exploded cartridge-cases, especially "browns," which will not bear
loading twice, about with him when shooting. in other words, that
cartridge-case has been fired inside the crater. consequently there must
be a gun somewhere. i was on the verge of asking gunga dass, but checked
myself, knowing that he would lie. we laid the body down on the edge of
the quicksand by the tussocks. it was my intention to push it out and let
it be swallowed up—the only possible mode of burial that i could
think of. i ordered gunga dass to go away.
then i gingerly put the corpse out on the quicksand. in doing so, it
was lying face downward, i tore the frail and rotten khaki shooting-coat
open, disclosing a hideous cavity in the back. i have already told you
that the dry sand had, as it were, mummified the body. a moment's glance
showed that the gaping hole had been caused by a gun-shot wound; the gun
must have been fired with the muzzle almost touching the back. the
shooting-coat, being intact, had been drawn over the body after death,
which must have been instantaneous. the secret of the poor wretch's death
was plain to me in a flash. some one of the crater, presumably gunga dass,
must have shot him with his own gun—the gun that fitted the brown
cartridges. he had never attempted to escape in the face of the rifle-fire
from the boat.
i pushed the corpse out hastily, and saw it sink from sight literally
in a few seconds. i shuddered as i watched. in a dazed, half-conscious way
i turned to peruse the notebook. a stained and discolored slip of paper
had been inserted between the binding and the back, and dropped out as i
opened the pages. this is what it contained:—"four out from
crow-clump: three left; nine out; two right; three back; two left;
fourteen out; two left; seven out; one left; nine back; two right; six
back; four right; seven back." the paper had been burned and charred
at the edges. what it meant i could not understand. i sat down on the
dried bents turning it over and over between my fingers, until i was aware
of gunga dass standing immediately behind me with glowing eyes and
outstretched hands.
"have you got it?" he panted. "will you not let me look at it also? i
swear that i will return it."
"got what? return what?" i asked.
"that which you have in your hands. it will help us both." he stretched
out his long, bird-like talons, trembling with eagerness,
"i could never find it," he continued. "he had secreted it about his
person. therefore i shot him, but nevertheless i was unable to obtain
it."
gunga dass had quite forgotten his little fiction about the
rifle-bullet. i received the information perfectly calmly. morality is
blunted by consorting with the dead who are alive.
"what on earth are you raving about? what is it you want me to give
you?"
"the piece of paper in the notebook. it will help us both. oh, you
fool! you fool! can you not see what it will do for us? we shall
escape!"
his voice rose almost to a scream, and he danced with excitement before
me. i own i was moved at the chance of getting away.
"don't skip! explain yourself. do you mean to say that this slip of
paper will help us? what does it mean?"
"read it aloud! read it aloud! i beg and i pray you to read it
aloud."
i did so. gunga dass listened delightedly, and drew an irregular line
in the sand with his fingers.
"see now! it was the length of his gun-barrels without the stock. i
have those barrels. four gun-barrels out from the place where i caught
crows. straight out; do you follow me? then three left—ah! how well
i remember when that man worked it out night after night. then nine out,
and so on. out is always straight before you across the quicksand. he told
me so before i killed him."
"but if you knew all this why didn't you get out before?"
"i did not know it. he told me that he was working it out a year
and a half ago, and how he was working it out night after night when the
boat had gone away, and he could get out near the quicksand safely. then
he said that we would get away together. but i was afraid that he would
leave me behind one night when he had worked it all out, and so i shot
him. besides, it is not advisable that the men who once get in here should
escape. only i, and i am a brahmin."
the prospect of escape had brought gunga dass's caste back to him. he
stood up, walked about and gesticulated violently. eventually i managed to
make him talk soberly, and he told me how this englishman had spent six
months night after night in exploring, inch by inch, the passage across
the quicksand; how he had declared it to be simplicity itself up to within
about twenty yards of the river bank after turning the flank of the left
horn of the horseshoe. this much he had evidently not completed when gunga
dass shot him with his own gun,
in my frenzy of delight at the possibilities of escape i recollect
shaking hands effusively with gunga dass, after we had decided that we
were to make an attempt to get away that very night. it was weary work
waiting throughout the afternoon.
about ten o'clock, as far as i could judge, when the moon had just
risen above the lip of the crater, gunga dass made a move for his burrow
to bring out the gun-barrels whereby to measure our path. all the other
wretched inhabitants had retired to their lairs long ago. the guardian
boat drifted down-stream some hours before, and we were utterly alone by
the crow-clump. gunga dass, while carrying the gun-barrels, let slip the
piece of paper which was to be our guide. i stooped down hastily to
recover it, and, as i did so, i was aware that the diabolical brahmin was
aiming a violent blow at the back of my head with the gun-barrels. it was
too late to turn round. i must have received the blow somewhere on the
nape of my neck. a hundred thousand fiery stars danced before my eyes, and
i fell forward senseless at the edge of the quicksand.
when i recovered consciousness, the moon was going down, and i was
sensible of intolerable pain in the back of my head. gunga dass had
disappeared and my mouth was full of blood. i lay down again and prayed
that i might die without more ado. then the unreasoning fury which i have
before mentioned laid hold upon me, and i staggered inland toward the
walls of the crater. it seemed that some one was calling to me in a
whisper—"sahib! sahib! sahib!" exactly as my bearer used to call me
in the mornings. i fancied that i was delirious until a handful of sand
fell at my feet, then i looked up and saw a head peering down into the
amphitheatre—the head of dunnoo, my dog-boy, who attended to my
collies. as soon as he had attracted my attention, he held up his hand and
showed a rope. i motioned, staggering to and fro the while, that he should
throw it down. it was a couple of leather punkah-ropes knotted together,
with a loop at one end. i slipped the loop over my head and under my arms;
heard dunnoo urge something forward; was conscious that i was being
dragged, face downward, up the steep sand slope, and the next instant
found myself choked and half fainting on the sand hills overlooking the
crater. dunnoo, with his face ashy grey in the moonlight, implored me not
to stay but to get back to my tent at once.
it seems that he had tracked pornic's footprints fourteen miles across
the sands to the crater; had returned and told my servants, who flatly
refused to meddle with any one, white or black, once fallen into the
hideous village of the dead; whereupon dunnoo had taken one of my ponies
and a couple of punkah-ropes, returned to the crater, and hauled me out as
i have described.
to cut a long story short, dunnoo is now my personal servant on a gold
mohur a month—a sum which i still think far too little for the
services he has rendered. nothing on earth will induce me to go near that
devilish spot again, or to reveal its whereabouts more clearly than i have
done. of gunga dass i have never found a trace, nor do i wish to do. my
sole motive in giving this to be published is the hope that some one may
possibly identify, from the details and the inventory which i have given
above, the corpse of the man in the olive-green hunting-suit.
a stone's throw out on either hand
from that well-ordered road we tread,
and all the world is wild and strange;
churel and ghoul and djinn and sprite
shall bear us company to-night,
for we have reached the oldest land
wherein the powers of darkness range.
—from the dusk to the dawn.
the house of suddhoo, near the taksali gate, is two-storied, with four
carved windows of old brown wood, and a flat roof. you may recognize it by
five red hand-prints arranged like the five of diamonds on the whitewash
between the upper windows. bhagwan dass the grocer and a man who says he
gets his living by seal-cutting live in the lower story with a troop of
wives, servants, friends, and retainers. the two upper rooms used to be
occupied by janoo and azizun and a little black-and-tan terrier that was
stolen from an englishman's house and given to janoo by a soldier. to-day,
only janoo lives in the upper rooms. suddhoo sleeps on the roof generally,
except when he sleeps in the street. he used to go to peshawar in the
cold, weather to visit his son who sells curiosities near the edwardes'
gate, and then he slept under a real mud roof. suddhoo is a great friend
of mine, because his cousin had a son who secured, thanks to my
recommendation, the post of head-messenger to a big firm in the station.
suddhoo says that god will make me a lieutenant-governor one of these
days. i dare say his prophecy will come true. he is very, very old, with
white hair and no teeth worth showing, and he has outlived his
wits—outlived nearly everything except his fondness for his son at
peshawar. janoo and azizun are kashmiris, ladies of the city, and theirs
was an ancient and more or less honorable profession; but azizun has since
married a medical student from the northwest and has settled down to a
most respectable life somewhere near bareilly. bhagwan dass is an
extortionate and an adulterator. he is very rich. the man who is supposed
to get his living by seal-cutting pretends to be very poor. this lets you
know as much as is necessary of the four principal tenants in the house of
suddhoo. then there is me of course; but i am only the chorus that comes
in at the end to explain things. so i do not count.
suddhoo was not clever. the man who pretended to cut seals was the
cleverest of them all—bhagwan dass only knew how to lie—except
janoo. she was also beautiful, but that was her own affair.
suddhoo's son at peshawar was attacked by pleurisy, and old suddhoo was
troubled. the seal-cutter man heard of suddhoo's anxiety and made capital
out of it. he was abreast of the times. he got a friend in peshawar to
telegraph daily accounts of the son's health. and here the story
begins.
suddhoo's cousin's son told me, one evening, that suddhoo wanted to see
me; that he was too old and feeble to come personally, and that i should
be conferring an everlasting honor on the house of suddhoo if i went to
him. i went; but i think, seeing how well off suddhoo was then, that he
might have sent something better than an ekka, which jolted
fearfully, to haul out a future lieutenant-governor to the city on a muggy
april evening. the ekka did not run quickly. it was full dark when
we pulled up opposite the door of ranjit singh's tomb near the main gate
of the fort. here was suddhoo, and he said that, by reason of my
condescension, it was absolutely certain that i should become a
lieutenant-governor while my hair was yet black. then we talked about the
weather and the state of my health, and the wheat crops, for fifteen
minutes in the huzuri bagh, under the stars.
suddhoo came to the point at last. he said that janoo had told him that
there was an order of the sirkar against magic, because it was
feared that magic might one day kill the empress of india. i didn't know
anything about the state of the law; but i fancied that something
interesting was going to happen. i said that so far from magic being
discouraged by the government it was highly commended. the greatest
officials of the state practiced it themselves. (if the financial
statement isn't magic, i don't know what is.) then, to encourage him
further, i said that, if there was any jadoo afoot, i had not the
least objection to giving it my countenance and sanction, and to seeing
that it was clean jadoo—white magic, as distinguished from
the unclean jadoo which kills folk. it took a long time before
suddhoo admitted that this was just what he had asked me to come for. then
he told me, in jerks and quavers, that the man who said he cut seals was a
sorcerer of the cleanest kind; that every day he gave suddhoo news of the
sick son in peshawar more quickly than the lightning could fly, and that
this news was always corroborated by the letters. further, that he had
told suddhoo how a great danger was threatening his son, which could be
removed by clean jadoo; and, of course, heavy payment. i began to
see exactly how the land lay, and told suddhoo that i also understood a
little jadoo in the western line, and would go to his house to see
that everything was done decently and in order. we set off together; and
on the way suddhoo told me that he had paid the seal-cutter between one
hundred and two hundred rupees already; and the jadoo of that night
would cost two hundred more. which was cheap, he said, considering the
greatness of his son's danger; but i do not think he meant it.
the lights were all cloaked in the front of the house when we arrived.
i could hear awful noises from behind the seal-cutter's shop-front, as if
some one were groaning his soul out. suddhoo shook all over, and while we
groped our way upstairs told me that the jadoo had begun, janoo and
azizun met us at the stair-head, and told us that the jadoo-work
was coming off in their rooms, because there was more space there. janoo
is a lady of a freethinking turn of mind. she whispered that the
jadoo was an invention to get money out of suddhoo, and that the
seal-cutter would go to a hot place when he died. suddhoo was nearly
crying with fear and old age. he kept walking up and down the room in the
half-light, repeating his son's name over and over again, and asking
azizun if the seal-cutter ought not to make a reduction in the case of his
own landlord. janoo pulled me over to the shadow in the recess of the
carved bow-windows. the boards were up, and the rooms were only lit by one
tiny oil-lamp. there was no chance of my being seen if i stayed still.
presently, the groans below ceased, and we heard steps on the
staircase. that was the seal-cutter. he stopped outside the door as the
terrier barked and azizun fumbled at the chain, and he told suddhoo to
blow out the lamp. this left the place in jet darkness, except for the red
glow from the two huqas that belonged to janoo and azizun. the
seal-cutter came in, and i heard suddhoo throw himself down on the floor
and groan. azizun caught her breath, and janoo backed on to one of the
beds with a shudder. there was a clink of something metallic, and then
shot up a pale blue-green flame near the ground. the light was just enough
to show azizun, pressed against one corner of the room with the terrier
between her knees; janoo, with her hands clasped, leaning forward as she
sat on the bed; suddhoo, face down, quivering, and the seal-cutter.
i hope i may never see another man like that seal-cutter. he was
stripped to the waist, with a wreath of white jasmine as thick as my wrist
round his forehead, a salmon colored loin-cloth round his middle, and a
steel bangle on each ankle. this was not awe-inspiring. it was the face of
the man that turned me cold. it was blue-grey in the first place. in the
second, the eyes were rolled back till you could only see the whites of
them; and, in the third, the face was the face of a demon—a
ghoul—anything you please except of the sleek, oily old ruffian who
sat in the daytime over his turning-lathe downstairs. he was lying on his
stomach with his arms turned and crossed behind him, as if he had been
thrown down pinioned. his head and neck were the only parts of him off the
floor. they were nearly at right angles to the body, like the head of a
cobra at spring. it was ghastly. in the centre of the room, on the bare
earth floor, stood a big, deep, brass basin, with a pale blue-green light
floating in the centre like a night-light. round that basin the man on the
floor wriggled himself three times. how he did it i do not know. i could
see the muscles ripple along his spine and fall smooth again; but i could
not see any other motion. the head seemed the only thing alive about him,
except that slow curl and uncurl of the laboring back-muscles, janoo from
the bed was breathing seventy to the minute; azizun held her hands before
her eyes; and old suddhoo, fingering at the dirt that had got into his
white beard, was crying to himself. the horror of it was that the
creeping, crawly thing made no sound—only crawled! and, remember,
this lasted for ten minutes, while the terrier whined, and azizun
shuddered, and janoo gasped, and suddhoo cried.
i felt the hair lift at the back of my head, and my heart thump like a
thermantidote paddle. luckily, the seal-cutter betrayed himself by his
most impressive trick and made me calm again. after he had finished that
unspeakable triple crawl, he stretched his head away from the floor as
high as he could, and sent out a jet of fire from his nostrils. now i knew
how fire-spouting is done—i can do it myself—so i felt at
ease. the business was a fraud. if he had only kept to that crawl without
trying to raise the effect, goodness knows what i might not have thought.
both the girls shrieked at the jet of fire and the head dropped, chin-down
on the floor, with a thud; the whole body lying then like a corpse with
its arms trussed. there was a pause of five full minutes after this, and
the blue-green flame died down. janoo stooped to settle one of her
anklets, while azizun turned her face to the wall and took the terrier in
her arms. suddhoo put out an arm mechanically to janoo's huqa, and
she slid it across the floor with her foot. directly above the body and on
the wall, were a couple of flaming portraits, in stamped-paper frames, of
the queen and the prince of wales. they looked down on the performance,
and to my thinking, seemed to heighten the grotesqueness of it all.
just when the silence was getting unendurable, the body turned over and
rolled away from the basin to the side of the room, where it lay
stomach-up. there was a faint "plop" from the basin—exactly like the
noise a fish makes when it takes a fly—and the green light in the
centre revived.
i looked at the basin, and saw, bobbing in the water, the dried,
shrivelled, black head of a native baby—open eyes, open mouth, and
shaved scalp. it was worse, being so very sudden, than the crawling
exhibition. we had no time to say anything before it began to speak.
read poe's account of the voice that came from the mesmerized dying
man, and you will realize less than one half of the horror of that head's
voice.
there was an interval of a second or two between each word, and a sort
of "ring, ring, ring," in the note of the voice, like the timbre of a
bell. it pealed slowly, as if talking to itself, for several minutes
before i got rid of my cold sweat. then the blessed solution struck me. i
looked at the body lying near the doorway, and saw, just where the hollow
of the throat joins on the shoulders, a muscle that had nothing to do with
any man's regular breathing twitching away steadily. the whole thing was a
careful reproduction of the egyptian teraphin that one reads about
sometimes; and the voice was as clever and as appalling a piece of
ventriloquism as one could wish to hear. all this time the head was
"lip-lip-lapping" against the side of the basin, and speaking. it told
suddhoo, on his face again whining, of his son's illness and of the state
of the illness up to the evening of that very night. i always shall
respect the seal-cutter for keeping so faithfully to the time of the
peshawar telegrams. it went on to say that skilled doctors were night and
day watching over the man's life; and that he would eventually recover if
the fee to the potent sorcerer, whose servant was the head in the basin,
were doubled.
here the mistake from the artistic point of view came in. to ask for
twice your stipulated fee in a voice that lazarus might have used when he
rose from the dead, is absurd. janoo, who is really a woman of masculine
intellect, saw this as quickly as i did. i heard her say "asli nahin!
fareib!" scornfully under her breath; and just as she said so, the
light in the basin died out, the head stopped talking, and we heard the
room door creak on its hinges. then janoo struck a match, lit the lamp,
and we saw that head, basin, and seal-cutter were gone. suddhoo was
wringing his hands and explaining to any one who cared to listen, that, if
his chances of eternal salvation depended on it, he could not raise
another two hundred rupees. azizun was nearly in hysterics in the corner;
while janoo sat down composedly on one of the beds to discuss the
probabilities of the whole thing being a bunao, or "make-up."
i explained as much as i knew of the seal-cutter's way of jadoo;
but her argument was much more simple—"the magic that is always
demanding gifts is no true magic," said she. "my mother told me that the
only potent love-spells are those which are told you for love. this
seal-cutter man is a liar and a devil. i dare not tell, do anything, or
get anything done, because i am in debt to bhagwan dass the bunnia for two
gold rings and a heavy anklet. i must get my food from his shop. the
seal-cutter is the friend of bhagwan dass, and he would poison my food. a
fool's jadoo has been going on for ten days, and has cost suddhoo
many rupees each night. the seal-cutter used black hens and lemons and
mantras before. he never showed us anything like this till
to-night. azizun is a fool, and will be a purdahnashin soon.
suddhoo has lost his strength and his wits. see now! i had hoped to get
from suddhoo many rupees while he lived, and many more after his death;
and behold, he is spending everything on that offspring of a devil and a
she-ass, the seal-cutter!"
here i said, "but what induced suddhoo to drag me into the business? of
course i can speak to the seal-cutter, and he shall refund. the whole
thing is child's talk—shame—and senseless."
"suddhoo is an old child," said janoo. "he has lived on the
roofs these seventy years and is as senseless as a milch-goat. he brought
you here to assure himself that he was not breaking any law of the
sirkar, whose salt he ate many years ago. he worships the dust off
the feet of the seal-cutter, and that cow-devourer has forbidden him to go
and see his son. what does suddhoo know of your laws or the
lightning-post? i have to watch his money going day by day to that lying
beast below."
janoo stamped her foot on the floor and nearly cried with vexation;
while suddhoo was whimpering under a blanket in the corner, and azizun was
trying to guide the pipe-stem to his foolish old mouth.
now, the case stands thus. unthinkingly, i have laid myself open to the
charge of aiding and abetting the seal-cutter in obtaining money under
false pretences, which is forbidden by section  of the indian penal
code. i am helpless in the matter for these reasons. i cannot inform the
police. what witnesses would support my statements? janoo refuses flatly,
and azizun is a veiled woman somewhere near bareilly—lost in this
big india of ours. i dare not again take the law into my own hands, and
speak to the seal-cutter; for certain am i that, not only would suddhoo
disbelieve me, but this step would end in the poisoning of janoo, who is
bound hand and foot by her debt to the bunnia. suddhoo is an old
dotard; and whenever we meet mumbles my idiotic joke that the
sirkar rather patronizes the black art than otherwise. his son is
well now; but suddhoo is completely under the influence of the
seal-cutter, by whose advice he regulates the affairs of his life. janoo
watches daily the money that she hoped to wheedle out of suddhoo taken by
the seal-cutter, and becomes daily more furious and sullen.
she will never tell, because she dare not; but, unless something
happens to prevent her, i am afraid that the seal-cutter will die of
cholera—the white arsenic kind—about the middle of may. and
thus i shall be privy to a murder in the house of suddhoo.
to the wake av tim o'hara
came company,
all st. patrick's alley
was there to see.
—robert buchanan.
as the three musketeers share their silver, tobacco, and liquor
together, as they protect each other in barracks or camp, and as they
rejoice together over the joy of one, so do they divide their sorrows.
when ortheris's irrepressible tongue has brought him into cells for a
season, or learoyd has run amok through his kit and accoutrements, or
mulvaney has indulged in strong waters, and under their influence reproved
his commanding officer, you can see the trouble in the faces of the
untouched two. and the rest of the regiment know that comment or jest is
unsafe. generally the three avoid orderly room and the corner shop that
follows, leaving both to the young bloods who have not sown their wild
oats; but there are occasions—
for instance, ortheris was sitting on the drawbridge of the main gate
of fort amara, with his hands in his pockets and his pipe, bowl down, in
his mouth. learoyd was lying at full length on the turf of the glacis,
kicking his heels in the air, and i came round the corner and asked for
mulvaney.
ortheris spat into the ditch and shook his head. "no good seein' 'im
now," said ortheris; "'e's a bloomin' camel. listen."
i heard on the flags of the veranda opposite to the cells, which are
close to the guard-room, a measured step that i could have identified in
the tramp of an army. there were twenty paces crescendo, a pause,
and then twenty diminuendo.
"that's 'im," said ortheris; "my gawd, that's 'im! all for a bloomin'
button you could see your face in an' a bit o' lip that a bloomin'
hark-angel would 'a' guv back."
mulvaney was doing pack-drill—was compelled, that is to say, to
walk up and down for certain hours in full marching order, with rifle,
bayonet, ammunition, knapsack, and overcoat. and his offence was being
dirty on parade! i nearly fell into the fort ditch with astonishment and
wrath, for mulvaney is the smartest man that ever mounted guard, and would
as soon think of turning out uncleanly as of dispensing with his
trousers.
"who was the sergeant that checked him?" i asked.
"mullins, o' course," said ortheris. "there ain't no other man would
whip 'im on the peg so. but mullins ain't a man. 'e's a dirty little
pigscraper, that's wot 'e is."
"what did mulvaney say? he's not the make of man to take that
quietly."
"said! bin better for 'im if 'e'd shut 'is mouth. lord, 'ow we laughed!
'sargint,' 'e sez, 'ye say i'm dirty. well,' sez 'e, 'when your wife lets
you blow your own nose for yourself, perhaps you'll know wot dirt is.
you're himperfectly eddicated, sargint,' sez 'e, an' then we fell in. but
after p'rade, 'e was up an' mullins was swearin' 'imself black in the face
at ord'ly room that mulvaney 'ad called 'im a swine an' lord knows wot
all. you know mullins. 'e'll 'ave 'is 'ead broke in one o' these days.
'e's too big a bloomin' liar for ord'nary consumption. 'three hours' can
an' kit,' sez the colonel; 'not for bein' dirty on p'rade, but for 'avin'
said somthin' to mullins, tho' i do not believe,' sez 'e, 'you said wot 'e
said you said.' an' mulvaney fell away sayin' nothin'. you know 'e never
speaks to the colonel for fear o' gettin' 'imself fresh copped."
mullins, a very young and very much married sergeant, whose manners
were partly the result of innate depravity and partly of imperfectly
digested board school, came over the bridge, and most rudely asked
ortheris what he was doing.
"me?" said ortheris, "ow! i'm waiting for my c'mission. 'seed it comin'
along yit?"
mullins turned purple and passed on. there was the sound of a gentle
chuckle from the glacis where learoyd lay.
"'e expects to get 'is c'mission some day," explained orth'ris; "gawd
'elp the mess that 'ave to put their 'ands into the same kiddy as 'im! wot
time d'you make it, sir? fower! mulvaney 'll be out in 'arf an hour. you
don't want to buy a dorg, sir, do you? a pup you can trust—'arf
rampore by the colonel's grey'ound."
"ortheris," i answered, sternly, for i knew what was in his mind, "do
you mean to say that"—
"i didn't mean to arx money o' you, any'ow," said ortheris; "i'd 'a'
sold you the dorg good an' cheap, but—but—i know mulvaney 'll
want somethin' after we've walked 'im orf, an' i ain't got nothin', nor 'e
'asn't neither, i'd sooner sell you the dorg, sir. 's'trewth! i
would!"
a shadow fell on the drawbridge, and ortheris began to rise into the
air, lifted by a huge hand upon his collar.
"onything but t' braass," said learoyd, quietly, as he held the
londoner over the ditch. "onything but t' braass, orth'ris, ma son! ah've
got one rupee eight annas of ma own." he showed two coins, and replaced
ortheris on the drawbridge rail.
"very good," i said; "where are you going to?"
"goin' to walk 'im orf wen 'e comes out—two miles or three or
fower," said ortheris.
the footsteps within ceased. i heard the dull thud of a knapsack
falling on a bedstead, followed by the rattle of arms. ten minutes later,
mulvaney, faultlessly dressed, his lips tight and his face as black as a
thunderstorm, stalked into the sunshine on the drawbridge. learoyd and
ortheris sprang from my side and closed in upon him, both leaning toward
as horses lean upon the pole. in an instant they had disappeared down the
sunken road to the cantonments, and i was left alone. mulvaney had not
seen fit to recognize me; so i knew that his trouble must be heavy upon
him.
i climbed one of the bastions and watched the figures of the three
musketeers grow smaller and smaller across the plain. they were walking as
fast as they could put foot to the ground, and their heads were bowed.
they fetched a great compass round the parade-ground, skirted the cavalry
lines, and vanished in the belt of trees that fringes the low land by the
river.
i followed slowly, and sighted them—dusty, sweating, but still
keeping up their long, swinging tramp—on the river bank. they
crashed through the forest reserve, headed toward the bridge of boats, and
presently established themselves on the bow of one of the pontoons. i rode
cautiously till i saw three puffs of white smoke rise and die out in the
clear evening air, and knew that peace had come again. at the bridge-head
they waved me forward with gestures of welcome.
"tie up your 'orse," shouted ortheris, "an' come on, sir. we're all
goin' 'ome in this 'ere bloomin' boat."
from the bridge-head to the forest officer's bungalow is but a step.
the mess-man was there, and would see that a man held my horse. did the
sahib require aught else—a peg, or beer? ritchie sahib had left half
a dozen bottles of the latter, but since the sahib was a friend of ritchie
sahib, and he, the mess-man, was a poor man—
i gave my order quietly, and returned to the bridge. mulvaney had taken
off his boots, and was dabbling his toes in the water; learoyd was lying
on his back on the pontoon; and ortheris was pretending to row with a big
bamboo.
"i'm an ould fool," said mulvaney, reflectively, "dhraggin' you two out
here bekaze i was undher the black dog—sulkin' like a child. me that
was soldierin' when mullins, an' be damned to him, was shquealin' on a
counterpin for five shillin' a week—an' that not paid! bhoys, i've
took you five miles out av natural pervarsity. phew!"
"wot's the odds so long as you're 'appy?" said ortheris, applying
himself afresh to the bamboo. "as well 'ere as anywhere else."
learoyd held up a rupee and an eight-anna bit, and shook his head
sorrowfully. "five mile from t'canteen, all along o' mulvaney's blasted
pride."
"i know ut," said mulvaney, penitently. "why will ye come wid me? an'
yet i wud be mortial sorry if ye did not—any time—though i am
ould enough to know betther. but i will do penance. i will take a dhrink
av wather."
ortheris squeaked shrilly. the butler of the forest bungalow was
standing near the railings with a basket, uncertain how to clamber down to
the pontoon. "might 'a' know'd you'd 'a' got liquor out o' bloomin'
desert, sir," said ortheris, gracefully, to me. then to the mess-man:
"easy with them there bottles. they're worth their weight in gold. jock,
ye long-armed beggar, get out o' that an' hike 'em down."
learoyd had the basket on the pontoon in an instant, and the three
musketeers gathered round it with dry lips. they drank my health in due
and ancient form, and thereafter tobacco tasted sweeter than ever. they
absorbed all the beer, and disposed themselves in picturesque attitudes to
admire the setting sun—no man speaking for a while.
mulvaney's head dropped upon his chest, and we thought that he was
asleep.
"what on earth did you come so far for?" i whispered to ortheris.
"to walk 'im orf, o' course. when 'e's been checked we allus walks 'im
orf, 'e ain't fit to be spoke to those times—nor 'e ain't fit to
leave alone neither. so we takes 'im till 'e is."
mulvaney raised his head, and stared straight into the sunset. "i had
my rifle," said he, dreamily, "an' i had my bay'nit, an' mullins came
round the corner, an' he looked in my face an' grinned dishpiteful.
'you can't blow your own nose,' sez he. now, i cannot tell fwhat
mullins's expayrience may ha' been, but, mother av god, he was nearer to
his death that minut' than i have iver been to mine—and that's less
than the thicknuss av a hair!"
"yes," said ortheris, calmly, "you'd look fine with all your buttons
took orf, an' the band in front o' you, walkin' roun' slow time. we're
both front-rank men, me an' jock, when the rig'ment's in 'ollow square,
bloomin' fine you'd look. 'the lord giveth an' the lord taketh
awai,—heasy with that there drop!—blessed be the naime o' the
lord,'" he gulped in a quaint and suggestive fashion.
"mullins! wot's mullins?" said learoyd, slowly. "ah'd take a coomp'ny
o' mullinses—ma hand behind me. sitha, mulvaney, don't be a
fool."
"you were not checked for fwhat you did not do, an' made a mock
av afther. 'twas for less than that the tyrone wud ha' sent o'hara to
hell, instid av lettin' him go by his own choosin', whin rafferty shot
him," retorted mulvaney.
"and who stopped the tyrone from doing it?" i asked.
"that ould fool who's sorry he didn't stick the pig mullins." his head
dropped again. when he raised it he shivered and put his hands on the
shoulders of his two companions.
"ye've walked the divil out av me, bhoys," said he.
ortheris shot out the red-hot dottel of his pipe on the back of the
hairy fist. "they say 'ell's 'otter than that," said he, as mulvaney swore
aloud. "you be warned so. look yonder!"—he pointed across the river
to a ruined temple—"me an' you an' 'im"-he indicated me by a
jerk of his head—"was there one day when hi made a bloomin' show o'
myself. you an' 'im stopped me doin' such—an' hi was on'y wishful
for to desert. you are makin' a bigger bloomin' show o' yourself now."
"don't mind him, mulvaney," i said; "dinah shadd won't let you hang
yourself yet awhile, and you don't intend to try it either. let's hear
about the tyrone and o'hara. rafferty shot him for fooling with his wife.
what happened before that?"
"there's no fool like an ould fool. you know you can do anythin' wid me
whin i'm talkin'. did i say i wud like to cut mullins's liver out? i deny
the imputashin, for fear that orth'ris here wud report me—ah! you
wud tip me into the river, wud you? sit quiet, little man. anyways,
mullins is not worth the trouble av an extry p'rade, an' i will trate him
wid outrajis contimpt. the tyrone an' o'hara! o'hara an' the tyrone,
begad! ould days are hard to bring back into the mouth, but they're always
inside the head."
followed a long pause.
"o'hara was a divil. though i saved him, for the honor av the rig'mint,
from his death that time, i say it now. he was a divil—a long,
bould, black-haired divil."
"which way?" asked ortheris,
"women."
"then i know another."
"not more than in reason, if you mane me, ye warped walkin'-shtick. i
have been young, an' for why should i not have tuk what i cud? did i iver,
whin i was corp'ril, use the rise av my rank—wan step an' that taken
away, more's the sorrow an' the fault av me!—to prosecute a
nefarious inthrigue, as o'hara did? did i, whin i was corp'ril, lay my
spite upon a man an' make his life a dog's life from day to day? did i
lie, as o'hara lied, till the young wans in the tyrone turned white wid
the fear av the judgment av god killin' thim all in a lump, as ut killed
the woman at devizes? i did not! i have sinned my sins an' i have made my
confesshin, an' father victor knows the worst av me. o'hara was tuk,
before he cud spake, on rafferty's doorstep, an' no man knows the worst av
him. but this much i know!
"the tyrone was recruited any fashion in the ould days. a draf from
connemara—a draf from portsmouth—a draf from kerry, an' that
was a blazin' bad draf—here, there and iverywhere—but the
large av thim was oirish—black oirish. now there are oirish an'
oirish. the good are good as the best, but the bad are wurrst than the
wurrst. 'tis this way. they clog together in pieces as fast as thieves,
an' no wan knows fwhat they will do till wan turns informer an' the gang
is bruk. but ut begins again, a day later, meetin' in holes an' corners
an' swearin' bloody oaths an' shtickin' a man in the back an' runnin'
away, an' thin waitin' for the blood-money on the reward papers—to
see if ut's worth enough. those are the black oirish, an' 'tis they that
bring dishgrace upon the name av oireland, an' thim i wud kill—as i
nearly killed wan wanst.
"but to reshume. my room—'twas before i was married—was wid
twelve av the scum av the earth—the pickin's av the
gutter—mane men that wud neither laugh nor talk nor yet get dhrunk
as a man shud. they thried some av their dog's thricks on me, but i dhrew
a line round my cot, an' the man that thransgressed ut wint into hospital
for three days good.
"o'hara had put his spite on the room—he was my color
sargint—an' nothin' cud we do to plaze him. i was younger than i am
now, an' i tuk what i got in the way av dressing down and
punishmint-dhrill wid my tongue in my cheek. but it was diff'rint wid the
others, an' why i cannot say, excipt that some men are borrun mane an' go
to dhirty murdher where a fist is more than enough. afther a whoile, they
changed their chune to me an' was desp'rit frien'ly—all twelve av
thim cursin' o'hara in chorus.
"'eyah,' sez i, 'o'hara's a divil an' i'm not for denyin' ut, but is he
the only man in the wurruld? let him go. he'll get tired av findin' our
kit foul an' our 'coutrements onproperly kep'.'
"'we will not let him go,' sez they.
"'thin take him,' sez i, 'an' a dashed poor yield you will get for your
throuble.'
"'is he not misconductin' himself wid slimmy's wife?' sez another.
"'she's common to the rig'mint,' sez i. 'fwhat has made ye this
partic'lar on a suddint?'
"'has he not put his spite on the roomful av us? can we do anythin'
that he will not check us for?' sez another.
"'that's thrue,' sez i.
"'will ye not help us to do aught,' sez another—'a big bould man
like you?'
"'i will break his head upon his shoulthers av he puts hand on me,' sez
i. 'i will give him the lie av he says that i'm dhirty, an' i wud not mind
duckin' him in the artillery troughs if ut was not that i'm thryin' for my
shtripes.'
"'is that all ye will do?' sez another. 'have ye no more spunk than
that, ye blood-dhrawn calf?'
"'blood-dhrawn i may be,' sez i, gettin' back to my cot an' makin' my
line round ut; 'but ye know that the man who comes acrost this mark will
be more blood-dhrawn than me. no man gives me the name in my mouth,' i
sez. 'ondersthand, i will have no part wid you in anythin' ye do, nor will
i raise my fist to my shuperior. is any wan comin' on?' sez i.
"they made no move, tho' i gave them full time, but stud growlin' an'
snarlin' together at wan ind av the room. i tuk up my cap and wint out to
canteen, thinkin' no little av mesilf, and there i grew most ondacintly
dhrunk in my legs. my head was all reasonable.
"'houligan,' i sez to a man in e comp'ny that was by way av bein' a
frind av mine; 'i'm overtuk from the belt down. do you give me the touch
av your shoulther to presarve my formation an' march me acrost the ground
into the high grass. i'll sleep ut off there,' sez i; an'
houligan—he's dead now, but good he was while he lasted—walked
wid me, givin' me the touch whin i wint wide, ontil we came to the high
grass, an', my faith, the sky an' the earth was fair rowlin' undher me. i
made for where the grass was thickust, an' there i slep' off my liquor wid
an easy conscience. i did not desire to come on books too frequent; my
characther havin' been shpotless for the good half av a year.
"whin i roused, the dhrink was dyin' out in me, an' i felt as though a
she-cat had littered in my mouth. i had not learned to hould my liquor wid
comfort in thim days. 'tis little betther i am now. 'i will get houligan
to pour a bucket over my head,' thinks i, an' i wud ha' risen, but i heard
some wan say: 'mulvaney can take the blame av ut for the backslidin' hound
he is.'
"'oho!' sez i, an' my head rang like a guard-room gong: 'fwhat is the
blame that this young man must take to oblige tim vulmea?' for 'twas tim
vulmea that shpoke.
"i turned on my belly an' crawled through the grass, a bit at a time,
to where the spache came from. there was the twelve av my room sittin'
down in a little patch, the dhry grass wavin' above their heads an' the
sin av black murdher in their hearts. i put the stuff aside to get a clear
view.
"'fwhat's that?' sez wan man, jumpin' up.
"'a dog,' says vulmea. 'you're a nice hand to this job! as i said,
mulvaney will take the blame—av ut comes to a pinch.'
"''tis harrd to swear a man's life away,' sez a young wan.
"'thank ye for that,' thinks i. 'now, fwhat the divil are you paragins
conthrivin' against me?'
"''tis as easy as dhrinkin' your quart,' sez vulmea. 'at seven or
thereon, o'hara will come acrost to the married quarters, goin' to call on
slimmy's wife, the swine! wan av us'll pass the wurrd to the room an' we
shtart the divil an' all av a shine—laughin' an' crackin' on an'
t'rowin' our boots about. thin o'hara will come to give us the ordher to
be quiet, the more by token bekaze the room-lamp will be knocked over in
the larkin'. he will take the straight road to the ind door where there's
the lamp in the veranda, an' that'll bring him clear against the light as
he shtands. he will not be able to look into the dhark. wan av us will
loose off, an' a close shot ut will be, an' shame to the man that misses.
'twill be mulvaney's rifle, she that that is at the head av the
rack—there's no mistakin' long-shtocked, cross-eyed bitch even in
the dhark.'
"the thief misnamed my ould firin'-piece out av jealousy—i was
pershuaded av that—an' ut made me more angry than all.
"but vulmea goes on: 'o'hara will dhrop, an' by the time the light's
lit again, there'll be some six av us on the chest av mulvaney, cryin'
murdher an' rape. mulvaney's cot is near the ind door, an' the shmokin'
rifle will be lyin' undher him whin we've knocked him over. we know, an'
all the rig'mint knows, that mulvaney has given o'hara more lip than any
man av us. will there be any doubt at the coort-martial? wud twelve honust
sodger-bhoys swear away the life av a dear, quiet, swate-timpered man such
as is mulvaney—wid his line av pipe-clay roun' his cot, threatenin'
us wid murdher av we overshtepped ut, as we can truthful testify?'
"'mary, mother av mercy!' thinks i to mesilf; 'it is this to have an
unruly number an' fistes fit to use! oh the sneakin' hounds!'
"the big dhrops ran down my face, for i was wake wid the liquor an' had
not the full av my wits about me. i laid shtill an' heard thim workin'
themselves up to swear my life by tellin' tales av ivry time i had put my
mark on wan or another; an' my faith, they was few that was not so
dishtinguished. 'twas all in the way av fair fight, though, for niver did
i raise my hand excipt whin they had provoked me to ut.
"'tis all well,' sez wan av thim, 'but who's to do this shootin'?'
"'fwhat matther?' sez vulmea. 'tis mulvaney will do that—at the
coort-martial.'
"'he will so,' sez the man, 'but whose hand is put to the
trigger—in the room?'
"'who'll do ut?' sez vulmea, lookin' round, but divil a man answeared.
they began to dishpute till kiss, that was always playin' shpoil five,
sez: 'thry the kyards!' wid that he opined his tunic an' tuk out the
greasy palammers, an' they all fell in wid the notion.
"'deal on!' sez vulmea, wid a big rattlin' oath, 'an' the black curse
av shielygh come to the man that will not do his duty as the kyards say.
amin!'
"'black jack is the masther,' sez kiss, dealin'. 'black jack, sorr, i
shud expaytiate to you, is the ace av shpades which from time immimorial
has been intimately connect wid battle, murdher an' suddin death.
"wanst kiss dealt an' there was no sign, but the men was whoite
wid the workin's av their sowls. twice kiss dealt, an' there was a
grey shine on their cheeks like the mess av an egg. three times
kiss dealt an' they was blue. 'have ye not lost him?' sez vulmea, wipin'
the sweat on him; 'let's ha' done quick!' 'quick ut is,' sez kiss t'rowin'
him the kyard; an' ut fell face up on his knee—black jack!
"thin they all cackled wid laughin'. 'duty thrippence,' sez wan av
thim, 'an' damned cheap at that price!' but i cud see they all dhrew a
little away from vulmea an' lef' him sittin' playin' wid the kyard. vulmea
sez no word for a whoile but licked his lips—cat-ways. thin he threw
up his head an' made the men swear by ivry oath known to stand by him not
alone in the room but at the coort-martial that was to set on me!
he tould off five av the biggest to stretch me on my cot whin the shot was
fired, an' another man he tould off to put out the light, an' yet another
to load my rifle. he wud not do that himself; an' that was quare, for
'twas but a little thing considerin'.
"thin they swore over again that they wud not bethray wan another, an'
crep' out av the grass in diff'rint ways, two by two. a mercy ut was that
they did not come on me. i was sick wid fear in the pit av my
stummick—sick, sick, sick! afther they was all gone, i wint back to
canteen an' called for a quart to put a thought in me. vulmea was there,
dhrinkin' heavy, an' politeful to me beyond reason. 'fwhat will i
do—fwhat will i do?' thinks i to mesilf whin vulmea wint away.
"presintly the arm'rer sargint comes in stiffin' an' crackin' on, not
pleased wid any wan, bekaze the martini-henry bein' new to the rig'mint in
those days we used to play the mischief wid her arrangemints. 'twas a long
time before i cud get out av the way av thryin' to pull back the
back-sight an' turnin' her over afther firin'—as if she was a
snider.
"'fwhat tailor-men do they give me to work wid?' sez the arm'rer
sargint. 'here's hogan, his nose flat as a table, laid by for a week, an'
ivry comp'ny sendin' their arrums in knocked to small shivreens.'
"'fwhat's wrong wid hogan, sargint?' sez i.
"'wrong!' sez the arm'rer sargint; 'i showed him, as though i had been
his mother, the way av shtrippin' a 'tini, an' he shtrup her clane an'
easy. i tould him to put her to again an' fire a blank into the blow-pit
to show how the dirt hung on the groovin'. he did that, but he did not put
in the pin av the fallin'-block, an' av coorse whin he fired he was strook
by the block jumpin' clear. well for him 'twas but a blank—a full
charge wud ha' cut his oi out,"
"i looked a thrifle wiser than a boiled sheep's head. 'how's that,
sargint?' sez i.
"'this way, ye blundherin' man, an' don't you be doin' ut,' sez he. wid
that he shows me a waster action—the breech av her all cut away to
show the inside—an' so plazed he was to grumble that he dimonstrated
fwhat hogan had done twice over. 'an' that comes av not knowin' the
wepping you're purvided wid,' sez he.
"'thank ye, sargint,' sez i; 'i will come to you again for further
information.'
"'ye will not,' sez he, 'kape your clanin'-rod away from the breech-pin
or you will get into throuble.'
"i wint outside an' i could ha' danced wid delight for the grandeur av
ut. 'they will load my rifle, good luck to thim, whoile i'm away,' thinks
i, and back i wint to the canteen to give them their clear chanst.
"the canteen was fillin' wid men at the ind av the day. i made feign to
be far gone in dhrink, an', wan by wan, all my roomful came in wid vulmea.
i wint away, walkin' thick an' heavy, but not so thick an' heavy that any
wan cud ha' tuk me. sure and thrue, there was a kyartridge gone from my
pouch an' lyin' snug in my rifle. i was hot wid rage against thim all, an'
i worried the bullet out wid my teeth as fast as i cud, the room bein'
empty. then i tuk my boot an' the clanin'-rod and knocked out the pin av
the fallin'-block. oh, 'twas music when that pin rowled on the flure! i
put ut into my pouch an' stuck a dab av dirt on the holes in the plate,
puttin' the fallin'-block back. 'that'll do your business, vulmea,' sez i,
lyin' easy on the cot. 'come an' sit on my chest the whole room av you,
an' i will take you to my bosom for the biggest divils that iver cheated
halter.' i would have no mercy on vulmea. his oi or his life—little
i cared!
"at dusk they came back, the twelve av thim, an' they had all been
dhrinkin'. i was shammin' sleep on the cot. wan man wint outside in the
veranda. whin he whishtled they began to rage roun' the room an' carry on
tremenjus. but i niver want to hear men laugh as they
did—sky-larkin' too! 'twas like mad jackals.
"'shtop that blasted noise!' sez o'hara in the dark, an' pop goes the
room lamp. i cud hear o'hara runnin' up an' the rattlin' av my rifle in
the rack an' the men breathin' heavy as they stud roun' my cot. i cud see
o'hara in the light av the veranda lamp, an' thin i heard the crack av my
rifle. she cried loud, poor darlint, bein' mishandled. next minut' five
men were houldin' me down. 'go easy,' i sez; 'fwhat's ut all about?'
"thin vulmea, on the flure, raised a howl you cud hear from wan ind av
cantonmints to the other. 'i'm dead, i'm butchered, i'm blind!' sez he.
'saints have mercy on my sinful sowl! sind for father constant! oh sind
for father constant an' let me go clean!' by that i knew he was not so
dead as i cud ha' wished.
"o'hara picks up the lamp in the veranda wid a hand as stiddy as a
rest. 'fwhat damned dog's thrick is this av yours?' sez he, and turns the
light on tim vulmea that was shwimmin' in blood from top to toe. the
fallin'-block had sprung free behin' a full charge av powther—good
care i tuk to bite down the brass afther takin' out the bullet that there
might be somethin' to give ut full worth—an' had cut tim from the
lip to the corner av the right eye, lavin' the eyelid in tatthers, an' so
up an' along by the forehead to the hair. 'twas more av a rakin' plough,
if you will ondherstand, than a clean cut; an' niver did i see a man bleed
as vulmea did, the dhrink an' the stew that he was in pumped the blood
strong. the minut' the men sittin' on my chest heard o'hara spakin' they
scatthered each wan to his cot, an' cried out very politeful: 'fwhat is
ut, sargint?'
"'fwhat is ut!' sez o'hara. shakin' tim. 'well an' good do you know
fwhat ut is, ye skulkin' ditch-lurkin' dogs! get a doolie, an' take
this whimperin' scutt away. there will be more heard av ut than any av you
will care for.'
"vulmea sat up rockin' his head in his hand an' moanin' for father
constant.
"'be done!' sez o'hara, dhraggin' him up by the hair. 'you're none so
dead that you cannot go fifteen years for thryin' to shoot me.'
"'i did not,' sez vulmea; 'i was shootin' mesilf.'
"'that's quare,' sez o'hara, 'for the front av my jackut is black wid
your powther.' he tuk up the rifle that was still warm an' began to laugh.
'i'll make your life hell to you,' sez he, 'for attempted murdher an'
kapin' your rifle onproperly. you'll be hanged first an' thin put undher
stoppages for four fifteen. the rifle's done for,' sez he.
"'why, 'tis my rifle!' sez i, comin' up to look; 'vulmea, ye divil,
fwhat were you doin' wid her—answer me that?'
"'lave me alone,' sez vulmea; 'i'm dyin'!'
"'i'll wait till you're betther,' sez i, 'an' thin we two will talk ut
out umbrageous.'
"o'hara pitched tim into the doolie, none too tinder, but all
the bhoys kep' by their cots, which was not the sign av innocint men. i
was huntin' ivrywhere for my fallin'-block, but not findin' ut at all. i
niver found ut.
"'now fwhat will i do?' sez o'hara, swinging the veranda light
in his hand an' lookin' down the room. i had hate and contimpt av o'hara
an' i have now, dead tho' he is, but, for all that, will i say he was a
brave man. he is baskin' in purgathory this tide, but i wish he cud hear
that, whin he stud lookin' down the room an' the bhoys shivered before the
oi av him, i knew him for a brave man an' i liked him so.
"'fwhat will i do?' sez o'hara agin, an' we heard the voice av a woman
low an' sof' in the veranda. 'twas slimmy's wife, come over at the shot,
sittin' on wan av the benches an' scarce able to walk.
"'o denny!—denny, dear,' sez she, 'have they kilt you?'
"o'hara looked down the room again an' showed his teeth to the gum.
then he spat on the flare.
"'you're not worth ut,' sez he. 'light that lamp, ye dogs,' an' wid
that he turned away, an' i saw him walkin' off wid slimmy's wife; she
thryin' to wipe off the powther-black on the front av his jackut wid her
handkerchief. 'a brave man you are,' thinks i—'a brave man an' a bad
woman.'
"no wan said a word for a time. they was all ashamed, past spache,
"'fwhat d'you think he will do?' sez wan av thim at last. 'he knows
we're all in ut.'
"'are we so?' sez i from my cot. 'the man that sez that to me will be
hurt. i do not know,' sez i, 'fwhat onderhand divilmint you have
conthrived, but by what i've seen i know that you cannot commit murdher
wid another man's rifle—such shakin' cowards you are. i'm goin' to
slape,' i sez, 'an' you can blow my head off whoile i lay.' i did not
slape, though, for a long time. can ye wonder?
"next morn the news was through all the rig'mint, an' there was nothin'
that the men did not tell. o'hara reports, fair an' easy, that vulmea was
come to grief through tamperin' wid his rifle in barricks, all for to show
the mechanism. an' by my sowl, he had the impart'nince to say that he was
on the sphot at the time an' cud certify that ut was an accidint! you
might ha' knocked my roomful down wid a straw whin they heard that. 'twas
lucky for thim that the bhoys were always thryin' to find out how the new
rifle was made, an' a lot av thim had come up for easin' the pull by
shtickin' bits av grass an' such in the part av the lock that showed near
the thrigger. the first issues of the 'tinis was not covered in, an' i
mesilf have eased the pull av mine time an' agin. a light pull is ten
points on the range to me.
"'i will not have this foolishness!' sez the colonel, 'i will twist the
tail off vulmea!' sez he; but whin he saw him, all tied up an' groanin' in
hospital, he changed his will. 'make him an early convalescint' sez he to
the doctor, an' vulmea was made so for a warnin'. his big bloody bandages
an' face puckered up to wan side did more to kape the bhoys from messin'
wid the insides av their rifles than any punishmint.
"o'hara gave no reason for fwhat he'd said, an' all my roomful were too
glad to inquire, tho' he put his spite upon thim more wearin' than before.
wan day, howiver, he tuk me apart very polite, for he cud be that at the
choosin'.
"'you're a good sodger, tho' you're a damned insolint man,' sez he.
"'fair words, sargint,' sez i, 'or i may be insolint again,'
"'tis not like you,' sez he, 'to lave your rifle in the rack widout the
breech-pin, for widout the breech-pin she was whin vulmea fired. i should
ha' found the break av ut in the eyes av the holes, else,' he sez.
"'sargint,' sez i, 'fwhat wud your life ha' been worth av the
breech-pin had been in place, for, on my sowl, my life wud be worth just
as much to me av i tould you whether ut was or was not. be thankful the
bullet was not there,' i sez.
"'that's thrue,' sez he, pulling his moustache; 'but i do not believe
that you, for all your lip, was in that business.'
"'sargint,' sez i, 'i cud hammer the life out av a man in ten minuts
wid my fistes if that man dishpleased me; for i am a good sodger, an' i
will be threated as such, an' whoile my fistes are my own they're strong
enough for all work i have to do. they do not fly back toward me!' sez i,
lookin' him betune the eyes.
"'you're a good man,' sez he, lookin' me betune the eyes—an' oh
he was a gran'-built man to see!—'you're a good man,' he sez, 'an' i
cud wish, for the pure frolic av ut, that i was not a sargint, or that you
were not a privit; an' you will think me no coward whin i say this
thing.'
"'i do not,' sez i. 'i saw you whin vulmea mishandled the rifle. but,
sargint,' i sez, 'take the wurrd from me now, spakin' as man to man wid
the shtripes off, tho' 'tis little right i have to talk, me being fwhat i
am by natur'. this time ye tuk no harm, an' next time ye may not, but, in
the ind, so sure as slimmy's wife came into the veranda, so sure will ye
take harm—an' bad harm. have thought, sargint,' sez i. 'is ut worth
ut?'
"'ye're a bould man,' sez he, breathin' harrd. 'a very bould man. but i
am a bould man tu. do you go your way, privit mulvaney, an' i will go
mine.'
"we had no further spache thin or afther, but, wan by another, he
drafted the twelve av my room out into other rooms an' got thim spread
among the comp'nies, for they was not a good breed to live together, an'
the comp'ny orf'cers saw ut. they wud ha' shot me in the night av they had
known fwhat i knew; but that they did not.
"an', in the ind, as i said, o'hara met his death from rafferty for
foolin' wid his wife. he wint his own way too well—eyah, too well!
shtraight to that affair, widout turnin' to the right or to the lef', he
wint, an' may the lord have mercy on his sowl. amin!"
"'ear! 'ear!" said ortheris, pointing the moral with a wave of his
pipe, "an' this is 'im 'oo would be a bloomin' vulmea all for the sake of
mullins an' a bloomin' button! mullins never went after a woman in his
life. mrs. mullins, she saw 'im one day"—
"ortheris," i said, hastily, for the romances of private ortheris are
all too daring for publication, "look at the sun. it's quarter past
six!"
"o lord! three quarters of an hour for five an' a 'arf miles! we'll
'ave to run like jimmy-o."
the three musketeers clambered on to the bridge, and departed hastily
in the direction of the cantonment road. when i overtook them i offered
them two stirrups and a tail, which they accepted enthusiastically.
ortheris held the tail, and in this manner we trotted steadily through the
shadows by an unfrequented road.
at the turn into the cantonments we heard carriage wheels. it was the
colonel's barouche, and in it sat the colonel's wife and daughter. i
caught a suppressed chuckle, and my beast sprang forward with a lighter
step.
the three musketeers had vanished into the night.
so we loosed a bloomin' volley,
an' we made the beggars cut,
an' when our pouch was emptied out.
we used the bloomin' butt,
ho! my!
don't yer come anigh,
when tommy is a playin' with the baynit an' the butt.
—barrack room ballad.
my friend private mulvaney told me this, sitting on the parapet of the
road to dagshai, when we were hunting butterflies together. he had
theories about the army, and colored clay pipes perfectly. he said that
the young soldier is the best to work with, "on account av the surpassing
innocinse av the child."
"now, listen!" said mulvaney, throwing himself full length on the wall
in the sun. "i'm a born scutt av the barrick-room! the army's mate an'
dhrink to me, bekaze i'm wan av the few that can't quit ut. i've put in
sivinteen years, an' the pipeclay's in the marrow av me. av i cud have
kept out av wan big dhrink a month, i wud have been a hon'ry lift'nint by
this time—a nuisince to my betthers, a laughin'-shtock to my equils,
an' a curse to meself. bein' fwhat i am, i'm privit mulvaney, wid no
good-conduc' pay an' a devourin' thirst. always barrin' me little frind
bobs bahadur, i know as much about the army as most men."
i said something here.
"wolseley be shot! betune you an' me an' that butterfly net, he's a
ramblin', incoherint sort av a divil, wid wan oi on the quane an' the
coort, an' the other on his blessed silf—everlastin'ly playing
saysar an' alexandrier rowled into a lump. now bobs is a sinsible little
man. wid bobs an' a few three-year-olds, i'd swape any army av the earth
into a towel, an' throw it away aftherward. faith, i'm not jokin'! tis the
bhoys—the raw bhoys—that don't know fwhat a bullut manes, an'
wudn't care av they did—that dhu the work. they're crammed wid
bull-mate till they fairly ramps wid good livin'; and thin, av they
don't fight, they blow each other's hids off. 'tis the trut' i'm tellin'
you. they shud be kept on water an' rice in the hot weather; but there'd
be a mut'ny av 'twas done.
"did ye iver hear how privit mulvaney tuk the town av lungtungpen? i
thought not! 'twas the lift'nint got the credit; but 'twas me planned the
schame. a little before i was inviladed from burma, me an' four-an'-twenty
young wans undher a lift'nint brazenose, was ruinin' our dijeshins thryin'
to catch dacoits. an' such double-ended divils i niver knew! tis only a
dah an' a snider that makes a dacoit, widout thim, he's a paceful
cultivator, an' felony for to shoot. we hunted, an' we hunted, an' tuk
fever an' elephints now an' again; but no dacoits, evenshually, we
puckarowed wan man, 'trate him tinderly,' sez the lift'nint. so i
tuk him away into the jungle, wid the burmese interprut'r an' my
clanin'-rod. sez i to the man, 'my paceful squireen,' sez i, 'you shquot
on your hunkers an' dimonstrate to my frind here, where your
frinds are whin they're at home?' wid that i introjuced him to the
clanin'-rod, an' he comminst to jabber; the interprut'r interprutin' in
betweens, an' me helpin' the intilligince departmint wid my clanin'-rod
whin the man misremimbered.
"prisintly, i learn that, acrost the river, about nine miles away, was
a town just dhrippin' wid dahs, an' bohs an' arrows, an' dacoits, and
elephints, an' jingles. 'good!' sez i; 'this office will now
close!'
"that night, i went to the lift'nint an' communicates my information. i
never thought much of lift'nint brazenose till that night. he was shtiff
wid books an' theouries, an' all manner av thrimmin's no manner av use.
'town did ye say?' sez he. 'accordin' to the theouries av war, we shud
wait for reinforcemints.'—'faith!' thinks i, 'we'd betther dig our
graves thin;' for the nearest throops was up to their shtocks in the
marshes out mimbu way. 'but,' says the lift'nint, 'since 'tis a speshil
case, i'll make an excepshin. we'll visit this lungtungpen to-night.'
"the bhoys was fairly woild wid deloight whin i tould 'em; an', by this
an' that, they wint through the jungle like buck-rabbits. about midnight
we come to the shtrame which i had clane forgot to minshin to my orficer.
i was on, ahead, wid four bhoys, an' i thought that the lift'nint might
want to theourise. 'shtrip boys!' sez i. 'shtrip to the buff, an' shwim in
where glory waits!'—'but i can't shwim!' sez two av thim. 'to
think i should live to hear that from a bhoy wid a board-school
edukashin!' sez i. 'take a lump av timber, an' me an' conolly here will
ferry ye over, ye young ladies!'
"we got an ould tree-trunk, an' pushed off wid the kits an' the rifles
on it. the night was chokin' dhark, an' just as we was fairly embarked, i
heard the lift'nint behind av me callin' out. 'there's a bit av a
nullah here, sorr,' sez i, 'but i can feel the bottom already.' so
i cud, for i was not a yard from the bank.
"'bit av a nullah! bit av an eshtuary!' sez the lift'nint. 'go
on, ye mad irishman! shtrip bhoys!' i heard him laugh; an' the bhoys begun
shtrippin' an' rollin' a log into the wather to put their kits on. so me
an' conolly shtruck out through the warm wather wid our log, an' the rest
come on behind.
"that shtrame was miles woide! orth'ris, on the rear-rank log, whispers
we had got into the thames below sheerness by mistake. 'kape on shwimmin',
ye little blayguard,' sez i, 'an' don't go pokin' your dirty jokes at the
irriwaddy,'—'silince, men!' sings out the lift'nint. so we shwum on
into the black dhark, wid our chests on the logs, trustin' in the saints
an' the luck av the british army.
"evenshually, we hit ground—a bit av sand—an' a man. i put
my heel on the back av him. he skreeched an' ran.
"'now we've done it!' sez lift'nint brazenose. 'where the divil
is lungtungpen?' there was about a minute and a half to wait. the
bhoys laid a hould av their rifles an' some thried to put their belts on;
we was marchin' wid fixed baynits av coorse. thin we knew where
lungtungpen was; for we had hit the river-wall av it in the dhark, an' the
whole town blazed wid thim messin' jingles an' sniders like a cat's
back on a frosty night. they was firin' all ways at wanst, but over our
hids into the shtrame.
"'have you got your rifles?' sez brazenose. 'got 'em!' sez orth'ris.
'i've got that thief mulvaney's for all my back-pay, an' she'll kick my
heart sick wid that blunderin' long shtock av hers.'—'go on!' yells
brazenose, whippin' his sword out. 'go on an' take the town! an' the lord
have mercy on our sowls!'
"thin the bhoys gave wan divastatin' howl, an' pranced into the dhark,
feelin' for the town, an' blindin' an' stiffin' like cavalry ridin'
masters whin the grass pricked their bare legs. i hammered wid the butt at
some bamboo-thing that felt wake, an' the rest come an' hammered
contagious, while the jingles was jingling, an' feroshus yells from
inside was shplittin' our ears. we was too close under the wall for thim
to hurt us.
"evenshually, the thing, whatever ut was, bruk; an' the six-and-twinty
av us tumbled, wan after the other, naked as we was borrun, into the town
of lungtungpen. there was a melly av a sumpshus kind for a whoile;
but whether they tuk us, all white an' wet, for a new breed av divil, or a
new kind av dacoit, i don't know. they ran as though we was both, an' we
wint into thim, baynit an' butt, shriekin' wid laughin'. there was torches
in the shtreets, an' i saw little orth'ris rubbin' his showlther ivry time
he loosed my long-shtock martini; an' brazenose walkin' into the gang wid
his sword, like diarmid av the gowlden collar—barring he hadn't a
stitch av clothin' on him. we diskivered elephints wid dacoits under their
bellies, an', what wid wan thing an' another, we was busy till mornin'
takin' possession av the town of lungtungpen.
"thin we halted an' formed up, the wimmen howlin' in the houses an'
lift'nint brazenose blushin' pink in the light av the mornin' sun. 'twas
the most ondasint p'rade i iver tuk a hand in. foive-and-twenty privits
an' a orficer av the line in review ordher, an' not as much as wud dust a
fife betune 'em all in the way of clothin'! eight av us had their belts
an' pouches on; but the rest had gone in wid a handful av cartridges an'
the skin god gave thim. they was as nakid as vanus.
"'number off from the right!' sez the lift'nint. 'odd numbers fall out
to dress; even numbers pathrol the town till relieved by the dressing
party.' let me tell you, pathrollin' a town wid nothing on is an
expayrience. i pathrolled for tin minutes, an' begad, before 'twas
over, i blushed. the women laughed so. i niver blushed before or since;
but i blushed all over my carkiss thin. orth'ris didn't pathrol. he sez
only, 'portsmith barricks an' the 'ard av a sunday! thin he lay down an'
rowled any ways wid laughin'.
"whin we was all dhressed, we counted the dead—sivinty-foive
dacoits besides wounded. we tuk five elephints, a hunder' an' sivinty
sniders, two hunder' dahs, and a lot av other burglarious thruck. not a
man av us was hurt—excep' maybe the lift'nint, an' he from the shock
to his dasincy.
"the headman av lungtungpen, who surrinder'd himself, asked the
interprut'r—''av the english fight like that wid their clo'es off,
what in the wurruld do they do wid their clo'es on?' orth'ris began
rowlin' his eyes an' crackin' his fingers an' dancin' a step-dance for to
impress the headman. he ran to his house; an' we spint the rest av the day
carryin' the lift'nint on our showlthers round the town, an' playin' wid
the burmese babies—fat, little, brown little divils, as pretty as
picturs.
"whin i was inviladed for the dysent'ry to india, i sez to the
lift'nint, 'sorr,' sez i, 'you've the makin's in you av a great man; but,
av you'll let an ould sodger spake, you're too fond of the-ourisin'.' he
shuk hands wid me and sez, 'hit high, hit low, there's no plasin' you,
mulvaney. you've seen me waltzin' through lungtungpen like a red injin
widout the warpaint, an' you say i'm too fond av
the-ourisin'?'—'sorr,' sez i, for i loved the bhoy; 'i wud waltz wid
you in that condishin through hell, an' so wud the rest av the
men!' thin i wint downshtrame in the flat an' left him my blessin'. may
the saints carry ut where ut shud go, for he was a fine upstandin' young
orficer,
"to reshume. fwhat i've said jist shows the use av three-year-olds. wud
fifty seasoned sodgers have taken lungtungpen in the dhark that way? no!
they'd know the risk av fever and chill. let alone the shootin'. two
hundher' might have done ut. but the three-year-olds know little an' care
less; an' where there's no fear, there's no danger. catch thim young, feed
thim high, an' by the honor av that great, little man bobs, behind a good
orficer 'tisn't only dacoits they'd smash wid their clo'es off—'tis
con-ti-nental ar-r-r-mies! they tuk lungtungpen nakid; an' they'd take st.
pethersburg in their dhrawers! begad, they would that!
"here's your pipe, sorr. shmoke her tinderly wid honey-dew, afther
letting the reek av the canteen plug die away. but 'tis no good, thanks to
you all the same, fillin' my pouch wid your chopped hay. canteen baccy's
like the army. it shpoils a man's taste for moilder things."
so saying, mulvaney took up his butterfly-net, and returned to
barracks.
may no ill dreams disturb my rest,
nor powers of darkness me molest.
—evening hymn.
one of the few advantages that india has over england is a great
knowability. after five years' service a man is directly or indirectly
acquainted with the two or three hundred civilians in his province, all
the messes of ten or twelve regiments and batteries, and some fifteen
hundred other people of the non-official caste, in ten years his knowledge
should be doubled, and at the end of twenty he knows, or knows something
about, every englishman in the empire, and may travel anywhere and
everywhere without paying hotel-bills.
globe-trotters who expect entertainment as a right, have, even within
my memory, blunted this open-heartedness, but none the less to-day, if you
belong to the inner circle and are neither a bear nor a black sheep, all
houses are open to you, and our small world is very, very kind and
helpful.
rickett of kamartha stayed with polder of kumaon some fifteen years
ago. he meant to stay two nights, but was knocked down by rheumatic fever,
and for six weeks disorganized polder's establishment, stopped polder's
work, and nearly died in polder's bedroom. polder behaves as though he had
been placed under eternal obligation by rickett, and yearly sends the
little ricketts a box of presents and toys. it is the same everywhere. the
men who do not take the trouble to conceal from you their opinion that you
are an incompetent ass, and the women who blacken your character and
misunderstand your wife's amusements, will work themselves to the bone in
your behalf if you fall sick or into serious trouble,
heatherlegh, the doctor, kept, in addition to his regular practice, a
hospital on his private account—an arrangement of loose boxes for
incurables, his friend called it—but it was really a sort of
fitting-up shed for craft that had been damaged by stress of weather. the
weather in india is often sultry, and since the tale of bricks is always a
fixed quantity, and the only liberty allowed is permission to work
overtime and get no thanks, men occasionally break down and become as
mixed as the metaphors in this sentence.
heatherlegh is the dearest doctor that ever was, and his invariable
prescription to all his patients is, "lie low, go slow, and keep cool." he
says that more men are killed by overwork than the importance of this
world justifies. he maintains that overwork slew pansay, who died under
his hands about three years ago. he has, of course, the right to speak
authoritatively, and he laughs at my theory that there was a crack in
pansay's head and a little bit of the dark world came through and pressed
him to death. "pansay went off the handle," says heatherlegh, "after the
stimulus of long leave at home. he may or he may not have behaved like a
blackguard to mrs. keith-wessington. my notion is that the work of the
katabundi settlement ran him off his legs, and that he took to brooding
and making much of an ordinary p. & o. flirtation. he certainly was
engaged to miss mannering, and she certainly broke off the engagement.
then he took a feverish chill and all that nonsense about ghosts
developed. overwork started his illness, kept it alight, and killed him,
poor devil. write him off to the system—one man to take the work of
two and a half men."
i do not believe this. i used to sit up with pansay sometimes when
heatherlegh was called out to patients, and i happened to be within claim.
the man would make me most unhappy by describing in a low, even voice, the
procession that was always passing at the bottom of his bed. he had a sick
man's command of language. when he recovered i suggested that he should
write out the whole affair from beginning to end, knowing that ink might
assist him to ease his mind. when little boys have learned a new bad word
they are never happy till they have chalked it up on a door. and this also
is literature.
he was in a high fever while he was writing, and the blood-and-thunder
magazine diction he adopted did not calm him. two months afterward he was
reported fit for duty, but, in spite of the fact that he was urgently
needed to help an undermanned commission stagger through a deficit, he
preferred to die; vowing at the last that he was hag-ridden. i got his
manuscript before he died, and this is his version of the affair, dated
my doctor tells me that i need rest and change of air. it is not
improbable that i shall get both ere long—rest that neither the
red-coated messenger nor the midday gun can break, and change of air far
beyond that which any homeward-bound steamer can give me. in the meantime
i am resolved to stay where i am; and, in flat defiance of my doctor's
orders, to take all the world into my confidence. you shall learn for
yourselves the precise nature of my malady; and shall, too, judge for
yourselves whether any man born of woman on this weary earth was ever so
tormented as i.
speaking now as a condemned criminal might speak ere the drop-bolts are
drawn, my story, wild and hideously improbable as it may appear, demands
at least attention. that it will ever receive credence i utterly
disbelieve. two months ago i should have scouted as mad or drunk the man
who had dared tell me the like. two months ago i was the happiest man in
india. to-day, from peshawur to the sea, there is no one more wretched. my
doctor and i are the only two who know this. his explanation is, that my
brain, digestion, and eyesight are all slightly affected; giving rise to
my frequent and persistent "delusions." delusions, indeed! i call him a
fool; but he attends me still with the same unwearied smile, the same
bland professional manner, the same neatly trimmed red whiskers, till i
begin to suspect that i am an ungrateful, evil-tempered invalid. but you
shall judge for yourselves.
three years ago it was my fortune—my great misfortune—to
sail from gravesend to bombay, on return from long leave, with one agnes
keith-wessington, wife of an officer on the bombay side. it does not in
the least concern you to know what manner of woman she was. be content
with the knowledge that, ere the voyage had ended, both she and i were
desperately and unreasoningly in love with one another. heaven knows that
i can make the admission now without one particle of vanity. in matters of
this sort there is always one who gives and another who accepts. from the
first day of our ill-omened attachment, i was conscious that agnes's
passion was a stronger, a more dominant, and—if i may use the
expression—a purer sentiment than mine. whether she recognized the
fact then, i do not know. afterward it was bitterly plain to both of
as.
arrived at bombay in the spring of the year, we went our respective
ways, to meet no more for the next three or four months, when my leave and
her love took us both to simla. there we spent the season together; and
there my fire of straw burned itself out to a pitiful end with the closing
year. i attempt no excuse. i make no apology. mrs. wessington had given up
much for my sake, and was prepared to give up all. from my own lips, in
august, , she learned that i was sick of her presence, tired of her
company, and weary of the sound of her voice. ninety-nine women out of a
hundred would have wearied of me as i wearied of them; seventy-five of
that number would have promptly avenged themselves by active and obtrusive
flirtation with other men. mrs. wessington was the hundredth. on her
neither my openly expressed aversion nor the cutting brutalities with
which i garnished our interviews had the least effect.
"jack, darling!" was her one eternal cuckoo cry: "i'm sure it's all a
mistake—a hideous mistake; and we'll be good friends again some day.
please forgive me, jack, dear."
i was the offender, and i knew it. that knowledge transformed my pity
into passive endurance, and, eventually, into blind hate—the same
instinct, i suppose, which prompts a man to savagely stamp on the spider
he has but half killed. and with this hate in my bosom the season of 
came to an end.
next year we met again at simla—she with her monotonous face and
timid attempts at reconciliation, and i with loathing of her in every
fibre of my frame. several times i could not avoid meeting her alone; and
on each occasion her words were identically the same. still the
unreasoning wail that it was all a "mistake"; and still the hope of
eventually "making friends." i might have seen had i cared to look, that
that hope only was keeping her alive. she grew more wan and thin month by
month. you will agree with me, at least, that such conduct would have
driven any one to despair. it was uncalled for; childish; unwomanly. i
maintain that she was much to blame. and again, sometimes, in the black,
fever-stricken night-watches, i have begun to think that i might have been
a little kinder to her. but that really is a "delusion." i could
not have continued pretending to love her when i didn't, could i? it would
have been unfair to us both.
last year we met again—on the same terms as before. the same
weary appeals, and the same curt answers from my lips. at least i would
make her see how wholly wrong and hopeless were her attempts at resuming
the old relationship. as the season wore on, we fell apart—that is
to say, she found it difficult to meet me, for i had other and more
absorbing interests to attend to. when i think it over quietly in my
sick-room, the season of  seems a confused nightmare wherein light and
shade were fantastically intermingled—my courtship of little kitty
mannering; my hopes, doubts, and fears; our long rides together; my
trembling avowal of attachment; her reply; and now and again a vision of a
white face flitting by in the 'rickshaw with the black and white liveries
i once watched for so earnestly; the wave of mrs. wessington's gloved
hand; and, when she met me alone, which was but seldom, the irksome
monotony of her appeal. i loved kitty mannering; honestly, heartily loved
her, and with my love for her grew my hatred for agnes. in august kitty
and i were engaged. the next day i met those accursed "magpie"
jhampanies at the back of jakko, and, moved by some passing
sentiment of pity, stopped to tell mrs. wessington everything. she knew it
already.
"so i hear you're engaged, jack dear." then, without a moment's
pause:—"i'm sure it's all a mistake—a hideous mistake. we
shall be as good friends some day, jack, as we ever were."
my answer might have made even a man wince. it cut the dying woman
before me like the blow of a whip. "please forgive me, jack; i didn't mean
to make you angry; but it's true, it's true!"
and mrs. wessington broke down completely. i turned away and left her
to finish her journey in peace, feeling, but only for a moment or two,
that i had been an unutterably mean hound. i looked back, and saw that she
had turned her 'rickshaw with the idea, i suppose, of overtaking me.
the scene and its surroundings were photographed on my memory. the
rain-swept sky (we were at the end of the wet weather), the sodden, dingy
pines, the muddy road, and the black powder-riven cliffs formed a gloomy
background against which the black and white liveries of the
jhampanies, the yellow-paneled 'rickshaw and mrs. wessington's
down-bowed golden head stood out clearly. she was holding her handkerchief
in her left hand and was leaning back exhausted against the 'rickshaw
cushions. i turned my horse up a bypath near the sanjowlie reservoir and
literally ran away. once i fancied i heard a faint call of "jack!" this
may have been imagination. i never stopped to verify it. ten minutes later
i came across kitty on horseback; and, in the delight of a long ride with
her, forgot all about the interview.
a week later mrs. wessington died, and the inexpressible burden of her
existence was removed from my life. i went plainsward perfectly happy.
before three months were over i had forgotten all about her, except that
at times the discovery of some of her old letters reminded me unpleasantly
of our bygone relationship. by january i had disinterred what was left of
our correspondence from among my scattered belongings and had burned it.
at the beginning of april of this year, , i was at
simla—semi-deserted simla—once more, and was deep in lover's
talks and walks with kitty. it was decided that we should be married at
the end of june. you will understand, therefore, that, loving kitty as i
did, i am not saying too much when i pronounce myself to have been, at
that time, the happiest man in india.
fourteen delightful days passed almost before i noticed their flight.
then, aroused to the sense of what was proper among mortals circumstanced
as we were, i pointed out to kitty that an engagement ring was the outward
and visible sign of her dignity as an engaged girl; and that she must
forthwith come to hamilton's to be measured for one. up to that moment, i
give you my word, we had completely forgotten so trivial a matter. to
hamilton's we accordingly went on the th of april, . remember
that—whatever my doctor may say to the contrary—i was then in
perfect health, enjoying a well-balanced mind and an absolutely
tranquil spirit. kitty and i entered hamilton's shop together, and there,
regardless of the order of affairs, i measured kitty for the ring in the
presence of the amused assistant. the ring was a sapphire with two
diamonds. we then rode out down the slope that leads to the combermere
bridge and peliti's shop.
while my waler was cautiously feeling his way over the loose shale, and
kitty was laughing and chattering at my side—while all simla, that
is to say as much of it as had then come from the plains, was grouped
round the reading-room and peliti's veranda,—i was aware that some
one, apparently at a vast distance, was calling me by my christian name.
it struck me that i had heard the voice before, but when and where i could
not at once determine. in the short space it took to cover the road
between the path from hamilton's shop and the first plank of the
combermere bridge i had thought over half a dozen people who might have
committed such a solecism, and had eventually decided that it must have
been singing in my ears. immediately opposite peliti's shop my eye was
arrested by the sight of four jhampanies in "magpie" livery,
pulling a yellow-paneled, cheap, bazar 'rickshaw. in a moment my mind flew
back to the previous season and mrs. wessington with a sense of irritation
and disgust. was it not enough that the woman was dead and done with,
without her black and white servitors reappearing to spoil the day's
happiness? whoever employed them now i thought i would call upon, and ask
as a personal favor to change her jhampanies' livery. i would hire
the men myself, and, if necessary, buy their coats from off their backs.
it is impossible to say here what a flood of undesirable memories their
presence evoked.
"kitty," i cried, "there are poor mrs. wessington's jhampanies
turned up again! i wonder who has them now?"
kitty had known mrs. wessington slightly last season, and had always
been interested in the sickly woman.
"what? where?" she asked. "i can't see them anywhere."
even as she spoke, her horse, swerving from a laden mule, threw himself
directly in front of the advancing 'rickshaw. i had scarcely time to utter
a word of warning when, to my unutterable horror, horse and rider passed
through men and carriage as if they had been thin air.
"what's the matter?" cried kitty; "what made you call out so foolishly,
jack? if i am engaged i don't want all creation to know about it.
there was lots of space between the mule and the veranda; and, if you
think i can't ride—there!"
whereupon wilful kitty set off, her dainty little head in the air, at a
hand-gallop in the direction of the band-stand; fully expecting, as she
herself afterward told me, that i should follow her. what was the matter?
nothing indeed. either that i was mad or drunk, or that simla was haunted
with devils. i reined in my impatient cob, and turned round. the 'rickshaw
had turned too, and now stood immediately facing me, near the left railing
of the combermere bridge.
"jack! jack, darling!" (there was no mistake about the words this time:
they rang through my brain as if they had been shouted in my ear.) "it's
some hideous mistake, i'm sure. please forgive me, jack, and let's
be friends again."
the 'rickshaw-hood had fallen back, and inside, as i hope and pray
daily for the death i dread by night, sat mrs. keith-wessington,
handkerchief in hand, and golden head bowed on her breast,
how long i stared motionless i do not know. finally, i was aroused by
my syce taking the waler's bridle and asking whether i was ill. from the
horrible to the commonplace is but a step. i tumbled off my horse and
dashed, half fainting, into peliti's for a glass of cherry-brandy. there
two or three couples were gathered round the coffee-tables discussing the
gossip of the day. their trivialities were more comforting to me just then
than the consolations of religion could have been. i plunged into the
midst of the conversation at once; chatted, laughed, and jested with a
face (when i caught a glimpse of it in a mirror) as white and drawn as
that of a corpse. three or four men noticed my condition; and, evidently
setting it down to the results of over-many pegs, charitably endeavored to
draw me apart from the rest of the loungers. but i refused to be led away,
i wanted the company of my kind—as a child rushes into the midst of
the dinner-party after a fright in the dark. i must have talked for about
ten minutes or so, though it seemed an eternity to me, when i heard
kitty's clear voice outside inquiring for me. in another minute she had
entered the shop, prepared to roundly upbraid me for failing so signally
in my duties. something in my face stopped her.
"why, jack," she cried, "what have you been doing? what
has happened? are you ill?" thus driven into a direct lie, i said
that the sun had been a little too much for me. it was close upon five
o'clock of a cloudy april afternoon, and the sun had been hidden all day.
i saw my mistake as soon as the words were out of my mouth: attempted to
recover it; blundered hopelessly and followed kitty in a regal rage, out
of doors, amid the smiles of my acquaintances. i made some excuse (i have
forgotten what) on the score of my feeling faint; and cantered away to my
hotel, leaving kitty to finish the ride by herself.
in my room i sat down and tried calmly to reason out the matter. here
was i, theobald jack pansay, a well-educated bengal civilian in the year
of grace , presumably sane, certainly healthy, driven in terror from
my sweetheart's side by the apparition of a woman who had been dead and
buried eight months ago. these were facts that i could not blink. nothing
was further from my thought than any memory of mrs. wessington when kitty
and i left hamilton's shop. nothing was more utterly commonplace than the
stretch of wall opposite peliti's. it was broad daylight. the road was
full of people; and yet here, look you, in defiance of every law of
probability, in direct outrage of nature's ordinance, there had appeared
to me a face from the grave.
kitty's arab had gone through the 'rickshaw: so that my first
hope that some woman marvelously like mrs. wessington had hired the
carriage and the coolies with their old livery was lost. again and again i
went round this treadmill of thought; and again and again gave up baffled
and in despair. the voice was as inexplicable as the apparition, i had
originally some wild notion of confiding it all to kitty; of begging her
to marry me at once; and in her arms defying the ghostly occupant of the
'rickshaw. "after all," i argued, "the presence of the 'rickshaw is in
itself enough to prove the existence of a spectral illusion. one may see
ghosts of men and women, but surely never of coolies and carriages. the
whole thing is absurd. fancy the ghost of a hillman!"
next morning i sent a penitent note to kitty, imploring her to overlook
my strange conduct of the previous afternoon. my divinity was still very
wroth, and a personal apology was necessary. i explained, with a fluency
born of nightlong pondering over a falsehood, that i had been attacked
with a sudden palpitation of the heart—the result of indigestion.
this eminently practical solution had its effect; and kitty and i rode out
that afternoon with the shadow of my first lie dividing us.
nothing would please her save a canter round jakko. with my nerves
still unstrung from the previous night i feebly protested against the
notion, suggesting observatory hill, jutogh, the boileaugunge
road—anything rather than the jakko round. kitty was angry and a
little hurt: so i yielded from fear of provoking further misunderstanding,
and we set out together toward chota simla. we walked a greater part of
the way, and, according to our custom, cantered from a mile or so below
the convent to the stretch of level road by the sanjowlie reservoir. the
wretched horses appeared to fly, and my heart beat quicker and quicker as
we neared the crest of the ascent. my mind had been full of mrs.
wessington all the afternoon; and every inch of the jakko road bore
witness to our old-time walks and talks. the bowlders were full of it; the
pines sang it aloud overhead; the rain-fed torrents giggled and chuckled
unseen over the shameful story; and the wind in my ears chanted the
iniquity aloud.
as a fitting climax, in the middle of the level men call the ladies'
mile the horror was awaiting me. no other 'rickshaw was in
sight—only the four black and white jhampanies, the
yellow-paneled carriage, and the golden head of the woman within—all
apparently just as i had left them eight months and one fortnight ago! for
an instant i fancied that kitty must see what i saw—we were
so marvelously sympathetic in all things. her next words undeceived
me—"not a soul in sight! come along, jack, and i'll race you to the
reservoir buildings!" her wiry little arab was off like a bird, my waler
following close behind, and in this order we dashed under the cliffs. half
a minute brought us within fifty yards of the 'rickshaw, i pulled my waler
and fell back a little. the 'rickshaw was directly in the middle of the
road; and once more the arab passed through it, my horse following. "jack!
jack dear! please forgive me," rang with a wail in my ears, and,
after an interval:—"it's all a mistake, a hideous mistake!"
i spurred my horse like a man possessed. when i turned my head at the
reservoir works, the black and white liveries were still
waiting—patiently waiting—under the grey hillside, and the
wind brought me a mocking echo of the words i had just heard. kitty
bantered me a good deal on my silence throughout the remainder of the
ride, i had been talking up till then wildly and at random. to save my
life i could not speak afterward naturally, and from sanjowlie to the
church wisely held my tongue.
i was to dine with the mannerings that night, and had barely time to
canter home to dress. on the road to elysium hill i overheard two men
talking together in the dusk.—"it's a curious thing," said one, "how
completely all trace of it disappeared. you know my wife was insanely fond
of the woman ('never could see anything in her myself), and wanted me to
pick up her old 'rickshaw and coolies if they were to be got for love or
money. morbid sort of fancy i call it; but i've got to do what the
memsahib tells me. would you believe that the man she hired it from
tells me that all four of the men—they were brothers—died of
cholera on the way to hard-war, poor devils; and the 'rickshaw has been
broken up by the man himself. 'told me he never used a dead
memsahib's 'rickshaw. 'spoiled his luck. queer notion, wasn't it?
fancy poor little mrs. wessington spoiling any one's luck except her own!"
i laughed aloud at this point; and my laugh jarred on me as i uttered it.
so there were ghosts of 'rickshaws after all, and ghostly
employments in the other world! how much did mrs. wessington give her men?
what were their hours? where did they go?
and for visible answer to my last question i saw the infernal thing
blocking my path in the twilight. the dead travel fast, and by short cuts
unknown to ordinary coolies. i laughed aloud a second time and checked my
laughter suddenly, for i was afraid i was going mad. mad to a certain
extent i must have been, for i recollect that i reined in my horse at the
head of the 'rickshaw, and politely wished mrs. wessington "good-evening,"
her answer was one i knew only too well. i listened to the end; and
replied that i had heard it all before, but should be delighted if she had
anything further to say. some malignant devil stronger than i must have
entered into me that evening, for i have a dim recollection of talking the
commonplaces of the day for five minutes to the thing in front of me.
"mad as a hatter, poor devil—or drunk. max, try and get him to
come home."
surely that was not mrs. wessington's voice! the two men had
overheard me speaking to the empty air, and had returned to look after me.
they were very kind and considerate, and from their words evidently
gathered that i was extremely drunk, i thanked them confusedly and
cantered away to my hotel, there changed, and arrived at the mannerings'
ten minutes late. i pleaded the darkness of the night as an excuse; was
rebuked by kitty for my unlover-like tardiness; and sat down.
the conversation had already become general; and under cover of it, i
was addressing some tender small talk to my sweetheart when i was aware
that at the further end of the table a short red-whiskered man was
describing, with much embroidery, his encounter with a mad unknown that
evening.
a few sentences convinced me that he was repeating the incident of half
an hour ago. in the middle of the story he looked round for applause, as
professional story-tellers do, caught my eye, and straightway collapsed.
there was a moment's awkward silence, and the red-whiskered man muttered
something to the effect that he had "forgotten the rest," thereby
sacrificing a reputation as a good story-teller which he had built up for
six seasons past. i blessed him from the bottom of my heart,
and—went on with my fish.
in the fulness of time that dinner came to an end; and with genuine
regret i tore myself away from kitty—as certain as i was of my own
existence that it would be waiting for me outside the door. the
red-whiskered man, who had been introduced to me as doctor heatherlegh of
simla, volunteered to bear me company as far as our roads lay together. i
accepted his offer with gratitude.
my instinct had not deceived me. it lay in readiness in the mall, and,
in what seemed devilish mockery of our ways, with a lighted headlamp. the
red-whiskered man went to the point at once, in a manner that showed he
had been thinking over it all dinner time.
"i say, pansay, what the deuce was the matter with you this evening on
the elysium road?" the suddenness of the question wrenched an answer from
me before i was aware.
"that!" said i, pointing to it.
"that may be either d.t. or eyes for aught i know. now you don't
liquor. i saw as much at dinner, so it can't be d.t. there's
nothing whatever where you're pointing, though you're sweating and
trembling with fright like a scared pony. therefore, i conclude that it's
eyes. and i ought to understand all about them. come along home with me.
i'm on the blessington lower road."
to my intense delight the 'rickshaw instead of waiting for us kept
about twenty yards ahead—and this, too, whether we walked, trotted,
or cantered. in the course of that long night ride i had told my companion
almost as much as i have told you here.
"well, you've spoiled one of the best tales i've ever laid tongue to,"
said he, "but i'll forgive you for the sake of what you've gone through.
now come home and do what i tell you; and when i've cured you, young man,
let this be a lesson to you to steer clear of women and indigestible food
till the day of your death."
the 'rickshaw kept steady in front; and my red-whiskered friend seemed
to derive great pleasure from my account of its exact whereabouts.
"eyes, pansay—all eyes, brain, and stomach. and the greatest of
these three is stomach. you've too much conceited brain, too little
stomach, and thoroughly unhealthy eyes. get your stomach straight and the
rest follows. and all that's french for a liver pill. i'll take sole
medical charge of you from this hour! for you're too interesting a
phenomenon to be passed over."
by this time we were deep in the shadow of the blessington lower road
and the 'rickshaw came to a dead stop under a pine-clad, overhanging shale
cliff. instinctively i halted too, giving my reason. heatherlegh rapped
out an oath.
"now, if you think i'm going to spend a cold night on the hillside for
the sake of a stomach-cum-brain-cum-eye illusion ... lord,
ha' mercy! what's that?"
there was a muffled report, a blinding smother of dust just in front of
us, a crack, the noise of rent boughs, and about ten yards of the
cliff-side—pines, undergrowth, and all—slid down into the road
below, completely blocking it up. the uprooted trees swayed and tottered
for a moment like drunken giants in the gloom, and then fell prone among
their fellows with a thunderous crash. our two horses stood motionless and
sweating with fear. as soon as the rattle of falling earth and stone had
subsided, my companion muttered:—"man, if we'd gone forward we
should have been ten feet deep in our graves by now. 'there are more
things in heaven and earth.' ... come home, pansay, and thank god. i want
a peg badly."
we retraced our way over the church ridge, and i arrived at dr.
heatherlegh's house shortly after midnight.
his attempts toward my cure commenced almost immediately, and for a
week i never left his sight. many a time in the course of that week did i
bless the good-fortune which had thrown me in contact with simla's best
and kindest doctor. day by day my spirits grew lighter and more equable.
day by day, too, i became more and more inclined to fall in with
heatherlegh's "spectral illusion" theory, implicating eyes, brain, and
stomach. i wrote to kitty, telling her that a slight sprain caused by a
fall from my horse kept me indoors for a few days; and that i should be
recovered before she had time to regret my absence.
heatherlegh's treatment was simple to a degree. it consisted of liver
pills, cold-water baths, and strong exercise, taken in the dusk or at
early dawn—for, as he sagely observed:—"a man with a sprained
ankle doesn't walk a dozen miles a day, and your young woman might be
wondering if she saw you."
at the end of the week, after much examination of pupil and pulse, and
strict injunctions as to diet and pedestrianism, heatherlegh dismissed me
as brusquely as he had taken charge of me. here is his parting
benediction:—"man, i certify to your mental cure, and that's as much
as to say i've cured most of your bodily ailments. now, get your traps out
of this as soon as you can; and be off to make love to miss kitty."
i was endeavoring to express my thanks for his kindness. he cut me
short.
"don't think i did this because i like you. i gather that you've
behaved like a blackguard all through. but, all the same, you're a
phenomenon, and as queer a phenomenon as you are a blackguard.
no!"—checking me a second time—"not a rupee please. go out and
see if you can find the eyes-brain-and-stomach business again. i'll give
you a lakh for each time you see it."
half an hour later i was in the mannerings' drawing-room with
kitty—drunk with the intoxication of present happiness and the
foreknowledge that i should never more be troubled with its hideous
presence. strong in the sense of my new-found security, i proposed a ride
at once; and, by preference, a canter round jakko.
never had i felt so well, so overladen with vitality and mere animal
spirits, as i did on the afternoon of the th of april. kitty was
delighted at the change in my appearance, and complimented me on it in her
delightfully frank and outspoken manner. we left the mannerings' house
together, laughing and talking, and cantered along the chota simla road as
of old.
i was in haste to reach the sanjowlie reservoir and there make my
assurance doubly sure. the horses did their best, but seemed all too slow
to my impatient mind, kitty was astonished at my boisterousness. "why,
jack!" she cried at last, "you are behaving like a child, what are you
doing?"
we were just below the convent, and from sheer wantonness i was making
my waler plunge and curvet across the road as i tickled it with the loop
of my riding-whip.
"doing?" i answered; "nothing, dear. that's just it. if you'd been
doing nothing for a week except lie up, you'd be as riotous as i.
"'singing and murmuring in your feastful mirth,
joying to feel yourself alive;
lord over nature, lord of the visible earth,
lord of the senses five.'"
my quotation was hardly out of my lips before we had rounded the corner
above the convent; and a few yards further on could see across to
sanjowlie. in the centre of the level road stood the black and white
liveries, the yellow-paneled 'rickshaw, and mrs. keith-wessington. i
pulled up, looked, rubbed my eyes, and, i believe, must have said
something. the next thing i knew was that i was lying face downward on the
road, with kitty kneeling above me in tears.
"has it gone, child!" i gasped. kitty only wept more bitterly.
"has what gone, jack dear? what does it all mean? there must be a
mistake somewhere, jack. a hideous mistake." her last words brought me to
my feet—mad—raving for the time being.
"yes, there is a mistake somewhere," i repeated, "a hideous
mistake. come and look at it."
i have an indistinct idea that i dragged kitty by the wrist along the
road up to where it stood, and implored her for pity's sake to speak to
it; to tell it that we were betrothed; that neither death nor hell could
break the tie between us: and kitty only knows how much more to the same
effect. now and again i appealed passionately to the terror in the
'rickshaw to bear witness to all i had said, and to release me from a
torture that was killing me. as i talked i suppose i must have told kitty
of my old relations with mrs. wessington, for i saw her listen intently
with white face and blazing eyes.
"thank you, mr. pansay," she said, "that's quite enough. syce
ghora lao."
the syces, impassive as orientals always are, had come up with the
recaptured horses; and as kitty sprang into her saddle i caught hold of
the bridle, entreating her to hear me out and forgive. my answer was the
cut of her riding-whip across my face from mouth to eye, and a word or two
of farewell that even now i cannot write down. so i judged, and judged
rightly, that kitty knew all; and i staggered back to the side of the
'rickshaw. my face was cut and bleeding, and the blow of the riding-whip
had raised a livid blue wheal on it. i had no self-respect. just then,
heatherlegh, who must have been following kitty and me at a distance,
cantered up.
"doctor," i said, pointing to my face, "here's miss mannering's
signature to my order of dismissal and ... i'll thank you for that lakh as
soon as convenient."
heatherlegh's face, even in my abject misery, moved me to laughter.
"i'll stake my professional reputation"—he began. "don't be a
fool," i whispered. "i've lost my life's happiness and you'd better take
me home."
as i spoke the 'rickshaw was gone. then i lost all knowledge of what
was passing. the crest of jakko seemed to heave and roll like the crest of
a cloud and fall in upon me.
seven days later (on the th of may, that is to say) i was aware that i
was lying in heatherlegh's room as weak as a little child. heatherlegh was
watching me intently from behind the papers on his writing-table. his
first words were not encouraging; but i was too far spent to be much moved
by them.
"here's miss kitty has sent back your letters. you corresponded a good
deal, you young people. here's a packet that looks like a ring, and a
cheerful sort of a note from mannering papa, which i've taken the liberty
of reading and burning. the old gentleman's not pleased with you."
"and kitty?" i asked, dully.
"rather more drawn than her father from what she says. by the same
token you must have been letting out any number of queer reminiscences
just before i met you. 'says that a man who would have behaved to a woman
as you did to mrs. wessington ought to kill himself out of sheer pity for
his kind. she's a hotheaded little virago, your mash. 'will have it too
that you were suffering from d. t. when that row on the jakko road turned
up, 'says she'll die before she ever speaks to you again."
i groaned and turned over on the other side.
"now you've got your choice, my friend. this engagement has to be
broken off; and the mannerings don't want to be too hard on you. was it
broken through d, t. or epileptic fits? sorry i can't offer you a better
exchange unless you'd prefer hereditary insanity. say the word and i'll
tell 'em it's fits. all simla knows about that scene on the ladies' mile.
come! i'll give you five minutes to think over it."
during those five minutes i believe that i explored thoroughly the
lowest circles of the inferno which it is permitted man to tread on earth.
and at the same time i myself was watching myself faltering through the
dark labyrinths of doubt, misery, and utter despair. i wondered, as
heatherlegh in his chair might have wondered, which dreadful alternative i
should adopt. presently i heard myself answering in a voice that i hardly
recognized,—
"they're confoundedly particular about morality in these parts. give
'em fits, heatherlegh, and my love. now let me sleep a bit longer."
then my two selves joined, and it was only i (half crazed, devil-driven
i) that tossed in my bed, tracing step by step the history of the past
month.
"but i am in simla," i kept repeating to myself. "i, jack pansay, am in
simla, and there are no ghosts here. it's unreasonable of that woman to
pretend there are. why couldn't agnes have left me alone? i never did her
any harm. it might just as well have been me as agnes. only i'd never have
come back on purpose to kill her. why can't i be left
alone—left alone and happy?"
it was high noon when i first awoke: and the sun was low in the sky
before i slept—slept as the tortured criminal sleeps on his rack,
too worn to feel further pain.
next day i could not leave my bed. heatherlegh told me in the morning
that he had received an answer from mr. mannering, and that, thanks to his
(heatherlegh's) friendly offices, the story of my affliction had traveled
through the length and breadth of simla, where i was on all sides much
pitied.
"and that's rather more than you deserve," he concluded, pleasantly,
"though the lord knows you've been going through a pretty severe mill.
never mind; we'll cure you yet, you perverse phenomenon."
i declined firmly to be cured, "you've been much too good to me
already, old man," said i; "but i don't think i need trouble you
further."
in my heart i knew that nothing heatherlegh could do would lighten the
burden that had been laid upon me.
with that knowledge came also a sense of hopeless, impotent rebellion
against the unreasonableness of it all. there were scores of men no better
than i whose punishments had at least been reserved for another world; and
i felt that it was bitterly, cruelly unfair that i alone should have been
singled out for so hideous a fate. this mood would in time give place to
another where it seemed that the 'rickshaw and i were the only realities
in a world of shadows; that kitty was a ghost; that mannering,
heatherlegh, and all the other men and women i knew were all ghosts; and
the great, grey hills themselves but vain shadows devised to torture me.
from mood to mood i tossed backward and forward for seven weary days; my
body growing daily stronger and stronger, until the bedroom looking-glass
told me that i had returned to everyday life, and was as other men once
more. curiously enough my face showed no signs of the struggle i had gone
through. it was pale indeed, but as expressionless and commonplace as
ever. i had expected some permanent alteration—visible evidence of
the disease that was eating me away. i found nothing.
on the th of may i left heatherlegh's house at eleven o'clock in the
morning; and the instinct of the bachelor drove me to the club. there i
found that every man knew my story as told by heatherlegh, and was, in
clumsy fashion, abnormally kind and attentive. nevertheless i recognized
that for the rest of my natural life i should be among but not of my
fellows; and i envied very bitterly indeed the laughing coolies on the
mall below. i lunched at the club, and at four o'clock wandered aimlessly
down the mall in the vague hope of meeting kitty. close to the band-stand
the black and white liveries joined me; and i heard mrs. wessington's old
appeal at my side. i had been expecting this ever since i came out; and
was only surprised at her delay. the phantom 'rickshaw and i went side by
side along the chota simla road in silence. close to the bazar, kitty and
a man on horseback overtook and passed us. for any sign she gave i might
have been a dog in the road. she did not even pay me the compliment of
quickening her pace; though the rainy afternoon had served for an
excuse.
so kitty and her companion, and i and my ghostly light-o'-love, crept
round jakko in couples. the road was streaming with water; the pines
dripped like roof-pipes on the rocks below, and the air was full of fine,
driving rain. two or three times i found myself saying to myself almost
aloud: "i'm jack pansay on leave at simla—at simla! everyday,
ordinary simla. i mustn't forget that—i mustn't forget that." then i
would try to recollect some of the gossip i had heard at the club: the
prices of so-and-so's horses—anything, in fact, that related to the
workaday anglo-indian world i knew so well. i even repeated the
multiplication-table rapidly to myself, to make quite sure that i was not
taking leave of my senses. it gave me much comfort; and must have
prevented my hearing mrs. wessington for a time.
once more i wearily climbed the convent slope and entered the level
road. here kitty and the man started off at a canter, and i was left alone
with mrs. wessington. "agnes," said i, "will you put back your hood and
tell me what it all means?" the hood dropped noiselessly, and i was face
to face with my dead and buried mistress. she was wearing the dress in
which i had last seen her alive; carried the same tiny handkerchief in her
right hand; and the same cardcase in her left. (a woman eight months dead
with a cardcase!) i had to pin myself down to the multiplication-table,
and to set both hands on the stone parapet of the road, to assure myself
that that at least was real.
"agnes," i repeated, "for pity's sake tell me what it all means." mrs.
wessington leaned forward, with that odd, quick turn of the head i used to
know so well, and spoke.
if my story had not already so madly overleaped the bounds of all human
belief i should apologize to you now. as i know that no one—no, not
even kitty, for whom it is written as some sort of justification of my
conduct—will believe me, i will go on. mrs. wessington spoke and i
walked with her from the sanjowlie road to the turning below the
commander-in-chief's house as i might walk by the side of any living
woman's 'rickshaw, deep in conversation. the second and most tormenting of
my moods of sickness had suddenly laid hold upon me, and like the prince
in tennyson's poem, "i seemed to move amid a world of ghosts." there had
been a garden-party at the commander-in-chief's, and we two joined the
crowd of homeward-bound folk. as i saw them then it seemed that
they were the shadows—impalpable, fantastic
shadows—that divided for mrs. wessington's 'rickshaw to pass
through. what we said during the course of that weird interview i
cannot—indeed, i dare not—tell. heatherlegh's comment would
have been a short laugh and a remark that i had been "mashing a
brain-eye-and-stomach chimera." it was a ghastly and yet in some
indefinable way a marvelously dear experience. could it be possible, i
wondered, that i was in this life to woo a second time the woman i had
killed by my own neglect and cruelty?
i met kitty on the homeward road—a shadow among shadows.
if i were to describe all the incidents of the next fortnight in their
order, my story would never come to an end; and your patience would be
exhausted. morning after morning and evening after evening the ghostly
'rickshaw and i used to wander through simla together. wherever i went
there the four black and white liveries followed me and bore me company to
and from my hotel. at the theatre i found them amid the crowd of yelling
jhampanies; outside the club veranda, after a long evening of
whist; at the birthday ball, waiting patiently for my reappearance; and in
broad daylight when i went calling. save that it cast no shadow, the
'rickshaw was in every respect as real to look upon as one of wood and
iron. more than once, indeed, i have had to check myself from warning some
hard-riding friend against cantering over it. more than once i have walked
down the mall deep in conversation with mrs. wessington to the unspeakable
amazement of the passers-by.
before i had been out and about a week i learned that the "fit" theory
had been discarded in favor of insanity. however, i made no change in my
mode of life. i called, rode, and dined out as freely as ever. i had a
passion for the society of my kind which i had never felt before; i
hungered to be among the realities of life; and at the same time i felt
vaguely unhappy when i had been separated too long from my ghostly
companion. it would be almost impossible to describe my varying moods from
the th of may up to to-day.
the presence of the 'rickshaw filled me by turns with horror, blind
fear, a dim sort of pleasure, and utter despair. i dared not leave simla;
and i knew that my stay there was killing me. i knew, moreover, that it
was my destiny to die slowly and a little every day. my only anxiety was
to get the penance over as quietly as might be. alternately i hungered for
a sight of kitty and watched her outrageous flirtations with my
successor—to speak more accurately, my successors—with amused
interest. she was as much out of my life as i was out of hers. by day i
wandered with mrs. wessington almost content. by night i implored heaven
to let me return to the world as i used to know it. above all these
varying moods lay the sensation of dull, numbing wonder that the seen and
the unseen should mingle so strangely on this earth to hound one poor soul
to its grave.
august .—heatherlegh has been indefatigable in his
attendance on me; and only yesterday told me that i ought to send in an
application for sick leave. an application to escape the company of a
phantom! a request that the government would graciously permit me to get
rid of five ghosts and an airy 'rickshaw by going to england!
heatherlegh's proposition moved me to almost hysterical laughter. i told
him that i should await the end quietly at simla; and i am sure that the
end is not far off. believe me that i dread its advent more than any word
can say; and i torture myself nightly with a thousand speculations as to
the manner of my death.
shall i die in my bed decently and as an english gentleman should die;
or, in one last walk on the mall, will my soul be wrenched from me to take
its place forever and ever by the side of that ghastly phantasm? shall i
return to my old lost allegiance in the next world, or shall i meet agnes
loathing her and bound to her side through all eternity? shall we two
hover over the scene of our lives till the end of time? as the day of my
death draws nearer, the intense horror that all living flesh feels toward
escaped spirits from beyond the grave grows more and more powerful. it is
an awful thing to go down quick among the dead with scarcely one-half of
your life completed. it is a thousand times more awful to wait as i do in
your midst, for i know not what unimaginable terror. pity me, at least on
the score of my "delusion," for i know you will never believe what i have
written here. yet as surely as ever a man was done to death by the powers
of darkness i am that man.
in justice, too, pity her. for as surely as ever woman was killed by
man, i killed mrs. wessington. and the last portion of my punishment is
even now upon me.
if your mirror be broken, look into still water; but have a
care that you do not fall in.
—hindu proverb.
next to a requited attachment, one of the most convenient things that a
young man can carry about with him at the beginning of his career, is an
unrequited attachment. it makes him feel important and business-like, and
blasè, and cynical; and whenever he has a touch of fever, or
suffers from want of exercise, he can mourn over his lost love, and be
very happy in a tender, twilight fashion,
hannasyde's affair of the heart had been a godsend to him. it was four
years old, and the girl had long since given up thinking of it. she had
married and had many cares of her own. in the beginning, she had told
hannasyde that, "while she could never be anything more than a sister to
him, she would always take the deepest interest in his welfare." this
startlingly new and original remark gave hannasyde something to think over
for two years; and his own vanity filled in the other twenty-four months.
hannasyde was quite different from phil garron, but, none the less, had
several points in common with that far too lucky man.
he kept his unrequited attachment by him as men keep a well-smoked
pipe—for comfort's sake, and because it had grown dear in the using.
it brought him happily through one simla season. hannasyde was not lovely.
there was a crudity in his manners, and a roughness in the way in which he
helped a lady on to her horse, that did not attract the other sex to him.
even if he had cast about for their favor, which he did not. he kept his
wounded heart all to himself for a while.
then trouble came to him. all who go to simla know the slope from the
telegraph to the public works office. hannasyde was loafing up the hill,
one september morning between calling hours, when a 'rickshaw came down in
a hurry, and in the 'rickshaw sat the living, breathing image of the girl
who had made him so happily unhappy. hannasyde leaned against the railings
and gasped. he wanted to run downhill after the 'rickshaw, but that was
impossible; so he went forward with most of his blood in his temples. it
was impossible, for many reasons, that the woman in the 'rickshaw could be
the girl he had known. she was, he discovered later, the wife of a man
from dindigul, or coimbatore, or some out-of-the-way place, and she had
come up to simla early in the season for the good of her health. she was
going back to dindigul, or wherever it was, at the end of the season; and
in all likelihood would never return to simla again; her proper
hill-station being ootacamund. that night hannasyde, raw and savage from
the raking up of all old feelings, took counsel with himself for one
measured hour. what he decided upon was this; and you must decide for
yourself how much genuine affection for the old love, and how much a very
natural inclination to go abroad and enjoy himself, affected the decision.
mrs. landys-haggert would never in all human likelihood cross his path
again. so whatever he did didn't much matter. she was marvelously like the
girl who "took a deep interest" and the rest of the formula. all things
considered, it would be pleasant to make the acquaintance of mrs.
landys-haggert, and for a little time—only a very little
time—to make believe that he was with alice chisane again. every one
is more or less mad on one point. hannasyde's particular monomania was his
old love, alice chisane.
he made it his business to get introduced to mrs. haggert, and the
introduction prospered. he also made it his business to see as much as he
could of that lady. when a man is in earnest as to interviews, the
facilities which simla offers are startling. there are garden-parties, and
tennis-parties, and picnics, and luncheons at annandale, and
rifle-matches, and dinners and balls; besides rides and walks, which are
matters of private arrangement. hannasyde had started with the intention
of seeing a likeness, and he ended by doing much more. he wanted to be
deceived, he meant to be deceived, and he deceived himself very
thoroughly. not only were the face and figure the face and figure of alice
chisane, but the voice and lower tones were exactly the same, and so were
the turns of speech; and the little mannerisms, that every woman has, of
gait and gesticulation, were absolutely and identically the same. the turn
of the head was the same; the tired look in the eyes at the end of a long
walk was the same; the stoop-and-wrench over the saddle to hold in a
pulling horse was the same; and once, most marvelous of all, mrs.
landys-haggert singing to herself in the next room, while hannasyde was
waiting to take her for a ride, hummed, note for note, with a throaty
quiver of the voice in the second line, "poor wandering one!" exactly as
alice chisane had hummed it for hannasyde in the dusk of an english
drawing-room. in the actual woman herself—in the soul of
her—there was not the least likeness; she and alice chisane being
cast in different moulds. but all that hannasyde wanted to know and see
and think about, was this maddening and perplexing likeness of face and
voice and manner. he was bent on making a fool of himself that way; and he
was in no sort disappointed.
open and obvious devotion from any sort of man is always pleasant to
any sort of woman; but mrs. landys-haggert, being a woman of the world,
could make nothing of hannasyde's admiration.
he would take any amount of trouble—he was a selfish man
habitually—to meet and forestall, if possible, her wishes. anything
she told him to do was law; and he was, there could be no doubting it,
fond of her company so long as she talked to him, and kept on talking
about trivialities. but when she launched into expression of her personal
views and her wrongs, those small social differences that make the spice
of simla life, hannasyde was neither pleased nor interested. he didn't
want to know anything about mrs. landys-haggert, or her experiences in the
past—she had traveled nearly all over the world, and could talk
cleverly—he wanted the likeness of alice chisane before his eyes and
her voice in his ears. anything outside that, reminding him of another
personality, jarred, and he showed that it did.
under the new post office, one evening, mrs. landys-haggert turned on
him, and spoke her mind shortly and without warning. "mr. hannasyde," said
she, "will you be good enough to explain why you have appointed yourself
my special cavalier servente? i don't understand it. but i am
perfectly certain, somehow or other, that you don't care the least little
bit in the world for me." this seems to support, by the way, the
theory that no man can act or tell lies to a woman without being found
out. hannasyde was taken off his guard. his defence never was a strong
one, because he was always thinking of himself, and he blurted out, before
he knew what he was saying, this inexpedient answer, "no more i do."
the queerness of the situation and the reply, made mrs. landys-haggert
laugh. then it all came out; and at the end of hannasyde's lucid
explanation mrs. haggert said, with the least little touch of scorn in her
voice, "so i'm to act as the lay-figure for you to hang the rags of your
tattered affections on, am i?"
hannasyde didn't see what answer was required, and he devoted himself
generally and vaguely to the praise of alice chisane, which was
unsatisfactory. now it is to be thoroughly made clear that mrs. haggert
had not the shadow of a ghost of an interest in hannasyde. only ... only
no woman likes being made love through instead of to—specially on
behalf of a musty divinity of four years' standing.
hannasyde did not see that he had made any very particular exhibition
of himself. he was glad to find a sympathetic soul in the arid wastes of
simla.
when the season ended, hannasyde went down to his own place and mrs.
haggert to hers, "it was like making love to a ghost," said hannasyde to
himself, "and it doesn't matter; and now i'll get to my work." but he
found himself thinking steadily of the haggert-chisane ghost; and he could
not be certain whether it was haggert or chisane that made up the greater
part of the pretty phantom.
he got understanding a month later.
a peculiar point of this peculiar country is the way in which a
heartless government transfers men from one end of the empire to the
other. you can never be sure of getting rid of a friend or an enemy till
he or she dies. there was a case once—but that's another story.
haggert's department ordered him up from dindigul to the frontier at
two days' notice, and he went through, losing money at every step, from
dindigul to his station. he dropped mrs. haggert at lucknow, to stay with
some friends there, to take part in a big ball at the chutter munzil, and
to come on when he had made the new home a little comfortable. lucknow was
hannasyde's station, and mrs. haggert stayed a week there. hannasyde went
to meet her. as the train came in, he discovered what he had been thinking
of for the past month. the unwisdom of his conduct also struck him. the
lucknow week, with two dances, and an unlimited quantity of rides
together, clinched matters; and hannasyde found himself pacing this circle
of thought:—he adored alice chisane, at least he had adored
her. and he admired mrs. landys-haggert because she was like alice
chisane. but mrs. landys-haggert was not in the least like alice
chisane, being a thousand times more adorable. now alice chisane
was "the bride of another," and so was mrs. landys-haggert, and a good and
honest wife too. therefore he, hannasyde, was ... here he called
himself several hard names, and wished that he had been wise in the
beginning.
whether mrs. landys-haggert saw what was going on in his mind, she
alone knows. he seemed to take an unqualified interest in everything
connected with herself, as distinguished from the alice-chisane likeness,
and he said one or two things which, if alice chisane had been still
betrothed to him, could scarcely have been excused, even on the grounds of
the likeness. but mrs. haggert turned the remarks aside, and spent a long
time in making hannasyde see what a comfort and a pleasure she had been to
him because of her strange resemblance to his old love. hannasyde groaned
in his saddle and said, "yes, indeed," and busied himself with
preparations for her departure to the frontier, feeling very small and
miserable.
the last day of her stay at lucknow came, and hannasyde saw her off at
the railway station. she was very grateful for his kindness and the
trouble he had taken, and smiled pleasantly and sympathetically as one who
knew the alice-chisane reason of that kindness. and hannasyde abused the
coolies with the luggage, and hustled the people on the platform, and
prayed that the roof might fall in and slay him.
as the train went out slowly, mrs. landys-haggert leaned out of the
window to say good-bye—"on second thoughts au revoir, mr.
hannasyde. i go home in the spring, and perhaps i may meet you in
town."
hannasyde shook hands, and said very earnestly and adoringly—"i
hope to heaven i shall never see your face again!"
and mrs. haggert understood.
and he told a tale.—chronicles of gautama
buddha.
far from the haunts of company officers who insist upon
kit-inspections, far from keen-nosed sergeants who sniff the pipe stuffed
into the bedding-roll, two miles from the tumult of the barracks, lies the
trap. it is an old dry well, shadowed by a twisted pipal tree and
fenced with high grass. here, in the years gone by, did private ortheris
establish his depôt and menagerie for such possessions, dead and
living, as could not safely be introduced to the barrack-room. here were
gathered houdin pullets, and fox-terriers of undoubted pedigree and more
than doubtful ownership, for ortheris was an inveterate poacher and
preëminent among a regiment of neat-handed dog-stealers.
never again will the long lazy evenings return wherein ortheris,
whistling softly, moved surgeon-wise among the captives of his craft at
the bottom of the well; when learoyd sat in the niche, giving sage counsel
on the management of "tykes," and mulvaney, from the crook of the
overhanging pipal, waved his enormous boots in benediction above
our heads, delighting us with tales of love and war, and strange
experiences of cities and men.
ortheris—landed at last in the "little stuff bird-shop" for which
your soul longed; learoyd—back again in the smoky, stone-ribbed
north, amid the clang of the bradford looms; mulvaney—grizzled,
tender, and very wise ulysses, sweltering on the earthwork of a central
india line—judge if i have forgotten old days in the trap!
orth'ris, as allus thinks he knaws more than other foaks, said she
wasn't a real laady, but nobbut a hewrasian. i don't gainsay as her culler
was a bit doosky like. but she was a laady. why, she rode iv a
carriage, an' good 'osses, too, an' her 'air was that oiled as you could
see your faice in it, an' she wore di'mond rings an' a goold chain, an'
silk an' satin dresses as mun 'a' cost a deal, for it isn't a cheap shop
as keeps enough o' one pattern to fit a figure like hers. her name was
mrs. desussa, an' t' waay i coom to be acquainted wi' her was along of our
colonel's laady's dog rip.
i've seen a vast o' dogs, but rip was t' prettiest picter of a cliver
fox-tarrier 'at iver i set eyes on. he could do owt you like but speeak,
an' t' colonel's laady set more store by him than if he hed been a
christian. she hed bairns of her awn, but they was i' england, and rip
seemed to get all t' coodlin' and pettin' as belonged to a bairn by good
right.
but rip were a bit on a rover, an' hed a habit o' breakin' out o'
barricks like, and trottin' round t' plaice as if he were t' cantonment
magistrate coom round inspectin'. the colonel leathers him once or twice,
but rip didn't care an' kept on gooin' his rounds, wi' his taail a-waggin'
as if he were flag-signallin' to t' world at large 'at he was "gettin' on
nicely, thank yo', and how's yo'sen?" an' then t' colonel, as was noa sort
of a hand wi' a dog, tees him oop. a real clipper of a dog, an' it's noa
wonder yon laady, mrs. desussa, should tek a fancy tiv him. theer's one o'
t' ten commandments says yo maun't cuvvet your neebor's ox nor his
jackass, but it doesn't say nowt about his tarrier dogs, an' happen thot's
t' reason why mrs. desussa cuvveted rip, tho' she went to church reg'lar
along wi' her husband who was so mich darker 'at if he hedn't such a good
coaat tiv his back yo' might ha' called him a black man and nut tell a lee
nawther. they said he addled his brass i' jute, an' he'd a rare lot on
it.
well, you seen, when they teed rip up, t' poor awd lad didn't enjoy
very good 'elth. so t' colonel's laady sends for me as 'ad a naame for
bein' knowledgeable about a dog, an' axes what's ailin' wi' him.
"why," says i, "he's getten t' mopes, an' what he wants is his libbaty
an' coompany like t' rest on us; wal happen a rat or two 'ud liven him
oop. it's low, mum," says i, "is rats, but it's t' nature of a dog; an'
soa's cuttin' round an' meetin' another dog or two an' passin' t' time o'
day, an' hevvin' a bit of a turn-up wi' him like a christian."
so she says her dog maun't niver fight an' noa christians iver
fought.
"then what's a soldier for?" says i; an' i explains to her t' contrairy
qualities of a dog, 'at, when yo' coom to think on't, is one o' t'
curusest things as is. for they larn to behave theirsens like gentlemen
born, fit for t' fost o' coompany—they tell me t' widdy herself is
fond of a good dog and knaws one when she sees it as well as onny body:
then on t' other hand a-tewin' round after cats an' gettin' mixed oop i'
all manners o' blackguardly street-rows, an' killin' rats, an' fightin'
like divils.
t' colonel's laady says:—"well, learoyd, i doan't agree wi' you,
but you're right in a way o' speeakin', an' i should like yo' to tek rip
out a-walkin' wi' you sometimes; but yo' maun't let him fight, nor chase
cats, nor do nowt 'orrid;" an' them was her very wods.
soa rip an' me gooes out a-walkin' o' evenin's, he bein' a dog as did
credit tiv a man, an' i catches a lot o' rats an' we hed a bit of a match
on in an awd dry swimmin'-bath at back o' t' cantonments, an' it was none
so long afore he was as bright as a button again. he hed a way o' flyin'
at them big yaller pariah dogs as if he was a harrow offan a bow, an'
though his weight were nowt, he tuk 'em so suddint-like they rolled over
like skittles in a halley, an' when they coot he stretched after 'em as if
he were rabbit-runnin'. saame with cats when he cud get t' cat agaate o'
runnin'.
one evenin', him an' me was trespassin' ovver a compound wall after one
of them mongooses 'at he'd started, an' we was busy grubbin' round a
prickle-bush, an' when we looks up there was mrs. desussa wi' a parasel
ovver her shoulder, a-watchin' us. "oh my!" she sings out; "there's that
lovelee dog! would he let me stroke him, mister soldier?"
"ay, he would, mum," sez i, "for he's fond o' laady's coompany. coom
here, rip, an' speeak to this kind laady." an' rip, seein' 'at t' mongoose
hed getten clean awaay, cooms up like t' gentleman he was, nivver a
hauporth shy or okkord.
"oh, you beautiful—you prettee dog!" she says, clippin' an'
chantin' her speech in a way them sooart has o' their awn; "i would like a
dog like you. you are so verree lovelee—so awfullee prettee," an'
all thot sort o' talk, 'at a dog o' sense mebbe thinks nowt on, tho' he
bides it by reason o' his breedin'.
an' then i meks him joomp ovver my swagger-cane, an' shek hands, an'
beg, an' lie dead, an' a lot o' them tricks as laadies teeaches dogs,
though i doan't haud with it mysen, for it's makin' a fool o' a good dog
to do such like.
an' at lung length it cooms out 'at she'd been thrawin' sheep's eyes,
as t' sayin' is, at rip for many a day. yo' see, her childer was grown up,
an' she'd nowt mich to do, an' were allus fond of a dog. soa she axes me
if i'd tek somethin' to dhrink. an' we goes into t' drawn-room wheer her
'usband was a-settin'. they meks a gurt fuss ovver t' dog an' i has a
bottle o' aale, an' he gave me a handful o' cigars.
soa i coomed away, but t' awd lass sings out—"oh, mister soldier,
please coom again and bring that prettee dog."
i didn't let on to t' colonel's laady about mrs. desussa, and rip, he
says nowt nawther, an' i gooes again, an' ivry time there was a good
dhrink an' a handful o' good smooaks. an' i telled t' awd lass a heeap
more about rip than i'd ever heeared; how he tuk t' lost prize at lunnon
dog-show and cost thotty-three pounds fower shillin' from t' man as bred
him; 'at his own brother was t' propputty o' t' prince o' wailes, an' 'at
he had a pedigree as long as a dook's. an' she lapped it all oop an' were
niver tired o' admirin' him. but when t' awd lass took to givin' me money
an' i seed 'at she were gettin' fair fond about t' dog, i began to
suspicion summat. onny body may give a soldier t' price of a pint in a
friendly way an' theer's no 'arm done, but when it cooms to five rupees
slipt into your hand, sly like, why, it's what t' 'lectioneerin' fellows
calls bribery an' corruption. specially when mrs. desussa threwed hints
how t' cold weather would soon be ovver an' she was goin' to munsooree
pahar an' we was goin' to rawalpindi, an' she would niver see rip any more
onless somebody she knowed on would be kind tiv her.
soa i tells mulvaney an' ortheris all t' taale thro', beginnin' to
end.
"'tis larceny that wicked ould laady manes," says t' irishman, "'tis
felony she is sejuicin' ye into, my frind learoyd, but i'll purtect your
innocince. i'll save ye from the wicked wiles av that wealthy ould woman,
an' i'll go wid ye this evenin' and spake to her the wurrds av truth an'
honesty. but jock," says he, waggin' his heead, "'twas not like ye to kape
all that good dhrink an' thim fine cigars to yerself, while orth'ris here
an' me have been prowlin' round wid throats as dry as lime-kilns, and
nothin' to smoke but canteen plug. 'twas a dhirty thrick to play on a
comrade, for why should you, learoyd, be balancin' yourself on the butt av
a satin chair, as if terence mulvaney was not the aquil av anybody who
thrades in jute!"
"let alone me," sticks in orth'ris, "but that's like life. them wot's
really fitted to decorate society get no show while a blunderin'
yorkshireman like you"—
"nay," says i, "it's none o' t' blunderin' yorkshireman she wants; it's
rip. he's t' gentleman this journey."
soa t' next day, mulvaney an' rip an' me goes to mrs. desussa's, an' t'
irishman bein' a strainger she wor a bit shy at fost. but yo've heeard
mulvaney talk, an' yo' may believe as he fairly bewitched t' awd lass wal
she let out 'at she wanted to tek rip away wi' her to munsooree pahar.
then mulvaney changes his tune an' axes her solemn-like if she'd thought
o' t' consequences o' gettin' two poor but honest soldiers sent t'
andamning islands. mrs. desussa began to cry, so mulvaney turns round
oppen t' other tack and smooths her down, allowin' 'at rip ud be a vast
better off in t' hills than down i' bengal, and 'twas a pity he shouldn't
go wheer he was so well beliked. and soa he went on, backin' an' fillin'
an' workin' up t'awd lass wal she fell as if her life warn't worth nowt if
she didn't hev t' dog.
then all of a suddint he says:—"but ye shall have him,
marm, for i've a feelin' heart, not like this could-blooded yorkshireman;
but 'twill cost ye not a penny less than three hundher rupees."
"don't yo' believe him, mum," says i; "t' colonel's laady wouldn't tek
five hundred for him."
"who said she would?" says mulvaney; "it's not buyin' him i mane, but
for the sake o' this kind, good laady, i'll do what i never dreamt to do
in my life. i'll stale him!"
"don't say steal," says mrs. desussa; "he shall have the happiest home.
dogs often get lost, you know, and then they stray, an' he likes me and i
like him as i niver liked a dog yet, an' i must hev him. if i got
him at t' last minute i could carry him off to munsooree pahar and nobody
would niver knaw."
now an' again mulvaney looked acrost at me, an' though i could mak nowt
o' what he was after, i concluded to take his leead.
"well, mum," i says, "i never thowt to coom down to dog-steealin', but
if my comrade sees how it could be done to oblige a laady like yo'-sen,
i'm nut t' man to hod back, tho' it's a bad business i'm thinkin', an'
three hundred rupees is a poor set-off again t' chance of them damning
islands as mulvaney talks on."
"i'll mek it three fifty," says mrs. desussa; "only let me hev t'
dog!"
so we let her persuade us, an' she teks rip's measure theer an' then,
an' sent to hamilton's to order a silver collar again t' time when he was
to be her awn, which was to be t' day she set off for munsooree pahar.
"sitha, mulvaney," says i, when we was outside, "you're niver goin' to
let her hev rip!"
"an' would ye disappoint a poor old woman?" says he; "she shall have
a rip."
"an' wheer's he to come through?" says i.
"learoyd, my man," he sings out, "you're a pretty man av your inches
an' a good comrade, but your head is made av duff. isn't our friend
orth'ris a taxidermist, an' a rale artist wid his nimble white fingers?
an' what's a taxidermist but a man who can thrate shkins? do ye mind the
white dog that belongs to the canteen sargint, bad cess to him—-he
that's lost half his time an' snarlin' the rest? he shall be lost for
good now; an' do ye mind that he's the very spit in shape an' size
av the colonel's, barrin' that his tail is an inch too long, an' he has
none av the color that divarsifies the rale rip, an' his timper is that av
his masther an' worse. but fwhat is an inch on a dog's tail? an' fwhat to
a professional like orth'ris is a few ringstraked shpots av black, brown,
an' white? nothin' at all, at all."
then we meets orth'ris, an' that little man, bein' sharp as a needle,
seed his way through t' business in a minute. an' he went to work
a-practicin' 'air-dyes the very next day, beginnin' on some white rabbits
he had, an' then he drored all rip's markin's on t' back of a white
commissariat bullock, so as to get his 'and in an' be sure of his colors;
shadin' off brown into black as nateral as life. if rip hed a fault
it was too mich markin', but it was straingely reg'lar an' orth'ris
settled himself to make a fost-rate job on it when he got haud o' t'
canteen sargint's dog. theer niver was sich a dog as thot for bad temper,
an' it did nut get no better when his tail hed to be fettled an inch an' a
half shorter. but they may talk o' theer royal academies as they like.
i niver seed a bit o' animal paintin' to beat t' copy as orth'ris
made of rip's marks, wal t' picter itself was snarlin' all t' time an'
tryin' to get at rip standin' theer to be copied as good as goold.
orth'ris allus hed as mich conceit on himsen as would lift a balloon,
an' he wor so pleeased wi' his sham rip he wor for tekking him to mrs.
desussa before she went away. but mulvaney an' me stopped thot, knowin'
orth'ris's work, though niver so cliver, was nobbut skin-deep.
an' at last mrs. desussa fixed t' day for startin' to munsooree pahar.
we was to tek rip to t' stayshun i' a basket an' hand him ovver just when
they was ready to start, an' then she'd give us t' brass—as was
agreed upon.
an' my wod! it were high time she were off, for them 'air-dyes upon t'
cur's back took a vast of paintin' to keep t' reet culler, tho' orth'ris
spent a matter o' seven rupees six annas i' t' best drooggist shops i'
calcutta.
an' t' canteen sargint was lookin' for 'is dog everywheer; an', wi'
bein' tied up, t' beast's timper got waur nor ever.
it wor i' t' evenin' when t' train started thro' howrah, an' we 'elped
mrs. desussa wi' about sixty boxes, an' then we gave her t' basket.
orth'ris, for pride av his work, axed us to let him coom along wi' us, an'
he couldn't help liftin' t' lid an' showin' t' cur as he lay coiled
oop.
"oh!" says t' awd lass; "the beautee! how sweet he looks!" an' just
then t' beauty snarled an' showed his teeth, so mulvaney shuts down t' lid
and says: "ye'll be careful, marm, whin ye tek him out. he's disaccustomed
to traveling by t' railway, an' he'll be sure to want his rale mistress
an' his friend learoyd, so ye'll make allowance for his feelings at
fost."
she would do all thot an' more for the dear, good rip, an' she would
nut oppen t' basket till they were miles away, for fear anybody should
recognize him, an' we were real good and kind soldier-men, we were, an'
she honds me a bundle o' notes, an' then cooms up a few of her relations
an' friends to say good-bye—not more than seventy-five there
wasn't—an' we cuts away.
what coom to t' three hundred and fifty rupees? thot's what i can
scarcelins tell yo', but we melted it—we melted it. it was share an'
share alike, for mulvaney said: "if learoyd got hold of mrs. desussa
first, sure, 'twas i that remimbered the sargint's dog just in the nick av
time, an' orth'ris was the artist av janius that made a work av art out av
that ugly piece av ill-nature. yet, by way av a thank-offerin' that i was
not led into felony by that wicked ould woman, i'll send a thrifle to
father victor for the poor people he's always beggin' for."
but me an' orth'ris, he bein' cockney, an' i bein' pretty far north,
did nut see it i' t' saame way. we'd getten t' brass, an' we meaned to
keep it. an' soa we did—for a short time.
noa, noa, we niver heeard a wod more o' t' awd lass. our rig'mint went
to pindi, an' t' canteen sargint he got himself another tyke insteead o'
t' one 'at got lost so reg'lar, an' was lost for good at last.
i closed and drew for my love's sake,
that now is false to me,
and i slew the riever of tarrant moss,
and set dumeny free.
and ever they give me praise and gold,
and ever i moan my loss;
for i struck the blow for my false love's sake,
and not for the men of the moss!
 —tarrant moss.
one of the many curses of our life in india is the want of atmosphere
in the painter's sense. there are no half-tints worth noticing. men stand
out all crude and raw, with nothing to tone them down, and nothing to
scale them against. they do their work, and grow to think that there is
nothing but their work, and nothing like their work, and that they are the
real pivots on which the administration turns. here is an instance of this
feeling. a half-caste clerk was ruling forms in a pay office. he said to
me, "do you know what would happen if i added or took away one single line
on this sheet?" then, with the air of a conspirator, "it would disorganize
the whole of the treasury payments throughout the whole of the presidency
circle! think of that!"
if men had not this delusion as to the ultra-importance of their own
particular employments, i suppose that they would sit down and kill
themselves. but their weakness is wearisome, particularly when the
listener knows that he himself commits exactly the same sin.
even the secretariat believes that it does good when it asks an
over-driven executive officer to take a census of wheat-weevils through a
district of five thousand square miles.
there was a man once in the foreign office—a man who had grown
middle-aged in the department, and was commonly said, by irreverent
juniors, to be able to repeat aitchison's treaties and sunnuds
backward in his sleep. what he did with his stored knowledge only the
secretary knew; and he, naturally, would not publish the news abroad. this
man's name was wressley, and it was the shibboleth, in those days, to
say—"wressley knows more about the central indian states than any
living man." if you did not say this, you were considered one of mean
understanding.
nowadays, the man who says that he knows the ravel of the inter-tribal
complications across the border is more of use; but, in wressley's time,
much attention was paid to the central indian states. they were called
"foci" and "factors," and all manner of imposing names.
and here the curse of anglo-indian life fell heavily. when wressley
lifted up his voice, and spoke about such-and-such a succession to
such-and-such a throne, the foreign office were silent, and heads of
departments repeated the last two or three words of wressley's sentences,
and tacked "yes, yes," on to them, and knew that they were assisting the
empire to grapple with serious political contingencies. in most big
undertakings, one or two men do the work while the rest sit near and talk
till the ripe decorations begin to fall.
wressley was the working-member of the foreign office firm, and, to
keep him up to his duties when he showed signs of flagging, he was made
much of by his superiors and told what a fine fellow he was. he did not
require coaxing, because he was of tough build, but what he received
confirmed him in the belief that there was no one quite so absolutely and
imperatively necessary to the stability of india as wressley of the
foreign office. there might be other good men, but the known, honored and
trusted man among men was wressley of the foreign office. we had a viceroy
in those days who knew exactly when to "gentle" a fractious big man, and
to hearten-up a collar-galled little one, and so keep all his team level.
he conveyed to wressley the impression which i have just set down; and
even tough men are apt to be disorganized by a viceroy's praise. there was
a case once—but that is another story.
all india knew wressley's name and office—it was in thacker and
spink's directory—but who he was personally, or what he did, or what
his special merits were, not fifty men knew or cared. his work filled all
his time, and he found no leisure to cultivate acquaintances beyond those
of dead rajput chiefs with ahir blots in their scutcheons. wressley
would have made a very good clerk in the herald's college had he not been
a bengal civilian.
upon a day, between office and office, great trouble came to
wressley—overwhelmed him, knocked him down, and left him gasping as
though he had been a little schoolboy. without reason, against prudence,
and at a moment's notice, he fell in love with a frivolous, golden-haired
girl who used to tear about simla mall on a high, rough waler, with a blue
velvet jockey-cap crammed over her eyes. her name was venner—tillie
venner—and she was delightful. she took wressley's heart at a
hand-gallop, and wressley found that it was not good for man to live
alone; even with half the foreign office records in his presses.
then simla laughed, for wressley in love was slightly ridiculous. he
did his best to interest the girl in himself—that is to say, his
work—and she, after the manner of women, did her best to appear
interested in what, behind his back, she called "mr. wressley's wajahs";
for she lisped very prettily. she did not understand one little thing
about them, but she acted as if she did. men have married on that sort of
error before now.
providence, however, had care of wressley, he was immensely struck with
miss venner's intelligence. he would have been more impressed had he heard
her private and confidential accounts of his calls. he held peculiar
notions as to the wooing of girls. he said that the best work of a man's
career should be laid reverently at their feet. ruskin writes something
like this somewhere, i think; but in ordinary life a few kisses are better
and save time.
about a month after he had lost his heart to miss venner, and had been
doing his work vilely in consequence, the first idea of his native rule
in central india struck wressley and filled him with joy. it was, as
he sketched it, a great thing—the work of his life—a really
comprehensive survey of a most fascinating subject—to be written
with all the special and laboriously acquired knowledge of wressley of the
foreign office—a gift fit for an empress.
he told miss venner that he was going to take leave, and hoped, on his
return, to bring her a present worthy of her acceptance. would she wait?
certainly she would. wressley drew seventeen hundred rupees a month. she
would wait a year for that. her mamma would help her to wait.
so wressley took one year's leave and all the available documents,
about a truck-load, that he could lay hands on, and went down to central
india with his notion hot in his head. he began his book in the land he
was writing of. too much official correspondence had made him a frigid
workman, and he must have guessed that he needed the white light of local
color on his palette. this is a dangerous paint for amateurs to play
with.
heavens, how that man worked! he caught his rajahs, analyzed his
rajahs, and traced them up into the mists of time and beyond, with their
queens and their concubines. he dated and cross-dated, pedigreed and
triple-pedigreed, compared, noted, connoted, wove, strung, sorted,
selected, inferred, calendared and counter-calendared for ten hours a day.
and, because this sudden and new light of love was upon him, he turned
those dry bones of history and dirty records of misdeeds into things to
weep or to laugh over as he pleased. his heart and soul were at the end of
his pen, and they got into the ink. he was dowered with sympathy, insight,
humor, and style for two hundred and thirty days and nights; and his book
was a book. he had his vast special knowledge with him, so to speak; but
the spirit, the woven-in human touch, the poetry and the power of the
output, were beyond all special knowledge. but i doubt whether he knew the
gift that was in him then, and thus he may have lost some happiness. he
was toiling for tillie venner, not for himself. men often do their best
work blind, for some one else's sake.
also, though this has nothing to do with the story, in india where
every one knows every one else, you can watch men being driven, by the
women who govern them, out of the rank-and-file and sent to take up points
alone. a good man, once started, goes forward; but an average man, so soon
as the woman loses interest in his success as a tribute to her power,
comes back to the battalion and is no more heard of.
wressley bore the first copy of his book to simla, and, blushing and
stammering, presented it to miss venner. she read a little of it. i give
her review verbatim—"oh your book? it's all about those
howwid wajahs. i didn't understand it."
wressley of the foreign office was broken, smashed,—i am not
exaggerating—by this one frivolous little girl. all that he could
say feebly was—"but—but it's my magnum opus! the work
of my life." miss venner did not know what magnum opus meant; but
she knew that captain kerrington had won three races at the last gymkhana.
wressley didn't press her to wait for him any longer. he had sense enough
for that.
then came the reaction after the year's strain, and wressley went back
to the foreign office and his "wajahs," a compiling, gazetteering,
report-writing hack, who would have been dear at three hundred rupees a
month. he abided by miss venner's review. which proves that the
inspiration in the book was purely temporary and unconnected with himself.
nevertheless, he had no right to sink, in a hill-tarn, five packing-cases,
brought up at enormous expense from bombay, of the best book of indian
history ever written.
when he sold off before retiring, some years later, i was turning over
his shelves, and came across the only existing copy of native rule in
central india—the copy that miss venner could not understand. i
read it, sitting on his mule-trunks, as long as the light lasted, and
offered him his own price for it. he looked over my shoulder for a few
pages and said to himself drearily—
"now, how in the world did i come to write such damned good stuff as
that?"
then to me—
"take it and keep it. write one of your penny-farthing yarns about its
birth. perhaps—perhaps—the whole business may have been
ordained to that end."
which, knowing what wressley of the foreign office was once, struck me
as about the bitterest thing that i had ever heard a man say of his own
work.
did ye see john malone, wid his shinin', brand-new hat?
 did ye see how he walked like a grand aristocrat?
 there was flags an' banners wavin' high,
an' dhress and shtyle were shown,
but the best av all the company was misther john malone.
—john malone.
there had been a royal dog-fight in the ravine at the back of the
rifle-butts, between learoyd's jock and ortheris's blue
rot—both mongrel rampur hounds, chiefly ribs and teeth. it
lasted for twenty happy, howling minutes, and then blue rot collapsed and
ortheris paid learoyd three rupees, and we were all very thirsty. a
dog-fight is a most heating entertainment, quite apart from the shouting,
because rampurs fight over a couple of acres of ground. later, when the
sound of belt-badges clicking against the necks of beer-bottles had died
away, conversation drifted from dog to man-fights of all kinds. humans
resemble red-deer in some respects. any talk of fighting seems to wake up
a sort of imp in their breasts, and they bell one to the other, exactly
like challenging bucks. this is noticeable even in men who consider
themselves superior to privates of the line: it shows the refining
influence of civilization and the march of progress.
tale provoked tale, and each tale more beer. even dreamy learoyd's eyes
began to brighten, and he unburdened himself of a long history in which a
trip to malham cove, a girl at pateley brigg, a ganger, himself and a pair
of clogs were mixed in drawling tangle.
"an' so ah coot's yead oppen from t' chin to t' hair, an' he was abed
for t' matter o' a month," concluded learoyd, pensively.
mulvaney came out of a revery—he was lying down—and
flourished his heels in the air. "you're a man, learoyd," said he,
critically, "but you've only fought wid men, an' that's an ivry-day
expayrience; but i've stud up to a ghost, an' that was not an
ivry-day expayrience."
"no?" said ortheris, throwing a cork at him. "you git up an' address
the 'ouse—you an' yer expayriences. is it a bigger one nor
usual?"
"twas the livin' trut'!" answered mulvaney, stretching out a huge arm
and catching ortheris by the collar. "now where are ye, me son? will ye
take the wurrud av the lorrd out av my mouth another time?" he shook him
to emphasize the question.
"no, somethin' else, though," said ortheris, making a dash at
mulvaney's pipe, capturing it and holding it at arm's length; "i'll chuck
it acrost the ditch if you don't let me go!"
"you maraudin' hathen! tis the only cutty i iver loved. handle her
tinder or i'll chuck you acrost the nullah. if that poipe was
bruk—ah! give her back to me, sorr!"
ortheris had passed the treasure to my hand. it was an absolutely
perfect clay, as shiny as the black ball at pool. i took it reverently,
but i was firm.
"will you tell us about the ghost-fight if i do?" i said.
"is ut the shtory that's troublin' you? av course i will. i mint to all
along. i was only gettin' at ut my own way, as popp doggle said whin they
found him thrying to ram a cartridge down the muzzle. orth'ris, fall
away!"
he released the little londoner, took back his pipe, filled it, and his
eyes twinkled. he has the most eloquent eyes of any one that i know.
"did i iver tell you," he began, "that i was wanst the divil of a
man?"
"you did," said learoyd, with a childish gravity that made ortheris
yell with laughter, for mulvaney was always impressing upon us his great
merits in the old days.
"did i iver tell you," mulvaney continued, calmly, "that i was wanst
more av a divil than i am now?"
"mer—ria! you don't mean it?" said ortheris.
"whin i was corp'ril—i was rejuced aftherward—but, as i
say, whin i was corp'ril, i was a divil of a man."
he was silent for nearly a minute, while his mind rummaged among old
memories and his eye glowed. he bit upon the pipe-stem and charged into
his tale.
"eyah! they was great times, i'm ould now; me hide's wore off in
patches; sinthrygo has disconceited me, an' i'm a married man tu. but i've
had my day—i've had my day, an' nothin' can take away the taste av
that! oh my time past, whin i put me fut through ivry livin' wan av the
tin commandmints between revelly and lights out, blew the froth off a
pewter, wiped me moustache wid the back av me hand, an' slept on ut all as
quiet as a little child! but ut's over—ut's over, an' 'twill niver
come back to me; not though i prayed for a week av sundays. was there
any wan in the ould rig'mint to touch corp'ril terence mulvaney
whin that same was turned out for sedukshin? i niver met him. ivry woman
that was not a witch was worth the runnin' afther in those days, an' ivry
man was my dearest frind or—i had stripped to him an' we knew which
was the betther av the tu.
"whin i was corp'ril i wud not ha' changed wid the colonel—no,
nor yet the commandher-in-chief. i wud be a sargint. there was nothin' i
wud not be! mother av hivin, look at me! fwhat am i now?
"we was quartered in a big cantonmint—'tis no manner av use
namin' names, for ut might give the barricks disrepitation—an' i was
the imperor av the earth to my own mind, an' wan or tu women thought the
same. small blame to thim. afther we had lain there a year, bragin, the
color sargint av e comp'ny, wint an' took a wife that was lady's maid to
some big lady in the station. she's dead now is annie bragin—died in
child-bed at kirpa tal, or ut may ha' been almorah—seven—nine
years gone, an' bragin he married agin. but she was a pretty woman whin
bragin inthrojuced her to cantonmint society. she had eyes like the brown
av a buttherfly's wing whin the sun catches ut, an' a waist no thicker
than my arm, an' a little sof button av a mouth i would ha' gone through
all asia bristlin' wid bay'nits to get the kiss av. an' her hair was as
long as the tail av the colonel's charger—forgive me mentionin' that
blunderin' baste in the same mouthful with annie bragin—but 'twas
all shpun gold, an' time was when ut was more than di'monds to me. there
was niver pretty woman yet, an' i've had thruck wid a few, cud open the
door to annie bragin.
"'twas in the cath'lic chapel i saw her first, me oi roiling round as
usual to see fwhat was to be seen, 'you're too good for bragin, my love,'
thinks i to mesilf, 'but that's a mistake i can put straight, or my name
is not terence mulvaney.'
"now take my wurrd for ut, you orth'ris there an' learoyd, an' kape out
av the married quarters—as i did not. no good iver comes av ut, an'
there's always the chance av your bein' found wid your face in the dirt, a
long picket in the back av your head, an' your hands playing the fifes on
the tread av another man's doorstep.
"twas so we found o'hara, he that rafferty killed six years gone, when
he wint to his death wid his hair oiled, whistlin' larry o'rourke
betune his teeth. kape out av the married quarters, i say, as i did not,
'tis onwholesim, 'tis dangerous, an' 'tis ivrything else that's bad,
but—o my sowl, 'tis swate while ut lasts!
"i was always hangin' about there whin i was off duty an' bragin
wasn't, but niver a sweet word beyon' ordinar' did i get from annie
bragin. ''tis the pervarsity av the sect,' sez i to mesilf, an' gave my
cap another cock on my head an' straightened my back—'twas the back
av a dhrum major in those days—an' wint off as tho' i did not care,
wid all the women in the married quarters laughin'. i was
pershuaded—most bhoys are, i'm thinkin'—that no women
born av woman cud stand against me av i hild up my little finger. i had
reason fer thinkin' that way—till i met annie bragin.
"time an' agin whin i was blandandherin' in the dusk a man wud go past
me as quiet as a cat. 'that's quare,' thinks i, 'for i am, or i should be,
the only man in these parts. now what divilment can annie be up to?' thin
i called myself a blayguard for thinkin' such things; but i thought thim
all the same. an' that, mark you, is the way av a man.
"wan evenin' i said:—'mrs. bragin, manin' no disrespect to you,
who is that corp'ril man'—i had seen the stripes though i cud niver
get sight av his face—'who is that corp'ril man that comes in
always whin i'm goin' away?'
"'mother av god!' sez she, turnin' as white as my belt; 'have
you seen him too?'
"'seen him!' sez i; 'av coorse i have. did ye want me not to see him,
for'—we were standin' talkin' in the dhark, outside the veranda av
bragin's quarters—'you'd betther tell me to shut me eyes. onless i'm
mistaken, he's come now.'
"an', sure enough, the corp'ril man was walkin' to us, hangin' his head
down as though he was ashamed av himsilf.
"'good-night, mrs. bragin,' sez i, very cool; ''tis not for me to
interfere wid your a-moors; but you might manage some things wid
more dacincy. i'm off to canteen', i sez.
"i turned on my heel an' wint away, swearin' i wud give that man a
dhressin' that wud shtop him messin' about the married quarters for a
month an' a week. i had not tuk ten paces before annie bragin was hangin'
on to my arm, an' i cud feel that she was shakin' all over.
"'stay wid me, mister mulvaney,' sez she; 'you're flesh an' blood, at
the least—are ye not?'
"'i'm all that,' sez i, an' my anger wint away in a flash. 'will
i want to be asked twice, annie?'
"wid that i slipped my arm round her waist, for, begad, i fancied she
had surrindered at discretion, an' the honors av war were mine,
"'fwhat nonsinse is this?' sez she, dhrawin' hersilf up on the tips av
her dear little toes. 'wid the mother's milk not dhry on your impident
mouth? let go!' she sez,
"did ye not say just now that i was flesh and blood?' sez i. 'i have
not changed since,' i sez; an' i kep' my arm where ut was.
"'your arms to yoursilf!' sez she, an' her eyes sparkild.
"'sure, 'tis only human nature,' sez i, an' i kep' my arm where ut
was.
