 natural standard; and whereas it has been ascertained by the
 commissioners appointed by his majesty to inquire into the subjects of
 weights and measures, that the yard, hereby declared to be the imperial
 standard yard, when compared with a pendulum vibrating seconds of mean
 time in the latitude of london, in a vacuum at the level of the sea, is
 in the proportion of thirty-six inches to thirty-nine inches and one
 thousand three hundred and ninety-three ten thousandth parts of an inch;
 be it enacted and declared, that if at any time hereafter the said
 imperial standard yard shall be lost, or shall be in any manner
 destroyed, defaced or otherwise injured, it shall and may be restored by
 making a new standard yard bearing the same proportion to such pendulum,
 as aforesaid, as the said imperial standard yard bears to such
 pendulum."
it was not long after this act had been passed, if indeed not before,
 that it became known that the pendulum method was an incorrect one, as it
 was found that errors had occurred in reducing the length obtained to
 that at the sea level, and despite the great pains that had been taken,
 it is doubtful if the method was not faulty in some of its other
 details.
when the houses of parliament were burned in , an opportunity was
 offered to try the method upon which so much time and care had been
 spent. a commission was appointed and to sir francis baily was assigned
 the task of restoring the standard. he did not live to complete the task,
 dying in . he succeeded in determining the composition of the metal
 that was best adapted to be used, which metal is now known as baily's
 metal.
rev. r. sheepshanks constructed a working model as a standard and
 compared it with two schuckburg's scales, the yard of the royal society,
 and two iron bars that had been used in the ordnance department. having
 determined to his own satisfaction and that of his associates the value
 of the yard, he prepared the standard imperial yard, known as bronze no.
 , a bronze bar  ×  ×  inch, with two gold plugs dropped into holes
 so that the surface of the plugs passes through the center plane of the
 bar. upon these plugs are three transverse lines and two longitudinal
 lines, the yard being the distance from the middle transverse
 line—the portion lying between the two longitudinal ones—of
 one plug, to the corresponding line on the other plug. forty copies were
 made, but two of these being correct at  degrees fahrenheit, and these
 two, together with the original and one other, are kept in england as the
 standards for reference. in  the standard as made by rev. sheepshanks
 was legalized.
attempts to fix a standard in the united states
the constitution empowers congress to fix the standards of weights and
 measures, but up to  no legal standard length had been adopted. in
 his first message to congress washington said: "a uniformity in the
 weights and measures of the country is among the important objects
 submitted to you by the constitution, and if it can be derived from a
 standard at once invariable and universal, it must be no less honorable
 to the public council than conducive to the public convenience."
in july, , thomas jefferson, then secretary of state, sent a
 report to congress containing two plans, both based on the length of the
 pendulum, in this case the pendulum to be a plain bar, the one plan to
 use the system then existing, referring it to the pendulum as the basis,
 and the other to take the pendulum and subdivide it, one-third of the
 pendulum to be called a foot. the whole length was that of one beating
 seconds of time. he made a table to read as follows:
 points make a line.
 lines make a foot.
 feet make a decad.
 decads make a rood.
 roods make a furlong.
 furlongs make a mile.
congress did not adopt his system, and as england was then working on
 the problem, it was decided to await the results of its labors. in ,
 madison, in his inaugural address, brought the matter of standards to the
 attention of congress, and a committee of the house made a report
 recommending the first plan of jefferson, but the report was not acted
 upon. in , j. q. adams, then secretary of state, made a long and
 exhaustive report in which he favored the metric system, but still
 advised congress to wait, and congress—waited.
what the standards are in the united states
the standard of length which had generally been accepted as the
 standard, was a brass scale  inches long, prepared by troughton for the
 coast survey of the united states. the yard used was the  inches
 between the th and d inch of the scale. in , however "bronze no.
 " was presented to the united states by the british government. this is
 a duplicate of the no.  bronze mentioned before, which is the legalized
 standard yard in england. it is standard length at . degrees f., and
 is the accepted standard in the united states. a bar of low moor iron,
 no. , was sent at the same time, and this is correct in length at .
 degrees f. the expansion of bronze no.  is . inch, and that of
 the iron bar is . inch for each degree fahrenheit. while the yard
 is the commonly accepted standard in this country, it is not the legal
 standard. in  congress passed a law making legal the meter, the first
 and only measure of length that has been legalized by our government.
 copies of the meter and kilogram, taken from the original platinum bar at
 paris, referred to before, were received in this country by the president
 and members of the cabinet, on jan. , , and were deposited with the
 coast survey. by formal order of the secretary of the treasury, april ,
 , these were denominated the "fundamental standards."
the international bureau of weights and measures
after the original meter was established, it was found that copies
 made by various countries differed to a greater or less extent from the
 original, and believing that a copy could be made from which other copies
 could be more readily made than from the end piece meter, and that better
 provision could be made for the preservation of the standard, france
 called a convention of representatives from various states using the
 system, to consider the matter. the united states representatives, or
 commissioners, were messrs. henry and hildegard, who met with the general
 commission in . the commissioners at once set at work to solve the
 problem presented to them, but the franco-prussian war put an end to
 their deliberations. the deliberations were resumed later, and may ,
 , representatives of the various countries signed a treaty providing
 for the establishment and maintenance, at the common expense of the
 contracting nations, of a "scientific and permanent international bureau
 of weights and measures, the location of which should be paris, to be
 conducted by a general conference for weights and measures, to be
 composed of the delegates of all the contracting governments."
this bureau is empowered to construct and preserve the international
 standards, to distribute copies of the same to the several countries, and
 also to discuss and initiate measures necessary for the determination of
 the metric system. the commission adopted a form for the standard as
 shown in fig. . the lines representing the length of the meter are drawn
 on the plane a, which is the neutral plane, and will not change in
 length should the bar deflect. the bar is made of  per cent platinum
 and  per cent iridium, about  kilograms having been melted when
 preparations were made for the first standard, so that all of the copies
 made from this cast represent the same coefficient of expansion and are
 subject to the same changes as the original. the french government
 presented to the bureau the pavilion breteuil, opposite the park of st.
 cloud, which was accepted and put into order and is now the repository of
 the originals of the meter and the kilogram. the expense attending the
 first establishment of the bureau was about $, to the united states,
 and since then its share of the annual expense has been about $. the
 standards in the possession of the united states were received through
 the international bureau.
the commercial value of a standard
having at the disposal of the nation a standard of length, the
 question arises, "what can be made of it commercially, and how do we know
 when we have a copy of the standard?"
fig. . form of bar adopted for international standards of length
in , the brown & sharpe mfg. co. decided to make a new
 standard to replace the one they had at that date. mr. o. j. beale was
 detailed to do this work. he prepared steel bars about  inches long by
 ¼ inch square, and after planing them, they were allowed to rest for
 several months. at the ends of these bars he inserted two gold plugs, the
 centers of which were about  inches apart, and a little beyond these
 two others about one meter apart. a bar was placed in position upon a
 heavy bed. this was so arranged that a tool carrier could be passed over
 the bar. the tool carrier consisted of a light framework, holding the
 marking tool. one feature of the marking was that the point of the
 marking tool was curved and had an angle, so that if dropped it made an
 impression in the form of an ellipse. in graduations, ordinarily, the
 line, when highly magnified, is apt to present at its ends an impression
 less definite than in the center, by reason of the form of the objective.
 the line made with the tool mentioned is short, and that portion of the
 line is read which passes, apparently, through the straight line in the
 eye-glass of the microscope. in order to make these lines as definite as
 possible, the point was lapped to a bright surface. after being placed in
 position, the microscope, which could be placed on the front of the tool
 carrier, was set to compare with the graduation on the standard bar from
 which the new bar was to be prepared. after such a setting the readings
 were made by three persons, and by turning the lever the marking tool was
 dropped, making a very fine line, so fine indeed, that when the
 authorities in washington began the examination of the bar later on they
 declared that no line had been made upon these studs.
after making the first line, the carriage was moved along to compare
 with the other line on the standard, and after the correction had been
 made by the use of the micrometer in the microscope, the marking tool was
 again dropped, giving the second line, which was intended to mark the
 limit of one yard over-all. the same operation was repeated in the
 marking of the meter. the whole of this work was done, of course, with
 the greatest care, and, while the theoretical portion of it appears very
 simple in detail, it required a great deal of time and patience before
 the last line had been made. the bar thus marked was taken to washington,
 and in mr. beale's presence was compared by the attendants with bronze
 no.  and later with low moor bar, no. .
in comparing this standard, a method was employed very similar to that
 used in marking it. the bar, properly supported, was placed upon a box
 that rested upon rolls, and on this same box was placed the government
 standard with which the brown & sharpe standard was to be compared.
 the standard was placed in position under the microscope, and after being
 properly set to the standard, the bar to be measured was placed under the
 microscope, and by the micrometer screw of the microscope the variation
 was measured. three comparisons were made by each of the attendants on
 each end before determining the reading of the microscope, and after such
 comparisons and many repetitions of it, the value of the standard no. 
 was found to be . inches for the yard, and . meter for the
 meter.
after this work had been done, mr. beale prepared a second standard
 which he called no. , and after examining, as shown above, the error was
 found to be . inch for the yard, and . meter for the meter.
 observing these variations as compared with the standards originally
 made, we find they are very close, and it is doubtful if many repeated
 trials would furnish more accurate work, when we remember that out of
 forty original standards made, but two are correct at  degrees
 fahrenheit.
after establishing a yard, the problem of obtaining an inch comes
 next, and this was made by subdividing the yard into two equal parts,
 these into three, and the three further subdivided into six parts. it
 should be particularly noted that no mention has been made of a standard
 inch, as there is none, the standard yard only existing, the subdivision
 of which falls upon those undertaking standard work. there is a
 remarkable agreement between at least three leading gage makers of this
 country and abroad, and each came to the result by its own method of
 subdividing the standard yard.
kinds of measurements and measuring tools
the measurements in the shop may, in general, be divided into
 measurements of length and measurements of angles. the length
 measurements in turn may be divided into line measurements and end
 measurements, the former being made by placing a rule or similar
 instrument against the object being measured, and comparing its length
 with the graduations on the measuring instruments; the latter are made by
 comparing the object being measured with the measuring instrument, by
 bringing the object measured into actual contact with the measuring
 surfaces of the instrument. examples of line measurements are the
 ordinary measurements made with the machinist's rule, and examples of end
 measurement are those made by the micrometer, measuring machines, and
 snap gages. angular measurements can also be divided into two classes;
 those measured directly by graduations on the instrument, and those
 measured by comparison with a given angle of the instrument.
measuring instruments may also be divided into two classes, according
 to whether they actually are used for measuring, or whether they are
 principally used for comparing objects with one another. according to
 this classification all kinds of rules and protractors belong to the
 first class, whereas all gages belong to the second class. the ordinary
 instruments for length measurements, the regular machinists' rule, the
 caliper square, and the ordinary micrometer caliper, are too well known
 to require any additional explanation. the same is true of the regular
 bevel protractor for measuring angles. we shall therefore in the
 following chapters deal principally with special measuring tools, and
 with such methods in the use of tools which are likely to suggest
 improvements, or otherwise be valuable to the user and maker of measuring
 tools.
in the present chapter we shall deal with the simpler forms of tools
 used for measuring, such as ordinary calipers, and their use; surface
 gages; special attachments for scales and squares, facilitating accurate
 measuring; and vernier and beam calipers. the descriptions of the tools
 and methods referred to have appeared in machinery from time to time. the names of the persons
 who originally contributed these descriptions have been stated in notes
 at the foot of the pages, together with the month and year when their
 contribution appeared.
setting inside calipers
figs.  and fig. 
setting inside calipers
it is customary with most machinists, when setting inside calipers to
 a scale, to place one end of the scale squarely against the face of some
 true surface, and then, placing one leg of the caliper against the same
 surface, to set the other leg to the required measurement on the scale.
 for this purpose the faceplate of the lathe is frequently used on account
 of its being close at hand for the latheman. the sides of the jaws of a
 vise or almost anything located where the light is sufficient to read the
 markings on the scale are frequently used.
the disadvantages of this method are, first, that a rough or untrue
 object is often chosen, particularly if it happens to be in a better
 light than a smooth and true one, and, second, that it is very hard to
 hold the scale squarely against an object. it is easy enough to hold it
 squarely crosswise, but it is not so easy a matter to keep it square
 edgewise. as can be readily seen, this makes quite a difference with the
 reading of the calipers, particularly if the scale is a thick one.
figs.  and  show this effect exaggerated. b is the block
 against which the scale abuts. the dotted line indicates where the
 caliper leg should rest, but cannot do so, unless the scale is held
 perfectly square with the block. fig.  shows a method of setting the
 calipers by using a small square to abut the scale and to afford a
 surface against which to place the leg of the caliper. the scale, lying
 flat on the blade of the square, is always sure to be square edgewise,
 and is easily held squarely against the stock of the square as shown.
 this method has also the advantage of being portable, and can be taken to
 the window or to any place where the light is satisfactory. when using a
 long scale, the free end may be held against the body to assist in
 holding it in place.[]
shoulder calipers
fig. . shoulder calipers
in fig.  are shown a pair of calipers which are very handy in
 measuring work from shoulder to shoulder or from a shoulder to the end of
 the piece of work. for this purpose they are much handier, and more
 accurate, than the ordinary "hermaphrodites." the legs are bent at
 aa so as to lie flat and thus bring the point of the long leg
 directly behind the short one which "nests" into it, as at b, so
 that the calipers may be used for short measurements as well as for long
 ones.
double-jointed calipers to fold in tool box
in fig.  are illustrated a pair of large calipers that can be folded
 up and put in a machinist's ordinary size tool chest. the usual large
 caliper supplied by the average machine shop is so cumbersome and heavy
 that this one was designed to fill its place. it can be carried in the
 chest when the usual style of large caliper cannot. it is a very light
 and compact tool. it is a -inch caliper, and will caliper up to 
 inches diameter. the top sections are made in four pieces, and the point
 ends fit between the top half like the blade of a knife, as shown in the
 engraving. each side of the upper or top section is made of saw steel
 / inch thick, and the lower part or point of steel ⅛ inch
 thick. the double section makes the tool very stiff and light.
the point section has a tongue a, extending between the double
 section, which is engaged by a sliding stud and thumb nut. the stud is a
 nice sliding fit in the slot, and the thumb nut clamps it firmly in place
 when in use. b, in the figure, shows the construction of the thumb
 nut. c is a sheet copper liner put between the washers at
 a. the dotted lines in the engraving show the points folded back
 to close up. the large joint washers are ¾ inch diameter, and a
 ⅝-inch pin with a ⅜-inch hexagon head screw tightens it up.
 the forward joints are the same style, but smaller. the main joint has
 two ¾-inch brass distance pieces or washers between the two main
 washers. the top section is ½ inches between centers, and the point
 sections  inches from center to point. closed up, the calipers measure
  inches over-all.
fig. . large double-jointed calipers
kinks in inside calipering
close measurements may be made by filing two notches in each leg of an
 inside caliper so as to leave a rounded projection between, as shown at
 e, fig. . then, with an outside caliper, d, the setting of
 the inside caliper, b, is taken from the rounded points. the
 inside caliper can be reset very accurately after removal by this method.
 a still better way is to have two short pins, cc′ set in the sides of the inside caliper
 legs, but this is not readily done as a makeshift. to measure the inside
 diameter of a bore having a shoulder like the piece h, the inside
 caliper f may also be set as usual and then a line marked with a
 sharp scriber on one leg, by drawing it along the side g. then the
 legs are closed to remove the caliper, and are reset to the scribed line.
 of course, this method is not as accurate as the previous one, and can be
 used only for approximate measurements.
fig. . methods of inside calipering
to get the thickness of a wall beyond a shoulder, as at k, fig.
 , set the caliper so that the legs will pass over the shoulder freely,
 and with a scale measure the distance between the outside leg and the
 outside of the piece. then remove the caliper and measure the distance
 between the caliper points. the difference between these two distances
 will be the thickness m.
inside calipers for close spaces
in fig.  are shown a pair of inside calipers which are bent so as to
 be well adapted for calipering distances difficult of access, such as the
 keyway in a shaft and hub which does not extend beyond the hub, as
 indicated. with the ordinary inside calipers, having straight legs, and
 which are commonly used for inside work, it is generally impossible to
 get the exact size, as the end which is held in the hand comes in contact
 with the shaft before both points come into the same vertical plane. the
 engraving plainly shows how calipers for this purpose are made, and how
 used. any mechanic can easily bend a common pair to about the shape shown
 to accommodate this class of work.[]
fig. . inside calipers for close spaces
surface gage with two pointers
figs.  and  show a special surface gage, and illustrate an original
 idea which has been found to be a great saver of time and of milling
 cutters. it can also be used on the planer or shaper. by its use the
 operator can raise the milling machine table to the right height without
 testing the cut two or three times, and eliminate the danger of taking a
 cut that is liable to break the cutter. this tool is especially valuable
 on castings, as raising the table and allowing the cutter to revolve in
 the gritty surface while finding the lowest spot is very disastrous to
 the cutting edges.
figs.  and . surface gage with two pointers
to use this surface gage, the pointer marked c in fig.  is set
 to the lowest spot in the casting, and then the pointer b is set
 from it with perhaps / inch between the points for a cut sufficient to
 clean up the surface. pointer c is then folded up as shown at
 c′ in fig. , and the table is
 raised until the pointer b will just touch the under side of the
 cutter as shown at b′ in fig. . in
 this way the table is quickly adjusted to a cut that will clean the
 casting or other piece being machined, and with no cutting or trying
 whatever.[]
to adjust the needle of a surface gage
fig. . method of adjusting the needle of a surface gage
fig. . scale attachment for the square
fig.  illustrates a method of adjusting the needle of a surface
 gage. to set the gage ¾ inches from the table, get somewhere within ¼
 inch of the mark on the square. with the thumb and forefinger on hook
 a, turn the needle till it reaches the point desired. by turning
 the needle, it will travel in a circular path, on account of the bend
 near the point, and thus reach the desired setting.
scale attachment for the square
fig.  shows a device for attaching a scale to a square. this
 combination makes a very convenient tool to use when setting up work for
 keyseating, as is illustrated in the engraving, in which s is the
 shaft to be splined and c the milling cutter. it is also a very
 handy tool for truing up work on the boring mill or lathe. at the upper
 left-hand corner, is shown the construction of the parts, which are made
 of dimensions to suit the size of the scale and the square. for the
 combination to be successful, it is essential that the blade of the
 square is the same thickness as the scale.[]
attachment for machinist's scale
fig. . convenient attachment for machinist's scale
fig.  shows a very convenient appliance. it will be found very
 useful in the machine shop for setting inside calipers to any desired
 size. the gage is clamped over the rule wherever desired, and one leg of
 the calipers set against the gage, the other leg being brought flush with
 the end of the scale.[]
setting dividers accurately
to set dividers accurately, take a -inch micrometer and cut a line
 entirely around the thimble as at a, fig. , and then, with the
 instrument set at zero, make a punch mark b exactly one inch from
 the line on the thimble. if less than one inch is wanted, open out the
 micrometer and set the dividers to the dot and line so as to give one
 inch more than the distance wanted. now with the dividers make two marks
 across a line, as at a and b, fig. , and then set the
 dividers to one inch and mark another line as at c. the distance
 from c to b is the amount desired, and the dividers can be
 set to it. great care must, of course, be exercised, if accurate results
 are required.
fig. . method of setting dividers accurately
combination caliper and divider
the combination caliper and divider shown in fig.  is one that is
 not manufactured by any of the various tool companies. it is, however,
 one of the handiest tools that can be in a machinist's kit, as it lends
 itself to so many varied uses, and often is capable of being used where
 only a special tool can be employed. the illustration suggests its
 usefulness. the tool can be used as an outside caliper, as an inside
 caliper, and as a divider. the common form of this tool has generally
 only one toe on the caliper legs, but the double toes save the reversal
 of the points when changing from outside to inside work. the divider
 points may be set at an angle, which permits of stepping off readily
 around the outside of a shaft at angular distances, where the ordinary
 dividers are useless. a number of other uses could be mentioned, but any
 intelligent mechanic can readily suggest them for himself.
fig. . combination caliper and divider
attachment for vernier calipers
while vernier and slide calipers are very handy shop tools, their
 usefulness is much more limited than it ought to be for such expensive
 instruments. in order to increase the usefulness of these tools, the
 attachments shown in fig.  may be made. in the upper left-hand part of
 the engraving the details of a useful addition to the caliper are shown.
 a is made of machine steel, while the tongue b is of tool
 steel, hardened and ground and lapped to a thickness of . inch, the
 top and bottom being absolutely parallel. this tongue is secured to
 a by the two rivets cc. the thumb-screw d is used
 for fastening the attachment to the sliding jaw of the vernier or slide
 caliper. in the upper part of the engraving is shown the base, which is
 of machine steel, with the slot f milled for the reception of the
 fixed jaw of the caliper. the set-screws ggg are put in at a
 slight angle so that the caliper will be held firmly and squarely in this
 base. in the figure to the left these pieces are shown in the position
 for forming a height gage, for which purpose the attachment is most
 commonly used. as a test of the accuracy of its construction when the
 attachment is placed in this position, the tongue b should make a
 perfect joint with the fixed jaw of the caliper, and the vernier should
 give a reading of exactly .. when it is desirable that the tongue
 b should overhang, the base e is pushed back even with the
 stationary jaw, as shown in the engraving to the right. in this position
 it is used for laying out and testing bushings in jigs, etc. the
 illustration shows the tool in use for this purpose, k being the
 jig to be tested. all measurements are from the center line upon which
 the bushing no.  is placed. taking this as a starting point we find the
 caliper to read  inch. bushing no. , which is undergoing the test,
 should be ⅝ inch from this center line. it has a ¼-inch hole, and
 we therefore insert a plug of this diameter. now adjust the tongue of the
 caliper to the bottom of this plug (as shown in the engraving) and the
 vernier should read . minus one-half the diameter of the plug, or
 ., and any variation from this will show the error of the jig. in
 this case the top surface of b was used and no allowance had to be
 made for its thickness. in case the bottom surface is used, . must be
 deducted from the reading of the caliper.
fig. . attachment for vernier calipers
it is very easy to make a mistake in setting a bushing, and such a
 mistake is equally hard to detect unless some such means of measuring as
 this is at hand. it often happens that jigs and fixtures are put into use
 containing such errors, and the trouble is not discovered until many
 dollars' worth of work has been finished and found worthless. the
 illustration shows but one of the many uses to which this attachment may
 be applied. the figures given on the details are correct for making an
 attachment to be used upon the brown & sharpe vernier caliper, but
 for other calipers they would, of course, have to be altered to suit.[]
improved micrometer beam caliper
fig. . improved micrometer beam caliper
in a beam caliper having a sliding micrometer jaw with or without a
 separate clamping slide, it is necessary to have the beam divided into
 unit spaces, at which the jaw or slide may be accurately fixed, the
 micrometer screw then being used to cover the distance between the
 divisions; but it is difficult to construct a beam caliper of this type
 with holes for a taper setting pin, at exactly equal distances apart;
 consequently a plan that is generally followed in making such tools is to
 provide as many holes through the slide and beam as there are inch
 divisions, each hole being drilled and reamed through both the slide and
 beam at once. if it were attempted to drill the holes through the beam at
 exactly one inch apart, having only one hole in the clamping head and
 using it as a jig for the purpose, it would be found very difficult, if
 not impossible, to get the holes all of one size and exactly one inch
 apart. the design of the micrometer beam caliper shown in fig. , which
 has been patented by mr. frank spalding, providence, rhode island, is
 such, however, that it is not necessary to drill more than one hole
 through the clamping slide. the beam f is grooved longitudinally,
 and in the groove are fitted hardened steel adjusting blocks in which a
 taper hole d is accurately finished. between the blocks are
 filling pieces g, which are brazed or otherwise fastened in the
 groove. holes are drilled, tapped, and countersunk between the blocks and
 the filling pieces g, in which are fitted taper head screws
 ee. the construction is thus obviously such that the
 blocks may be shifted longitudinally by loosening one screw and
 tightening the other. in constructing the caliper, the holes through the
 beam are drilled as accurately as possible, one inch apart, and centered
 in the longitudinal groove, but are made larger than the holes in the
 blocks, so as to provide for slight adjustment.
large beam caliper
fig. . large beam caliper
fig.  shows a large beam caliper designed for machinists and
 patternmakers. it consists of a beam mn and the legs r and
 s, made of cherry wood to the dimensions indicated. the legs are
 secured in position on the beam by means of the thumb screws a,
 which jam against the gibs c at the points of the screws. the gibs
 have holes countersunk for the screws to enter, to hold them
 approximately in place, and the nuts b are of brass, fitted into
 the filling pieces p that keep them from turning. the filling
 pieces are riveted to the legs by means of cherry dowels d. one
 leg s is provided with a fine adjustment consisting of flexible
 steel spring h, ending in a point which is adjusted by the thumb
 screw e. this screw is locked in adjustment by the check nut
 g bearing against the brass nut f, which is inserted in the
 leg as shown.[]
of all measuring instruments used in the shop intended for accurate
 measurements, those working on the principle of the ordinary micrometer
 calipers are the most common. in the present chapter we shall describe
 and illustrate a number of different designs of these tools, intended to
 be used for various purposes. the instruments shown in figs.  to 
 were built, in leisure hours, by mr. a. l. monrad, of east hartford,
 conn.
micrometer for snap gages
fig. . micrometer for snap gages
fig.  shows a form of micrometer that has proved very handy for
 measuring snap gages, and thicknesses, and can also be used as a small
 height gage to measure the distance from a shoulder to the base, as shown
 in fig. . in measuring snap gages or thicknesses, the outside and
 inside of the measuring disks are used, respectively. this instrument may
 also come in very handy when setting tools on the planer or shaper. as
 will be seen in the engraving, there are two sets of graduations on the
 sleeve a, thus enabling the operator to tell at a glance what
 measurement is obtained from the outside or the inside of the measuring
 disks. each of the disks is . inch thick, so that the range of the
 micrometer is . and . inch for the outside and inside,
 respectively. the details of the instrument are as follows:
the sleeve a is composed of the inside measuring disk, the
 graduated sleeve, and the micrometer nut combined. on the disk are two
 projections kk, which are knurled, thus providing a grip when
 operating the tool. the sleeve is threaded on the inside of one end,
 which acts as a micrometer nut, and the outside of this same end is
 threaded to receive the adjusting nut d. the sleeve has two slots,
 each placed  degrees from the graduations, and these provide for
 compensation for wear. the disk part is hardened by heating in a lead
 bath, and is finished by grinding and lapping. the barrel b is the
 same as a regular micrometer barrel, and is graduated with  divisions.
 spindle e consists of the outside disk and the micrometer screw,
 and the barrel b fits on its end, which is tapped out to receive
 the speeder c, which serves to hold the barrel in position. the
 thread is ¼ inch,  pitch, and the disk and unthreaded parts are
 hardened, ground and lapped. to adjust this, instrument, loosen the
 speeder c and turn the barrel until the proper adjustment is
 obtained. then lock the barrel by tightening the speeder again.[]
fig. . micrometer in fig.  used as height gage
micrometer caliper square
fig.  shows an assembled view and the details of a micrometer
 caliper square which, if accurately made, is equal and often preferable
 to the vernier caliper now so generally used. one of its advantages over
 the vernier is that when the measurement is taken, it can be readily
 discerned without straining the eyes, and this instrument is as easy to
 manipulate as the regular micrometer.
in the details, part a, which is the main body of the
 instrument, is made of tool steel, the forward or jaw end being solid
 with the body. this end is hardened, and the jaw ground and lapped. the
 body is bored out and two flats milled on the outside, which lighten it
 up and make it neat in appearance. the jaw end is counterbored out with a
 -degree counterbore to form a bearing for the forward end of the
 micrometer screw. a slot, ⅛ inch in width, extends from the fixed
 jaw to the other end, and in this slides the movable jaw c. there
 are  divisions along the side of this slot, each division being .
 inch apart, giving the tool a range of . inches for outside and .
 inches for inside measurements. the screw b is the most essential
 part of this tool, its construction requiring great accuracy. its
 diameter is ⅜ inch and it is cut with  threads per inch. on its
 forward end fits the cone f, which is hardened and ground, the
 round part acting as the forward bearing of the screw and fitting in the
 -degree counterbored hole in the body a. on its other end fits
 the graduated barrel d and also the speeder g.
fig. . micrometer caliper square
the barrel is graduated in fifty divisions, each division equaling
 . inch. on the inside of the barrel is a -degree bearing which
 rides on the cone m, the cone being held stationary on the end of
 the body. thus it will be seen that both front and back ends of the
 micrometer screw are carried in cone bearings, which give a very small
 point of contact, thereby causing but little friction and preventing any
 danger of gumming up so as to run hard. the sliding jaw c is made
 of tool steel, hardened, ground and lapped, and combined with it is the
 micrometer nut which is drawn to a spring temper. this nut is split and
 adjusted by two screws to compensate for wear. on this jaw are the two
 zero marks that tell at a glance the outside or inside measurements
 taken. the screw and washer, marked h and i, go onto the
 end of the micrometer screw and take up the end play. to make a neat
 appearance, the cap e is placed in the forward counterbored hole,
 being held in place by a tight fit. the adjustment of the tool is
 accomplished by loosening the speeder g and turning the barrel on
 the screw; when the adjustment is made, the speeder is again tightened
 down and the barrel locked.[]
micrometer depth gage
the depth gage, shown in fig. , has a ½-inch movement of the rod,
 and may be used with rods of any desired length. these have small
 -degree-on-a-side grooves cut into them at intervals of ½ inch. a small
 spiral spring, marked i, gives the rod a constant downward
 pressure, so that, when taking a measurement, the base of the tool is
 placed on the piece of work, and the rod always finds the bottom of the
 hole; then, by tightening the knurled screw f the rod is clamped
 in position and the tool may be picked up and its measurement read from
 the dial. the graduations on this instrument are similar to those of the
 vernier caliper, only they are much plainer, as a half-inch movement of
 the rod turns the dial one complete revolution. the figures on the dial
 denote tenths of an inch, and those on the body of the tool thousandths;
 each graduation on the dial is therefore equal to ., so that to show
 the depth of a hole to be . the dial would be revolved around so that
 the seventh division beyond the  mark would be near to , and then by
 looking from the  mark toward the left, the third graduation on the body
 and one on the dial would be in line, thus denoting ..
fig. . micrometer depth gage
the most essential part of this tool is the threaded screw b,
 which acts as a rack, and the worm-wheel, solid with the dial c.
 the upper end of the screw forms a split chuck which grips the measuring
 rods, while the part marked r is flatted off, and against this
 portion bears a threaded sleeve g, which acts as a key to keep the
 screw in position. this sleeve is threaded, both inside and outside, and
 screws into the body of the tool, while the binding screw f fits
 into it and binds against a small piece of copper, marked h, which
 in turn holds the screw in position. the thread on b is . inch
 in diameter and is cut with  threads per inch. the worm-wheel which
 meshes into this screw is solid with the dial, as shown at c. it
 is . inch in diameter, and requires great accuracy in cutting; it is
 not hobbed, but the teeth, of which there are twenty, are milled with a
 circular cutter of the same diameter as the screw b plus .
 inch. the little studs, marked ee, on the dial and on the body
 k, hold the coiled spring in position. very great accuracy must be
 attained when locating the holes in k that are to receive the
 screw and dial b and c. the screw marked j fits into
 the dial, where it serves as a bearing and also holds the dial in
 position. the knurled cap d tightens the split chuck in order to
 hold the measuring rod firmly.[]
indicator for accuracy of lead-screws
fig. . indicator for accuracy of lead-screws
all of the tools that have been described require an accurately cut
 screw, and, as very few lathes are capable of producing this, it may be
 well to illustrate an indicator for testing the accuracy of the
 lead-screw, and to explain the method by which it is used. this
 instrument is shown in fig. , where it is applied to a test screw
 k. it consists of a body a on one end of which is a
 projection l serving as the upper bearing for the pivoted lever
 d. this lever swings about a small steel pivot which can be
 adjusted by the screw e. the rear end of the lever is forked, and
 between the prongs is passed a thread making a double turn about the
 pivot f that carries the pointer j. any movement of this
 lever will, therefore, cause this pointer to revolve about the dial
 c. this dial has  divisions, each indicating one-half thousandth
 of an inch movement of the front end of the lever, so that a total
 revolution of the pointer about the dial would indicate a movement of the
 front end of the lever of . inch. the screws i serve to hold
 the dial in place on the body of the indicator, while the spring m
 keeps the pointer normally at the zero mark. the indicator is held in the
 toolpost by the arm g, which can be set at any angle and firmly
 clamped by the screw h.
to use the indicator, remove the screw from a micrometer which is
 known to be accurate, and, with the aid of a brass bushing, chuck it in
 the lathe so that the thread end will project. now gear the lathe to cut
  threads per inch and apply the indicator. when the lathe is started,
 the point of the indicator follows along in the thread of the micrometer
 screw, and any variation in the lead will be noted by a movement of the
 pointer over the dial. if, on the other hand, no movement takes place, it
 is an indication that the pitch of the lead-screw is correct.[]
micrometer attachment for reading ten-thousandths of an inch
fig. . micrometer with attachment for reading ten-thousandths of an inch
fig.  shows an attachment for micrometers designed and made for
 readings in tenths of thousandths of an inch. with very little fitting it
 is interchangeable for -, -, or -inch b. & s. micrometers. the
 idea is simple, as can be seen by the illustration. the diameter of the
 thimble is increased  to  by a disk which is graduated with  lines
 instead of , making each line represent . inch instead of .
 inch. a piece of steel is then turned up and bored and cut away so as to
 form the index blade and a shell to clasp the micrometer frame, the whole
 thing being made in one piece. the thimble disk being just a good
 wringing fit, it can be easily adjusted  to . the attachment can be
 removed when fine measuring is not required.[]
special micrometer for large dimensions
fig.  shows a -inch micrometer caliper designed for measuring from
  to  inches by half-thousandths. the sliding micrometer head travels on
 a cylinder barrel through which a hole is accurately bored to suit three
 plugs, one, two, and three inches long, as shown in the engraving. these
 plugs serve to locate the traveling head at fixed distances one inch
 apart. the micrometer screw itself has a travel of one inch, like any
 standard micrometer. a locknut is used to hold the screw in any desired
 position. a thumb screw at the end of the barrel bears against the end
 plug, and zero marks are provided to bring the screw against the plug
 with the same degree of pressure at each setting. when the head is
 clamped by means of the locking nut, it is as rigid as though it were
 solid with the barrel, and the faces of the measuring points are thus
 always parallel.
fig. . special micrometer for large dimensions
combination micrometer
fig. . combined one- and two-inch micrometer
a combined one- and two-inch micrometer is shown in fig. . one side
 records measurements up to one inch, and the other side up to two inches.
 a single knurled sleeve or nut serves to move the double-ended measuring
 piece one way or the other as desired, this piece having a travel of one
 inch. the spindle is non-rotating, so that the faces of the screw and
 anvil are always parallel. a locking device holds the screw in any
 position. this tool is convenient for use both in measuring and as a
 gage, since it can be conveniently held by the finger ring appearing at
 the back.
micrometer stop for the lathe
most micrometer lathe stops are limited in their use to work where
 only a stationary height is required. it is, however, often necessary to
 use the stop at different heights, to accommodate different lathes; then
 again, we wish to use it on the right-hand side as well as the left. the
 form of holder shown in fig.  can be used either right or left, and for
 various heights, and, by simply taking out the screw a, the
 micrometer may be removed and used in any other form of holder
 desired.
fig. . micrometer stop for the lathe
both an assembled view and details of the holder are shown in the
 engraving, so that it can be easily constructed by any one desiring to do
 so. the micrometer and barrel may be procured from any of the
 manufacturers of measuring instruments. the swivel c is bored out
 so that the axis of the micrometer screw will be parallel to the body of
 the holder when it is in place. the swivel is made of tool steel and is
 fastened to the holder by the screw a. it is hardened and lapped
 to a true bearing surface on the sides and bottom, and so adjusted that
 it will turn to either side and remain in the desired position without
 moving the screw. the holder b is milled through its entire length
 with a -degree cutter so that it will fit along the ways of the lathe,
 and the bottom is lapped to a true surface. for a neat appearance, the
 tool should be color hardened. on top the holder is spotted or
 countersunk with a drill to form a recess for the c-clamp. a knurled ring
 d is driven onto the micrometer sleeve so that it can be turned
 around to bring the graduations uppermost when the position of the barrel
 is changed.[]
micrometer surface and height gage
fig. . micrometer surface and height gage
fig.  shows a form of surface gage that has proved very handy, and
 which can be used also as a height gage for measuring distances from
 shoulders to the base. if accurately made it is equal, and often
 preferable, to the vernier or slide caliper now so generally used with an
 attachment to the sliding jaw. one of its advantages over the vernier is
 the readiness with which the graduations are discerned, and it is as easy
 to manipulate as the ordinary micrometer. the part b, which forms
 the main body of the instrument, is made of tool steel, and one end is
 fitted into the base where it is held in position by the screw d.
 the remainder is milled to a thickness of ⅛ inch and has
 graduations of . inch for a distance of three inches. the screw
 a is the most essential part of the tool, and its construction
 requires great accuracy. its diameter is ½ inch, and it is cut with 
 threads per inch. in the upper end of the screw is driven the ball
 h for the sake of giving a neat appearance. the top of the thread
 is turned off . inch to allow the scriber f to slide freely on
 the screw. the barrel i is used for raising and lowering the
 slide, but instead of having the graduations placed directly upon it,
 they are made upon the sleeve c, which fits over a shoulder on the
 barrel. this allows more easy means of adjustment than would be possible
 were the graduations placed on the barrel itself. the sleeve is graduated
 with fifty divisions each equaling a movement of the scriber of .
 inch. this sleeve may be turned by means of a small spanner wrench so as
 to bring the zero line into correct position to compensate for wear. a
 knurled locking nut is also provided for holding the scriber in any fixed
 position. the scriber itself is hardened and lapped to a finished
 surface, the tail end being slotted and provided with two screws to
 compensate for wear. on the scriber is placed the zero mark which shows
 at a glance the measurement that is being taken. the block k is
 three inches in height, and by using this block and placing the gage on
 its top, the range of the gage is increased to six inches. the screw
 e is used for fastening the gage to the top of the block. the
 center of the block is drilled out and slots cut through the sides in
 order to make it light and neat in appearance.[]
micrometer of from one- to five-inch capacity
fig. . micrometer of from one- to five-inch capacity
fig.  shows a very simple and light five-inch micrometer that can be
 quickly set to exact position from one to five inches. the round beam is
 graduated by a series of angular grooves,  inch apart, which are of such
 a form and depth that the clamping fingers at the end of part a
 spring in, allowing one inch adjustment of the beam to be quickly and
 positively made. the sleeve k is of tool steel, being counterbored
 from the forward end for all but one-half inch of its length. for this
 half inch it is threaded on the inside and acts as a micrometer nut. the
 outside of the same end is threaded to receive the adjusting nut
 f, and two slots are cut in the sleeve, at  degrees with the
 graduations. these slots, by a movement of the nut f, provide a
 means for compensating for wear. the bushing e is hardened and
 lapped, and fitted tightly in the forward counterbore of this sleeve,
 where it acts as a guide for the front end of the micrometer screw. the
 barrel j is the same as that of a regular micrometer, and is
 graduated in . inch divisions.
the most essential part of the tool is the threaded screw i,
 over the end of which fits the barrel j. the end is tapped out to
 receive the speeder h, which serves to hold the barrel in
 position. the thread is / inch in diameter, with  threads per inch,
 while the unthreaded part is hardened, ground and lapped. to adjust the
 instrument, loosen the speeder h and turn the barrel until the
 proper adjustment is obtained; lock the barrel by again tightening the
 speeder. the beam c has a ¼-inch hole drilled throughout its
 entire length in order to make it light. small -degree grooves are cut
 into it at intervals of  inch, and a ⅛-inch slot is milled
 through one side to within ¼ inch of the forward end. the back end of
 part a forms a spring-tempered split chuck, which grips the beam
 and holds a in position, while the exterior is threaded to receive
 the knurled cap b by which the chuck is tightened firmly to the
 beam. from the front end, toward the split chuck, the body is
 counterbored ⅝ inch and the bushing d driven in tight. this
 bushing has a key g fitted into it, which slides in the slot of
 the beam and prevents the arm from turning. the projecting arm is bored
 and tapped to receive the sleeve k. this gage must be carefully
 and accurately made to be of value.[]
inside micrometer for setting calipers
fig. . method of setting calipers from inside micrometers
fig.  shows an application of inside micrometers which is very
 handy. the hole for the scriber in the scriber clamp of a surface gage is
 reamed out to fit the rods used with inside micrometers. this forms a
 convenient holder for the micrometer when used for setting outside
 calipers to it. the calipers can be set easily and accurately at the same
 time, and where extreme accuracy is not necessary this arrangement is
 more handy than that of using large-sized micrometers.
with care and practice an accuracy of within one-quarter of . inch
 is obtainable in this way. mistakes, in fact, are more easily guarded
 against than is the case when using the micrometers directly.
micrometer frame
fig. . useful and handy micrometer frame
fig.  shows a micrometer frame used some years ago at the
 westinghouse works. the frame is an aluminum casting, and the anvil is
 simply a tool-steel pin, which fits well in the hole into which it is
 inserted, and can be clamped anywhere within the limits of its length.
 the micrometer end of the frame is supplied with an inside micrometer
 head. the tool is adjusted to a gage, either to a standard pin gage, or
 to an inside micrometer gage. the capacities of three of these
 micrometers in a set may be from about ½ to  inches,  to  inches,
 and  to  inches. when the head is turned outward, as shown in the
 lower view in the cut, the tool is very handy around a horizontal boring
 machine where a pin gage cannot be used without removing the boring
 bar.
micrometer stop for the lathe
fig. . micrometer stop for the lathe
the simple micrometer stop shown in fig.  is used on the engine
 lathe for obtaining accurate movements of the lathe carriage. it consists
 of a micrometer head, which can be purchased from any micrometer
 manufacturer, and a machine steel body which is bored to fit the
 micrometer head. this tool is clamped on the front way of the lathe bed,
 and when the jaw of the micrometer is against the lathe carriage, it can
 easily be adjusted to a thousandth of an inch. of course, care should be
 taken not to bump the carriage against the micrometer.[]
use of micrometer for internal thread cutting
fig. . method of using micrometer for internal thread cutting
fig.  illustrates a means of determining the size of internally
 threaded work. the work shown is intended for a lathe chuck. the outside
 diameter of the hub on the work is turned to the same size as the hubs on
 small faceplates which are furnished with all new lathes. the threaded
 size is then taken and transferred with a micrometer, over the anvil of
 which is fitted a -degree point as shown enlarged at a. in
 connection with a graduated cross-feed screw this greatly facilitates the
 work over the usual cut-and-try method.[]
inside micrometer
the inside micrometer shown in sections in figs.  and  is adapted
 to measuring, by use of extension rods, from  inches up to any size of
 hole, and has one inch adjustment of the measuring screw.
figs.  and . section of inside micrometer
referring to the section shown in fig. , the measuring screw
 s is secured to the thimble b with the screw d, the
 head of which is hardened and forms the anvil. by loosening this screw
 d, the thimble can be rotated to compensate for wear. the wear of
 the measuring screw and nut is taken up by screwing the bushing a
 into the frame with the wrench shown in fig. . this bushing is split in
 three sections for about two-thirds of its length on the threaded end.
 the three small lugs on the wrench fit into these slots. the handle end
 of the wrench is a screw driver which is used for manipulating the set
 screw c. the bushing is made an easy fit in the frame on its plain
 end and tapered, as shown, on its outside threaded part. this thread
 being the same pitch as the measuring screw, adjustment for wear does not
 affect the reading of the micrometer. this manner of adjustment brings
 the nut squarely down on the measuring screw for its whole length,
 presenting the same amount of wearing surface after adjustment as when
 new.
fig. . handle for inside micrometer
fig. . wrench used with inside micrometer
the point f, which is hardened on its outer end, screws into
 the frame, and is secured by the taper-headed screw o, which
 screws into and expands the split and threaded end of the point f.
 the handle, fig. , clamps over the knurled part of the frame for use in
 small, deep holes. the rods, six in number, running from  to  inches
 inclusive, are made by screwing a sleeve onto a rod with a hardened point
 and locking it with a taper-headed screw on its threaded and split end,
 the same as in the point f. the extension pieces, fig. , are
 adjustable, on their socketed ends, in the same way, and run in lengths
 of , ,  inches, etc.[]
fig. . adjustable extension pieces for inside micrometer
direct fractional-reading micrometer
fig. . direct fractional-reading micrometer
the direct fractional-reading micrometer shown in fig.  is the
 result of talks with many mechanics in which all agreed that such a
 feature added to a micrometer would, by making it both a fractional and
 decimal gage, more than double its practical value. while approximate
 readings in ths, etc., may be obtained by the graduations on the barrel
 b as on an ordinary inch scale, the exact readings of th, etc.,
 may be obtained only by reference to graduations on the movable thimble
 a. there are but eight places on a which coincide with the
 long graduation line on b when any th, d, th, or th is
 being measured, and each of these eight places is marked with a line, and
 the th, d, th, or th for which that line should be used is marked
 thereon. (see a and b, fig. .) the line a would be
 used for /, /, /, etc., and the line b for /, /,
 /, etc. now suppose we wish to accurately measure / inch. we
 first roughly read it off the inch scale on sleeve b by turning
 out thimble a. having secured it closely by drawing edge of
 a over that graduation, we find that the line a (fig. )
 on the movable thimble very nearly or exactly coincides with the long
 graduation line on b. when these lines coincide, we have the exact
 measurement of / inch without reference to how many thousandths may
 be contained in the fraction. thus all through the scale any fraction may
 be found instantly. there is no mental arithmetic, use of tables, or
 memory work in using the tool. the new graduations are independent of the
 old, and may be used equally well with or without them.
fig. . graduations on the fractional-reading micrometer
micrometers may also be graduated as in fig. . instead of using the
 zero line on a as a base line, a point is taken one-fifth of a
 turn around a, and the graduated scale on b is placed to
 correspond, as shown in the engraving; also, instead of making lines
 a, b, etc., on a, full length, they are made about
 half an inch long, and the numerators are entirely omitted and the
 denominators placed at the end instead of under the line. to the ordinary
 user of the tool, this is all that is necessary for a perfectly clear
 reading of the fractions.[]
fig. . another method of graduating for fractional reading
sensitive attachment for measuring instruments
no matter how finely and accurately micrometers and verniers may be
 made, dependence must in all cases be placed on the sensitiveness of a
 man's hand to obtain the exact dimensions of the piece to be measured. in
 order to overcome this difficulty and eliminate the personal equation in
 the manufacture of duplicate and interchangeable parts, the sensitive
 attachment to the micrometer shown in fig.  may be used, and will be
 found of much value.
fig. . sensitive micrometer attachment
the auxiliary barrel a is held to the anvil of the micrometer
 by means of a thumb screw b. at the inside end of the barrel is a
 secondary anvil c, the base of which bears against the short arm
 of the indicating lever d. the action will be clearly seen by
 reference to the engraving. the micrometer is so set that when a gage,
 g, of exact size, is placed between the measuring points, the long
 arm of the indicator stands at the  mark. if the pieces being calipered
 vary in the least from the standard size it will be readily noted by the
 movement of the pointer. hard rubber shapes turned from rough casting
 often vary from . to . inch after having passed the inspector's
 test with an ordinary micrometer. with this attachment the inspector's
 helper can detect very minute variations from the limit size. anything
 within the limits of the micrometer can be made to show to the naked eye
 variations as small as a ten-thousandth inch.[]
another sensitive micrometer attachment
fig. . another sensitive micrometer attachment
when testing the diameters of pieces that are handled in great
 quantities and are all supposed to be within certain close limits of a
 standard dimension, the ordinary micrometer presents the difficulty of
 having to be moved for each piece, and small variations in diameters have
 to be carefully read off from the graduations on the barrel. not only
 does this take a comparatively long time, but it also easily happens that
 the differences from the standard diameter are not carefully noted, and
 pieces are liable to pass inspection that would not pass if a convenient
 arrangement for reading off the differences were at hand. fig.  shows a
 regular brown & sharpe micrometer fitted with a sensitive arrangement
 for testing and inspecting the diameters of pieces which must be within
 certain close limits of variation. the addition to the ordinary
 micrometer is all at the anvil end of the instrument. the anvil itself is
 loose and consists of a plunger b, held in place by a small pin
 a. the pin has freedom to move in a slot in the micrometer body,
 as shown in the enlarged view in the cut. a spring c holds the
 plunger b up against the work to be measured, and a screw d
 is provided for obtaining the proper tension in the spring. the screw and
 the spring are contained in an extension e screwed and doweled to
 the body of the micrometer. a pointer or indicator is provided which is
 pivoted at f and has one extensional arm resting against the pin
 a, which is pointed in order to secure a line contact. at the end
 of the indicator a small scale is graduated with the zero mark in the
 center, and as the indicator swings to one side or the other the
 variations in the size of the piece measured are easily determined. a
 small spring g is provided for holding the pointer up against the
 pin a. the case h simply serves the purpose of protecting
 the spring mentioned. as the plunger b takes up more space than
 the regular anvil, the readings of the micrometer cannot be direct. the
 plunger b can be made of such dimensions, however, that . inch
 deducted from the barrel and thimble reading will give the actual
 dimension. such a deduction is easily done in all cases. in other words,
 the reading of the micrometer should be . when the face of the
 measuring screw is in contact with the face of the plunger; the .
 inch mark is thus the zero line of this measuring tool.
when desiring to measure a number of pieces, a standard size piece or
 gage is placed between the plunger b and the face l of the
 micrometer screw, and the instrument is adjusted until the indicator
 points exactly to zero on the small scale provided on the body of the
 micrometer. after this the micrometer is locked, and the pieces to be
 measured are pushed one after another between the face l and the
 plunger b, the indications of the pointer m being meanwhile
 observed. whenever the pointer shows too great a difference, the piece,
 of course, does not pass inspection. all deviations are easily detected,
 and any person of ordinary common sense can be employed for inspecting
 the work.
micrometer scale
fig. . micrometer mounted on machinist's scale
a micrometer, mounted as shown in fig.  is very handy. the
 micrometer may be used in combination with a -, -, -, or -inch
 scale. it can be adjusted on standard plugs, or one can make a set of
 gages up to  inches, out of /-inch round tool steel wire, and use
 these for setting. in mounting the micrometer, before cutting it apart,
 mill the shoulders shown at a, and in milling the bottom pieces
 b, use a piece of machine steel long enough for both, cutting the
 piece in half after milling the slots. in this way one obtains perfect
 alignment. in a shop where a set of large micrometers is not kept, this
 arrangement is very useful.[]
among the miscellaneous measuring tools and gages dealt with in this
 chapter are tools and gages for measuring and comparing tapers,
 adjustable gages, radius gages, gages for grinding drills, sensitive
 gages, tools for gaging taper threaded holes, contour gages, etc. of
 course, these are offered merely as examples of what can be done in the
 line of measuring tools for different purposes, and, while having a
 distinct and direct value to the mechanic, they also have a great
 indirect value, because they furnish suggestions for the designing and
 making of tools for similar purposes.
tool for measuring tapers
fig. . taper measuring tool
fig.  shows a tool which has proved very useful. it is a tool for
 measuring tapers on dowel pins, reamers, drill shanks, or anything to be
 tapered. most machinists know that to find the taper of a shank they must
 use their calipers for one end and reset them for the other end; or else
 caliper two places, say, three inches apart, and if, for instance, the
 difference should be / inch, they must multiply this difference by
 four to get the taper per foot. with the tool above mentioned, all this
 trouble in calipering and figuring is saved. simply place the shank or
 reamer to be measured between pins a, b, c, and
 d, and slide h and k together. then the taper can be
 read at once on the graduated scale at l. the construction of the
 tool will be readily understood. the body or base f has a cross
 piece supporting the two pins a and b. on this slides piece
 k, which has at its right end the graduated segment. the screw
 g is fast to piece k, and upon it swivels the pointer
 e, which carries the two pins c and d. thus these
 two pins can be brought into contact with a tapered piece of any diameter
 within the capacity of the tool, and the swivel screw g allows the
 pins to adjust themselves to the taper of the work and the pointer
 e to move to the left or right, showing instantly the taper per
 foot.
as the pins a and b are ½ inch apart, which is ⅛
 of a foot, and the distance from g to l is ½ inches, which
 is three times longer than the distance between a and b,
 the graduations should be / inch apart, in order to indicate the taper
 per foot in eighths of an inch.[]
taper gage
fig. . handy taper gage
a handy taper gage is shown in fig. . the blades of the gage are
 made of tool steel. the edge of the blade a is v-shaped, and the
 blade b has a v-groove to correspond. the end of b is
 offset so as to make the joint and allow the two blades to be in the same
 plane. a strong screw and nut are provided to hold the blades at any
 setting. the user of this gage looks under the edge of a, and is
 thereby enabled to tell whether the taper coincides with that set by the
 gage, and also where a taper piece needs touching up to make it true.[]
test gage for maintaining standard tapers
fig. . test gage for maintaining standard tapers
in steam injector work, accurately ground reamers of unusual tapers
 are commonly required, and the gage shown in fig.  was designed to
 maintain the prevailing standard. it consists of a graduated bar,  inch
 square, with the slot f running its entire length. the stationary
 head a is secured in position flush with the end of the bar, and
 the sliding head b is fitted with a tongue which guides it in the
 slot. this head may be secured in any desired position by means of a
 knurled thumb nut. the bushings d and d′ are made of tool steel, hardened and
 ground to a knife edge on the inside flush with the face. all bushings
 are made interchangeable as to outside diameter.
the head b is fitted with an indicating edge e which is
 set flush with the knife edge of the bushing. the reading indicates to
 . inch the distance the bushings are from each other, and the
 difference in their diameter being known, it is easy to compute the
 taper. with this gage it is possible to maintain the standard tapers
 perfectly correct, each reamer being marked with the reading as shown by
 the scale.[]
inside and outside adjustable gages
fig. . adjustable gage for inside and outside measurements
fig.  shows an inside and an outside adjustable gage for accurate
 work, used in laying out drill jigs, and in setting tools on lathes,
 shapers, planers, and milling machines. the outside gage is shown in the
 side view and in the sectional end view marked y. at x in
 the same figure is a sectional end view showing how the gage is
 constructed for inside work. the top and bottom edges are rounded, so
 that the diameters of holes may be easily measured.
the gage consists of a stepped block b, mounted so as to slide
 upon the inclined edge of the block c. there are v-ways upon the
 upper edge of the latter, and the block b is split and arranged to
 clamp over the ways by the screw shown at s. all parts of the gage
 are hardened and the faces of the steps marked a, are ground and
 finished so that at any position of the slide they are parallel to the
 base of the block c. the lower split portion of the block is
 spring-tempered to prevent breaking under the action of the screw, and
 also to cause it to spring open when loosened. the gage has the advantage
 that it can be quickly adjusted to any size within its limits, which does
 away with using blocks. in planing a piece to a given thickness, the gage
 may be set to that height with great accuracy by means of a micrometer
 caliper, and then the planer or shaper tool adjusted down to the gage.
 this method does away with the "cut-and-try" process, and will bring the
 finishing cut within . inch of the required size. if the piece being
 planed, or the opening to be measured, is larger than the extreme limit
 of the gage, parallels may be used. in fitting bushings into bushing
 holes, the adjustable gage may be moved out to fit the hole, and then,
 when the bushing is finished to the diameter given by the gage, as
 determined by a micrometer caliper, a driving fit is ensured.[]
radius gage
fig. . radius gage
fig.  shows a radius gage which has proved to be very handy for all
 such work as rounding corners or grinding tools to a given radius. the
 blades are of thin steel, and are fastened together at the end by a
 rivet, thus forming a tool similar to the familiar screw pitch gage. the
 right-hand corner of each blade is rounded off to the given radius, while
 the left-hand corner is cut away to the same radius, thus providing an
 instrument to be used for either convex or concave surfaces. the radius
 to which each blade is shaped is plainly stamped upon the side.[]
gage for grinding drills
fig. . gage for grinding drills
fig.  shows a gage for use in grinding drills, which has been found
 very handy and accurate. this gage enables either a large or small drill
 to lie solidly in the groove provided for it on top of the gage, and the
 lips can then be tested for their truth in width, or angle, much easier
 and quicker than with the gages in common use without the groove. there
 is a line, to set the blade b by, on the stock at an angle of 
 degrees at the top of the graduated blade, and the user can easily make
 other lines, if needed for special work. the blade is clamped in position
 by the knurled nut n at the back, and can be thus adjusted to any
 angle. the stock a is cut away where the blade is pivoted on, so
 that one side of the blade comes directly in line with the middle of the
 groove.[]
tool for gaging taper threaded holes
fig. . tool for gaging taper threaded holes
the tool shown in fig.  is used for gaging taper threaded holes in
 boilers when fitting studs. it is a simple, though very useful and
 economical tool, and it will doubtless be appreciated by those having
 much work of this kind to do. the hole in which the stud is to be fitted
 is calipered by filling the threads of the plug with chalk, and then
 screwing the plug in the hole. when the plug is removed the chalk will
 show exactly the largest diameter of the hole.[]
contour gage
fig. . setting contour gage to turned sample
fig. . end view of contour gage
figs. ,  and  illustrate a special tool which will be found of
 great value in certain classes of work. the need of some such device
 becomes apparent when patterns and core boxes are required to be
 accurately checked with the drawings of brass specialties, in particular.
 the tool is applied to the work, and the wires pressed down onto the
 contour by using the side of a lead pencil. of course, patterns parted on
 the center could have their halves laid directly on the drawing without
 using the contour gage, but some patterns are cored and inseparable. such
 a tool proves a relentless check upon the patternmaker, who, by making
 the patterns larger than necessary, can cause a considerable loss in a
 business where thousands of casts are made yearly from the same patterns.
 as a ready and universal templet it is very useful.[]
fig. . testing core-box with gage
testing a lead-screw
fig. . micrometer for testing lathe lead-screw
a reliable way for testing the pitch of a lead-screw, at any position
 of its length, is to procure a micrometer screw and barrel complete, such
 as can be purchased from any of the manufacturers of accurate measuring
 instruments, and bore out a holder so that the axis of the micrometer
 screw will be parallel to the holder when the screw is in place, as shown
 in fig. . with the lathe geared for any selected pitch, the nut engaged
 with the lead-screw, and all backlash of screw, gears, etc., properly
 taken up, clamp the micrometer holder to the lathe bed, as shown in fig.
 , so that the body of the holder is parallel to the carriage. adjust
 the micrometer to one inch when the point of the screw bears against the
 carriage and with a surface gage scribe a line on the outer edge of the
 faceplate. now rotate the lathe spindle any number of full revolutions
 that are required to cause the carriage to travel over the portion of the
 lead-screw that is being tested, bringing the line on the faceplate to
 the surface gage point. if the distance traveled by the carriage is not
 greater than one inch, the micrometer will indicate the error directly.
 for lengths of carriage travel greater than one inch, an end measuring
 rod, set to the number of even inches required, can be used between the
 micrometer point and lathe carriage. the error in the lead-screw is then
 easily determined by the adjustment that may be required to make a
 contact for the measuring points between the carriage and the micrometer
 screw. the pitch can be tested at as many points as are considered
 necessary by using end measuring rods, of lengths selected, set to good
 vernier calipers. the style of holder shown can, with the micrometer
 screw, be used for numerous other shop tests, and as the screw is only
 held by friction caused by the clamping screw, it can easily be removed
 and placed in any form of holder that is found necessary.[]
fig. . testing a lathe lead-screw
simple tool for measuring angles
fig. . special tool for measuring angles
fig.  shows a very simple, but at the same time, a very ingenious
 tool for measuring angles. strictly speaking, the tool is not intended
 for measuring angles, but rather for comparing angles of the same size.
 the illustration shows so plainly both the construction and the
 application of the tool, that an explanation would seem superfluous. it
 will be noticed that any angle conceivable can be obtained in an instant,
 and the tool can be clamped at this angle by means of screws passing
 through the joints between the straight and curved parts of which the
 tool consists. linear measurements can also be taken conveniently, one of
 the straight arms of the tool being graduated. as both of the arms which
 constitute the actual angle comparator are in the same plane, it is all
 the easier to make accurate comparisons. this tool is of german design,
 and is manufactured by carl mahr, esslingen a. n.
bevel gear-testing gage
fig. . sensitive gear-testing gage
in fig.  is shown a sensitive gage for inspecting small bevel gears.
 the special case shown to which the gage is applied in the engraving is a
 small brass miter gear finished on a screw machine, in which case some of
 the holes through the gears were not concentric with the beveled face of
 the gears, causing the gears to bind when running together in pairs. the
 gage shown is quite inexpensive, but it indicates the slightest
 inaccuracy.
[] machinery, october, .
[] m. h. ball, april, .
[] m. h. ball, february, .
[] harry ash, april, .
[] m. h. ball, march, .
[] ezra f. landis, may, .
[] l. s. brown, march, .
[] c. w. putnam, october, .
[] jos. m. stabel, may, .
[] jos. m. stabel, may, .
[] jos. m. stabel, may, .
[] jos. m. stabel, may, .
[] p. l. l. yorgensen, february,
[] a. l. monrad, december,
[] a. l. monrad, december,
[] a. l. monrad, december,
[] j. l. marshall, february,
[] charles sherman, november,
[] m. h. ball, may, .
[] chas. a. kelley, may,
[] h. j. bachmann, december,
[] wm. ainscough, may, .
[] john aspenleiter, october,
[] w. w. cowles, june, .
[] i. b. niemand, december,
[] geo. m. woodbury, february,
[] a. putnam, july, .
[] m. h. ball, october, .
[] f. rattek, january, .
[] howard d. yoder, december,
[] w. cantelo, july, .
end of the project gutenberg ebook of measuring tools, by unknown
***** this file should be named -h.htm or -h.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
 http://www.gutenberg.org//////
produced by chris curnow, keith edkins and the online
distributed proofreading team at http://www.pgdp.net (this
file was produced from images generously made available
by the internet archive)
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at
 www.gutenberg.org/license.
section . general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph .e..
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
.e.. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs .e.
through .e. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .e. or
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .e. through .e. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
.e.. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
.e.. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .e. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
.e.. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
