daughter of chaos and eternal night.”
pope.
minerva, having forced her unattractive predecessor to beat an
ignominious retreat, quickly seized the scepter, and immediately
began to rule in her stead.
naming
of athens.
not long after her birth, cecrops, a phœnician, came to
greece, where he founded a beautiful city in the province since
called attica. all the gods watched his undertaking
with great interest; and finally, seeing the town
promised to become a thriving place, each wished the privilege
of naming it. a general council was held, and after some deliberation
most of the gods withdrew their claims. soon none
but minerva and neptune were left to contend for the coveted
honor.
to settle the quarrel without evincing any partiality, jupiter
announced that the city would be intrusted to the protection of
the deity who would create the most useful object for the use of
man. raising his trident, neptune struck the ground, from which
a noble horse sprang forth, amid the exclamations of wonder and
admiration of all the spectators. his qualities were duly explained
by his proud creator, and all thought it quite impossible
for minerva to surpass him. loudly they laughed, and scornfully
too, when she, in her turn, produced an olive tree; but
when she had told them the manifold uses to which wood, fruit,
foliage, twigs, etc., could be applied, and explained that the
olive was a sign of peace and prosperity, and therefore far more
desirable than the horse, the emblem of war and wretchedness,
they could but acknowledge her gift the most serviceable, and
award her the prize.
to commemorate this victory over her rival, minerva gave
her own name of athene to the city, whose inhabitants, from
that time forth, were taught to honor her as their tutelary
goddess.
[pg ]
ever at jupiter’s side, minerva often aided him by her wise
counsels, and in times of war borrowed his terrible shield, the
ægis, which she flung over her shoulder when she sallied forth
to give her support to those whose cause was just.
“her shoulder bore
the dreadful ægis with its shaggy brim
bordered with terror. there was strife, and there
was fortitude, and there was fierce pursuit,
and there the gorgon’s head, a ghastly sight,
deformed and dreadful, and a sign of woe.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
the din of battle had no terrors for this doughty goddess,
and on every occasion she was wont to plunge into the thickest
of the fray with the utmost valor.
story of
arachne.
these virile tastes were, however, fully counterbalanced by
some exclusively feminine, for minerva was as deft with her
needle as with her sword. in greece there lived
in those olden times a maiden by the name of
arachne. pretty, young, and winsome, she would have been
loved by all had it not been for her inordinate pride, not in her
personal advantages, but in her skill as a needlewoman.
arachne, in her conceit, fancied that no one could equal the
work done by her deft fingers, so she boasted far and wide that
she would have no fear to match her skill with minerva’s. she
made this remark so loudly and so frequently, that the goddess was
finally annoyed, and left her seat in high olympus to come down
upon earth and punish the maiden. in the guise of an old
crone, she entered arachne’s house, seated herself, and began
a conversation. in a few minutes the maiden had resumed
her usual strain, and renewed her rash boast. minerva gently
advised her to be more modest, lest she should incur the wrath
of the gods by her presumptuous words; but arachne was so
blinded by her conceit, that she scorned the well-meant warning,
saucily tossed her head, and declared she wished the goddess
would hear her, and propose a contest, in which she would
[pg ]
surely be able to prove the truth of her assertions. this insolent
speech so incensed minerva, that she cast aside her disguise and
accepted the challenge.
both set up their looms, and began to weave exquisite designs
in tapestry: minerva choosing as her subject her contest with
neptune; and arachne, the kidnapping of europa. in silence
the fair weavers worked, and their webs grew apace under their
practiced fingers. the assembled gods, the horse, the olive tree,
seemed to live and move under minerva’s flashing shuttle.
“emongst these leaves she made a butterflie,
with excellent device and wondrous slight,
fluttring among the olives wantonly,
that seem’d to live, so like it was in sight:
the velvet nap which on his wings doth lie,
the silken downe with which his backe is dight,
his broad outstretched hornes, his hayrie thies,
his glorious colours, and his glistering eies.”
spenser.
arachne, in the mean while, was intent upon her swimming
bull, against whose broad breast the waves splashed, and upon a
half-laughing, half-frightened girl, who clung to the bull’s horns,
while the wind played with her flowing tresses and garments.
“sweet europa’s mantle blew unclasp’d,
from off her shoulder backward borne:
from one hand droop’d a crocus: one hand grasp’d
the mild bull’s golden horn.”
tennyson.
the finishing touches all given, each turned to view her
rival’s work, and at the very first glance arachne was forced to
acknowledge her failure. to be thus outstripped, after all her
proud boasts, was humiliating indeed. bitterly did arachne now
repent of her folly; and in her despair she bound a rope about
her neck, and hung herself. minerva saw her discomfited rival
was about to escape: so she quickly changed her dangling body
[pg ]
into a spider, and condemned her to weave and spin without
ceasing,—a warning to all conceited mortals.
worship of
minerva.
minerva, the goddess of wisdom, was widely worshiped. temples
and altars without number were dedicated to her service,
the most celebrated of all being the parthenon
at athens. naught but the ruins of this mighty
pile now exist; but they suffice to testify to the beauty of the
edifice, which served, in turn, as temple, church, mosque, and
finally as powder magazine.
“fair parthenon! yet still must fancy weep
for thee, thou work of nobler spirits flown.
bright, as of old, the sunbeams o’er thee sleep
in all their beauty still—and thine is gone!
empires have sunk since thou wert first revered.
and varying rites have sanctified thy shrine.
the dust is round thee of the race that rear’d
thy walls; and thou—their fate must soon be thine!”
hemans.
statues of minerva—a beautiful, majestic woman, fully clothed
and armed—were very numerous. the most celebrated of all, by
the renowned greek sculptor phidias, measured full forty feet in
height. festivals were celebrated in honor of minerva wherever
her worship was held,—some, the greek panathenæa, for instance,
only every four years; others, such as the minervalia
and quinquatria, every year. at these festivals the palladium, a
statue of the goddess, said to have fallen from heaven, was carried
in procession through the city, where the people hailed its
appearance with joyful cries and songs of praise.
[pg ]
the most glorious and beautiful among all the gods was apollo
(phœbus, sol, helios, cynthius, pytheus), god of the sun, of medicine,
music, poetry, and all fine arts.
“bright-hair’d apollo!—thou who ever art
a blessing to the world—whose mighty heart
forever pours out love, and light, and life;
thou, at whose glance, all things of earth are rife
with happiness; to whom, in early spring,
bright flowers raise up their heads, where’er they cling
on the steep mountain side, or in the vale
are nestled calmly. thou at whom the pale
and weary earth looks up, when winter flees,
with patient gaze: thou for whom wind-stripped trees
put on fresh leaves, and drink deep of the light
that glitters in thine eye: thou in whose bright
and hottest rays the eagle fills his eye
with quenchless fire, and far, far up on high
screams out his joy to thee, by all the names
that thou dost bear—whether thy godhead claims
phœbus or sol, or golden-hair’d apollo,
cynthian or pythian, if thou dost follow
the fleeing night, oh, hear
our hymn to thee, and willingly draw near!”
pike.
apollo was the son of jupiter and latona, or leto, the goddess
of dark nights. juno’s jealousy had been aroused by
jupiter’s preference for her rival. to avenge herself, she banished
[pg ]
latona to earth, and declared that if any one, mortal or immortal,
showed her any pity or gave her any assistance, he would
incur her lasting resentment.
after long, painful wanderings on earth, poor latona, weary
and parched with thirst, drew near a small pool by the wayside
to refresh herself; but, urged by juno, some reapers bade her
pass on, and then, seeing she paid no heed to their commands,
they sprang into the shallow waters, and stirred up the mud at
the bottom until it was quite unpalatable. with tear-dimmed
eyes, latona prayed these cruel men might never leave the spot
whereon they now stood; and jupiter, in answer to her prayer,
immediately transformed them into huge green frogs, which creatures
have since then showed great preference for muddy pools.
driven on once more by juno’s unrelenting hatred, latona
finally came to the seashore, where she stretched out imploring
hands to neptune, who sent a dolphin to bear her in safety to
the floating island of delos, raised in her behalf from the depths
of the sea. the rocking motion, however, proving disagreeable
to the goddess, neptune chained the island fast in the ægean
sea; and there in that delightful climate, justly praised by poets,
were born to jupiter and latona twin children, apollo and diana,
the divinities of the sun and moon.
story of
coronis.
apollo, having attained manhood, could not avoid the usual
lot of the gods, as well as of mortal men,—the pangs of love.
they were first inspired by coronis, a fair maiden,
who kindled within his breast an ardent flame.
the sun god wooed the girl warmly and persistently, and at length
had the deep satisfaction of seeing his affections returned. his
bliss, however, proved but fleeting; for coronis, reasoning, that,
if one lover were so delightful, two would be doubly so, secretly
encouraged another suitor.
“flirted with another lover
(so at least the story goes)
and was wont to meet him slyly,
underneath the blushing rose.”
saxe.
[pg ]
although so cleverly managed, these trysts could not escape
the bright eyes of apollo’s favorite bird, the snowy raven,—for
such was his hue in those early times,—so he flew off in
haste to his master to report the discovery he had made. desperate
with love and jealousy, apollo did not hesitate, but, seizing
his bow and deadly arrows, shot coronis through the heart.
the deed was no sooner accomplished, than all his love returned
with tenfold power; and, hastening to coronis’ side, he
vainly tried all his remedies (he was god of medicine) to recall
her to life.
“the god of physic
had no antidote; alack!
he who took her off so deftly
couldn’t bring the maiden back!”
saxe.
bending over the lifeless body of his beloved one, he bewailed
his fatal haste, and cursed the bird which had brought him the
unwelcome tidings of her faithlessness.
“then he turned upon the raven,
‘wanton babbler! see thy fate!
messenger of mine no longer,
go to hades with thy prate!
“‘weary pluto with thy tattle!
hither, monster, come not back;
and—to match thy disposition—
henceforth be thy plumage black!’”
saxe.
æsculapius.
the only reminder of this unfortunate episode was a young
son of apollo and coronis, æsculapius (asklepios), who was
carefully instructed by apollo in the healing art.
the disciple’s talent was so great, that he soon
rivaled his master, and even, it is said, recalled the dead to life.
of course, these miracles did not long remain concealed from
jupiter’s all-seeing eye; and he, fearing lest the people would
[pg ]
forget him and worship their physician, seized one of his thunderbolts,
hurled it at the clever youth, and thus brought to an
untimely end his brilliant medical career.
“then jove, incensed that man should rise
from darkness to the upper skies,
the leech that wrought such healing hurled
with lightning down to pluto’s world.”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
æsculapius’ race was not entirely extinct, however, for he left
two sons—machaon and podalirius, who inherited his medical
skill—and a daughter, hygeia, who watched over the health of
man.
admetus and
alcestis.
maddened with grief at the unexpected loss of his son, apollo
would fain have wreaked his vengeance upon the cyclopes, the
authors of the fatal thunderbolt; but ere he could
execute his purpose, jupiter interfered, and, to punish
him, banished him to earth, where he entered the service of
admetus, king of thessaly. one consolation alone now remained
to the exiled god,—his music. his dulcet tones soon won the
admiration of his companions, and even that of the king, who
listened to his songs with pleasure, and to reward him gave him
the position of head shepherd.
“then king admetus, one who had
pure taste by right divine,
decreed his singing not too bad
to hear between the cups of wine:
“and so, well pleased with being soothed
into a sweet half sleep
three times his kingly beard he smoothed
and made him viceroy o’er his sheep.”
lowell.
time passed. apollo, touched by his master’s kindness, wished
to bestow some favor in his turn, and asked the gods to grant
admetus eternal life. his request was complied with, but only on
[pg ]
condition, that, when the time came which had previously been
appointed for the good king’s death, some one should be found
willing to die in his stead. this divine decree was reported to
alcestis, admetus’ beautiful young wife, who in a passion of self-sacrifice
offered herself as substitute, and cheerfully gave her
life for her husband. but immortality was too dearly bought at
such a price; and admetus mourned until hercules, pitying his
grief, descended into hades, and brought her back from the
tomb.
“did not hercules by force
wrest from the guardian monster of the tomb
alcestis, a reanimated corse,
given back to dwell on earth in vernal bloom?”
wordsworth.
the walls of
troy.
apollo, after endowing admetus with immortality, left his service,
and went to assist neptune, who had also been banished
to earth, to build the walls of troy. scorning to
perform any menial tasks, the god of music seated
himself near by, and played such inspiring tunes that the stones
waltzed into place of their own accord.
apollo slays
python.
then, his term of exile being ended, he returned to heaven,
and there resumed his wonted duties. from his exalted position
he often cast loving glances down upon men,
whose life he had shared for a short time, whose
every privation he had endured; and, in answer to their prayers,
he graciously extended his protection over them, and delivered
them from misfortunes too numerous to mention. among other
deeds done for men was the slaying of the monster serpent
python, born from the slime and stagnant waters which remained
upon the surface of the earth after the deluge. none had dared
approach the monster; but apollo fearlessly drew near, and
slew him with his golden shafts. the victory over the terrible
python won for apollo the surname of pytheus (the slayer), by
which appellation he was frequently invoked.
apollo belvedere. (vatican, rome.)
this annihilation of python is, of course, nothing but an
[pg ]
allegory, illustrating the sun’s power to dry up marshes and stagnant
pools, thus preventing the lurking fiend malaria from making
further inroads.
apollo has always been a favorite subject for painters and
sculptors. the most beautiful statue of him is the apollo belvedere,
which represents him at the moment of his conquest of the
python.
apollo and
hyacinthus.
although successful in war, apollo was very unfortunate indeed
in friendship. one day he came down to earth to enjoy the
society of a youth of mortal birth, named hyacinthus.
to pass the time agreeably, the friends
began a game of quoits, but had not played long, before zephyrus,
god of the south wind, passing by, saw them thus occupied.
jealous of apollo, for he too loved hyacinthus, zephyrus
blew apollo’s quoit aside so violently that it struck his
playmate, and felled him to the ground. vainly apollo strove
to check the stream of blood which flowed from the ghastly
wound. hyacinthus was already beyond aid, and in a few seconds
breathed his last in his friend’s arms. to keep some reminder
of the departed, apollo changed the fallen blood drops
into clusters of flowers, ever since called, from the youth’s name,
hyacinths; while zephyrus, perceiving too late the fatal effect
of his jealousy, hovered inconsolable over the sad spot, and
tenderly caressed the dainty flowers which had sprung from his
friend’s lifeblood.
“zephyr penitent,
who now, ere phœbus mounts the firmament,
fondles the flower.”
keats.
apollo and
cyparissus.
to divert his mind from the mournful fate of hyacinthus,
apollo sought the company of cyparissus, a clever young hunter;
but this friendship was also doomed to a sad end,
for cyparissus, having accidentally killed apollo’s
pet stag, grieved so sorely over this mischance, that he pined away,
and finally died. apollo then changed his lifeless clay into a
[pg ]
cypress tree, which he declared should henceforth be used
to shade the graves of those who had been greatly beloved
through life.
apollo and
daphne.
some time after this episode, apollo encountered in the forest
a beautiful nymph by the name of daphne, the daughter of
the river god peneus. love at first sight was the
immediate consequence on apollo’s part, and he
longed to speak to the maid and win her affections. he first
tried to approach her gently, so as not to frighten her; but, before
he could reach her side, she fled, and he, forgetful of all else,
pursued her flying footsteps. as he ran, he called aloud to
daphne, entreating her to pause were it only for a moment, and
promising to do her no harm.
“abate, fair fugitive, abate thy speed,
dismiss thy fears, and turn thy beauteous head;
with kind regard a panting lover view;
less swiftly fly, less swiftly i’ll pursue:
pathless, alas! and rugged is the ground,
some stone may hurt thee, or some thorn may wound.
“you fly, alas! not knowing whom you fly;
no ill-bred swain, nor rustic clown, am i.”
prior.
the terrified girl paid no heed to promises or entreaties, but
sped on until her strength began to fail, and she perceived, that,
notwithstanding her utmost efforts, her pursuer was gaining upon
her. panting and trembling, she swerved aside, and rushed down
to the edge of her father’s stream, calling out loudly for his protection.
no sooner had she reached the water’s edge, than her
feet seemed rooted to the ground. a rough bark rapidly inclosed
her quivering limbs, while her trembling hands were filled with
leaves. her father had granted her prayer by changing her into
a laurel tree.
apollo and daphne.—bernini. (villa borghese, rome.)
apollo, coming up just then with outstretched arms, clasped
nothing but a rugged tree trunk. at first he could not realize
that the fair maiden had vanished from his sight forever; but,
[pg ]
when the truth dawned upon him, he declared that from henceforth
the laurel would be considered his favorite tree, and that
prizes awarded to poets, musicians, etc., should consist of a
wreath of its glossy foliage.
“i espouse thee for my tree:
be thou the prize of honor and renown;
the deathless poet, and the poem, crown;
thou shalt the roman festivals adorn,
and, after poets, be by victors worn.”
ovid (dryden’s tr.).
this story of apollo and daphne was an illustration of the
effect produced by the sun (apollo) upon the dew (daphne).
the sun is captivated by its beauty, and longs to view it more
closely; the dew, afraid of its ardent lover, flies, and, when its
fiery breath touches it, vanishes, leaving nothing but verdure in
the selfsame spot where but a moment before it sparkled in all
its purity.
cephalus and
procris.
the ancients had many analogous stories, allegories of the sun
and dew, amongst others the oft-quoted tale of cephalus and
procris. cephalus was a hunter, who fell in love
with and married one of diana’s nymphs, procris.
she brought him as dowry a hunting dog, lelaps, and a javelin
warranted never to miss its mark. the newly married pair were
perfectly happy; but their content was viewed with great displeasure
by eos (aurora), goddess of dawn, who had previously
tried, but without success, to win cephalus’ affections, and who
now resolved to put an end to the bliss she envied.
all day long cephalus hunted in the forest, and, when the
evening shadows began to fall, joined his loving wife in their
cozy dwelling. her marriage gifts proved invaluable, as lelaps
was swift of foot, and tireless in the chase. one day, to test his
powers, the gods from olympus watched him course a fox, a
special creation of theirs; and so well were both animals matched
in speed and endurance, that the chase bade fair to end only
with the death of one or both of the participants. the gods, in
[pg ]
their admiration for the fine run, declared the animals deserved
to be remembered forever, and changed them into statues, which
retained all the spirited action of the living creatures.
in the warm season, when the sun became oppressive, cephalus
was wont to rest during the noon hour in some shady spot,
and as he flung himself down upon the short grass he often called
for a breeze, bidding it cool his heated brow.
“a hunter once in that grove reclin’d,
to shun the noon’s bright eye,
and oft he woo’d the wandering wind,
to cool his brow with its sigh.
while mute lay ev’n the wild bee’s hum,
nor breath could stir the aspen’s hair,
his song was still, ‘sweet air, oh come!’
while echo answer’d, ‘come, sweet air!’”
moore.
eos heard of this habit, and was fully aware that he merely
addressed the passing wind; nevertheless she sought procris, and
informed her that her husband was faithless, and paid court to a
fair maid, who daily met him at noonday in the forest solitudes.
procris, blinded by sudden jealousy, gave credit to the false
story, and immediately resolved to follow her husband.
the morning had well-nigh passed, and the sun was darting
its perpendicular rays upon the earth, when cephalus came to
his usual resort, near which procris was concealed.
“sweet air, oh come!” the hunter cried; and procris, cut to
the heart by what she considered an infallible proof of his infidelity,
sank fainting to the ground. the rustle caused by her
swoon attracted cephalus’ attention. under the mistaken impression
that some wild beast was lurking there, ready to pounce
upon him, he cast his unerring javelin into the very midst of
the thicket, and pierced the faithful bosom of his wife. her dying
moan brought him with one bound to her side; ere she breathed
her last, an explanation was given and received; and procris
died with the blissful conviction that her husband had not
[pg ]
deserved her unjust suspicions, and that his heart was all her
own.
there are, of course, many other versions of these selfsame
myths; but one and all are intended to illustrate the same natural
phenomena, and are subject to the same interpretation.
apollo’s principal duty was to drive the sun chariot. day after
day he rode across the azure sky, nor paused on his way till
he reached the golden boat awaiting him at the end of his long
day’s journey, to bear him in safety back to his eastern palace.
“helios all day long his allotted labor pursues;
no rest to his passionate heart and his panting horses given,
from the moment when roseate-fingered eos kindles the dews
and spurns the salt sea-floors, ascending silvery the heaven,
until from the hand of eos hesperos, trembling, receives
his fragrant lamp, and faint in the twilight hangs it up.”
owen meredith.
clytie.
a fair young maiden, named clytie, watched apollo’s daily
journey with strange persistency; and from the moment when he
left his palace in the morning until he came to the
far western sea in the evening, she followed his
course with loving eyes, thought of the golden-haired god, and
longed for his love. but, in spite of all this fervor, she never won
favor in apollo’s eyes, and languished until the gods, in pity,
changed her into a sunflower.
even in this altered guise, clytie could not forget the object
of her love; and now, a fit emblem of constancy, she still follows
with upturned face the glowing orb in its daily journey across
the sky.
“no, the heart that has truly lov’d never forgets,
but as truly loves on to the close;
as the sunflower turns on her god when he sets
the same look which she turn’d when he rose.”
moore.
apollo and
marsyas.
a young shepherd, lying in the cool grass one summer afternoon,
became aware of a distant sound of music, so sweet, so
[pg ]
thrilling, that he fairly held his breath to listen. these weird,
delightful tones were produced by minerva, who, seated by the
banks of a small stream, was trying her skill on
the flute. as she bent over the limpid waters, she
suddenly beheld her puffed cheeks and distorted features, and
impetuously threw the instrument into the water, vowing never
to touch it again.
“hence, ye banes of beauty, hence!
what? shall i my charms disgrace
by making such an odious face?”
melanippides.
the sudden break in the entrancing music caused the youth,
marsyas, to start from his abstraction and look about him.
he then perceived the rejected flute sailing gently down the
stream past his feet. to seize the instrument and convey it to
his lips was the work of an instant; and no sooner had he
breathed into it, than the magic strain was renewed. no recollection
of his pastoral duties could avail to tear marsyas away
from his new-found treasure; and so rapidly did his skill increase,
that he became insufferably conceited, and boasted he
could rival apollo, whom he actually challenged to a musical
contest.
intending to punish him for his presumption, apollo accepted
the challenge, and selected the nine muses—patronesses of
poetry and music—as umpires. marsyas was first called upon
to exhibit his proficiency, and charmed all by his melodious
strains.
“so sweet that alone the south wind knew,
by summer hid in green reeds’ jointed cells
to wait imprisoned for the south wind’s spells,
from out his reedy flute the player drew,
and as the music clearer, louder grew,
wild creatures from their winter nooks and dells,
sweet furry things with eyes like starry wells,
crept wanderingly out; they thought the south wind blew.
[pg ]
with instant joyous trust, they flocked around
his feet who such a sudden summer made,
his eyes, more kind than men’s, enthralled and bound
them there.”
the muses bestowed much deserved praise, and then bade
apollo surpass his rival if he could. no second command was
necessary. the god seized his golden lyre, and poured forth impassioned
strains. before pronouncing their decision, the muses
resolved to give both musicians a second hearing, and again both
strove; but on this occasion apollo joined the harmonious accents
of his godlike voice to the tones of his instrument, causing
all present, and the very muses too, to hail him as conqueror.
“and, when now the westering sun
touch’d the hills, the strife was done,
and the attentive muses said:
‘marsyas, thou art vanquished!’”
matthew arnold.
according to a previous arrangement,—that the victor should
have the privilege of flaying his opponent alive,—apollo bound
marsyas to a tree, and slew him cruelly. as soon as the mountain
nymphs heard of their favorite’s sad death, they began to
weep, and shed such torrents of tears, that they formed a new
river, called marsyas, in memory of the sweet musician.
apollo
and pan.
the mournful termination of this affair should have served as
a warning to all rash mortals. such was not the case, however;
and shortly after, apollo found himself engaged in
another musical contest with pan, king midas’
favorite flute player. upon this occasion midas himself retained
the privilege of awarding the prize, and, blinded by partiality,
gave it to pan, in spite of the marked inferiority of his playing.
apollo was so incensed by this injustice, that he determined to
show his opinion of the dishonest judge by causing generous-sized
ass’s ears to grow on either side of his head.
[pg ]
“the god of wit, to show his grudge,
clapt asses’ ears upon the judge;
a goodly pair, erect and wide,
which he could neither gild nor hide.”
swift.
greatly dismayed by these new ornaments, midas retreated
into the privacy of his own apartment, and sent in hot haste for
a barber, who, after having been sworn to secrecy, was admitted,
and bidden to fashion a huge wig, which would hide the deformity
from the eyes of the king’s subjects. the barber acquitted
himself deftly, and, before he was allowed to leave the palace, was
again charged not to reveal the secret, under penalty of immediate
death.
but a secret is difficult to keep; and this one, of the king’s
long ears, preyed upon the poor barber’s spirits, so that, incapable
of enduring silence longer, he sallied out into a field,
dug a deep hole, and shouted down into the bosom of the
earth,—
“‘king midas wears
(these eyes beheld them, these) such ass’s ears!’”
horace.
unspeakably relieved by this performance, the barber returned
home. time passed. reeds grew over the hole, and, as they
bent before the wind which rustled through their leaves, they
were heard to murmur, “midas, king midas, has ass’s ears!”
and all who passed by caught the whisper, and noised it abroad,
so that the secret became the general topic of all conversations.
orpheus and
eurydice.
as apollo had frequent opportunities of meeting the muses,
it is not to be wondered at that he fell a victim to the charms of
the fair calliope, who, in her turn, loved him passionately,
and even wrote verses in his honor.
this being the state of her feelings, she readily consented to their
union, and became the proud mother of orpheus, who inherited
his parents’ musical and poetical gifts.
[pg ]
“orpheus with his lute made trees,
and the mountain-tops, that freeze,
bow themselves when he did sing:
to his music plants and flowers
ever sprung; as sun and showers
there had made a lasting spring.
“everything that heard him play,
even the billows of the sea,
hung their heads, and then lay by.”
shakespeare.
this talent waxed greater as the years passed by, and became
so remarkable, that the youth’s fame was very widespread; and
when he fell in love with eurydice, he brought all his skill into
play to serenade her, and wooed her with voice and glance and
with tender, passionate music. eurydice was touched by his
courtship, and ere long requited the love lavished upon her by
conferring her hand upon orpheus.
shortly after their union, while walking alone in the fields, the
bride encountered a youth named aristæus, whose bold admiration
proved so distasteful, that she fled from him as quickly as
possible. in her haste she accidentally trod upon a venomous
serpent lurking in the long grass, which immediately turned upon
her, and bit her heel. a short period of agonized suffering
ensued; then eurydice died, and her spirit was conducted down
into the gloomy realms of pluto, leaving orpheus broken-hearted.
plaintive, heartrending laments now replaced the joyous wedding
strains; but even the charms of music failed to make life
endurable, and orpheus wandered off to olympus, where he so
piteously implored jupiter to restore his wife to his longing arms,
that the great god’s heart was moved to compassion. he gave
him permission, therefore, to go down into the infernal regions
to seek his wife, but warned him at the same time that the undertaking
was perilous in the extreme.
nothing daunted, orpheus hastened to the entrance of hades,
and there saw the fierce three-headed dog, named cerberus, who
[pg ]
guarded the gate, and would allow no living being to enter, nor
any spirit to pass out of hades. as soon as this monster saw
orpheus, he began to growl and bark savagely, to frighten him
away; but orpheus merely paused, and began to play such melting
chords, that cerberus’ rage was appeased, and he finally
allowed him to pass into pluto’s dark kingdom.
the magic sounds penetrated even into the remote depths
of tartarus, where the condemned suspended their toil for a
moment, and hushed their sighs and groans to listen.
“e’en tantalus ceased from trying to sip
the cup that flies from his arid lip;
ixion, too, the magic could feel,
and, for a moment, blocked his wheel;
poor sisyphus, doomed to tumble and toss
the notable stone that gathers no moss,
let go his burden, and turned to hear
the charming sounds that ravished his ear.”
saxe.
no living being had ever before penetrated thus into the infernal
regions, and orpheus wandered on until he came to the throne of
pluto, king of these realms, whereon the stern ruler sat in silence,
his wife proserpina beside him, and the relentless fates at his feet.
orpheus made known his errand in operatic guise, and succeeded
in moving the royal pair to tears, whereupon they graciously
consented to restore eurydice to life and to her fond
husband’s care.
“hell consented
to hear the poet’s prayer:
stern proserpine relented,
and gave him back the fair.
thus song could prevail
o’er death, and o’er hell,
a conquest how hard and how glorious!
tho’ fate had fast bound her
with styx nine times round her,
yet music and love were victorious.”
pope.
[pg ]
orpheus and eurydice.—beyschlag.
[pg ]
but one condition was imposed before he was allowed to depart;
i.e., that he should leave the infernal regions without
turning once to look into his beloved wife’s face.
orpheus accepted the condition joyfully, and wended his way
out of hades, looking neither to the right nor to the left, but
straight before him; and as he walked he wondered whether
eurydice were changed by her sojourn in these rayless depths.
his longing to feast his eyes once more upon her loved features
made him forget the condition imposed by pluto, and turn just
before he reached the earth; but he only beheld the vanishing
form of the wife he had so nearly snatched from the grave.
all was now over. he had tried and failed. no hope remained.
in despair, the lonely musician retreated to the forest
solitudes, and there played his mournful laments,—
“such strains as would have won the ear
of pluto, to have quite set free
his half-regained eurydice.”
milton.
but there were none to hear except the trees, winds, and wild
beasts in the forest, who strove in their dumb way to comfort
him as he moved restlessly about, seeking a solace for his bursting
heart. at times it seemed to his half-delirious fancy that
he could discern eurydice wandering about in the dim distance,
with the selfsame mournful expression of which he had caught
a mere glimpse as she drifted reluctantly back into the dark
shadows of hades.
“at that elm-vista’s end i trace
dimly thy sad leave-taking face,
eurydice! eurydice!
the tremulous leaves repeat to me
eurydice! eurydice!”
lowell.
at last there dawned a day when some bacchantes overtook
him in the forest, and bade him play some gay music, so they
[pg ]
might indulge in a dance. but poor orpheus, dazed with grief,
could not comply with their demands; and the sad notes which
alone he now could draw from his instrument so enraged the
merrymakers, that they tore him limb from limb, and cast his
mangled remains into the hebrus river.
as the poet-musician’s head floated down the stream, the
pallid lips still murmured, “eurydice!” for even in death he
could not forget his wife; and, as his spirit drifted on to join her,
he incessantly called upon her name, until the brooks, trees, and
fountains he had loved so well caught up the longing cry, and
repeated it again and again.
nothing was now left to remind mortals of the sweet singer
who had thus perished, except his lute, which the gods placed
in the heavens as a bright constellation, lyra, also called by
orpheus’ name.
another musician celebrated in mythological annals is amphion,
whose skill was reported to be but little inferior to
orpheus’.
“tis said he had a tuneful tongue,
such happy intonation,
wherever he sat down and sung
he left a small plantation;
wherever in a lonely grove
he set up his forlorn pipes,
the gouty oak began to move,
and flounder into hornpipes.”
tennyson.
story of
amphion.
this musician, a son of jupiter and antiope, had a twin
brother zethus, who, however, shared none of his artistic tastes.
hearing that their mother antiope had been
repudiated by her second husband, lycus, so that
he might marry another wife by the name of dirce, these youths
hastened off to thebes, where they found the state of affairs
even worse than represented; for poor antiope was now imprisoned,
and subject to her rival’s daily cruel treatment.
[pg ]
farnese bull. (national museum, naples.)
[pg ]
zethus and amphion, after besieging and taking the city, put
lycus to death, and, binding dirce to the tail of a wild bull, let
him loose to drag her over briers and stones until she perished.
this punishment inflicted upon dirce is the subject of the
famous group once belonging to the farnese family, and now
called by their name.
amphion’s musical talent was of great use to him when he
subsequently became king of thebes, and wished to fortify his
capital by building a huge rampart all around it; for the stones
moved in rhythmic time, and, of their own volition, marched into
their places.
arion.
second to him only, in musical fame, was arion, the musician
who won untold wealth by his talent. on one occasion, having
gone to sicily to take part in a musical contest
which had attracted thither the most famous
musicians from all points of the compass, he resolved to return
home by sea.
unfortunately for him, the vessel upon which he had embarked
was manned by an avaricious, piratical crew, who, having heard
of his treasures, resolved to murder him to obtain possession
of them. he was allowed but scant time to prepare for death;
but, just as they were about to toss him overboard, he craved
permission to play for the last time. the pirates consented.
his clear notes floated over the sea, and allured a school of
dolphins, which came and played about the ship. the pirates,
terrified by the power of his music, and in dread lest their hearts
should be moved, quickly laid hands upon him, and hurled him
into the water, where he fell upon the broad back of a dolphin,
who bore him in safety to the nearest shore.
“then was there heard a most celestiall sound
of dainty musicke, which did next ensew
before the spouse: that was arion crownd;
who, playing on his harpe, unto him drew
the eares and hearts of all that goodly crew,
that even yet the dolphin, which him bore
[pg ]
through the agean seas from pirates vew,
stood still by him astonisht at his lore,
and all the raging seas for joy forgot to rore.”
spenser.
to commemorate this miracle, the gods placed arion’s harp,
together with the dolphin, in the heavens, where they form a
constellation.
in the sunny plains of greece there once dwelt clymene, a
fair nymph. she was not alone, however, for her golden-haired
little son phaeton was there to gladden her heart with all his
childish graces.
story of
phaeton.
early in the morning, when the sun’s bright orb first appeared
above the horizon, clymene would point it out to her boy, and
tell him that his father, apollo, was setting out for
his daily drive. clymene so often entertained her
child with stories of his father’s beauty and power, that at last
phaeton became conceited, and acquired a habit of boasting
rather loudly of his divine parentage. his playmates, after a
time, wearied of his arrogance, and, to avoid the constant repetition
of his vain speeches, bade him show some proof of his divine
origin, or keep his peace.
stung to the quick by some insolent taunts which they added,
phaeton hastened to his mother, and begged her to direct him to
his father, that he might obtain the desired proof. clymene immediately
gave him all necessary information, and bade him
make haste if he would reach his father’s palace in the far east
before the sun chariot passed out of its portals to accomplish its
daily round. directly eastward phaeton journeyed, nor paused
to rest until he came in view of the golden and jeweled pinnacles
and turrets of his father’s abode.
“the sun’s bright palace, on high columns rais’d
with burnish’d gold and flaming jewels blaz’d,
the folding gates diffus’d a silver light,
and with a milder gleam refresh’d the sight.”
addison.
[pg ]
quite undazzled by this splendor, the youth still pressed on,
straining his eyes to catch the first glimpse of the godly father,
whose stately bearing and radiant air his mother had so enthusiastically
described.
apollo, from his golden throne, had watched the boy’s approach,
and, as he drew nearer, recognized him as his own offspring.
timidly now phaeton advanced to the steps of his father’s throne,
and humbly waited for permission to make his errand known.
apollo addressed him graciously, called him his son, and bade
him speak without fear. in a few minutes the youth impetuously
poured out the whole story, and watched with pleasure
the frown which gathered on apollo’s brow when he repeated
his companions’ taunts. as soon as he had finished his tale,
apollo exclaimed that he would grant him any proof he wished,
and confirmed these words by a solemn oath.
“‘by the terrible styx!’ said the angry sire,
while his eyes flashed volumes of fury and fire,
‘to prove your reviler an infamous liar,
i swear i will grant you whate’er you desire!’”
saxe.
this oath was the most solemn any god could utter, and in
case of perjury he was obliged to drink the waters of this river,
which would lull him into senseless stupidity for one whole year.
during nine years following he was deprived of his office,
banished from olympus, and not allowed to taste of the life-giving
nectar and ambrosia.
with a flash of triumph in his dark eyes, phaeton, hearing this
oath, begged permission to drive the sun chariot that very day,
stating that all the world would be sure to notice his exalted
position, and that none would ever dare doubt his veracity after
such a signal mark of apollo’s favor.
when the god heard this presumptuous request, he started
back in dismay, for he alone could control the four fiery steeds
which drew the golden-wheeled sun car. patiently he then
[pg ]
explained to phaeton the great danger of such an undertaking,
earnestly begging him to select some other, less fatal boon.
“choose out a gift from seas, or earth, or skies,
for open to your wish all nature lies;
only decline this one unequal task,
for ’tis a mischief, not a gift, you ask.”
addison.
but phaeton, who, like many another conceited youth, fancied
he knew better than his sire, would not give heed to the kindly
warning, and persisted in his request, until apollo, who had sworn
the irrevocable oath, was obliged to fulfill his promise.
the hour had already come when the sun usually began his
daily journey. the pawing, champing steeds were ready; rosy-fingered
aurora only awaited her master’s signal to fling wide the
gates of morn; and the hours were ready to escort him as usual.
apollo, yielding to pressure, quickly anointed his son with a
cooling essence to preserve him from the burning sunbeams,
gave him the necessary directions for his journey, and repeatedly
and anxiously cautioned him to watch his steeds with the utmost
care, and to use the whip but sparingly, as they were inclined to
be very restive.
the youth, who had listened impatiently to cautions and directions,
then sprang into the seat, gathered up the reins, signaled
to aurora to fling the gates wide, and dashed out of the eastern
palace with a flourish.
for an hour or two phaeton bore in mind his father’s principal
injunctions, and all went well; but later, elated by his exalted
position, he became very reckless, drove faster and faster, and
soon lost his way. in finding it again he drove so close to
the earth, that all the plants shriveled up, the fountains and
rivers were dried in their mossy beds, the smoke began to rise
from the parched and blackened earth, and even the people of the
land over which he was passing were burned black,—a hue retained
by their descendants to this day.
[pg ]
aurora.—guido reni. (rospigliosi palace, rome.)
[pg ]
terrified at what he had done, phaeton whipped up his steeds,
and drove so far away, that all the vegetation which had survived
the intense heat came to an untimely end on account of
the sudden cold.
the cries of mortals rose in chorus, and their clamors became
so loud and importunate, that they roused jupiter from a profound
sleep, and caused him to look around to discover their
origin. one glance of his all-seeing eye sufficed to reveal the
damaged earth and the youthful charioteer. how had a beardless
youth dared to mount the sun chariot? jupiter could
scarcely credit what he saw. in his anger he vowed he would
make the rash mortal expiate his presumption by immediate
death. he therefore selected the deadliest thunderbolt in his
arsenal, aimed it with special care, and hurled it at phaeton,
whose burned and blackened corpse fell from his lofty seat down
into the limpid waves of the eridanus river.
“and phaethon, caught in mid career,
and hurled from the sun to utter sunlessness,
like a flame-bearded comet, with ghastliest hiss,
fell headlong in the amazed eridanus,
monarch of streams, who on the italian fields
let loose, and far beyond his flowery lips
foam-white, ran ruinous to the adrian deep.”
worsley.
the heliades.
the tidings of his death soon reached poor clymene, who
mourned her only son, and refused to be comforted; while the
heliades, phaeton’s sisters, three in number,—phaetusa,
lampetia, and ægle,—spent their days
by the riverside, shedding tears, wringing their white hands, and
bewailing their loss, until the gods, in pity, transformed them
into poplar trees, and their tears into amber, which substance
was supposed by the ancients to flow from the poplar trees
like teardrops. phaeton’s intimate friend, cycnus, piously
collected his charred remains, and gave them an honorable
[pg ]
burial. in his grief he continually haunted the scene of his
friend’s death, and repeatedly plunged into the river, in the hope
of finding some more scattered fragments, until the gods
changed him into a swan; which bird is ever sailing mournfully
about, and frequently plunging, his head into the water to continue
his sad search.
apollo, as the dearly loved leader of the nine muses,—daughters
of jupiter and mnemosyne, goddess of memory,—was surnamed
musagetes.
“whom all the muses loved, not one alone;
into his hands they put the lyre of gold,
and, crowned with sacred laurel at their fount,
placed him as musagetes on their throne.”
longfellow.
although the muses united at times in one grand song, they
had each separate duties assigned them.
the nine
muses.
clio, the muse of history, recorded all great deeds and heroic
actions, with the names of their authors, and was therefore generally
represented with a laurel wreath and a book
and stylus, to indicate her readiness to note all
that happened to mortal men or immortal gods.
euterpe, the graceful “mistress of song,” was represented
with a flute, and garlands of fragrant flowers.
thalia, muse of pastoral poetry, held a shepherd’s crook and
mask, and wore a crown of wild flowers.
“mild pastoral muse!
that, to the sparkling crown urania wears,
and to her sister clio’s laurel wreath,
preferr’st a garland culled from purple heath!”
wordsworth.
her graver sister, melpomene, who presided over tragedy,
wore a crown of gold, and wielded a dagger and a scepter; while
terpsichore, the light-footed muse of dancing, was represented
treading an airy measure.
[pg ]
apollo and the muses.—mengs.
[pg ]
erato, who preferred lyric poetry to all other styles of composition,
was pictured with a lyre; and polyhymnia, muse of rhetoric,
held a scepter to show that eloquence rules with resistless sway.
calliope, muse of heroic poetry, also wore a laurel crown; and
urania, muse of astronomy, held mathematical instruments, indicative
of her love of the exact sciences.
this glorious sisterhood was wont to assemble on mount parnassus
or on mount helicon, to hold their learned debates on
poetry, science, and music.
apollo’s favorite attendant was eos (aurora), the fair goddess
of dawn, whose rose-tipped fingers opened wide the eastern
gates of pearl, and who then flashed across the sky to announce
her master’s coming.
“hail, gentle dawn! mild blushing goddess, hail!
rejoiced i see thy purple mantle spread
o’er half the skies; gems pave thy radiant way,
and orient pearls from every shrub depend.”
somerville.
story of
aurora and
tithonus.
this dainty goddess loved and married tithonus, prince of
troy, and won from the gods the boon of everlasting life to
confer upon him. alas! however, she forgot to
ask at the same time for continued youth; and
her husband grew older and older, and finally became
so decrepit, that he was a burden to her. knowing he
would never die, and wishing to rid herself of his burdensome
presence, she changed him into a grasshopper.
at this time the goddess fell in love with cephalus, the young
hunter, and frequently visited him on mount hymettus.
“‘come,’ phœbus cries, ‘aurora, come—too late
thou linger’st slumbering with thy wither’d mate!
leave him, and to hymettus’ top repair!
thy darling cephalus expects thee there!’
the goddess, with a blush, her love betrays,
but mounts, and, driving rapidly, obeys.”
keats.
worship
of apollo.
[pg ]
the principal temples dedicated to the worship of apollo were
at delos, his birthplace, and at delphi, where a priestess called
pythia gave out mysterious oracles purporting to
have come from the god. the ancients everywhere
could not fail to recognize the sun’s kindly influence and
beneficent power, and were therefore ever ready to worship apollo.
“i marvel not, o sun! that unto thee
in adoration man should bow the knee,
and pour his prayers of mingled awe and love;
for like a god thou art, and on thy way
of glory sheddest with benignant ray,
beauty, and life, and joyance from above.”
southey.
the most renowned among the numerous festivals held in
honor of apollo were, without exception, the pythian games,
celebrated at delphi every three years.
a manly, beardless youth of great beauty, apollo is generally
crowned with laurels, and bears either a bow or a lyre.
“the lord of the unerring bow,
the god of life, and poesy, and light—
the sun in human limbs array’d, and brow
all radiant from his triumph in the fight;
the shaft hath just been shot—the arrow bright
with an immortal’s vengeance; in his eye
and nostril beautiful disdain, and might
and majesty, flash their full lightnings by,
developing in that one glance the deity.”
byron.
one of the seven wonders of the ancient world, the famous
colossus of rhodes, was a statue of apollo, his head encircled
with a halo of bright sunbeams, and his legs spread wide apart
to allow vessels, with all their sails spread, to pass in and out of
the harbor, whose entrance he guarded for many a year.
[pg ]
diana of versailles. (louvre, paris.)
[pg ]
diana (cynthia, phœbe, selene, artemis), the fair twin sister
of apollo, was not only goddess of the moon, but also of
the chase.
“‘goddess serene, transcending every star!
queen of the sky, whose beams are seen afar!
by night heaven owns thy sway, by day the grove,
when, as chaste dian, here thou deign’st to rove.’”
byron.
in works of art this goddess is generally represented as a beautiful
maiden, clad in a short hunting dress, armed with a bow, a
quiver full of arrows at her side, and a crescent on her well-poised
head.
proud of her two children, apollo and diana, latona boasted
far and wide that such as hers had never been, for they excelled
all others in beauty, intelligence, and power.
story of
niobe.
the daughter of tantalus, niobe, heard this boast, and
laughed in scorn; for she was the mother of fourteen
children,—seven manly sons and seven beautiful
daughters. in her pride she called aloud to latona, and
taunted her because her offspring numbered but two.
shortly after, niobe even went so far as to forbid her people
to worship apollo and diana, and gave orders that all the statues
representing them in her kingdom should be torn down from
their pedestals, and destroyed. enraged at this insult, latona
called her children to her side, and bade them go forth and slay
all her luckless rival’s offspring.
[pg ]
provided with well-stocked quivers, the twins set out to do her
bidding; and apollo, meeting the seven lads out hunting, cut
their existence short with his unfailing arrows.
“phœbus slew the sons
with arrows from his silver bow, incensed
at niobe.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
with all proverbial speed the tidings reached niobe, whose
heart failed when she heard that her seven sons, her pride and
delight, had fallen under apollo’s shafts, and that they now lay
cold and stiff in the forest, where they had eagerly hastened a
few hours before, to follow the deer to its cover.
as she mourned their untimely death, she thought her cup
of sorrow was full; but long ere her first passion of grief was
over, diana began to slay her daughters.
“but what is this? what means this oozing flood?
her daughters, too, are weltering in their blood:
one clasps her mother’s knees, one clings around
her neck, and one lies prostrate on the ground;
one seeks her breast; one eyes the coming woe
and shudders; one in terror crouches low.”
meleager.
in vain the poor girls sought to escape the flying arrows. in
vain niobe sought to protect them, and called upon all the gods
of olympus. her daughters fell one by one, never to rise again.
the last clung convulsively to her mother’s breast; but, even in
that fond mother’s passionate embrace, death found and claimed
her. then the gods, touched by the sight of woe so intense,
changed niobe into stone, just as she stood, with upturned face,
streaming eyes, and quivering lips.
this statue was placed on mount sipylus, close to a stream of
running water; and it was said that tears continually flowed
down the marble cheeks, for, though changed, niobe still felt, and
wept for her great loss.
[pg ]
niobe. (uffizi palace, florence.)
[pg ]
this story is an allegory, in which niobe, the mother, represents
winter, hard, cold, and proud; until apollo’s deadly arrows,
the sunbeams, slay her children, the winter months. her tears
are emblems of the natural thaw which comes in spring, when
winter’s pride has melted.
diana’s
avocations.
as soon as the young goddess of the moon had been introduced
in olympus, all the gods expressed a wish to marry her;
but she refused to listen to their entreaties, begged
her father’s permission to remain single all her life,
and pleaded her cause so ably, that jupiter was forced to grant
her request.
every evening, as soon as the sun had finished his course,
diana mounted her moon car, and drove her milk-white steeds
across the heavens, watched over and loved by the countless
stars, which shone their brightest to cheer her on her way; and
as she drove she often bent down to view the sleeping earth, so
shadowy and dreamlike, and to breathe the intoxicating perfume
of the distant flowers. it always seemed to her then as if
nature, so beautiful during the day, borrowed additional charms
from the witching hours of the night.
“’twas now the time when phœbus yields to night,
and rising cynthia sheds her silver light,
wide o’er the world in solemn pomp she drew
her airy chariot hung with pearly dew.”
story of
endymion.
one evening, as she was driving noiselessly along, she suddenly
checked her steeds; for there on the hillside she saw a handsome
young shepherd, fast asleep, his upturned
face illumined by the moon’s soft light. diana
wonderingly gazed upon his beauty, and before long felt her
heart beat with more than admiration. gliding gently from
her chariot, she floated to his side, bent slowly, and dropped an
airy kiss upon his slightly parted lips.
the youth endymion, only partially awakened by this demonstration,
half raised his fringed lids, and for a moment his
[pg ]
sleep-dimmed eyes rested wonderingly upon the beautiful vision.
that one glance, although it drove diana away in great haste,
kindled in his heart an inextinguishable passion. he rose
with a start, and rubbed his sleepy eyes; but when he saw the
moon, which he fancied close beside him, sailing away across the
deep-blue sky, he felt sure the whole occurrence had been but a
dream, but so sweet a dream that he cast himself down upon the
sward, hoping to woo it to visit him once more.
it did not come again that night, however; but the next
night, as he lay on the selfsame spot, it recurred in all its sweetness;
and night after night it was repeated when the pale moonbeams
fell athwart his sleeping face.
“then, as the full orb poised upon the peak,
there came a lovely vision of a maid,
who seemed to step as from a golden car
out of the low-hung moon.”
lewis morris.
diana, fully as enamored as he, could not bear to pass him
by without a caress, and invariably left her car for a moment, as
it touched the mountain peak, to run to him and snatch a hasty
kiss.
“chaste artemis, who guides the lunar car,
the pale nocturnal vigils ever keeping,
sped through the silent space from star to star,
and, blushing, stooped to kiss endymion sleeping.”
boyesen.
but, even when asleep, endymion watched for her coming,
and enjoyed the bliss of her presence; yet a spell seemed to prevent
his giving any sign of consciousness.
time passed thus. diana, who could not bear to think of the
youth’s beauty being marred by want, toil, and exposure, finally
caused an eternal sleep to fall upon him, and bore him off to
mount latmus, where she concealed him in a cave held sacred
to her, and never profaned by human gaze. there each night
[pg ]
the goddess paused to gaze enraptured upon his beloved countenance,
and to press a soft kiss upon his unconscious lips. such
is the tale of diana and her lowly sweetheart, which has inspired
poets of all ages.
“queen of the wide air; thou most lovely queen
of all the brightness that mine eyes have seen!
as thou exceedest all things in thy shrine,
so every tale, does this sweet tale of thine.”
keats.
story of
orion.
endymion was not, however, the only mortal loved by diana,
for mythologists report that her affections were also bestowed
upon a young hunter by the name of orion. all
day long this youth scoured the forest, his faithful
dog sirius at his heels.
one day, in the dense shade of the forest, he met a group of
diana’s nymphs, the seven pleiades, daughters of atlas. these
fair maidens needed but to be seen to be passionately loved, and
orion’s heart burned as he sought to approach them; but they
were very coy, and, as he drew near and addressed them, turned
and fled.
afraid lest he should never see them again were he now to
lose sight of them, he pursued them hotly; but the nymphs sped
on, until, their strength failing, they called upon their patroness’s
aid. their prayer was no sooner heard than answered, and
orion, panting and weary, came up just in time to see seven
snow-white pigeons wing their way up into the azure sky.
there a second transformation overtook the pleiades, who
were changed into a constellation, composed of seven bright
stars, and there they shone undimmed for ages; but when troy
fell into the enemy’s hands, all grew pale with grief, and one,
more timid and impressionable than the rest, withdrew from
sight to hide her anguish from the curious eyes of men.
“and is there glory from the heavens departed?—
o void unmark’d!—thy sisters of the sky
still hold their place on high,
[pg ]
though from its rank thine orb so long hath started
thou, that no more art seen of mortal eye!”
hemans.
orion, like a fickle youth, was soon consoled for their disappearance,
and loved merope, daughter of œnopion, king of
chios, who consented to their union on condition that his future
son-in-law should win his bride by some heroic deed. now, as
orion was anything but a patient man, the delay was very unwelcome
indeed, and he made up his mind to abduct his bride
instead of marrying her openly; but the plan was frustrated by
œnopion’s watchfulness, and orion was punished by the loss
not only of his bride, but also of his eyesight.
blind, helpless, and alone, he now wandered from place to
place, hoping to find some one capable of restoring his sight. at
last he reached the cyclopes’ cave, and one of them took pity
on him, and led him to the sun, from whose radiance he borrowed
a store of light,—
“when, blinded by œnopion,
he sought the blacksmith at his forge,
and, climbing up the mountain gorge,
fixed his blank eyes upon the sun.”
longfellow.
happy once more, he resumed his favorite sport, and hunted
from morn till eve. diana met him in the forest, and, sharing
his tastes, soon learned to love him; but this affection was
viewed with great displeasure by apollo, from whose piercing
glance nothing that occurred by day could be hidden, and he
resolved to put an end to his sister’s infatuation. he therefore
summoned her to his side. to divert her suspicions, he began
to talk of archery, and, under the pretext of testing her skill as a
markswoman, bade her shoot at a dark speck rising and falling
far out at sea.
diana seized her bow, feathered her arrow, and sent it with
such force and accurate aim, that she touched the point, and
saw it vanish beneath the waves, little suspecting that the dark
[pg ]
head of orion, who was refreshing himself by a sea bath,
was given her as a target. when she discovered her error, she
mourned his loss with many tears, vowed never to forget him,
and placed him and his faithful dog sirius as constellations in
the sky.
story of
actæon.
when diana had finished her nightly journey in her moon
car, she seized her bow and arrows, and, attended
by her nymphs, was wont to sally forth to hunt
the wild beasts in the forest.
one summer afternoon, after an unusually long and exciting
pursuit, diana and her followers came to one of the still mountain
pools where they had often resorted to enjoy a plunge.
the cool waters rippled so invitingly, that the goddess and her
attendants hastened to divest themselves of their short hunting
garments, and lave their heated limbs.
but unfortunately the goddess and her attendant nymphs had
not been the only ones out hunting that day. actæon, the
huntsman, had risen at dawn to stalk the deer; and now, weary
and parched with thirst, he too sought the well-known mountain
spring,
“deep in the cool recesses of the wood,
where the cold crystal of a mossy pool
rose to the flowery marge, and gave again
the soft green lawn where ofttimes, overspent,
i lay upon the grass and eager bathed
my limbs in the clear lymph.”
lewis morris.
as he drew near the accustomed spot, actæon fancied he
heard bursts of silvery laughter: so he crept on very cautiously,
and soon, gently parting the thick branches of the underbrush,
beheld the sporting group.
at the selfsame moment diana turned to ascertain the cause
of the rustle which had caught her practiced ear, and met the
admiring gaze of the astonished young hunter. speechless with
indignation that a mortal had beheld her thus, she caught some
[pg ]
water in her hollow palm, flung it in his face, and bade him go
and declare, if he could, that he had seen diana disrobed.
the glittering drops had no sooner touched the young man’s
face, than he turned to obey her command, and found himself
transformed into a stag, with slender, sinewy limbs, furry skin,
and wide-branching antlers. nothing remained of his former
self except the woeful consciousness of his transformation; and as
he stood there, motionless and dismayed, the distant baying of
his hounds coming to join him fell upon his ear.
an electric thrill of fear shot through every vein, as, mindful
of his new form, he bounded away through the forest. alas!
too late; for the pack had caught one glimpse of his sleek sides,
and were after him in full cry.
in vain poor actæon strained every muscle. his limbs refused
their support, and, as he sank exhausted to the ground, the
hounds sprang at his quivering throat.
“nearer they came and nearer, baying loud,
with bloodshot eyes and red jaws dripping foam;
and when i strove to check their savagery,
speaking with words, no voice articulate came,
only a dumb, low bleat. then all the throng
leapt swift on me, and tore me as i lay!”
lewis morris.
diana was widely worshiped, and temples without number
were dedicated to her service; among others, the world-renowned
sanctuary of ephesus. the ancients also celebrated
many festivals in honor of this fair goddess of the moon, who
was ever ready to extend her protection over all deserving
mortals.
[pg ]
venus de milo. (louvre, paris.)
[pg ]
venus’
birth.
venus (dione, aphrodite, cytherea), the goddess of beauty,
love, laughter, and marriage, is said by some
mythologists to be the daughter of jupiter and
dione, goddess of moisture: others report that she sprang from
the foam of the sea.
“look, look, why shine
those floating bubbles with such light divine?
they break, and from their mist a lily form
rises from out the wave, in beauty warm.
the wave is by the blue-veined feet scarce press’d,
her silky ringlets float about her breast,
veiling its fairy loveliness; while her eye
is soft and deep as the blue heaven is high.
the beautiful is born; and sea and earth
may well revere the hour of that mysterious birth.”
shelley.
the ocean nymphs were the first to discover her, cradled on a
great blue wave; and they carried her down into their coral
caves, where they tenderly nursed her, and taught her with the
utmost care. then, her education being completed, the sea
nymphs judged it time to introduce her to the other gods, and,
with that purpose in view, carried her up to the surface of the
sea,—where tritons, oceanides, and nereides all crowded around
her, loudly expressing their ardent admiration,—and offered her
pearls and choice bits of coral from the deep, as a tribute to her
charms.
[pg ]
fourth hour of the night.—raphael.
[pg ]
then they pillowed her softly on a great wave, and intrusted
her to the care of zephyrus, the soft south wind, who blew a
gentle breath, and wafted her to the island of cyprus.
the four beautiful horæ (the seasons), daughters of jupiter
and themis, goddess of justice, stood there on the shore to welcome
her.
“an ethereal band
are visible above: the seasons four,—
green-kirtled spring, flush summer, golden store
in autumn’s sickle, winter frosty hoar.”
keats.
and they were not alone to watch for her coming, for the
three charites (graces, or gratiæ) were also present.
“‘these three on men all gracious gifts bestow,
which decke the body or adorne the mynde,
to make them lovely or well-favoured show;
as comely carriage, entertainement kynde,
sweete semblaunt, friendly offices that bynde,
and all the complements of curtesie:
they teach us how to each degree and kynde
we should our selves demeane, to low, to hie,
to friends, to foes; which skill men call civility.’”
spenser.
daughters of jupiter and eurynome, these maidens, who bore
the respective names of aglaia, euphrosyne, and thalia, longed
to show their love for their new mistress. when the wave upon
which she reclined came nearer still, the “rosy-bosomed hours,
fair venus’ train,” appeared. the wind finally brought the fair
goddess in safety to the shore; and, as soon as her foot touched
the white sand, all bent in homage to her surpassing beauty, and
reverentially watched her dry her hair.
“idalian aphrodite beautiful,
fresh as the foam, new-bathed in paphian wells,
with rosy slender fingers backward drew
from her warm brows and bosom her deep hair
[pg ]
ambrosial, golden round her lucid throat
and shoulder: from the violets her light foot
shone rosy-white, and o’er her rounded form
between the shadows of the vine bunches
floated the glowing sunlights, as she moved.”
tennyson.
this hasty and somewhat primitive toilet completed, venus
and her followers set out for mount olympus, and on their way
thither were joined by himerus, god of the desire of love;
pothos, god of the amities of love; suadela, god of the soft
speech of love; and hymen, god of marriage.
venus and
vulcan.
a throne had been prepared for the expected goddess, and,
when she suddenly appeared to take possession of it, the assembled
gods could not restrain a rapturous murmur
of admiration. her beauty took them by storm,
and her grace won their hearts; but, although they one and all
expressed a desire to marry her, venus scornfully rejected their
proposals. even the king of gods was slighted, and, to punish
her for her pride, he decreed she should marry vulcan, god of
the forge, the most ill-favored of all the heavenly council.
this compulsory union was anything but a happy one; for
venus never showed any affection for her deformed consort,
and, instead of being a faithful wife, soon deserted him, and
openly declared she would please herself.
story of
alectryon.
her first fancy was for mars, the handsome god of war, who
was not slow in reciprocating the fair goddess’s affections, and
many and sweet were the secret interviews they
enjoyed. yet, fearful lest some of the gods passing
by should discover them together, mars always placed his
attendant alectryon on guard, bidding him give due warning of
any one’s approach, and especially to call him before the sun
rose, as the lovers were particularly anxious that apollo should
not witness their parting caresses.
all prospered according to their desires, until one night the
unfortunate alectryon fell asleep; and so profound were his
[pg ]
slumbers, that he did not even stir when aurora flung open the
gates of the east, and apollo flashed forth to receive the melodious
greetings of the feathered denizens of the forest.
the sun god drove rapidly on, glancing right and left, and
taking note of all he saw. nothing escaped his bright and piercing
eye, as it flashed its beams hither and thither, and he was
soon aware of the sleeping watchman and of the guilty lovers.
as fast as his fleet-footed steeds could carry him, apollo hastened
to vulcan, to whom he vividly described the sight which
had greeted his eyes.
the irate husband lost no time, but, seizing a net of linked
steel, went in search of his runaway wife. stealthily he approached
the lovers’ bower, and deftly flung the net over both
sleepers, who were caught in its fine meshes, and could not
escape; and there he kept them imprisoned, in spite of their entreaties,
until all the gods had seen their humiliating plight, and
turned them into ridicule. but when he at last set them free,
mars darted away, vowing vengeance upon the negligent sentinel,
who was still blissfully sleeping. pouncing upon him, mars
awakened him roughly, administered a sharp reproof, changed
him into a cock, banished him into the barnyard, and condemned
him to give daily warning of the sun’s approach.
“and, from out a neighboring farmyard,
loud the cock alectryon crowed.”
longfellow.
venus’
children.
several beautiful children were born to mars and venus.
hermione, or harmonia, their daughter, married cadmus, king of
thebes; and cupid (cupido, eros, amor), their
little son, was appointed god of love. although
nursed with tender solicitude, this second-born child did not grow
as other children do, but remained a small, rosy, chubby child,
with gauzy wings and roguish, dimpled face. alarmed for his
health, venus consulted themis, who oracularly replied, “love
cannot grow without passion.”
[pg ]
in vain the goddess strove to catch the concealed meaning of
this answer. it was only revealed to her when anteros, god of
passion, was born. when with his brother, cupid grew and
flourished, until he became a handsome, slender youth; but when
separated from him, he invariably resumed his childish form and
mischievous habits.
venus and
adonis.
venus, however, did not lavish all her love upon mars, for she
is said to have felt a tender passion for a young man named
adonis, a bold young hunter, whose rash pursuit
of dangerous game caused venus many anxious
alarms. in vain she besought him to forego the pleasures of
the chase and remain with her. he laughingly escaped, and continued
to join the other hunters in his favorite sport. but, alas!
one day, after an exciting pursuit, he boldly attacked a wild boar,
which, goaded to madness, turned upon him, buried his strong
tusk in the youth’s unprotected side, and trampled him to death.
“the white tusk of a boar has transpierced his white thigh.
“the youth lieth dead while his dogs howl around,
and the nymphs weep aloud from the mists of the hill.”
bion (mrs. browning’s tr.).
venus ran straight to the scene of his tragic death, rushing
through underbrush and briers, tearing her delicate skin, and her
blood tingeing all the white roses along her way to a faint pink.
when she arrived, she found her beloved adonis cold in death,
and her passionate caresses met with no response. then she
burst into such a passion of tears, that the wood and water
nymphs, the gods, men, and all nature in fact, joined with her
to mourn the beloved youth.
“her loss the loves deplore:
woe, venus, woe! adonis is no more.”
bion (elton’s tr.).
sleeping love.—perrault.
very reluctantly mercury at last appeared to lead the soul of
the departed down into the infernal regions, where it was
[pg ]
welcomed by proserpina, queen of the realm, and led to the place
where pure and virtuous mortals enjoyed an eternity of bliss.
venus, still inconsolable, shed countless tears, which, as they
dropped upon the ground, were changed to anemones, while the
red drops which had fallen from adonis’ side were transformed
into red roses.
“as many drops as from adonis bled,
so many tears the sorrowing venus shed:
for every drop on earth a flower there grows:
anemones for tears; for blood the rose.”
bion (elton’s tr.).
as time did not soften venus’ grief, but, on the contrary,
made it more and more unendurable, she went to olympus,
where she fell at jupiter’s feet, imploring him to release adonis
from death’s embrace, or allow her to share his lot in hades.
to allow beauty to desert the earth was not possible, nor
could he resist her pleading: so he finally decreed that adonis
should be restored to her longing arms. but pluto, whose subject
he had now become, refused to yield up adonis; and after
much dispute a compromise was agreed upon, by virtue of which
adonis was allowed to spend one half of the year on earth,
providing he spent the remaining six months in the elysian
fields.
in early spring, therefore, adonis left the lower world, and
came with bounding tread to join his beloved. on his path
the flowers bloomed and the birds sang, to show their joy at his
coming. an emblem of vegetation, which rises from the ground
in early spring to deck the earth with beautiful foliage and flowers,
and cause the birds to sing for gladness, adonis reluctantly
returned to hades, when winter, the cruel boar, slew him again
with his white tusk, and made nature again droop, and mourn
his departure.
“but even in death, so strong is love,
i could not wholly die; and year by year,
[pg ]
when the bright springtime comes, and the earth lives,
love opens these dread gates, and calls me forth
across the gulf.”
lewis morris.
venus and
anchises.
the goddess of beauty also loved anchises, prince of troy,
but, ashamed of lavishing favors upon a mere mortal, extorted
from him a promise that he would never reveal
their secret marriage. unfortunately, however,
anchises was of a boastful disposition, and ere long yielded to
temptation and revealed the secret, incurring her wrath to such
an extent, that some mythologists accuse her of borrowing one
of jupiter’s thunderbolts and slaying him. others, however,
report that anchises lived to a ripe old age, and escaped from
burning troy on his son æneas’ back. venus’ love was, however,
all transferred to her son æneas, whom she signally protected
throughout his checkered career.
story of hero
and leander.
venus’ most ardent admirers and faithful worshipers were the
young people, for she delighted in their youthful
sentiments, and was ever ready to lend a helping
hand to all true lovers when apparently insurmountable obstacles
appeared on their path.
this was the case with a lovely maiden by the name of hero,
who was dedicated by her parents to venus’ service, and, as soon
as old enough, spent all her time in the temple, ministering to the
goddess, or in a lonely tower by the sea, where she dwelt alone
with her aged nurse.
“honey-sweet hero, of a princely race,
was priestess to queen venus in that place;
and at her father’s tower, by the sea set—
herself a queen of love, though maiden yet—
dwelt.”
edwin arnold.
the maiden’s beauty increased with her years, until the fame
of her loveliness spread throughout her native city sestus, and
even passed over the hellespont and reached abydus, where
[pg ]
leander, the bravest and handsomest youth of the town, was
fired with a desire to view the charming young priestess.
just at that time a solemn festival in honor of venus was to
be celebrated at sestus, to which all the youths and maidens
were cordially invited. under pretext of paying homage to the
goddess, leander entered her temple, and saw the young priestess,
whose charms far surpassed all descriptions.
venus, as has already been stated, was always deeply interested
in young lovers; and when she saw these two, so well
matched in beauty and grace, she bade cupid pierce them with
his love darts, which behest the mischief-loving god immediately
obeyed.
“god eros, setting notch to string,
wounded two bosoms with one shaft-shooting,
a maiden’s and a youth’s—leander he,
and lovely hero, sestos’ sweetest, she;
she of her town, and he of his, the boast;
a noble pair!”
edwin arnold.
an undying passion was thus simultaneously kindled in both
young hearts; and, thanks to venus’ assistance, leander managed
to exchange a few words with hero, declared his love, implored
her to view his suit kindly, and, above all, to grant him a
private interview, or he would surely die.
the maiden listened to his pleading with mingled joy and
terror, for she knew her parents would never consent to their
union. then, afraid lest some one should notice that she was
talking to a stranger, she bade him depart; but he refused to go
until he had learned where she lived, and proposed to swim
across the hellespont when the shades of night had fallen, and
none could see his goal, and pay her a visit in her lonely tower.
“‘sweet! for thy love,’ he cried, ‘the sea i’d cleave,
though foam were fire, and waves with flame did heave,
i fear not billows if they bear to thee;
nor tremble at the hissing of the sea!
[pg ]
and i will come—oh! let me come—each night,
swimming the swift flood to my dear delight:
for white abydos, where i live, doth front
thy city here, across our hellespont.’”
edwin arnold.
at last his prayers overcame the maiden’s scruples, and she
arranged to receive him in her sea-girt tower, promising at a
given hour to light a torch and hold it aloft to guide him safely
across the sea. then only he departed.
night came on; darkness stole over the earth; and leander
impatiently paced the sandy shore, and watched for the promised
signal, which no sooner appeared, than he exultantly plunged into
the dark waves, and parted them with lusty strokes, as he hastened
across the deep to join his beloved. at times the huge billows
towered above his head; but when he had escaped their threatening
depths, and rose up on their foamy crests, he could catch a
glimpse of the torch burning brightly, and pictured to himself
the shy, sweet blushes which would dye hero’s cheek as he
clasped her to his passionate heart.
“leander had no fear—he cleft the wave—
what is the peril fond hearts will not brave!”
landon.
venus, from the top of “many-peaked olympus,” smilingly
viewed the success of her scheme, and nerved leander’s arm to
cleave the rapid current. at last he reached the tower steps, and
was lovingly greeted by hero, whose heart had throbbed with
anxiety at the thought of the perils her lover was braving for the
sake of seeing her once more.
it was only when the dawn began to whiten the east, that the
lovers finished their interview and parted, he to return to abydus,
and she to prepare for the daily duties which would soon claim
her attention. but separation by day was all these fond lovers
could endure, and night after night, as soon as the first stars appeared,
hero lighted her torch, and leander hastened to her, to
linger by her side till dawn.
[pg ]
“thus pass’d the summer shadows in delight:
leander came as surely as the night,
and when the morning woke upon the sea,
it saw him not, for back at home was he.”
hunt.
no one suspected their meetings; and all went well until the
first fierce storms of winter swept down over the hellespont.
hero, in the gray dawn of a winter’s morning, besought her lover
not to leave her to battle against the waves, which beat so violently
against the stone tower; but he gently laughed at her fears,
and departed, promising to return at night as usual.
the storm, which had raged so fiercely already in the early
morning, increased in violence as the day wore on, until the
waves were lashed into foam, while the wind howled more and
more ominously as the darkness came on again; but none of
these signs could deter leander from visiting hero.
“there came one night, the wildest of the year,
when the wind smote like edge of hissing spear,
and the pale breakers thundered on the beach.”
edwin arnold.
all day long hero had hoped that her lover would renounce
his nightly journey; but still, when evening came, she lighted
her torch to serve as beacon, should he risk all to keep his word.
the wind blew so fiercely, that the torch wavered and flickered,
and nearly went out, although hero protected its feeble flame
by standing over it with outstretched robes.
at sight of the wonted signal, leander, who had already once
been beaten back by the waves, made a second attempt to cross
the strait, calling upon the gods to lend him their aid. but
this time his prayers were unheard, drowned in the fury of the
storm; yet he struggled on a while longer, with hero’s name on
his lips.
hero and leander.—bodenhausen.
at last, exhausted and ready to sink, he lifted his eyes once
more to view the cheering light. it was gone, extinguished by
[pg ]
a passing gust of wind. like a stone leander sank, once, twice,
thrice, and the billows closed forever over his head.
hero in the mean while had relighted her torch, and, quite unconscious
of the tragedy which had taken place, stood on the
tower, straining her eyes to pierce the darkness. all night long
she waited and watched for the lover who did not come; and,
when the first sunbeams shone over the tossing sea, she cast an
anxious glance over the waters to abydus. no one was in
sight as far as she could see. she was about to descend to
pursue her daily tasks, when, glancing at the foot of the tower,
she saw her lover’s corpse heaving up and down on the waves.
“as shaken on his restless pillow,
his head heaves with the heaving billow;
that hand, whose motion is not life,
yet feebly seems to menace strife,
flung by the tossing tide on high,
then level’d with the wave.”
byron.
hero’s heart broke at this sad sight, and she longed to die,
too, that she might not be parted from leander. to hasten
their meeting, she threw herself into the sea, and perished in the
waves, close by his side. thus lived and died the faithful lovers,
whose attachment has passed into a proverb.
byron, the celebrated english bard, attempted leander’s feat
of swimming across the hellespont, and, on his return from
that dangerous venture, wrote the following lines, which are so
familiar to all english-speaking people:—
“the winds are high on helle’s wave,
as on that night of stormy water
when love, who sent, forgot to save
the young, the beautiful, the brave,
the lonely hope of sestos’ daughter.
oh! when alone along the sky
her turret torch was blazing high,
though rising gale, and breaking foam,
and shrieking sea-birds warn’d him home;
[pg ]
and clouds aloft and tides below,
with signs and sounds, forbade to go,
he could not see, he would not hear,
or sound or sign foreboding fear;
his eye but saw that light of love,
the only star it hail’d above;
his ear but rang with hero’s song,
‘ye waves, divide not lovers long!’
that tale is old, but love anew
may nerve young hearts to prove as true.”
pyramus
and thisbe.
an equally loving and unfortunate pair were pyramus and
thisbe. although no waves divided them, and they had the
good fortune to occupy adjoining houses in babylon,
their parents having quarreled, they were forbidden
to see or speak to each other. this decree wrung
their tender hearts; and their continuous sighs finally touched
venus, who prepared to give them her aid. thanks to this
goddess’s kind offices, a crack was discovered in the party wall,
through which the lovers could peep at each other, converse,
and even, it is said, exchange a kiss or two.
sundry stolen interviews through this crack made them long
for uninterrupted and unrestrained meetings: so they made an
appointment to meet on a certain day and hour, under a white
mulberry tree, just without the city gates.
thisbe, anxious to see her lover, was the first to reach the
trysting place, and, as she slowly paced back and forth to while
away the time of waiting, she wondered what had happened to
delay pyramus. her meditation was suddenly broken by a rustling
sound in some neighboring bushes; and, thinking pyramus
was concealed there, she was about to call to him that he was
discovered, when, instead of her lover, she saw a lion emerge from
the thicket and come towards her, slowly lashing his sides with
his tail, and licking his bloody jaws. with one terrified shriek
the girl ran away, dropping her veil, which the lion caught in his
bloody mouth and tore to shreds, before beating a retreat into
the forest.
[pg ]
shortly after, pyramus came rushing up, out of breath, and
full of loving excuses for thisbe, who was not there, however,
to receive them. wondering at her absence, pyramus looked
around, and after a short investigation discerned the lion’s footprints
and the mangled veil. these signs sufficed to convince
him that thisbe had perished, and in a fit of despair he drew
his dagger from its sheath and thrust it into his heart.
a few minutes later, thisbe cautiously drew near, peering
anxiously about to discover whether the lion were still lurking
near. her first glance showed her pyramus stretched dead beneath
the mulberry tree, with her bloody veil pressed convulsively
to his lips. with a cry of terror she flew to his side, and tried
to revive him; but, when assured that all her efforts were in vain,
she drew the dagger from his breast, and, plunging it into her
own bosom, fell beside him quite lifeless.
“in her bosom plunged the sword,
all warm and reeking from its slaughtered lord.”
ovid (eusden’s tr.).
since that ominous day the fruit of the mulberry tree, which
had been white, assumed a blood-like hue, dyed by the blood
which flowed from the death wounds of pyramus and thisbe.
echo and
narcissus.
the lovely and talkative nymph echo lived free from care
and whole of heart until she met narcissus, hunting in the forest.
this frivolous young lady no sooner beheld
the youth, than she fell deeply in love with him,
and was proportionately grieved when she saw that he did not
return her affections.
all her blandishments were unavailing, and, in her despair at
his hard-heartedness, she implored venus to punish him by making
him suffer the pangs of unrequited love; then, melancholy
and longing to die, she wandered off into the mountains, far
from the haunts of her former companions, and there, brooding
continually over her sorrow, pined away until there remained
naught of her but her melodious voice.
[pg ]
the gods, displeased at her lack of proper pride, condemned
her to haunt rocks and solitary places, and, as a warning to
other impulsive maidens, to repeat the last sounds which fell
upon her ear.
“but her voice is still living immortal,—
the same you have frequently heard
in your rambles in valleys and forests,
repeating your ultimate word.”
saxe.
venus alone had not forgotten poor echo’s last passionate
prayer, and was biding her time to punish the disdainful narcissus.
one day, after a prolonged chase, he hurried to a lonely
pool to slake his thirst.
“in some delicious ramble, he had found
a little space, with boughs all woven round;
and in the midst of all, a clearer pool
than e’er reflected in its pleasant cool
the blue sky here, and there, serenely peeping
through tendril wreaths fantastically creeping.”
keats.
quickly he knelt upon the grass, and bent over the pellucid
waters to take a draught; but he suddenly paused, surprised.
down near the pebbly bottom he saw a face so passing fair, that
he immediately lost his heart, for he thought it belonged to some
water nymph gazing up at him through the transparent flood.
with sudden passion he caught at the beautiful apparition;
but, the moment his arms touched the water, the nymph vanished.
astonished and dismayed, he slowly withdrew to a short distance,
and breathlessly awaited the nymph’s return.
the agitated waters soon resumed their mirrorlike smoothness;
and narcissus, approaching noiselessly on tiptoe, and
cautiously peeping into the pool, became aware first of curly,
tumbled locks, and then of a pair of beautiful, watchful, anxious
eyes. evidently the nymph had just concluded to emerge from
her hiding place to reconnoiter.
[pg ]
more prudent this time, the youth gradually bent further over
the pool; and, reassured by his kindly glances, the nymph’s
whole head appeared. in gentle tones the youth now addressed
her; and her ruby lips parted and moved as if she were answering,
though not a sound came to his ear. in his excitement he
began to gesticulate, whereupon two snowy arms repeated his
every gesture; but when, encouraged by her loving glances and
actions, he tried once more to clasp her in his arms, she vanished
as rapidly as the first time.
time and again the same pantomime was enacted, and time
and again the nymph eluded his touch; but the enamored youth
could not tear himself away from the spot haunted by this sweet
image, whose sensitive face reflected his every emotion, and who
grew as pale and wan as he,—evidently, like him, a victim to
love and despair.
even the shades of night could not drive narcissus away
from his post, and, when the pale moonbeams illumined his retreat,
he bent over the pool to ascertain whether she too were
anxious and sleepless, and saw her gazing longingly up at him.
there narcissus lingered day and night, without eating or
drinking, until he died, little suspecting that the fancied nymph
was but his own image reflected in the clear waters. echo was
avenged; but the gods of olympus gazed compassionately down
upon the beautiful corpse, and changed it into a flower bearing
the youth’s name, which has ever since flourished beside quiet
pools, wherein its pale image is clearly reflected.
“a lonely flower he spied,
a meek and forlorn flower, with naught of pride,
drooping its beauty o’er the watery clearness,
to woo its own sad image into nearness:
deaf to light zephyrus it would not move;
but still would seem to droop, to pine, to love.”
keats.
pygmalion
and
galatea.
pygmalion, king of cyprus, was a very celebrated sculptor.
all his leisure moments were spent in the faithful portrayal of the
[pg ]
gods and goddesses. one day his practiced hand fashioned an
image of galatea. it was so beautiful that even before it was
entirely finished its author loved it. when completed,
pygmalion admired it still more, deemed
it too beautiful to remain inanimate, and besought
venus to give it life, stating that he wished a wife just like it.
as pygmalion had always been an obdurate bachelor, and
had frequently declared he would never marry, venus was delighted
to see him at last a victim of the tender passion, and resolved
to grant his request. pygmalion clasped the exquisite
image to his breast to infuse some of his own warmth into the
icy bosom, and pressed kiss after kiss upon the chiseled lips,
until at last they grew soft and warm at his touch, and a faint
color flushed the pale cheeks, as a breath dilated her lungs, and
sent her blood coursing along her veins,—
“as once with prayers in passion flowing,
pygmalion embraced the stone,
till, from the frozen marble glowing,
the light of feeling o’er him shone.”
schiller.
pygmalion’s delight at seeing his fair image a living and
breathing maiden was unbounded, and after a short but passionate
wooing the object of his affections became his happy wife.
cupid and
psyche.
in those same remote ages of “sweet mythology” there lived
a king whose three daughters were world-renowned on account
of their matchless beauty. psyche, the youngest
of the sisters, was so lovely, that her father’s subjects
declared her worthy to be called the goddess of beauty, and
offered to pay homage to her instead of to venus. offended by
this proposal, which psyche had good sense enough to refuse,
venus resolved to demonstrate forcibly to that benighted race
that the maiden was mortal. she therefore bade her son cupid
slay her.
armed with his bow and arrows, and provided with a deadly
poison, cupid set out to do her bidding, and at nightfall reached
[pg ]
the palace, crept noiselessly past the sleeping guards, along the
deserted halls, and came to psyche’s apartment, into which he
glided unseen. stealthily he approached the couch upon which
the fair maiden was sleeping, and bent over her to administer the
poisoned dose.
a moonbeam falling athwart her face revealed her unequaled
loveliness, and made cupid start back in surprise; but, as he did
so, one of his own love arrows came into contact with his rosy
flesh, and inflicted a wound, from which he was to suffer for
many a weary day.
all unconscious of the gravity of his hurt, he hung enraptured
over the sleeping maiden, and let her fair image sink into his
heart; then, noiselessly as he had entered, he stole out again,
vowing he would never harm such innocence and beauty.
morning dawned. venus, who had expected to see the sun
illumine her rival’s corpse, saw her sporting as usual in the palace
gardens, and bitterly realized that her first plan had completely
failed. she therefore began to devise various torments
of a petty kind, and persecuted the poor girl so remorselessly,
that she fled from home with the firm intention of putting an
end to the life she could no longer enjoy in peace.
to achieve this purpose, psyche painfully toiled up a rugged
mountain, and, creeping to the very edge of a great precipice,
cast herself down, expecting to be dashed to pieces on the
jagged rocks below; but cupid, who had indignantly though
helplessly seen all his mother’s persecutions, had followed psyche
unseen, and, when he perceived her intention to commit suicide,
he called to zephyrus (the south wind), and entreated him to
catch the maiden in his strong yet gentle arms, and bear her
off to a distant isle.
consequently, instead of a swift, sharp fall and painful death,
psyche felt herself gently wafted over hill and dale, across sparkling
waters; and, long before she wearied of this new mode of
travel, she was gently laid on a flowery bank, in the midst of an
exquisite garden.
[pg ]
bewildered, she slowly rose to her feet, rubbed her pretty eyes
to make sure she was not dreaming, and wonderingly strolled
about the beautiful grounds. ere long she came to an enchanted
palace, whose portals opened wide to receive her, while
gentle voices bade her enter, and invisible hands drew her over
the threshold and waited upon her.
when night came, and darkness again covered the earth,
cupid appeared in search of his beloved psyche. in the perfumed
dusk he confessed his love, and tenderly begged for some
return.
now, although the fading light would not permit her to discern
the form or features of her unknown lover, psyche listened
to his soft tones with unconcealed pleasure, and soon consented
to their union. cupid then entreated her to make no
attempt to discover his name, or to catch a glimpse of his face,
warning her that if she did so he would be forced to leave her,
never to return.
“‘dear, i am with thee only while i keep
my visage hidden; and if thou once shouldst see
my face, i must forsake thee: the high gods
link love with faith, and he withdraws himself
from the full gaze of knowledge.’”
lewis morris.
psyche solemnly promised to respect her mysterious lover’s
wishes, and gave herself up entirely to the enjoyment of his company.
all night long they talked; and when the first faint streak
of light appeared above the horizon, cupid bade psyche farewell,
promising to return with the welcome shades of night. all
day long psyche thought of him, longed for him, and, as soon as
the sun had set, sped to the bower where the birds were sleepily
trilling forth their evening song, and breathlessly waited until he
came to join her.
“now on broad pinions from the realms above
descending cupid seeks the cyprian grove;
[pg ]
to his wide arms enamor’d psyche springs,
and clasps her lover with aurelian wings.
a purple sash across his shoulder bends,
and fringed with gold the quiver’d shafts suspends.”
darwin.
although the hours of day seemed interminable, spent as they
were in complete solitude, psyche found the hours of night all
too short in the sweet society of love. her every wish was
gratified almost as soon as expressed; and at last, encouraged
by her lover’s evident anxiety to please her, she gave utterance
to her longing to see and converse with her sisters once more.
the ardent lover could not refuse to grant this request, yet
psyche noticed that his consent seemed somewhat hesitating and
reluctant.
the next morning, while enjoying a solitary stroll, psyche suddenly
encountered her two sisters. after rapturous embraces
and an incoherent volley of questions and answers, they settled
down to enjoy a long talk. psyche related her desperate attempt
at suicide, her miraculous preservation from certain death,
her aërial journey, her entrance into the enchanted palace, her
love for her mysterious nightly visitor,—all, in short, that had
happened since she had left her father’s home.
now, the elder sisters had always been jealous of psyche’s
superior beauty; and when they saw her luxurious surroundings,
and heard her raptures about her lover, they were envious, and
resolved to mar the happiness which they could not enjoy.
they therefore did all in their power to convince poor psyche
that her lover must be some monster, so hideous that he dare not
brave the broad light of day, lest he should make her loathe him,
and further added, that, if she were not very careful, he would
probably end by devouring her.
cupid awakening psyche.—thumann.
they thereupon advised poor troubled psyche to conceal a
lamp and dagger in her lover’s apartment, and to gaze upon him
in secret, when his eyes were closed in sleep. if the light of the
lamp revealed, as they felt sure it would, the hideous
[pg ]
countenance and distorted form of a monster, they bade her use the
dagger to kill him. then, satisfied with their work, the sisters
departed, leaving psyche alone to carry out their evil suggestions.
when safe at home once more, the sisters constantly brooded
over the tale psyche had poured into their ears, and, hoping to
secure as luxurious a home and as fascinating a lover, they each
hurried off in secret to the mountain gorge, cast themselves over
the precipice, and—perished.
night having come, bringing the usually so welcome cupid,
psyche, tortured with doubt, could with difficulty conceal her
agitation. after repeated efforts to charm her from her silent
mood, cupid fell asleep; and, as soon as his regular breathing proclaimed
him lost in slumber, psyche noiselessly lighted her lamp,
seized her dagger, and, approaching the couch with great caution,
bent over her sleeping lover. the lamp, which she held high
above her head, cast its light full upon the face and form of a
handsome youth.
“now trembling, now distracted; bold,
and now irresolute she seems;
the blue lamp glimmers in her hold,
and in her hand the dagger gleams.
prepared to strike, she verges near,
then, the blue light glimmering from above,
the hideous sight expects with fear—
and gazes on the god of love.”
apollonius.
psyche’s heart beat loudly with joy and pride as she beheld,
instead of the monster, this graceful youth; and as she hung over
him, enraptured, she forgot all caution. an inadvertent motion
tipped her lamp, and one drop of burning oil, running over the
narrow brim, fell upon cupid’s naked shoulder.
the sudden pain made him open his eyes with a start. the
lighted lamp, the glittering dagger, the trembling psyche, told
the whole story. cupid sprang from the couch, seized his bow
[pg ]
and arrows, and, with a last sorrowful, reproachful glance at
psyche, flew away through the open window, exclaiming,—
“‘farewell! there is no love except with faith,
and thine is dead! farewell! i come no more!’”
lewis morris.
psyche
forsaken.
when he had vanished into the dusky air without, the balmy
night winds ceased to blow; and suddenly a tempest began to
rage with such fury, that poor frightened psyche
dared not remain alone in the palace, but hastened
out into the gardens, where she soon lost consciousness of her
misery in a deep swoon. when she opened her eyes once more,
the storm had ceased, the sun was high in the heavens, and
palace and gardens had vanished.
poor psyche lingered there the following and many succeeding
nights, vainly hoping for cupid’s return, and shedding many bitter
tears of repentance. finally she resolved to commit suicide,
and, with that purpose in view, plunged into a neighboring river;
but the god of the stream caught and carried her ashore, where
his daughters, the water nymphs, restored her to life. thus
forced to live, psyche wandered about disconsolate, seeking
cupid, and questioning all she met, the nymphs, pan, and ceres,
who compassionately listened to her confession of love for her
husband.
“not as the earthly loves which throb and flush
round earthly shrines was mine, but a pure spirit,
lovelier than all embodied love, more pure
and wonderful; but never on his eyes
i looked, which still were hidden, and i knew not
the fashion of his nature; for by night,
when visual eyes are blind, but the soul sees,
came he, and bade me seek not to inquire
or whence he came or wherefore. nor knew i
his name. and always ere the coming day,
as if he were the sun god, lingering
with some too well loved maiden, he would rise
and vanish until eve.”
lewis morris.
[pg ]
ceres had often seen cupid, and had heard that very morning
that he was having a wound in his shoulder dressed by
venus: so she advised psyche to go to the goddess of beauty, to
enter her service, and to perform every task with cheerful alacrity,
knowing that such a course would ultimately bring about a
meeting and reconciliation between the lovers.
psyche gratefully accepted and followed ceres’ advice, and
labored early and late to satisfy her exacting mistress, who appointed
such difficult tasks, that the poor girl would never have
been able to accomplish them had she not been aided by all the
beasts and insects, who loved her dearly.
psyche’s
journey to
hades.
venus repeatedly tested her fidelity and endurance, and finally
resolved, as a crucial experiment, to send her to hades to fetch
a box of beauty ointment, for which proserpina
alone had the recipe. directed by zephyrus, her
old friend, psyche encountered the terrors of hades
in safety, delivered her message, and in return received a small
box. the gates of hades were closed behind her, and she had
nearly finished her last task, when she suddenly fancied that it
would be wise to appropriate a little of the magic preparation to
efface the traces of sleepless nights and many tears.
the box, however, contained naught but the spirit of sleep,
who, pouncing upon psyche, laid her low by the roadside.
cupid, passing by, saw her there, marked the ravages of grief,
remembered his love and her suffering, and, wrestling with the
spirit, forced him to reënter the narrow bounds of his prison,
and woke psyche with a loving kiss.
“‘dear, unclose thine eyes.
thou mayst look on me now. i go no more,
but am thine own forever.’”
lewis morris.
charon and psyche.—neide.
then, hand in hand, they winged their flight to olympus,
entered the council hall; and there cupid presented psyche, his
chosen bride, to the assembled deities, who all promised to be
present at the nuptial ceremony. venus even, forgetting all her
[pg ]
former envy, welcomed the blushing bride, who was happy ever
after.
the ancients, for whom cupid was an emblem of the heart,
considered psyche the personification of the soul, and represented
her with butterfly wings; that little insect being another
symbol of the soul, which cannot die.
berenice’s
hair.
one of the latest myths concerning venus is that of berenice,
who, fearing for her beloved husband’s life, implored the goddess
to protect him in battle, vowing to sacrifice her
luxuriant hair if he returned home in safety. the
prayer was granted, and berenice’s beautiful locks laid upon
venus’ shrine, whence they, however, very mysteriously disappeared.
an astrologer, consulted concerning the supposed theft,
solemnly pointed to a comet rapidly coming into view, and declared
that the gods had placed berenice’s hair among the stars,
there to shine forever in memory of her wifely sacrifice.
worship of
venus.
venus, goddess of beauty, is represented either entirely naked,
or with some scanty drapery called a “cestus.” seated in her
chariot, formed of a single pearl shell, and drawn
by snow-white doves, her favorite birds, she journeyed
from shrine to shrine, complacently admiring the lavish
decorations of jewels and flowers her worshipers provided. the
offerings of young lovers were ever those which found most favor
in her sight.
“venus loves the whispers
of plighted youth and maid,
in april’s ivory moonlight
beneath the chestnut shade.”
macaulay.
numerous ancient and some modern statues of this goddess
grace the various art galleries, but among them all the most
perfect is the world-renowned venus de milo.
venus’ festivals were always scenes of graceful amusements;
and her votaries wore wreaths of fresh, fragrant flowers, the
emblem of all natural beauty.
[pg ]
birth of
mercury.
as already repeatedly stated in the course of this work, jupiter
was never a strictly faithful spouse, and, in spite of his wife’s
remonstrances, could not refrain from indulging
his caprice for every pretty face he met along
his way. it is thus, therefore, that he yielded to the charms
of maia, goddess of the plains, and spent some blissful hours in
her society. this divine couple’s happiness culminated when
they first beheld their little son, mercury (hermes, psychopompus,
oneicopompus), who was born in a grotto on mount
cyllene, in arcadia,—
“mercury, whom maia bore,
sweet maia, on cyllene’s hoary top.”
virgil (cowper’s tr.).
this infant god was quite unlike mortal children, as will
readily be perceived by the numerous pranks he played immediately
after his birth. first he sprang from his mother’s knee,
grasped a tortoise shell lying on the ground, bored holes in its
sides, stretched strings across its concavity, and, sweeping his
hands over them, produced strains of sweetest music, thus inventing
the first lyre.
“so there it lay, through wet and dry,
as empty as the last new sonnet,
till by and by came mercury,
and, having mused upon it,
[pg ]
‘why here,’ cried he, ‘the thing of things
in shape, material, and dimension!
give it but strings, and, lo, it sings,
a wonderful invention.’”
lowell.
mercury’s
theft.
being very hungry toward evening, young mercury escaped
from his sleeping mother, and sallied out in search of food. he
had not gone very far, before he came to a wide
meadow, where apollo’s herds were at pasture.
the oxen were fat and sleek; and the mischievous little god, after
satisfying himself that they were young, and therefore promised
to be tender and juicy, drove fifty of them off to a secluded spot,
taking good care to envelop their feet in leafy branches, so they
would leave no traces. then, his hiding place being reached
in safety, mercury coolly killed two of the oxen, which he proceeded
to eat.
apollo soon missed his cattle, and began to search for some
clew to their hiding place or to the thief. he could, however,
discover nothing but some broken twigs and scattered leaves.
suddenly he remembered that the babe whose birth had been
announced early that morning in high olympus had been appointed
god of thieves. he therefore lost no more time in useless
search and conjecture, but strode off to mount cyllene,
where he found mercury peacefully sleeping in his cradle. with
a rude shake, the sun god roused him from his slumbers, and
bade him restore the stolen cattle. mercury pretended innocence,
until apollo, exasperated, dragged him off to olympus,
where he was convicted of the theft, and condemned to restore
the stolen property. mercury yielded to the decree, produced
the remaining oxen, and, in exchange for the two missing, gave
apollo the lyre he had just fashioned.
flying mercury.—bologna. (national museum, florence.)
this, like most other myths, admits of a natural explanation.
apollo (the sun) was supposed by the ancients to possess great
herds of cattle and sheep,—the clouds; and mercury, the personification
of the wind, born in the night, after a few hours’
[pg ]
existence waxes sufficiently strong to drive away the clouds and
conceal them, leaving no trace of his passage except a few
broken branches and scattered leaves.
mercury’s
wand, cap,
and shoes.
the gift of the lyre pleased apollo so well, that he in return
wished to make a present to mercury, and gave him a magic
wand, called caduceus, which had the power of
reconciling all conflicting elements. mercury, anxious
to test it, thrust it between two quarreling
snakes, who immediately wound themselves in amity around it.
this so pleased him, that he bade them remain there forever, and
used the wand on all occasions.
“a snake-encircl’d wand;
by classic authors term’d caduceus
and highly fam’d for several uses.”
goldsmith.
mercury was in due time appointed messenger of the gods,
who, to make him fleet of foot, presented him with winged sandals,
the talaria, which endowed him with marvelous rapidity of
motion. as these sandals did not seem quite sufficient, however,
the gods added the winged cap, petasus, to the winged shoes.
“foot-feather’d mercury appear’d sublime
beyond the tall tree tops; and in less time
than shoots the slanted hail-storm, down he dropt
towards the ground; but rested not, nor stopt
one moment from his home; only the sward
he with his wand light touch’d, and heavenward
swifter than sight was gone.”
keats.
mercury was not only the messenger of the gods, but was also
appointed god of eloquence, commerce, rain, wind, and the special
patron of travelers, shepherds, cheats, and thieves.
story of io.
jupiter often intrusted to mercury messages of a delicate
nature, and always found him an invaluable ally;
but the faithful messenger was never so much
needed or so deeply appreciated as during jupiter’s courtship
of io, the peerless daughter of the river god inachus.
[pg ]
to avoid juno’s recriminations, jupiter had carried on this
affair with even more than his usual secrecy, visiting his beloved
only when quite certain that his wife was asleep, and taking the
further precaution of spreading a cloud over the spot where he
generally met her, to shield her from all chance of being seen
from olympus.
one fine afternoon, all conditions being favorable, jupiter hastened
down to earth to see io, and began to stroll with her up
and down the river edge. they heeded not the noonday heat,
for the cloud over their heads screened them from the sun’s too
ardent rays.
from some cause juno’s slumbers were less protracted than
usual, and she soon arose from her couch to look about her
realm, the atmosphere, and convince herself that all was well.
her attention was soon attracted by an opaque, immovable
cloud near the earth,—a cloud which had no business there,
for had she not bidden them all lie still on the blue until she
awoke? her suspicions being aroused by the presence of this
cloud, she sought her husband in olympus, and, not finding him,
flew down to earth, brushing the cloud aside in her haste.
jupiter, thus warned of her coming, had but time to change
the maiden beside him into a heifer, ere his wife alighted and
inquired what he was doing there. carelessly the god pointed
to the heifer, and declared he had been whiling away the time
by creating it; but the explanation failed to satisfy juno, who,
seeing no other living creature near, suspected that her spouse
had been engaged in a clandestine flirtation, and had screened
its fair object from her wrath only by a sudden transformation.
dissimulating these suspicions with care, juno begged her husband
to give her his new creation, which request he could not refuse,
but granted most reluctantly, thus adding further confirmation
to her jealous fears. the queen of heaven then departed,
taking io with her, and placed her under the surveillance of argus,
one of her servants, who possessed myriad eyes, but one half of
which he closed at a time.
[pg ]
“the eyes of argus, sentinel of heaven:
those thousand eyes that watch alternate kept,
nor all o’er all his body waked or slept.”
statius (elton’s tr.).
argus’ watch.
she bade him watch the heifer closely, and report anything
unusual in its actions. one day, therefore, as he was watching
his charge pasture by the river, argus heard her
relate to her father, inachus, the story of her transformation,
and immediately imparted his discovery to juno, who,
advising still closer watchfulness, sent him back to his post.
jupiter, in the mean while, was in despair; for days had passed
without his being able to exchange a word with io, or deliver
her from her imprisonment. finally he called mercury to his
aid, and bade him devise some plan to rescue her. armed with
a handful of poppies, mercury approached argus, and offered
to while away the time by telling him tales.
as mercury was the prince of story-tellers, this offer was not
to be despised, and argus joyfully accepted; but instead of
exerting himself to be entertaining, mercury droned out such
lengthy, uninteresting stories, that argus soon closed half his eyes
in profound sleep. still talking in the same monotonous way,
mercury softly shook the poppies over the giant’s head, until one
by one the remaining eyelids closed, and argus was wrapped in
complete slumber.
then mercury seized the giant’s sword, and with one well-directed
blow severed his head from the huge trunk. only one
half of the task was successfully accomplished; and while mercury
was driving the heifer away, juno discovered his attempt,
and promptly sent an enormous gadfly to torment the poor
beast, who, goaded to madness by its cruel stings, fled wildly
from one country to another, forded streams, and finally plunged
into the sea, since called ionian. after swimming across it,
she took refuge in egypt, where jupiter restored her to all her
girlish loveliness, and where her son epaphus was born, to be
the first king and the founder of memphis.
[pg ]
“in coming time that hollow of the sea
shall bear the name ionian, and present
a monument of io’s passage through,
unto all mortals.”
e. b. browning.
juno mourned the loss of her faithful argus most bitterly, and,
gathering up his myriad eyes, scattered them over the tail of
her favorite bird, the peacock, to have some memento of her
faithful servant ever near her.
“from argus slain a painted peacock grew,
fluttering his feathers stain’d with various hue.”
moschus.
this story also is an allegory. io personifies the moon, restlessly
wandering from place to place; argus, the heavens, whose
starry eyes keep ceaseless watch over the moon’s every movement;
mercury is the rain, whose advent blots out the stars one
by one, thus killing argus, who else was never known to close
all his eyes at once.
mercury’s
offices and
worship.
to mercury was intrusted the charge of conducting the
souls of the departed to hades, and when occupied
in this way he bore the name of psychopompus,
while, when addressed as conductor of dreams, he was
oneicopompus.
“gently as a kiss came death to sever
from spirit flesh, and to the realm of gloom
the pallid shades with fearless brow descended
to hades, by the winged god attended.”
boyesen.
he was one of the twelve principal gods of olympus, and
was widely worshiped. temples, altars, and shrines were dedicated
to his service throughout the ancient countries. his statues
were considered sacred boundary marks, and their removal punished
by death. solemn annual festivals were held in rome in
mercury’s honor in the month of may, and from him received
their name of mercuralia.
[pg ]
mars’
character.
mars (ares), son of jupiter and juno, was the god of war, the
personification of the angry clouded sky, and, although but little
worshiped in greece, was one of the principal
roman divinities. he is said to have first seen
the light in thrace, a country noted for its fierce storms and
war-loving people.
“infant mars, where thracia’s mountains rose,
press’d with his hardy limbs th’ incrusted snows.”
statius (elton’s tr.).
never sated with strife and bloodshed, this god preferred the
din of battle to all other music, and found no occupation so
congenial as the toils and dangers of war. no gentle deeds of
kindness were ever expected from him; no loving prayers were
ever addressed to him; and the ancients felt no love for him,
but, on the contrary, shuddered with terror when his name was
mentioned.
mars was generally represented in a brilliant suit of armor, a
plumed helmet on his proud young head, a poised spear in one
muscular hand, and a finely wrought shield in the other, showing
him ever ready to cope with a foe.
mars’
attendants.
his attendants, or some say his children, sympathized heartily
with his quarrelsome tastes, and delighted in following
his lead. they were eris (discord), phobos
(alarm), metus (fear), demios (dread), and pallor (terror).
bellona, or enyo, goddess of war, also accompanied him, drove
[pg ]
his chariot, parried dangerous thrusts, and watched over his
general safety. mars and bellona were therefore worshiped
together in the selfsame temple, and their altars were the only
ones ever polluted by human sacrifices.
“and to the fire-ey’d maid of smoky war,
all hot and bleeding, will we offer them:
the mailed mars shall on his altar sit,
up to the ears in blood.”
shakespeare.
story of otus
and ephialtes.
as strife was his favorite element, mars was very active indeed
during the war between the gods and giants, but in his martial
ardor he frequently forgot all caution. on one
occasion he was obliged to surrender to otus and
ephialtes,—two giants, who, though but nine years of age, were
already of immense stature, since they increased in height at the
rate of nine inches each month.
proud of their victory over the god of war, these giants bore
him off in triumph, and bound him fast with iron chains slipped
through iron rings. day and night they kept watch over him;
and even when they slept, the rattle of the chains, whenever any
one of the gods attempted to set him free, woke them up, and
frustrated all efforts to deliver him. during fifteen weary
months poor mars lingered there in durance vile, until mercury,
the prince of thieves, noiselessly and deftly slipped the chains out
of the rings, and restored him to freedom.
in revenge for the cruel treatment inflicted by otus and ephialtes,
mars prevailed upon apollo and diana to use their poisoned
arrows, and thus rid the world of these two ugly and useless giants.
the areopagus.
of a fiery disposition, mars was never inclined to forgive an
injury; and when halirrhothius, neptune’s son, dared to carry off
his daughter alcippe, mars hotly pursued the abductor,
and promptly slew him. neptune, angry at
this act of summary justice, cited the god of war to appear
before a tribunal held in the open air, on a hill near the newly
founded city of athens.
[pg ]
it was then customary for such cases to be tried at night, in
utter darkness, so that the judges might not be influenced by the
personal appearance of either plaintiff or defendant; and no
rhetoric of any kind was allowed, that their minds might remain
quite unbiased. mars appeared before the judges, simply stated
his case, and was acquitted. since then the hill upon which his
trial took place has been called the areopagus (ares’ hill) or
mars’ hill, and the judges of the principal court of justice at
athens received the name of areopagitæ.
mars’
children.
although such a partisan of strife, mars was not impervious
to softer emotions, and passionately returned the devotion of venus,
who bore him three beautiful children,—harmonia,
cupid, and anteros. mars also fell in love
with a beautiful young vestal named ilia, a descendant of æneas,
who, in spite of the solemn pledge not to listen to a lover’s pleadings
until her time of service at the goddess vesta’s altar was
accomplished, yielded to mars’ impetuous wooing, and consented
to a clandestine union.
romulus and
remus.
although secretly married, ilia continued to dwell in the
temple until the birth of her twin sons romulus and remus.
her parents, hearing she had broken her vows, commanded
that she should suffer the prescribed punishment
of being buried alive, and that the children should be exposed
to the teeth and claws of the wild beasts of the forest.
the double sentence was ruthlessly carried out, and the young
mother perished; but, contrary to all previsions, the babes survived,
and, after having been suckled for a time by a she-wolf,
were found and adopted by a shepherd.
romulus and remus throve under this man’s kind care, and
grew up strong and fearless. when they reached manhood, they
longed for a wider sphere for their youthful activity, and, leaving
the mountain where they had grown up, journeyed out into the
world to seek their fortunes. after some time they came to a
beautiful hilly country, where they decided to found a great city,
the capital of their future realm. accordingly the brothers began
[pg ]
to trace the outline of their city limits, and, in doing so, quarreled
over the name of the prospective town.
blinded by anger, romulus suddenly raised the tool he held,
and struck remus such a savage blow that he fell to the ground,
slain by his brother in a fit of passion. alone now, romulus at
first vainly tried to pursue his undertaking, but, being soon joined
by a number of adventurers as wicked and unscrupulous as
he, they combined their forces, and built the celebrated city of
rome.
“then, with his nurse’s wolf-skin girt,
shall romulus the line assert,
invite them to his new raised home,
and call the martial city rome.”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
as founder of this city, romulus was its first king, and ruled
the people with such an iron hand that his tyranny eventually
became unbearable. the senators, weary of his exactions and
arbitrary measures, finally resolved to free themselves of his
presence. taking advantage of an eclipse, which plunged the
city in sudden darkness at noonday, and which occurred while
all were assembled on the forum, the magistrates slew romulus,
cut his body into pieces, and hid them under their wide togas.
quirinus.
when the light returned, and the terrified and awestruck
people, somewhat reassured, looked about them for their king,
they were told he had gone, never to return, carried
off by the immortal gods, who wished him to share
their abode and dignity. the senators further informed the
credulous population that romulus was to be henceforth worshiped
as a god under the name of quirinus, and gave orders
for the erection of a temple on one of the seven hills, which
since then has been known as mount quirinal. yearly festivals
in romulus’ honor were ever after held in rome, under the name
of quirinalia.
well pleased with the new city of rome and its turbulent, lawless
citizens, mars took it under his special protection; and once,
[pg ]
when a plague was raging which threatened to destroy all the
people, the romans rushed in a body to his temple, and clamored
for a sign of his favor and protection.
the ancile.
even while they prayed, it is said, a shield, ancile, fell from
heaven, and a voice was distinctly heard to declare that rome
would endure as long as this token of the god’s
good will was preserved. the very same day the
plague ceased its frightful ravages, and the romans, delighted
with the result of their petitions, placed the heavenly shield in
one of their principal temples.
then, in constant dread lest some of their enemies should succeed
in stealing it, they caused eleven other shields to be made,
so exactly like the heaven-sent ancile, that none but the guardian
priests, the salii, who kept continual watch over them, could
detect the original from the facsimiles. during the month of
march, which, owing to its blustery weather, was dedicated to
mars and bore his name, the ancilæ were carried in a procession
all through the city, the salii chanting their rude war songs,
and executing intricate war dances.
a roman general, ere setting out on any warlike expedition,
always entered the sanctuary of mars, touched the sacred shield
with the point of his lance, shook the spear in the hand of the
god’s effigy, and called aloud, “mars, watch over us!”
worship
of mars.
a common superstition among the roman soldiery was,
that mars, under the name of gradivus, marched
in person at the head of their army, and led them
on to victory. mars’ principal votaries were therefore the roman
soldiers and youths, whose exercising ground was called, in his
honor, the campus martius, or field of mars. all the laurel
crowns bestowed upon victorious generals were deposited at the
foot of his statues, and a bull was the customary thank offering
after a successful campaign.
“the soldier, from successful camps returning
with laurel wreath’d, and rich with hostile spoil,
severs the bull to mars.”
prior.
[pg ]
vulcan’s fall.
vulcan, or hephæstus, son of jupiter and juno, god of fire
and the forge, seldom joined the general council of the gods.
his aversion to olympus was of old standing. he
had once been tenderly attached to his mother,
had lavished upon her every proof of his affection, and had
even tried to console her when she mourned jupiter’s neglect.
on one occasion, intending to punish juno for one of her usual
fits of jealousy, jupiter hung her out of heaven, fast bound by a
golden chain; and vulcan, perceiving her in this plight, tugged
at the chain with all his might, drew her up, and was about to
set her free, when jupiter returned, and, in anger at his son’s
interference in his matrimonial concerns, kicked him out of
heaven.
the intervening space between heaven and earth was so great,
that vulcan’s fall lasted during one whole day and night, ere he
finally touched the summit of mount mosychlus, in the island of
lemnos.
“from morn
to noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
a summer’s day; and with the setting sun
dropt from the zenith like a falling star,
on lemnos th’ ægean isle.”
milton.
of course, to any one but a god such a terrible fall would have
proved fatal; and even vulcan did not escape entirely unharmed,
for he injured one of his legs, which accident left him lame and
somewhat deformed for the remainder of his life.
vulcan’s
forge.
[pg ]
now, although vulcan had risked so much and suffered so
greatly in taking his mother’s part, she never even made the
slightest attempt to ascertain whether he had
reached the earth in safety. hurt by her indifference
and ingratitude, vulcan vowed never again to return to
olympus, and withdrew to the solitudes of mount ætna, where
he established a great forge in the heart of the mountain, in
partnership with the cyclopes, who helped him manufacture
many cunning and useful objects from the metals found in great
profusion in the bosom of the earth.
among these ingenious contrivances were two golden handmaidens
gifted with motion, who attended the god wherever he
went, and supported his halting footsteps.
“two golden statues, like in form and look
to living maidens, aided with firm gait
the monarch’s steps.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
the golden
throne.
vulcan also devised a golden throne with countless hidden
springs, which, when unoccupied, did not present an extraordinary
appearance; but as soon as any one ventured
to make use of it, the springs moved, and, the chair
closing around the person seated upon it, frustrated all attempts
to rise and escape from its treacherous embrace.
vulcan dispatched this throne, when completed, to his mother,
who, delighted with its beauty and delicate workmanship,
proudly seated herself upon it, and found herself a prisoner. in
vain she strove to escape, in vain the gods all gallantly rushed
to her assistance. their united strength and skill proved useless
against the cunning springs.
forge of vulcan.—velasquez. (museum, madrid.)
finally mercury was sent to vulcan, primed with a most diplomatic
request to honor high olympus with his presence; but
all mercury’s eloquence and persuasions failed to induce the god
of the forge to leave his sooty abode, and the messenger god
was forced to return alone and report the failure of his attempt.
[pg ]
then the gods deliberated anew, and decided to send bacchus,
god of wine, hoping his powers of persuasion would prove more
effective.
armed with a flask of his choicest vintage, bacchus presented
himself before vulcan, and offered him a refreshing draught.
vulcan, predisposed to thirst, and incited to drink by the very
nature of his labor, accepted the offered cup, and allowed himself
to be beguiled into renewing his potations, until he was quite
intoxicated. in this condition, bacchus led him passive to
olympus, made him release the queen of heaven, and urged
him to embrace his father and crave forgiveness.
although restored to favor, vulcan would not remain permanently
in olympus, but preferred to return to his forge and
continue his labors. he undertook, however, the construction
of magnificent golden palaces for each of the gods upon the
olympian heights, fashioned their sumptuous furniture from precious
metals, and further embellished his work by a rich ornamentation
of precious stones.
“then to their starry domes the gods depart,
the shining monuments of vulcan’s art:
jove on his couch reclin’d his awful head,
and juno slumber’d on the golden bed.”
homer (pope’s tr.).
aided by the cyclopes, vulcan manufactured jupiter’s weapons,
the dread thunderbolts, whose frightful power none could
withstand, and cupid’s love-inspiring darts.
vulcan’s
loves.
vulcan, in spite of his deformity, extreme ugliness, and well-known
aversion to any home but his sooty forge, was none the
less prone to fall in love with the various goddesses.
he first wooed minerva, who, having
sworn never to marry, contemptuously dismissed his suit. to
console vulcan for this rebuff, and at the same time punish the
goddess of beauty, who, according to some mythologists, had
refused even his addresses, jupiter bestowed upon him the fair
[pg ]
hand of venus, and sent her and her mischievous train of loves
and graces to reside in the dark caves of mount ætna.
amused by all the strange sights and sounds, the goddess at
first seemed quite contented; but after a time vulcan’s gloomy
abode lost all its attractions: so she forsook her ill-favored husband,
and went in search of another, more congenial mate.
some time after, vulcan married one of the graces, who, however,
seems to have also soon wearied of his society, for she deserted
him.
vulcan’s children were mostly monsters, such as cacus, periphetes,
cercyon, etc., all of whom play an important part in
heroic mythology. he is also the reputed father of servius
tullius, sixth king of rome, by a slave ocrisia, whom he was
wont to visit in the guise of a bright flame, which played harmlessly
about her.
vulcan was worshiped by all blacksmiths and artisans, who
recognized him as their special patron, and venerated him accordingly.
“those who labor
the sweaty forge, who edge the crooked scythe,
bend stubborn steel, and harden gleaming armor,
acknowledge vulcan’s aid.”
prior.
great festivals, the vulcanalia and the hephæstia, were celebrated
in honor of this god, who is generally represented as a
short, muscular man, with one leg shorter than the other, a workman’s
cap on his curly locks, a short upper garment, and a smith’s
tools in his hand.
[pg ]
when jupiter assigned to each of his brothers a separate portion
of the universe, he decreed that neptune, or poseidon,
should govern all the waters upon the face of the earth, and be
sole monarch of the ocean.
“neptune, the mighty marine god, i sing;
earth’s mover, and the fruitless ocean’s king.
that helicon and th’ ægean deeps dost hold.
o thou earth-shaker; thy command, twofold
the gods have sorted; making thee of horses
the awful tamer, and of naval forces
the sure preserver. hail, o saturn’s birth!
whose graceful green hair circles all the earth.
bear a benign mind; and thy helpful hand
lend all, submitted to thy dread command.”
homer (chapman’s tr.).
before this new ruler made his appearance, the titan
oceanus had wielded the scepter of the sea; and regretfully he
now resigned it to his youthful supplanter, whom he nevertheless
admired sincerely, and described in glowing colors to his brothers.
“have ye beheld the young god of the seas,
my dispossessor? have ye seen his face?
have ye beheld his chariot, foam’d along
by noble winged creatures he hath made?
i saw him on the calmed waters scud,
with such a glow of beauty in his eyes,
that it enforc’d me to bid sad farewell
to all my empire.”
keats.
[pg ]
fountain of neptune.—bologna. (bologna.)
neptune’s
exile.
[pg ]
neptune, the personification as well as the god of the sea, was
of an exceedingly encroaching disposition. dissatisfied with the
portion allotted him, he once conspired to dethrone
jupiter; but, unfortunately for the success of his
undertaking, his plot was discovered before he could put it into
execution, and jupiter, in punishment for his temerity, exiled him
to earth. there he was condemned to build the walls of troy
for laomedon, king of that city, who, in return, promised a
handsome compensation.
apollo, also banished from heaven at that time, volunteered
to aid neptune by playing on his lyre, and moving the stones by
the power of sweet sounds (p. ). the task satisfactorily ended,
laomedon, an avaricious and dishonest king, refused the promised
guerdon, whereupon neptune created a terrible monster,
which came upon the shore, devoured the inhabitants, devastated
everything within his reach, and inspired all with great terror.
“a great serpent from the deep,
lifting his horrible head above their homes,
devoured the children.”
lewis morris.
to save themselves from the awful death which threatened
them all, the trojans consulted an oracle, who advised the sacrifice
of a beautiful virgin, and promised the monster would disappear
as soon as he had devoured the appointed victim.
story of
hesione.
a young girl was therefore chosen by lot, led down to the
seashore, and chained by the priest’s own hands to a slimy rock.
as soon as her mourning friends had forsaken her,
the hideous serpent came out of his lair in the
waves, and devoured her; then he vanished, and nothing more
was heard of him for a whole year, at the end of which time he
reappeared, and resumed his former depredations, which were
only checked by the sacrifice of a second virgin.
year after year, however, he returned, and year after year a
fair girl was doomed to perish, until finally the lot fell upon
[pg ]
hesione, the king’s only daughter. he could not bear the
thought of the terrible fate awaiting her, and tried every means
in his power to save her. as a last resort he sent heralds to
publish far and wide that the king would give a great reward
to any man who would dare attack and succeed in slaying the
monster.
hercules, on his return from the scene of one of his stupendous
labors, heard the proclamation, and, with no other weapon
than the oaken club he generally carried, slew the monster just
as he was about to drag poor hesione down into his slimy cave.
laomedon was, of course, overjoyed at the monster’s death, but,
true to his nature, again refused the promised reward, and by
his dishonesty incurred the hatred and contempt of this hero
also. some time after, having finished his time of servitude
with eurystheus, hercules, aided by a chosen band of adventurers,
came to troy to punish him for his perfidy. the city
was stormed and taken, the king slain, and his wife and children
carried to greece as captives. there hesione became the bride
of telamon; while her brother podarces, later known as priam,
was redeemed by his people and made king of troy.
laomedon’s failure to pay his just debts was the primary
cause of the enmity which apollo and neptune displayed towards
the trojans during their famous war with the greeks (p. ).
neptune’s
contests.
their term of exile ended, the gods were reinstated in their
exalted positions, and hastened to resume their former occupations;
but, in spite of the severe lesson just received,
neptune was not yet cured of his grasping
tendencies. not long after his return from troy, he quarreled
with minerva for the possession of the then recently founded
city of athens, then nameless, and entered into the memorable
contest in which he was signally defeated (p. ). he also
disputed the sovereignty of trœzene with minerva, and that of
corinth with apollo. in the latter instance, the disputants
having chosen briareus as umpire, the prize was awarded to him
as the most powerful of all the gods except jupiter.
neptune’s
power.
[pg ]
as god of the sea, neptune did not generally remain in
olympus, but dwelt way down in the coral caves of his kingdom,
over which he ruled with resistless sway. by
one word he could stir up or calm the wildest
storm, and cause the billows to roar with fury or subside into
peaceful ripples.
“he spake, and round about him called the clouds
and roused the ocean,—wielding in his hand
the trident,—summoned all the hurricanes
of all the winds, and covered earth and sky
at once with mists, while from above the night
fell suddenly.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
the rivers, fountains, lakes, and seas were not only subject to
his rule, but he could also cause terrible earthquakes at will, and,
when he pleased, raise islands from the deep, as he did when latona
entreated him to shelter her from juno’s persecutions (p. ).
neptune is said to have loved the goddess ceres, and to have
followed her during her prolonged search for her daughter, proserpina.
annoyed by his persistent wooing, the goddess, to escape
him, assumed the form of a mare; but the god of the sea, not at
all deceived by this stratagem, straightway assumed the form of
a horse, in which guise he contentedly trotted after her and renewed
his attentions.
neptune’s
wives.
the offspring of this equine pair was arion, a wonderful
winged steed, gifted with the power of speech, whose early education
was intrusted to the nereides. they trained
him to draw his father’s chariot over the waves with
incredible rapidity, and parted with him regretfully when he was
given to copreus, pelops’ son. this marvelous horse passed
successively into hercules’ and adrastus’ hands; and the latter
won all the chariot races, thanks to his fleetness.
on another occasion, neptune, having fallen deeply in love
with a maiden named theophane, and fearful lest some one of
her numerous suitors should find favor in her eyes before he had
[pg ]
time to urge his wooing, suddenly changed her into a sheep, and
conveyed her to the island of crumissa, where he assumed the
guise of a ram, and, in this metamorphosed condition, carried
on his courtship, which eventually proved successful. the offspring
of this union was the golden-fleeced ram which bore
phryxus in safety to the colchian shores, and whose pelt was the
goal of the argonautic expedition (p. ).
neptune also loved and married medusa in the days of her
youth and beauty, and when some drops of blood fell from her
severed head into the salt sea foam, he produced from them the
graceful winged steed pegasus (p. ).
neptune is also said to be the father of the giants otus and
ephialtes, of neleus, pelias, and polyphemus.
amphitrite.
the queen of the ocean, neptune’s own true and lawful wife,
was a nereid, one of the fifty daughters of doris and nereus,—the
personification of the calm and sunlit aspect of
the sea. her name was amphitrite, or salacia.
at first she was in great awe of her distinguished suitor, and
in her fear fled at his approach, leaving him no chance to admire
any of her charms, except the grace and celerity with which
she managed to flit, or rather glide, out of his sight.
“along the deep
with beauteous ankles, amphitrite glides.”
hesiod (elton’s tr.).
this conduct grieved neptune so sorely, that he sent a dolphin
to plead his cause, and persuade the fair nymph to share
his throne. the messenger, carefully instructed beforehand,
carried out the directions with such skill, that amphitrite formally
consented to become neptune’s wife.
the king of the deep was so overjoyed at these good tidings,
that he transferred the dolphin to the sky, where he forms a
well-known constellation. neptune and amphitrite in due time
became the happy parents of several children, among whom the
most celebrated is triton, whose body was half man and half
fish, and who gave his name to all his male descendants.
story of idas
and marpessa.
[pg ]
like all other gods, neptune took a lively interest in men’s
affairs, and sometimes interfered in their behalf. on one occasion,
for instance, he even lent his beautiful chariot to a
youth by the name of idas, who, loving a maiden
dearly, and unable to win her father’s consent to their union, had
resolved to kidnap her. marpessa, for such was the lady’s name,
allowed herself to be carried off without protest; and the lovers
were blissfully speeding along in neptune’s chariot, when her
father, evenus, perceiving their escape, started in pursuit of them.
in spite of the most strenuous efforts, he could not overtake the
fleeing pair, and in his anger plunged into a river, where he was
drowned, and which from him received the name of evenus.
idas and marpessa were just congratulating themselves upon
their narrow escape, when suddenly apollo appeared before
them, and, checking their steeds, declared he loved the maiden
too, and would not tamely yield her up to a rival.
this was quite equivalent to a challenge; and idas, stepping
down from the chariot, was about to engage in the fight, when
suddenly out of a clear sky a thunderbolt came crashing down
to earth, and an imperious voice was heard to declare that the
quarrel could be settled by marpessa only, and that she should
freely choose the suitor she preferred as husband.
the maiden glanced at both her lovers, and quickly reviewed
their respective attractions. remembering that apollo, being
immortal, would retain all his youthful bloom when her more
ephemeral beauty had vanished, and that he would then probably
cease to love her, she held out her hand to idas, declaring she
preferred to link her fate to that of a mortal, who would grow
old when she did, and love her as long as they both lived. this
choice was approved by jupiter; and the lovers, after reaching
a place of safety, returned the wondrous chariot to neptune,
with many grateful thanks for his timely aid.
neptune’s
attendants.
all the nereides, tritons, and lesser sea divinities
formed a part of neptune and amphitrite’s train, and followed
closely when they rode forth to survey their kingdom.
[pg ]
neptune had, besides this, many subordinates, whose duty it
was to look after various seas, lakes, rivers, fountains, etc., confided
to their special care. in harmony with their occupations,
these divinities were either hoary river gods (such as father
nile), slender youths, beautiful maidens, or little babbling children.
they seldom left the cool waves of their appointed dwellings,
and strove to win neptune’s approbation mostly by the
zeal they showed in the discharge of their various duties.
proteus, too, another inferior deity, had the care of the flocks
of the deep, and he always attended neptune when it was safe to
leave his great herds of sea calves to bask on the sunny shores.
“in ages past old proteus, with his droves
of sea calves, sought the mountains and the groves.”
cowper.
proteus.
in common with all the other gods, proteus enjoyed the gift
of prophecy, and had the power to assume any shape he pleased.
the former gift he was wont to exercise very reluctantly;
and when mortals wished to consult him,
he would change his form with bewildering rapidity, and, unless
they clung to him through all his changes, they could obtain no
answer to their questions.
“shouting [we] seize the god: our force t’ evade,
his various arts he soon resumes in aid:
a lion now, he curls a surgy mane;
sudden, our hands a spotted pard restrain;
then, arm’d with tusks, and lightning in his eyes,
a boar’s obscener shape the god belies:
on spiry volumes, there, a dragon rides;
here, from our strict embrace a stream he glides;
and last, sublime, his stately growth he rears,
a tree, and well-dissembled foliage wears.”
homer (pope’s tr.).
but if these manifestations proved unavailing to drive his
would-be hearers away, the god answered every question circumstantially.
[pg ]
father nile. (vatican, rome.)
[pg ]
amphitrite, neptune’s wife,—generally represented as a beautiful
nude nymph, crowned with seaweed, and reclining in a
pearl-shell chariot drawn by dolphins, or sea-horses,—was worshiped
with her husband.
worship of
neptune.
neptune, majestic and middle-aged, with long, flowing hair
and beard, wearing a seaweed crown, and brandishing a trident, or
three-pronged fork, was widely worshiped throughout
greece and italy, and had countless shrines.
his principal votaries were the seamen and horse trainers, who
often bespoke his aid.
“hail, neptune, greatest of the gods!
thou ruler of the salt sea floods;
thou with the deep and dark-green hair,
that dost the golden trident bear;
thou that, with either arm outspread,
embosomest the earth we tread:
thine are the beasts with fin and scales,
that round thy chariot, as it sails,
plunging and tumbling, fast and free,
all reckless follow o’er the sea.”
arion.
many large temples were dedicated exclusively to the worship
of neptune, and games were frequently celebrated in his honor.
the most noted of all were undoubtedly the isthmian games,—a
national festival, held every four years at corinth, on the isthmus
of the same name. hither people came from all points of
the compass, and all parts of the then known world, either to witness
or to take part in the noted wrestling, boxing, and racing
matches, or in the musical and poetical contests.
[pg ]
pluto[] (dis, hades, orcus, aïdoneus), son of cronus and
rhea, received as his share of the world the supervision of the
infernal regions, situated beneath the earth, and was also appointed
god of the dead and of riches, for all precious metals
are buried deep in the bosom of the earth.
besides this pluto, god of the infernal regions, the greeks also worshiped
plutus, a son of ceres and jason, who was known exclusively as the god of
wealth. abandoned in infancy, he was brought up by pax, the goddess of
peace, who is often represented holding him in her lap. because plutus insisted
upon bestowing his favors upon good and noble mortals only, jupiter
soon deprived him of his sight. since then the blind god’s gifts have been
distributed indiscriminately.
this god inspired all men with a great fear. they never spoke
of him without trembling, and fervently prayed that they might
never see his face; for, when he appeared on the surface of the
earth, it was only in search of some victim to drag down into his
dismal abode, or to make sure there was no crevice through
which a sunbeam might glide to brighten its gloom and dispel its
shadows. whenever the stern god set out on one of these expeditions,
he rode in a chariot drawn by four coal-black steeds;
and, if any obstacle presented itself to impede his progress, he
struck it with his two-pronged fork, the emblem of his power,
and the obstacle was immediately removed. it was on one of
these occasions that pluto kidnapped proserpina, the fair goddess
of vegetation, daughter of ceres, whom he set on his throne in
hades, and crowned his queen (p. ).
worship of
pluto.
[pg ]
pluto is always represented as a stern, dark, bearded man, with
tightly closed lips, a crown on his head, a scepter and a key in
hand, to show how carefully he guards those who
enter his domains, and how vain are their hopes to
effect their escape. no temples were dedicated to him, and
statues of this god are very rare. human sacrifices were sometimes
offered on his altars; and at his festivals, held every hundred
years, and thence called secular games, none but black
animals were slain.
hades.
his kingdom, generally called hades, was very difficult of
access. according to roman traditions, it could only be entered
at avernus, but the greeks asserted that there was
another entrance near the promontory of tænarum.
both nations agreed, however, in saying that it was an
almost impossible feat to get out again if one were rash enough
to venture in.
“to the shades you go a down-hill, easy way;
but to return and re-enjoy the day,
this is a work, a labor!”
virgil.
to prevent all mortals from entering, and all spirits from
escaping, pluto placed a huge three-headed dog, called cerberus,
to guard the gate.
“there in state old cerberus sate,
a three-headed dog, as cruel as fate,
guarding the entrance early and late.”
saxe.
from thence a long subterranean passage, through which
shadowy spirits glided incessantly, led to the throne room, where
pluto and proserpina sat in state, clad in their sable robes.
from the foot of this throne flowed the rivers which channeled
the lower world. one, the cocytus, rolled salt waves, composed
of naught but the tears flowing continually from the eyes of the
[pg ]
criminals condemned to hard labor in tartarus, the portion of
hades reserved for the exclusive use of the wicked.
“cocytus, named of lamentation loud
heard on the rueful stream.”
homer.
rivers of
hades.
to separate this section from the remainder of his realm, pluto
surrounded it with the phlegethon, a river of fire; while the
acheron, a black and deep stream, was to be passed
by all souls ere they reached pluto’s throne and
heard his decree. the current of this river was so swift, that
even the boldest swimmer could not pass over; and, as there
was no bridge, all the spirits were obliged to rely upon the aid of
charon, an aged boatman, who plied the only available skiff—a
leaky, worm-eaten punt—from shore to shore. neither would
he allow any soul to enter his bark, unless he was first given a
small coin, called the obolus, the ferryman’s fare, which the ancients
carefully laid under the tongue of the dead, that they
might pass on to pluto without delay. charon’s leaky boat no
sooner touched the shore than a host of eager spirits pressed forward
to claim a place. the cruel boatman repulsed them roughly,
and brandished his oars, while he leisurely selected those he
would next ferry across the stream.
“the shiv’ring army stands,
and press for passage with extended hands.
now these, now those, the surly boatman bore;
the rest he drove to distance from the shore.”
virgil (dryden’s tr.).
all those who could not produce the required obolus were
obliged to wait one hundred years, at the end of which time
charon reluctantly ferried them over free of charge.
there was also in hades the sacred river styx, by whose
waters the gods swore their most irrevocable oaths; and the
blessed lethe, whose waters had the power to make one forget all
unpleasant things, thus preparing the good for a state of endless
bliss in the elysian fields.
[pg ]
the furies.—a study for the masque of cupid.—burne-jones.
[pg ]
“lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
her wat’ry labrinth, whereof who drinks,
forthwith his former state and being forgets,
forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.”
milton.
the judges.
near pluto’s throne were seated the three judges of hades,
minos, rhadamanthus, and æacus, whose duty it was to question
all newly arrived souls, to sort out the confused
mass of good and bad thoughts and actions, and
place them in the scales of themis, the blindfolded, impartial goddess
of justice, who bore a trenchant sword to indicate that her
decrees would be mercilessly enforced. if the good outweighed
the evil, the spirit was led to the elysian fields; but if, on the
contrary, the evil prevailed, the spirit was condemned to suffer in
the fires of tartarus.
“where his decrees
the guilty soul within the burning gates
of tartarus compel, or send the good
to inhabit, with eternal health and peace,
the valley of elysium.”
akenside.
the furies.
the guilty souls were always intrusted to the three snake-locked
furies (erinnyes, or eumenides), who drove them with their stinging
lashes to the gates of tartarus. these deities,
who were sisters, and children of acheron and
nyx, were distinguished by the individual names of alecto, tisiphone,
and megæra, and with nemesis, goddess of revenge, were
noted for their hard hearts and the merciless manner in which
they hurried the ghosts intrusted to their care over the fiery
flood of the phlegethon, and through the brazen gates of their
future place of incessant torment.
the three fates.—thumann.
“there rolls swift phlegethon, with thund’ring sound,
his broken rocks, and whirls his surges round.
on mighty columns rais’d sublime are hung
the massy gates, impenetrably strong.
[pg ]
in vain would men, in vain would gods essay,
to hew the beams of adamant away.
here rose an iron tow’r: before the gate,
by night and day, a wakeful fury sate,
the pale tisiphone; a robe she wore,
with all the pomp of horror, dy’d in gore.”
virgil (c. pitt’s tr.).
the fates.
the three fates (mœræ, parcæ), sisters, also sat near pluto’s
throne. clotho, the youngest, spun the thread of
life, in which the bright and dark lines were intermingled.
lachesis, the second, twisted it; and under her fingers
it was now strong, now weak.
“twist ye, twine ye! even so,
mingle shades of joy and woe,
hope, and fear, and peace, and strife,
in the thread of human life.”
scott.
atropos, the third sister, armed with a huge pair of shears, remorselessly
cut short the thread of life,—an intimation that another
soul would ere long find its way down into the dark kingdom
of hades.
tartarus.
when the gates of tartarus turned on their hinges to receive
the newcomer, a chorus of cries, groans, and imprecations
from within fell upon his ear, mingled with
the whistling of the whips incessantly plied by retributive deities.
“what sounds were heard,
what scenes appeared,
o’er all the dreary coasts!
dreadful gleams,
dismal screams,
fires that glow,
shrieks of woe,
sullen moans,
hollow groans,
and cries of tortured ghosts.”
pope.
the danaides.
[pg ]
many victims renowned while on earth for their cruelty
found here the just punishment of their sins. attention was first
attracted by a group of beautiful maidens, who
carried water to fill a bottomless cask. down to
the stream they hastened, a long procession, filled their urns with
water, painfully clambered up the steep and slippery bank, and
poured their water into the cask; but when, exhausted and ready
to faint from fatigue, they paused to rest for a moment, the cutting
lash fell upon their bare shoulders, and spurred them on to
renewed efforts to complete a task so hopeless that it has become
proverbial.
these fair maidens were the danaides, daughters of danaus,
who had pledged his fifty daughters to the fifty sons of his
brother ægyptus. the marriage preparations were all completed,
when danaus suddenly remembered an ancient prophecy which
had quite escaped his memory, and which foretold that he would
perish by the hand of his son-in-law.
it was now too late to prevent the marriages, so, calling his
daughters aside, he told them what the oracle had said, and, giving
them each a sharp dagger, bade them slay their husbands on
their wedding night. the marriages were celebrated, as was customary,
with mirth, dance, and song; and the revelry continued
until late at night, when, the guests having departed, the newly
married couples retired. but as soon as danaus’ daughters were
quite certain their husbands were fast asleep, they produced their
daggers and slew their mates.
“danaus arm’d each daughter’s hand
to stain with blood the bridal bed.”
euripides (potter’s tr.).
one of the brides only, hypermnestra, loved her husband too
dearly to obey her father’s command, and, when morning broke,
only forty-nine of ægyptus’ sons were found lifeless. the sole
survivor, lynceus, to avenge his brothers’ death, slew danaus,
thus fulfilling the ominous prophecy; while the gods, incensed
[pg ]
by the danaides’ heartlessness, sent them to hades, where they
were compelled to fill the bottomless cask.
tantalus.
tartarus also detained within its brazen portals a cruel king
named tantalus (the father of niobe), who, while on earth, had
starved and ill-treated his subjects, insulted the
immortal gods, and on one occasion had even
dared to cook and serve up to them his own son pelops. most
of the gods were immediately aware of the deception practiced
upon them, and refused the new dish; but ceres, who was very
melancholy on account of the recent loss of her daughter, paid
no heed to what was offered her, and in a fit of absent-mindedness
ate part of the lad’s shoulder.
the gods in pity restored the youth to life, and ceres replaced
the missing shoulder with one of ivory or of gold. driven
away from his kingdom, which was seized by the king of troy,
pelops took refuge in greece, where he ruled the extensive
peninsula, the peloponnesus, which still bears his name.
to punish the inhuman tantalus, the gods then sent him to
tartarus, where he stood up to his chin in a stream of pure
water, tormented with thirst; for, whenever he stooped to drink,
the waters fled from his parched lips. over his head hung a
branch of luscious fruit. his hunger was as intolerable as his
thirst; but, whenever he clutched at the fruit, the branch swung
upward, and eluded his eager grasp.
“above, beneath, around his hapless head,
trees of all kinds delicious fruitage spread.
the fruit he strives to seize; but blasts arise,
toss it on high, and whirl it to the skies.”
homer (pope’s tr.).
this singular punishment inflicted upon tantalus gave rise to
the expression “to tantalize.”
sisyphus.
another criminal was sisyphus, who, while king of corinth,
had misused his power, had robbed and killed travelers,
and even deceived the gods. his reprehensible
conduct was punished in tartarus, where he was condemned
[pg ]
to roll a huge stone to the top of a very steep hill; and just as
he reached the summit, and fancied his task done, the rock would
slip from his grasp and roll to the foot of the hill, thus obliging
him to renew all his exertions.
“with many a weary step, and many a groan,
up the high hill he heaves a huge round stone;
the huge round stone, resulting with a bound,
thunders impetuous down, and smokes along the ground.
again the restless orb his toil renews,
dust mounts in clouds, and sweat descends in dews.”
homer (pope’s tr.).
salmoneus.
salmoneus, another king, had vainly tried to make his subjects
believe he was jupiter. to that effect, he had once driven over
a brazen bridge to imitate the roll of thunder, and,
to simulate the thunderbolts, had thrown lighted
torches down upon the multitude, purposely assembled below.
“th’ audacious wretch four fiery coursers drew:
he wav’d a torch aloft, and, madly vain,
sought godlike worship from a servile train.
ambitious fool, with horny hoofs to pass
o’er hollow arches of resounding brass,
to rival thunder in its rapid course,
and imitate inimitable force!”
virgil (dryden’s tr.).
this insolent parody so incensed jupiter, that he grasped one
of his deadliest thunderbolts, brandished it aloft for a moment,
and then hurled it with vindictive force at the arrogant king. in
tartarus, salmoneus was placed beneath an overhanging rock,
which momentarily threatened to fall, and crush him under its
mass.
“he was doomed to sit under a huge stone,
which the father of the gods
kept over his head suspended.
thus he sat
in continual dread of its downfall,
and lost to every comfort.”
pindar.
tityus.
[pg ]
still farther on was the recumbent form of tityus, a giant whose
body covered nine acres of ground. he had
dared offer an insult to juno, and in punishment
was chained like prometheus, while a vulture feasted on his liver.
“there tityus was to see, who took his birth
from heav’n, his nursing from the foodful earth:
here his gigantic limbs, with large embrace,
infold nine acres of infernal space.
a rav’nous vulture in his open side
her crooked beak and cruel talons try’d:
still for the growing liver digg’d his breast,
the growing liver still supply’d the feast.”
virgil (dryden’s tr.).
ixion.
here in tartarus, too, was ixion, king of the lapithæ, who
had been given the hand of dia in marriage on condition that he
would give her father a stipulated sum of money
in exchange, but who, as soon as the maiden was
his, refused to keep his promise. the father-in-law was an avaricious
man, and clamored so loudly for his money, that ixion, to
be rid of his importunities, slew him. such an act of violence
could not be overlooked by the gods: so jupiter summoned ixion
to appear before him and state his case.
ixion pleaded so skillfully, that jupiter was about to declare
him acquitted, when he suddenly caught him making love to
juno, which offense seemed so unpardonable, that he sent him
to tartarus, where he was bound to a constantly revolving wheel
of fire.
“proud ixion (doom’d to feel
the tortures of the eternal wheel,
bound by the hand of angry jove)
received the due rewards of impious love.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
elysian fields.
far out of sight and hearing of the pitiful sounds which so
constantly rose out of tartarus, were the elysian fields, lighted
[pg ]
by a sun and moon of their own, decked with the most fragrant
and beautiful of flowers, and provided with every charm that
nature or art could supply. no storms or wintry
winds ever came to rob these fields of their springlike
beauty; and here the blessed spent eternity, in pleasant communion
with the friends they had loved on earth.
“patriots who perished for their country’s rights,
or nobly triumphed in the fields of fight:
there holy priests and sacred poets stood,
who sang with all the raptures of a god:
worthies whose lives by useful arts refined;
with those who leave a deathless name behind,
friends of the world, and fathers of mankind.”
[pg ]
among all the mortal maidens honored by the love of jupiter,
king of the gods, none was more attractive than semele, daughter
of cadmus and harmonia.
“for semele was molded in the form
of elegance; the beauty of her race
shone in her forehead.”
nonnus (elton’s tr.).
story of
semele.
although conscious of these superior attractions, semele was
excessively coy, and it was only with the greatest difficulty that
jupiter, disguised as a mortal, could urge his love
suit. when he had at last obtained a hearing, he
told her who he was, calculating upon the effect which such a
revelation must necessarily produce.
he was not mistaken in his previsions, for semele, proud of having
attracted the greatest among the gods, no longer offered any
resistance, and consented to their union. their love grew and
prospered, and jupiter came down from olympus as often as possible
to enjoy the society of his beloved. his frequent absences
finally aroused juno’s suspicions, and, as usual, she spared no
pains to discover what powerful charm could draw him from her
side. after a few days she knew all, and straightway determined
to have her revenge, and punish her fickle spouse. to accomplish
this successfully, she assumed the face and form of beroe, semele’s
old nurse, and thus entered the young princess’s apartment quite
unsuspected.
[pg ]
“old beroe’s decrepit shape she wears,
her wrinkled visage, and her hoary hairs;
whilst in her trembling gait she totters on,
and learns to tattle in the nurse’s tone.”
ovid (addison’s tr.).
there she immediately entered into conversation with her supposed
nursling, artfully extracted a complete confession, heard
with suppressed rage how long jupiter had wooed ere he had
finally won the maiden’s consent, and received a rapturous and
minute catalogue of all his personal charms and a synopsis of all
they had both said.
the false nurse listened with apparent sympathy; but in reality
she was furious, and, to put an end to it all, asked semele if
she were quite sure he was king of the gods, as he asserted, and
whether he visited her in all the pomp of his regal apparel.
the maiden shamefacedly replied that he was wont to visit her
in the guise of a mortal only; whereupon beroe, with feigned
indignation, told her nursling he must either be a vile impostor,
or else that he did not love her as dearly as he loved juno, in
whose presence he seldom appeared except in godlike array.
with artful words she so worked upon the guileless nature of her
rival, that, when jupiter next came, the maiden used all her blandishments
to extort from him a solemn oath to grant any request
she chose to make. a lover is not very likely to weigh his
words under such circumstances, and jupiter took the most
solemn of all the oaths to gratify her whim.
“‘bear me witness, earth, and ye, broad heavens
above us, and ye, waters of the styx,
that flow beneath us, mightiest oath of all,
and most revered by the blessed gods!’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
the promise won, the delighted semele bade her lover speedily
return to olympus, don his own majestic form and apparel,
and hasten back to her side, surrounded by all his heavenly
[pg ]
pomp, and armed with his dreaded thunderbolts. jupiter, horrified
at this imprudent request, implored her to ask something else,
and release him from a promise fraught with such danger to her;
but all in vain. semele, like many another fair lady, enjoyed
having her own way, and fairly forced him to obey.
jupiter returned to olympus, modified his costume as much
as possible, dimmed his glory wherever he could, and chose the
feeblest of all his bolts, for well he knew no mere mortal could
endure the shock of his full glory. then, mounted on a pale
flash of lightning, he darted back to semele.
“to keep his promise he ascends, and shrouds
his awful brow in whirlwinds and in clouds;
whilst all around, in terrible array,
his thunders rattle, and his lightnings play.
and yet, the dazzling luster to abate,
he set not out in all his pomp and state,
clad in the mildest lightning of the skies,
and arm’d with thunder of the smallest size:
not those huge bolts, by which the giants slain,
lay overthrown on the phlegrean plain.
’twas of a lesser mold, and lighter weight;
they call it thunder of a second-rate.
for the rough cyclops, who by jove’s command
temper’d the bolt and turn’d it to his hand,
work’d up less flame and fury in its make,
and quench’d it sooner in the standing lake.
thus dreadfully adorn’d, with horror bright,
th’ illustrious god, descending from his height,
came rushing on her in a storm of light.”
ovid (addison’s tr.).
but, although so much milder than usual, this apparition was
more than poor semele’s human nerves could bear, and she
dropped to the floor in a swoon at the first glimpse of her lover.
oblivious of all but her alarming condition, jupiter sprang to her
side; but the lightning which played about his head set fire to
the whole palace, which was reduced to ashes.
birth of
bacchus.
[pg ]
semele herself perished, burned to death; and the only person
in all the building who escaped uninjured was bacchus (liber,
dionysus), the infant son of jupiter and semele,
who was saved by his father’s powerful hand.
jupiter was at first inconsolable at the death of semele; and, to
testify to all mortals how fondly he had loved her, he brought her
spirit up to heaven, where he raised her to the rank of a deity.
“semele of the flowing hair,
who died in thunder’s crashing flame,
to deified existence came.”
prior.
the infant bacchus was first intrusted to the care of his aunt
ino, the second wife of athamas, king of thebes, who nursed
him as tenderly as if he had been her own child. but all her
love could not avail to screen him from the effects of juno’s
persistent hatred: so jupiter, fearing lest some harm might befall
his precious son, bade mercury convey him to the distant home
of the nysiades,—nymphs who guarded him most faithfully.
juno, not daring to continue her persecutions, wreaked all her
anger upon poor ino and her unhappy household by sending the
fury tisiphone to goad athamas to madness. in a fit of deluded
frenzy, he pursued his wife and children as if they were wild
beasts. one of his sons, learchus, fell beneath his arrows; and,
to escape his murderous fury, ino plunged headlong into the sea
with her second child in her arms. the gods, in pity for her
sufferings, changed her into the goddess leucothea, and her son
into a sea deity by the name of palæmon.
bacchus’
attendants.
when still but a youth, bacchus was appointed god of wine
and revelry, and intrusted to the guidance of silenus, a satyr,
half man and half goat, who educated him, and
accompanied him on all his travels; for he delighted
in roaming all over the world, borne by his followers, or
riding in his chariot drawn by wild beasts, while his tutor followed
him, mounted on an ass, supported on either side by an
attendant.
[pg ]
bacchus. (vatican, rome.)
[pg ]
“and near him rode silenus on his ass,
pelted with flowers as he on did pass.”
keats.
bacchus’ train was very large indeed, and composed of men
and women, nymphs, fauns, and satyrs, all crowned with ivy
leaves, who drank wine,—a drink compounded for their express
use out of water and sunshine,—ate grapes, danced and sang,
and loudly proclaimed him their chosen leader.
“‘we follow bacchus! bacchus on the wing,
a conquering!
bacchus, young bacchus! good or ill betide,
we dance before him thorough kingdoms wide.’”
keats.
the most unruly among his female followers were the bacchantes,
who delighted in revelry, and were in a perpetual state
of intoxication as they went with him from land to land, where
he taught the people the cultivation of the vine and the art of
making wine. he traveled thus, it is said, throughout greece
and asia minor, and even ventured as far as india and ethiopia.
bacchus and
the pirates.
during these long journeys, bacchus, as was inevitable, met
with many adventures, which have been fertile themes for poetry
and art. on one occasion, having strayed away
from his followers and lost his way, bacchus laid
himself down upon the sand on the seashore to rest. some
pirates, sailing by, saw the handsome young sleeper, and noiselessly
bore him off to their vessel, intending to sell him as a slave
in egypt.
they were already quite far out at sea when the god awoke,
and gazed around him in mute wonder at his surroundings.
when fully roused, he bade the seamen take him back to land,
but they merely replied by laughter and mockery. their amusement
was cut short, however, for the ship came to a sudden
standstill; and, when they leaned over the sides to ascertain why
their oars could no longer propel it onward, they saw a vine
[pg ]
grow out of the sea, and twine its branches and tendrils with lightning-like
velocity around oars, mast, and rigging, thus transforming
the vessel into a floating arbor. then a sound of music and
revelry greeted their astonished ears, and bacchus’ followers
came thronging over the ship’s sides, riding on wild beasts, and
chanting the praises of their god and of his favorite beverage.
“in chorus we sing of wine, sweet wine,
its power benign, and its flavor divine.”
martinez de la rosa.
these extraordinary sights and sounds so bewildered the poor
sailors, that they lost all presence of mind, and jumped overboard
into the sea, where they were drowned and changed into dolphins.
on another occasion, silenus, after a great carousal, lost his
way in the forest, and helplessly wandered from place to place
in search of his companions, until he finally came to the court
of midas, king of lydia, of ass’s ears fame (p. ).
the curse of
gold.
midas no sooner beheld the red nose and bloated appearance
of the wanderer, than he recognized him as bacchus’ tutor, and
volunteered to lead him back to his divine pupil.
delighted to see silenus again, bacchus promised
midas any reward he wished; whereupon midas, who was an
avaricious old king, fell upon his knees, and humbly besought
the god to grant that all he touched might be changed into gold.
“‘give me,’ says he (nor thought he ask’d too much),
‘that with my body whatsoe’er i touch,
changed from the nature which it held of old,
may be converted into yellow gold.’”
ovid (croxall’s tr.).
bacchus immediately signified that his prayer was granted;
and midas, overjoyed at the success of his bold venture, wandered
back to his palace, testing his new-won power, which
changed all to gold at a mere touch of one of his fingers.
“down from a lowly branch a twig he drew,
the twig straight glitter’d with a golden hue.
[pg ]
he takes a stone, the stone was turn’d to gold:
a clod he touches, and the crumbling mold
acknowledged soon the great transforming power,
in weight and substance like a mass of ore.
he pluck’d the corn, and straight his grasp appears
fill’d with a bending tuft of golden ears.
an apple next he takes, and seems to hold
the bright hesperian vegetable gold:
his hand he careless on a pillar lays,
with shining gold the fluted pillars blaze.”
ovid (croxall’s tr.).
the sight of these and many other wonders, wrought by a
mere touch, filled his heart with joy; and in his elation he bade
his servants prepare a sumptuous feast, and invite all his courtiers
to share his merriment. his commands were obeyed with
the utmost celerity, and midas beamed with satisfaction as he
took his place at the head of the board, and viewed the choice
dishes and wines prepared for his delectation.
here, too, however, a new revelation awaited him; for cloth,
plate, and cup turned to gold, as did the food and drink as soon
as they met his eager lips.
“whose powerful hands the bread no sooner hold,
but all its substance is transform’d to gold:
up to his mouth he lifts the savory meat,
which turns to gold as he attempts to eat:
his patron’s noble juice of purple hue,
touch’d by his lips, a gilded cordial grew,
unfit for drink; and, wondrous to behold,
it trickles from his jaws a fluid gold.
the rich poor fool, confounded with surprise,
starving in all his various plenty lies.”
ovid (croxall’s tr.).
in the midst of plenty, the gnawing pangs of hunger now
made themselves felt; and the precious gift, which prevented his
allaying them, soon lost all its attractions. with weary feet,
[pg ]
midas now retraced the road he had traveled in his pride a few
hours before, again cast himself at bacchus’ feet, and this time
implored him to take back the inconvenient gift, which prevented
him from satisfying his natural appetites.
his distress seemed so real, that bacchus bade him go and
wash in the pactolus river, if he would be rid of the power
which had so soon turned into a curse. midas hastened off to
the river and plunged in its tide, noting that even its sands all
turned to gold beneath his tread; since when,
“pactolus singeth over golden sands.”
gray.
naxos.
bacchus’ favorite place of resort was the island of naxos,
which he visited after every journey. during one of his sojourns
there, he discovered a fair maiden lying alone on
the sandy shore. ariadne, for such was the girl’s
name, had been forsaken there by her lover, theseus, who had
sailed away while she slept (p. ). as soon as she awoke, she
called her faithless lover; but no answering sound fell upon her
ear except the mocking tones of echo. her tears flowed freely
as she beat her breast in despair; but suddenly her lamentations
ceased, as she caught the faint sound of music floating toward
her on the summer breeze. eagerly turning toward the pleasant
music, she caught sight of a merry procession, headed by the god
of wine.
“‘and as i sat, over the light blue hills
there came a noise of revelers: the rills
into the wide stream came of purple hue—
’twas bacchus and his crew!
the earnest trumpet spake, and silver thrills
from kissing cymbals made a merry din—
’twas bacchus and his kin!
like to a moving vintage down they came,
crown’d with green leaves, and faces all on flame;
all madly dancing through the pleasant valley.’”
keats.
[pg ]
marriage of bacchus and ariadne.—tintoretto. (ducal palace, venice.)
bacchus and
ariadne.
[pg ]
bacchus, the first to perceive the fair mourner, hastened to her
side, and brought all his powers of persuasion into
play to console her. his devotion at last induced
her to forget her recreant lover, and, after a short courtship, bacchus
won her as a bride.
their wedding was the gayest ever seen, and the feasting
lasted for several days. the bridegroom presented the bride
with a crown adorned with seven glittering stars,—an ornament
which fitly enhanced her peerless beauty. shortly after her marriage,
however, poor ariadne sickened and died, leaving a disconsolate
widower, who took the crown she had so often worn
and flung it up into the air. it rose higher and higher, until
the gods fixed it in the sky, where it still forms a brilliant constellation,
known as ariadne’s crown, or corona.
“and still her sign is seen in heaven,
and, ’midst the glittering symbols of the sky,
the starry crown of ariadne glides.”
apollonius rhodius.
bacchus’ lightheartedness had all vanished, and he no longer
took any pleasure in music, dance, or revelry, until jupiter, in pity
for his bereavement, restored ariadne to his longing arms, and,
to prevent her being again claimed by death, gave her immortal
life.
story of
pentheus.
when but a short distance from thebes, bacchus once sent a
herald to pentheus, the king, to announce his approach, and
bespeak a suitable reception and sumptuous entertainment.
rumors of the noise and disorder,
which seemed to have been the invariable accompaniment of the
god’s presence, had already reached pentheus, who therefore dismissed
the herald with an insolent message, purporting that bacchus
had better remain outside of the city gates.
to avenge this insult, bacchus inspired the theban women
with a species of dementia, which made them rush simultaneously
out of the city and join his followers. then they all clamored
[pg ]
for permission to witness the religious rites in his honor,
generally called mysteries, which permission was graciously
granted.
the king’s spies reported all that had occurred, and their
accounts made pentheus long to view the ceremonies in secret.
he therefore disguised himself, and hid in a bush near the consecrated
place, hoping to see all without being seen; but an
inadvertent movement attracted the attention of the already excited
bacchantes, who, led by agave, the king’s own mother,
dragged him from his hiding place and tore him limb from limb.
worship of
bacchus.
bacchus, god of wine, was worshiped throughout the ancient
world, and festivals without number were held in his honor.
the most noted were the greater and lesser dionysia,
the liberalia, and the bacchanalia, where
the wildest merrymaking and license were freely indulged in by
all participants.
“bacchus, on thee they call, in hymns divine,
and hang thy statues on the lofty pine:
hence plenty every laughing vineyard fills,
thro’ the deep valleys and the sloping hills;
where’er the god inclines his lovely face,
more luscious fruits the rich plantations grace.
then let us bacchus’ praises duly sing,
and consecrated cakes, and chargers bring,
dragg’d by their horns let victim goats expire,
and roast on hazel spits before the sacred fire.”
“come, sacred sire, with luscious clusters crown’d,
here all the riches of thy reign abound;
each field replete with blushing autumn glows,
and in deep tides for thee the foaming vintage flows.”
virgil (warton’s tr.).
bacchus is generally represented as a handsome youth, crowned
with ivy or grape leaves and clusters, bearing the thyrsus, an ivy-circled
wand, as scepter, and riding in a chariot drawn by panthers
or leopards.
[pg ]
ceres and
proserpina.
ceres (demeter), daughter of cronus and rhea, and one of
jupiter’s numerous consorts, was goddess of agriculture and civilization.
her manifold cares were shared by her
daughter, proserpina (cora, pherephatta, persephone),
the goddess of vegetation. whenever her duties permitted,
this fair young goddess hastened off to the island of
sicily, her favorite place of resort, where she wandered about all
day long, attended by a merry girlish train, gathering flowers,
on the green slopes of mount ætna, and danced with the
nymphs in the beautiful plain of enna.
one day, weary of labor, proserpina called these fair playmates
to join her and spend a merry day gathering flowers.
“and one fair morn—
not all the ages blot it—on the side
of ætna we were straying. there was then
summer nor winter, springtide nor the time
of harvest, but the soft unfailing sun
shone always, and the sowing time was one
with reaping.”
lewis morris.
pluto kidnaps
proserpina.
the maidens sang merry lays as they wound their long garlands;
and their joyous voices and ripples of silvery laughter
attracted the attention of pluto, just then driving
past in his dark chariot drawn by four fiery coal-black
steeds. to ascertain whence these sounds proceeded, the
[pg ]
god stepped out of his car, and cautiously peeped through the
thick foliage.
he saw proserpina sitting on a mossy bank, almost buried in
many-hued blossoms, her laughing companions picturesquely
grouped around her. one glance sufficed to convince pluto of
her loveliness and grace, and to make him feel that his happiness
depended on the possession of this bright young creature.
long ere this, he had tried to persuade one after another of the
goddesses to share his gloomy throne; but one and all had refused
the honor, and declined to accompany him to a land where the sun
never shone, the birds never sang, and the flowers never bloomed.
hurt and disappointed by these rebuffs, pluto had finally registered
a solemn vow never to go wooing again; and so, instead
of gently inviting proserpina to become his queen, he resolved
to kidnap her.
straight through the bushes he strode, direct to the spot where
she was seated. the noise of crackling branches and hasty footsteps
made the assembled maidens swiftly turn. one glance
sufficed to identify the intruder, for none but he could boast of
such a dark, lowering countenance; and all exclaimed in mingled
wonder and terror at his unwonted presence in those sunlit
regions.
abduction of proserpina.—schobelt.
“’tis he, ’tis he: he comes to us
from the depths of tartarus.
for what of evil doth he roam
from his red and gloomy home,
in the center of the world,
where the sinful dead are hurled?
mark him as he moves along,
drawn by horses black and strong,
such as may belong to night
ere she takes her morning flight.
now the chariot stops: the god
on our grassy world hath trod:
like a titan steppeth he,
yet full of his divinity.
[pg ]
on his mighty shoulders lie
raven locks, and in his eye
a cruel beauty, such as none
of us may wisely look upon.”
barry cornwall.
frightened by his impetuous approach, the trembling nymphs
first crowded around proserpina, who, in her astonishment and
trepidation, dropped all her pretty flowers and stood motionless
among them. her uncertainty as to his purpose was only momentary,
for, catching her in his brawny arms ere she could make
an attempt to escape, he bore her off to his chariot, in spite of
prayers and struggles, and drove away as fast as his fleet steeds
could carry him.
he was soon out of hearing of the wild cries and lamentations
of the nymphs, who vainly pursued him, and tried to overtake their
beloved mistress. afraid lest ceres should come and force him to
relinquish his new-won treasure, pluto drove faster and faster,
nor paused for an instant until he reached the banks of the
cyane river, whose waters, at his approach, began to seethe and
roar in a menacing fashion, and spread themselves as much as
possible, to check him in his flight.
pluto quickly perceived that to attempt to cross the river in
his chariot would be madness, while by retracing his footsteps
he ran the risk of meeting ceres, and being forced to relinquish
his prize. he therefore decided to have recourse to other means,
and, seizing his terrible two-pronged fork, struck the earth such a
mighty blow, that a great crevice opened under his feet, through
which horses and chariot plunged down into the darkness of the
lower world.
proserpina turned her weeping eyes to catch a parting glimpse
of the fair earth she was leaving, and then, with a fond thought
of her anxious mother, who, when evening came, would vainly
seek her child in all her favorite haunts, she quickly flung her
girdle into the cyane, and called to the water nymph to carry it
to ceres.
[pg ]
elated by the complete success of his bold venture, and no
longer fearful of immediate pursuit, the happy god strained his
fair captive to his breast, pressed kisses on her fresh young cheeks,
and tried to calm her terrors, as the black steeds rushed faster
and faster along the dark passage, nor paused until they reached
the foot of their master’s throne.
“pleased as he grasps her in his iron arms,
frights with soft sighs, with tender words alarms.”
darwin.
ceres’ search.
in the mean while the sun had sunk below the sicilian horizon;
and ceres, returning from the fields of fast-ripening grain to her
own dwelling, sought for the missing proserpina,
of whom no trace could be found except the scattered
flowers. hither and thither the mother wandered, calling
her daughter, and wondering where she could be, and why she did
not come bounding to meet her. as time passed, and still proserpina
did not appear, ceres’ heart beat fast with apprehension,
and the tears coursed down her cheeks as she rushed about from
place to place, calling her daughter.
“what ails her that she comes not home?
demeter seeks her far and wide,
and gloomy-browed doth ceaseless roam
from many a morn till eventide.
‘my life, immortal though it be,
is naught!’ she cries, ‘for want of thee,
persephone—persephone!’”
ingelow.
night came, and ceres, kindling a torch at the volcanic fires of
mount ætna, continued her search. day dawned, and still the
mother called, awakening the morning echoes with her longing
cries for her child. her daily duties were all neglected. the
rain no longer refreshed the drooping flowers, the grain was
parched by the ardent rays of the sun, and the grass all perished,
while ceres roamed over hill and dale in search of proserpina.
[pg ]
weary at last of her hopeless quest, the goddess seated herself
by the wayside, near the city of eleusis, and gave way to her
overwhelming grief.
“long was thine anxious search
for lovely proserpine, nor didst thou break
thy mournful fast, till the far-fam’d eleusis
received thee wandering.”
orphic hymn.
ceres and
triptolemus.
to avoid recognition, she had assumed the appearance of an
aged crone; and as she sat there by the wayside, in tears, she
attracted the compassionate inquiries of the daughters
of celeus, king of the country. having heard
her bewail the loss of her child, they entreated her to come to
the palace, and, knowing nothing could so well soothe a breaking
heart, offered her the charge of their infant brother triptolemus.
ceres, touched by their ready sympathy, accepted the offer;
and when she arrived at the palace, the royal heir was intrusted
to her care. tenderly the goddess kissed the puny child’s little
pinched face; and at her touch the child became rosy and well,
to the unbounded astonishment of the royal family and all the
court.
in the night, while ceres sat alone with her charge, it occurred
to her that she might confer a still greater blessing upon him,
that of immortality: so she anointed his limbs with nectar, murmured
a powerful charm, and placed him upon the red-hot coals,
to consume all the perishable elements left in his body.
the queen, metaneira, who had thought it somewhat imprudent
to leave the child thus alone with a stranger, now stole
noiselessly into the apartment, and with a wild shriek rushed to
the fire and snatched her child out of the flames, pressed him
anxiously to her breast, and, after ascertaining that he was quite
unharmed, turned to vent her indignation upon the careless
nurse; but the aged beggar woman had vanished, and in her
stead she confronted the radiant goddess of agriculture.
[pg ]
ceres. (vatican, rome.)
[pg ]
“from her fragrant robes
a lovely scent was scattered, and afar
shone light emitted from her skin divine,
and yellow locks upon her shoulders waved;
white as from lightning, all the house was filled
with splendor.”
homeric hymn.
with a gentle reproof to the queen for her untimely interference,
ceres explained what she fain would have done, and vanished,
to continue her wanderings in other lands. she finally returned
to italy; and, while wandering along the river banks one day,
the waters suddenly cast a glittering object at her feet. stooping
hastily to ascertain what it might be, she recognized the girdle
her daughter had worn when she had parted from her in sicily.
joyfully she embraced the token, and, thinking she must now
be upon proserpina’s track, hastened on until she came to a crystal
fountain, by whose side she sat down to rest. her eyes
were heavy with the combined effect of tears, fatigue, and oppressive
heat, and she was about to lose all consciousness of her
trouble in sleep, when the murmur of the fountain increased, until
she fancied it was talking; not as mortals do, but in its own silvery
accents.
arethusa and
alpheus.
the goddess was not mistaken; for a few minutes later she could
distinguish words, and heard the fountain entreat her to listen,
if she would hear what had befallen her child.
the fountain then went on to tell how she had not
always been a mere stream, but was once a nymph, called arethusa,
in diana’s train, and how, overcome by the heat, she had
once sought a cool stream wherein she might bathe her heated
limbs.
a nymph.—kray.
she soon found one, the alpheus river, and selected a spot
where the trees hung over the limpid waters, where the sand on
the bottom was fine and even, and where no mortal eyes could
see her as she threw aside her sandals and outer garments. she
was enjoying the refreshing sensation of the water rippling
[pg ]
around her hot limbs, and was reveling in the complete solitude,
when suddenly the river, until now as smooth as a mirror, was
ruffled by waves, which crept nearer and nearer to the startled
nymph, until in affright she sprang out of the water.
then a voice—the voice of the river god alpheus—was heard,
calling to her in pleading accents to stay her flight and lend
an ear to his wooing; but when the impetuous god, instead of
waiting for an answer to his suit, rose up out of the water and
rushed to clasp her in his arms, she turned and fled in great
terror. she fled, but he pursued. over hill and dale, through
forest and field, arethusa ran, still closely followed by her too
ardent lover, until, exhausted, she paused for breath, crying aloud
to diana to come to her rescue.
her prayer was answered. a moment later she was enveloped
in a thick mist and transformed into a fountain. alpheus could
no longer see her, but wandered about, bewailing her disappearance,
and calling her in passionate accents.
“‘o arethusa, peerless nymph! why fear
such tenderness as mine? great dian, why,
why didst thou hear her prayer? oh that i
were rippling round her dainty fairness now,
circling about her waist, and striving how
to entice her to a dive! then stealing in
between her luscious lips and eyelids thin.’”
keats.
the misty cloud in which arethusa had been enveloped by
diana’s protecting care was soon blown away by a mischievous
breath from zephyrus; and alpheus, who was still hovering
near there, suddenly beholding a fountain where none had ever
existed before, surmised what had happened. changing himself
into an impetuous torrent, he rushed to join his beloved, who
sprang out of her mossy bed, and hurried on over sticks and
stones, until diana, seeing her new plight, opened a crevice,
through which she glided away from the bright sunlight she
loved so well into the depths of pluto’s realm.
[pg ]
while gliding there in the gloom, arethusa had caught a
glimpse of proserpina on her sable throne, beside the stern-browed
pluto. she could not, however, pause to inquire how she came
there, but hurried on breathlessly, until another crevice offered
her the means of returning to the upper world, and seeing once
more the blue sky and sun on the sicilian plains.
the monotonous murmur of the fountain now subsided again
into its usual undertone; and ceres, knowing where to seek her
daughter, was about to depart, when she heard the sudden rush
and roar of a large body of water. she immediately turned, and
beheld the torrent alpheus, who, after a disconsolate search underground
for the lost arethusa, had found a crevice, through which
he passed to join his beloved on the sicilian plains.
“alpheus, elis’ stream, they say,
beneath the seas here found his way,
and now his waters interfuse
with thine, o fountain arethuse,
beneath sicilian skies.”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
in spite of her previous efforts to escape him, arethusa must
still have been very glad to see him once more, for ceres heard
her murmur contentedly as she sank into his arms and listened
to his louder tones of rapturous love.
maidens in greece were wont to throw fresh garlands into the
alpheus river; and it was said the selfsame flowers, carried
away by his current, soon reappeared in the sicilian fountain,
carried there as love offerings by the enamored river.
“o my beloved, how divinely sweet
is the pure joy when kindred spirits meet!
like him, the river god, whose waters flow,
with love their only light, through caves below,
wafting in triumph all the flowery braids
and festal rings, with which olympic maids
have decked his current, an offering meet
to lay at arethusa’s shining feet.
[pg ]
think when at last he meets his fountain bride
what perfect love must thrill the blended tide!
and lost in each, till mingling into one,
their lot the same for shadow or for sun,
a type of true love, to the deep they run.”
moore.
ceres’
mourning.
now, although poor ceres had ascertained where to find her
missing daughter, her grief was not at all diminished, for she felt
convinced that pluto would never willingly relinquish
her. she therefore withdrew into a dark
cave to mourn unseen, and still further neglected her wonted
duties.
famine threatened to visit the people, and they prayed and clamored
for her aid; but, absorbed in grief, she paid no heed to their
distress, and vowed that nothing on earth should grow, with her
permission, as long as her daughter was detained in hades. in
despair at this frightful state of affairs, the people then besought
jupiter to pity the sufferings they endured, and to allow proserpina
to revisit the upper world once more.
“arise, and set the maiden free;
why should the world such sorrow dree
by reason of persephone?”
ingelow.
as soon as she became aware of this petition, ceres hastened
to olympus, to join her supplications to the cries which rose from
all parts of the earth; until jupiter, wearied by these importunities,
consented to proserpina’s return, upon condition, however, that
she had not touched any food during the whole time of her
sojourn in the infernal regions.
“last, zeus himself,
pitying the evil that was done, sent forth
his messenger beyond the western rim
to fetch me back to earth.”
lewis morris.
the pomegranate
seeds.
[pg ]
ceres in person hastened to her daughter’s new abode, and was
about to lead her away in spite of pluto, when a spirit, ascalaphus,
suddenly declared that the queen had partaken of
some pomegranate seeds that very day. proserpina
could not refute the charge, and jupiter decreed that for
every seed she had eaten she should spend one month of every
year in her husband’s gloomy kingdom.
thus it came about that proserpina was condemned to spend
one half the year in hades, and could linger on the bright earth
only for six months at a time.
mercury was chosen to lead her to and from hades; and,
whenever he brought her out of her gloomy prison, the skies became
blue and sunny, the grass sprang fresh and green beneath
her elastic tread, the flowers bloomed along her way, the birds
trilled forth their merry lays, and all was joy and brightness.
“and when, in springtime, with sweet-smelling flowers
of various kinds the earth doth bloom, thou’lt come
from gloomy darkness back—a mighty joy
to gods and mortal men.”
homeric hymn.
proserpina’s
return.
ceres, happy once more in the possession of her beloved
daughter, cheerfully and diligently attended to all her duties, and
blessed the earth with plenty; but when the six
months were over, and the skies wept and all
nature mourned proserpina’s departure, she again returned to
her cave, whence no entreaties could draw her.
as for the merry, happy-natured proserpina, the moment
hades’ portals closed behind her, she became pale and melancholy;
and none would have dreamed the playful, flower-crowned
goddess of vegetation was identical with the sad-faced, sable-vested
queen of hades (now called hecate), who held a pomegranate
in one hand, and a torch in the other. proserpina, like
adonis, was the personification of vegetation, visibly prosperous
during the six favorable months of the year, and lurking hidden
under the cold ground during the remainder of the time.
worship of
ceres.
[pg ]
many beautiful temples were dedicated to ceres and proserpina
in greece and italy, where yearly festivals,
the thesmophoria and the cerealia, were celebrated
with great pomp.
“to ceres chief her annual rites be paid,
on the green turf, beneath a fragrant shade,
when winter ends, and spring serenely shines,
then fat the lambs, then mellow are the wines,
then sweet are slumbers on the flowery ground,
then with thick shades are lofty mountains crown’d.
let all the hinds bend low at ceres’ shrine;
mix honey sweet, for her, with milk and mellow wine;
thrice lead the victim the new fruits around,
and ceres call, and choral hymns resound:
presume not, swains, the ripen’d grain to reap,
till crown’d with oak in antic dance ye leap,
invoking ceres, and in solemn lays,
exalt your rural queen’s immortal praise.”
virgil (c. pitt’s tr.).
to commemorate her long search for her daughter, ceres returned
to eleusis, taught her former nursling, triptolemus, the
various secrets of agriculture, and gave him her chariot, bidding
him travel everywhere, and teach the people how to plow, sow,
and reap; and then she instituted the eleusinia, festivals held in
honor of her daughter and herself at eleusis.
triptolemus did not fail to carry out the goddess’s instructions,
and journeyed far and wide, until he finally reached the court of
lyncus, king of scythia, where the false monarch would have
treacherously slain him had not ceres by timely interference prevented
the execution of his base purpose by changing the traitor
into a lynx, the emblem of perfidy.
ceres was generally represented as a fair, matronly woman, clad
in flowing draperies, sometimes crowned with wheat ears, and
bearing a sheaf of grain and a sickle, or with a plow and a
horn of plenty disgorging its wealth of fruit and flowers at her
feet. groves were frequently dedicated to her; and any mortal
[pg ]
rash enough to lay the ax on one of these sacred trees was sure
to incur the goddess’s wrath, as is proved by the story of erisichthon.
story of
erisichthon.
this man was evidently a freethinker, and, to show his contempt
for the superstitious veneration paid to ceres’ trees, took
his ax and cut down one of her sacred oaks. at
his first blow, blood began to flow from the tree;
but, undeterred by the phenomenon or the entreaties of the bystanders,
erisichthon continued. finally, annoyed by the importunities
of the spectators, he turned and slew one or two, and then
completed his sacrilege.
ceres, incensed by his insolence and cruelty, devised a terrible
chastisement for the unfortunate man, and sent famine to gnaw
his vitals, and torment him night and day. the wretch, tortured
by a hunger which no amount of food could allay, disposed of
all his property to obtain the means of procuring nourishment;
but his monstrous appetite continued, and, as he had but one
daughter left, he sold her as a slave to obtain food.
the girl’s master left her alone for a moment upon the seashore,
and, in answer to her prayer, neptune delivered her from
servitude by changing her into a fisherman. when the master
returned and found his slave gone, he questioned the fisherman,
and, not obtaining any satisfactory information, departed. neptune
then restored the maiden to her own form, and let her return
home; but, as her father sold her again, the god was obliged
to interfere once more in her behalf, until at last erisichthon,
deprived of means to procure food, devoured himself.
ceres and
stellio.
another anecdote illustrating ceres’ power is told about a lad,
stellio, who made fun of the goddess when she was journeying,
on account of the haste with which she disposed
of a bowl of gruel offered by some charitable
person. to punish the boy for his rudeness, ceres flung the
remainder of her gruel into his face, and changed him into a
lizard.
[pg ]
worship of
vesta.
vesta, or hestia, daughter of cronus and rhea, goddess of
fire and of the family hearth, and guardian angel of mankind, was
worshiped principally throughout italy, although
she also had shrines in greece and asia minor.
the family hearth in ancient times possessed a far different
signification from what it does now, and was considered the
family altar, for there the father of the family was wont to offer
up his daily prayers and sacrifices. “as, according to the old
heathen custom, all men were regarded as enemies unless by a
special compact they had been made friends, so vesta presided
especially over true and faithful dealing;” and she was therefore
generally represented as pure and undefiled.
a beautiful circular temple in rome was dedicated to vesta’s
service; and here the palladium of troy was supposed to be preserved,
together with the goddess’s sacred fire, originally kindled
by the rays of the sun.
this fire—an emblem of the flame of life, which the ancients
fancied was kept burning within each human breast by vesta,
the life-giver—was kept constantly burning, and never allowed
to go out for want of fuel or timely care. its flames were also
intended to represent the purity of the goddess, who, although
wooed by many lovers,—among whom apollo and neptune can
justly claim the precedence,—remained always a virgin.
school of the vestal virgins.—le roux.
the romans fancied that her worship had been introduced in
italy by æneas, their famous ancestor, who brought thither his
[pg ]
home gods, and who, according to tradition, selected the first
vestal virgins.
vestal
virgins.
the second king of rome, numa pompilius, built a beautiful
temple, and instituted various religious ceremonies, in honor of
vesta. the loveliest and noblest among the roman
maidens were chosen to serve this goddess,
and were known as vestals, or vestal virgins. admitted into
the temple at the early age of six, they were compelled to
serve ten years in fitting themselves to fulfill the duties they
would be called upon to perform during the next decade as
priestesses and guardians of the sacred fire. the last ten years
were spent in instructing the novices; and, when their thirty-years’
service was ended, they were at liberty either to continue in
the temple, where they were treated with the greatest respect,
or to leave it, and even marry, if such were their pleasure.
during their time of servitude, they were expected to keep their
vows of chastity and fidelity to their patroness, and to maintain
her sacred fire, under penalty of being buried alive in a vaulted
chamber, fashioned for this express purpose by numa pompilius’s
order. in turn, each of the priestesses watched the fire, renewed
the fuel, and fanned the flame, nor lost sight of it night or day;
for the romans considered the extinction of this sacred flame
the precursor of some great public calamity.
the vestals were, however, so pure and vigilant, that during
one thousand years only eighteen failed to keep their vows
satisfactorily, and suffered punishment. the vestal tuccia was
accused of breach of faith, but, as proof of her purity, was
given power to carry water in a sieve from the tiber to the
temple.
the vestal tuccia.—le roux.
in return for the signal services the vestals rendered to the
state by maintaining this sacred fire, they enjoyed many privileges:
among others, that of being preceded by a lictor with fasces when
they walked abroad; of occupying the seats of honor in public
ceremonies and festivities; of being buried within the city limits
(a privilege granted to but very few); and of obtaining the
[pg ]
pardon of criminals whom they met by accident on their way
to the place of execution. loved and greatly honored by all,
the vestals have become types of all things pure and lovely in
woman.
“by these her trembling fires,
like vesta’s, ever burning; and, like hers,
sacred to thoughts immaculate and pure.”
young.
the vestal virgins were further distinguished by a vesture of
pure white linen, with a purple border and a wide purple mantle.
in time of war or danger they were answerable for the preservation
of the sacred fire, which they were allowed to remove to any
place of safety; and on several occasions they therefore carried
it out of rome and down the tiber, lest it should fall into the
enemy’s hands.
the vestals continued their office until the reign of theodosius
the great, who, being converted to christianity a.d. ,
abolished the worship of vesta, dispersed the vestals, and extinguished
the sacred fire.
festivals.
vesta’s services were held with great pomp; and her festivals,
the vestalia, were among the most beautiful and popular in
rome. statues of this goddess—generally representing
a woman of majestic beauty, clad in long
robes, holding a lighted torch or lamp in one hand and a votive
bowl in the other—were carried through the main streets of the
city on all solemn occasions.
in public processions the vestals had the privilege of carrying
their sacred fire; while the roman matrons, glad to swell their
ranks, followed them, barefooted, chanting the praises of the
good goddess vesta.
“and from the temple brings
dread vesta, with her holy things,
her awful fillets, and the fire
whose sacred embers ne’er expire.”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
[pg ]
on these occasions great banquets were prepared before each
house, all daily toil was suspended, the millstones were decked
with flowers, and the very asses wont to turn them were covered
with garlands and led in the processions.
among the romans, vesta was not the only goddess invoked
on the family hearth, for she shared that place of honor with the
lares, manes, and penates, who all enjoyed special veneration
and sacrifices.
lares, manes,
and penates.
the lares, quite unknown to the greeks, were two in number,
the children of mercury and lara, a naiad famous for her
beauty as well as for her extreme loquacity, which
no one could check. tradition relates that this
fair maiden talked from morning till night, and told all she knew.
upon one occasion she incurred jupiter’s wrath by relating to
juno a conversation she had overheard between him and one of
his numerous ladyloves.
to punish her, and at the same time prevent further tale-bearing,
the king of the gods cut off lara’s tongue, and, summoning
mercury, bade him lead her down to hades to linger there
forever. but on the way to the dismal abode of the dead, the
messenger god fell in love with his fair charge, who, being now
effectually cured of her sole fault, was irresistibly charming;
and, instead of obeying jupiter, he made love to her, and by
pantomime obtained her consent to their union. she bore him
two children, who from her were called lares, and to whom
the romans always paid divine honors, reserving special places
for them on the family hearth, for they were supposed to preside
over houses and families. their statues resembled monkeys
covered with the skins of dogs; while at their feet a barking
dog, the symbol of their care and vigilance, was always represented.
the manes—a name generally applied to souls when separated
from the body—were also reckoned among the roman
divinities, and the illustrious ancestors of different families were
often worshiped under this name.
[pg ]
as for the penates, they presided over the houses and domestic
affairs. each head of a household was wont to choose his
own penates, whom he then invoked as his special patrons. the
statues of the penates were of clay, wax, ivory, silver, or gold,
according to the wealth of the family whose hearth they graced,
and the offerings generally made to them were a small part of
each meal.
upon removing from one house to another or from one place
to another, it was customary for the head of the family to remove
his household gods also, and establish them suitably before
he thought of his own or his family’s comfort, and in return for
this kindly care the penates blessed him with peace and prosperity.
[pg ]
janus, god of the past, present, and future, of gates, entrances,
war, and peace, and patron of all beginnings, although one of
the most important of all the roman divinities, was entirely unknown
to the greeks.
according to some mythologists, he was the son of apollo;
and, although born in thessaly, he early in life came to italy,
where he founded a city on the tiber, to which he gave the name
janiculum. here he was joined by the exiled saturn, with
whom he generously shared his throne. together they civilized
the wild inhabitants of italy, and blessed them with such prosperity
that their reign has often been called the age of gold.
“saturn fled before victorious jove,
driven down and banish’d from the realms above.
he, by just laws, embodied all the train,
who roam’d the hills, and drew them to the plain;
there fixed, and latium called the new abode,
whose friendly shores concealed the latent god.
these realms, in peace, the monarch long controlled,
and blessed the nations with an age of gold.”
virgil (c. pitt’s tr.).
janus’
two faces.
janus is generally represented with two faces, turned in opposite
directions, because he was acquainted with
the past and future as well as with the present,
and because he is considered an emblem of the sun, which
opens the day at its rising, and closes the day at its setting.
[pg ]
in some statues he is represented with one white-haired and
bearded face, and the other quite youthful in appearance, while
others represent him with three and even four heads.
“janus am i; oldest of potentates;
forward i look, and backward, and below
i count, as god of avenues and gates,
the years that through my portals come and go.
“i block the roads and drift the fields with snow;
i chase the wild-fowl from the frozen fen;
my frosts congeal the rivers in their flow;
my fires light up the hearths and hearts of men.”
longfellow.
the commencement of every new year, month, and day was
held sacred to janus, and at that time special sacrifices and
prayers were offered up at his shrines. he also presided over
all gates and avenues, and through him alone prayers were supposed
to reach the immortal gods: therefore in all religious
ceremonies his name was always the first invoked. from this
circumstance he often appears with a key in his right hand, and a
rod in his left; or, when he presides over the year, he holds the
number  in one hand, and  in the other.
worship of
janus.
he was also supposed to watch over peace and war, and had
numerous temples throughout all italy. one very celebrated
temple was called janus quadrifons, because it
was perfectly square. on each side of the building
there was one door and three windows. these apertures
were all symbolical,—the doors of the four seasons, and the
windows of the twelve months, of the year.
in times of war the temple gates were opened wide, for the
people, being in need of aid and comfort, were all anxious to
enter and present their offerings; but when peace reigned, the
doors were immediately closed, for the god’s intercession was no
longer necessary. the romans, however, were such a belligerent
people, that the temple gates were closed but thrice in more than
seven centuries, and then only for a very short period.
[pg ]
festivals in honor of janus were celebrated on the first day
of the new year; and one month bore the god’s name, and
was considered sacred to him. it was customary for friends and
relatives to exchange calls, good wishes, and gifts on the first
day of this month,—a roman custom in force to this day.
ancient divisions
of time.
janus is not the only one among the greek and latin divinities
whose name has been given to a part of the year or week;
for in latin the names of the days are dies solis
(sun day), dies lunæ (moon day), dies martis
(mars’ day), dies mercurii (mercury’s day), dies jovis (jove’s day),
dies veneris (venus’ day), dies saturni (saturn’s day); latin names
which are still in use in legislative and judiciary acts, while in
english the common nomenclature is derived from the names of
the corresponding saxon divinities.
[pg ]
cave of sleep.
after leaving the joyless regions of pluto’s realm, and following
the even course of the lethe river, the ancients fancied
one reached a large cave in a remote and quiet
valley. this cave was the dwelling of somnus (or
hupnos), god of sleep, and of his twin brother mors (or thanatos),
god of death; and both were sons of the goddess of night, who
had once ruled the whole universe. near the entrance of the
cave, shadowy forms kept constant watch, gently shaking great
bunches of poppies, and, with finger to lips, enjoining silence on
all who ventured near. these forms were the genii of sleep and
death, represented in art as crowned with poppies or amaranths,
and sometimes holding a funeral urn or a reversed torch.
somnus and
morpheus.
the cave was divided into chambers, each one darker and
more silent than the one which preceded it. in one of the inner
rooms, which was all draped with sable curtains,
stood a downy couch, upon which reclined the
monarch of sleep. his garments were also black, but all strewn
with golden stars. he wore a crown of poppies on his head, and
held a goblet full of poppy juice in his languid hand. his
drowsy head was supported by morpheus, his prime minister, who
watched incessantly over his prolonged slumbers, and hindered
any one from troubling his repose.
genius of death.—canova. (tomb of clement xiii.; st. peter’s, rome.)
“deep in a cavern dwells the drowsy god:
whose gloomy mansion nor the rising sun,
nor setting, visits, nor the lightsome noon:
[pg ]
but lazy vapors round the region fly,
perpetual twilight, and a doubtful sky;
no crowing cock does there his wings display,
nor with his horny bill provoke the day:
nor watchful dogs, nor the more wakeful geese,
disturb with nightly noise the sacred peace:
nor beast of nature, nor the tame, are nigh,
nor trees with tempest rock’d, nor human cry;
but safe repose, without an air of breath,
dwells here, and a dumb quiet next to death.
an arm of lethe, with a gentle flow,
arising upwards from the rock below,
the palace moats, and o’er the pebbles creeps,
and with soft murmurs calls the coming sleeps;
around its entry nodding poppies grow,
and all cool simples that sweet rest bestow;
night from the plants their sleepy virtue drains,
and passing, sheds it on the silent plains:
no door there was the unguarded house to keep,
on creaking hinges turn’d to break his sleep.
but in the gloomy court was rais’d a bed,
stuff’d with black plumes, and on an ebon sted:
black was the covering too, where lay the god,
and slept supine, his limbs display’d abroad.
about his head fantastic visions fly,
which various images of things supply,
and mock their forms; the leaves on trees not more,
nor bearded ears in fields, nor sands upon the shore.”
ovid (dryden’s tr.).
dreams and
nightmares.
all around the bed and over it hovered throngs of exquisite
spirits, the dreams, who stooped to whisper their pleasant messages
in his ear; while in the distant corners of
the apartment lurked the hideous nightmares.
the dreams were often dispatched to earth under mercury’s
charge, to visit mortals.
two gates led out of the valley of sleep,—one of ivory, and
the other of horn. the dreams which passed through the glittering
gates of ivory were delusive, while those which passed
[pg ]
through the homely gate of horn were destined to come true in
the course of time.
“of dreams, o stranger, some are meaningless
and idle, and can never be fulfilled.
two portals are there for their shadowy shapes,
of ivory one, and one of horn. the dreams
that come through the carved ivory deceive
with promises that never are made good;
but those which pass the doors of polished horn,
and are beheld of men, are ever true.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
dreams were also frequently sent through the gates of horn
to prepare mortals for misfortunes, as in the case of halcyone.
story of ceyx
and halcyone.
ceyx, king of thessaly, was once forced to part from his beloved
wife, halcyone, to travel off to delphi to consult the oracle.
with many tears this loving couple parted, and
halcyone watched the lessening sail until it had
quite vanished from sight; then she returned to her palace to
pray for her husband’s safe return. but, alas! the gods had
decreed they should never meet again on earth; and, even while
halcyone prayed, a tempest arose which wrecked ceyx’s vessel,
and caused him and all his crew to perish in the seething waves.
day after day the queen hastened down to the seashore, followed
by her attendants, to watch for the returning sails of her
husband’s vessel; and night after night she lay on her couch,
anxiously expecting the morrow, which she ever fancied would
prove auspicious. the gods, seeing her anxiety, and wishing to
prepare her to receive the news of his death, and especially to
view with some composure his corpse, which they had decided
should be washed ashore, sent a dream to visit her.
after assuming the face and form of ceyx, the dream glided
away through the gate of horn, hastened to halcyone’s bedside,
and whispered that her husband was dead, and that his body was
even now being cast up on the smooth, sandy beach by the salt
sea waves. with a wild cry of terror and grief, halcyone awoke,
[pg ]
and hastened to the seashore to convince herself that the dream
had been false; but she had no sooner reached the beach, than
the waves washed her husband’s corpse to her feet.
to endure life without him seemed too great a task for poor
halcyone, who immediately cast herself into the sea, to perish
beside him. touched by grief so real and intense, the gods
changed both bodies into birds, since known as halcyon birds,
and decreed they should ever live on the waters. these birds
were said to build their nests and hatch their young on the heaving
billows, and to utter shrill cries of warning to the seamen
whenever a storm threatened, bidding them prepare for the blast,
and hasten to shelter in port, if they would not encounter the
mournful fate of poor ceyx.
mors.
mors, god of death, occupied one of the corners of somnus’
cave. he was a hideous, cadaverous-looking deity, clad in a
winding sheet, and held an hourglass and a scythe
in his hand. his hollow eyes were fixed upon
the sands of time; and when they had run out, he knew some
life was about to end, and sallied forth, scythe in hand, to mow
down his prey with relentless joy.
needless to say, this cruel deity was viewed by the ancients
with fear and dislike, and no homage was offered him.
these two divinities were, however, but of slight importance
in the general scheme of ancient mythology, in which proserpina
was generally regarded as the emblem of death, and they were
therefore more like local divinities. the lacedæmonians paid
the most heed to them, and invariably placed their statues side
by side.
morpheus.
as for morpheus, the son as well as the prime minister of
somnus, he was also called the god of sleep, and mortals were
wont to intercede for his good offices. he is generally
represented as a sleeping child of great corpulence,
and with wings. morpheus held a vase in one hand,
and poppies in the other, which he gently shook to induce a
state of drowsiness,—according to him, the acme of bliss.
[pg ]
not very far away from the quiet realm of somnus and mors,
but on the surface of the earth, were the æolian islands, now
known as the lipari islands, where æolus, god of the storm and
winds, governed a very unruly and turbulent population.
he is said to have received his royal dignity from the fair
hands of juno, and he was therefore specially eager to obey all
her behests. he is commonly reputed to have
married aurora, or eos, who gave him six sons
i.e., boreas, the north wind; corus, the northwest wind; aquilo,
the west wind; notus, the southwest wind; eurus, the east
wind; and lastly, zephyrus, the gentle and lovable south wind,
whose mission it was to announce to mortals the return of ever-welcome
spring.
æolus’ children.
æolus’ five elder sons were of a noisy, roving, mischievous,
turbulent disposition, and peace and quiet were utterly impossible
to them. to prevent their causing serious disasters, he therefore
ruled them with a very strict hand, kept them very closely confined
in a great cave, and let them loose only one at a time, to
stretch their limbs and take a little exercise.
“æolus in a cavern vast
with bolt and barrier fetters fast
rebellious storm and howling blast.
they with the rock’s reverberant roar
chafe blustering round their prison door
he, throned on high, the scepter sways,
controls their moods, their wrath allays.”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
[pg ]
although very unruly indeed, the winds always obeyed their
father’s voice, and at his command, however reluctant, returned
to their gloomy prison, where they expended their impotent rage
in trying to shake its strong walls.
according to his own mood, or in conformity with the gods’
request, æolus either sent the gentler winds to play among the
flowers, or, recalling them, let the fiercest of all his children free,
with orders to pile up the waves mountain-high, lash them to
foam, tear the sails of all the vessels at sea, break their masts,
uproot the trees, tear the roofs off the houses, etc.,—in short, to
do all the harm they possibly could.
“now rising all at once, and unconfin’d,
from every quarter roars the rushing wind:
first, from the wide atlantic ocean’s bed,
tempestuous corus rears his dreadful head,
th’ obedient deep his potent breath controls,
and, mountain-high, the foamy flood he rolls;
him the northeast encountering fierce, defied,
and back rebuffeted the yielding tide.
the curling surges loud conflicting meet,
dash their proud heads, and bellow as they beat;
while piercing boreas, from the scythian strand,
plows up the waves and scoops the lowest sand.
nor eurus then, i ween, was left to dwell,
nor showery notus in th’ æolian cell,
but each from every side, his power to boast,
ranged his proud forces to defend the coast.”
lucan.
æolus, king of the winds, shared with dædalus the honor of
inventing the sails which propel the ships so swiftly over the tide.
it was he, too, who, according to homer, bound all his children
but one in a leather bag, which he gave to ulysses when the latter
visited æolia. thanks to this gift, ulysses reached the shores
of ithaca, and would have landed in safety, had not his men, in
view of port, untied the sack to investigate its contents, and thus
[pg ]
set free the angry winds, who stirred up the most frightful tempest
in mythic annals.
temple of æolus.
the ancients, and especially the athenians, paid particular attention
to the winds, to whom they dedicated a temple, which is
still extant, and generally known as the tower of
the winds, or the temple of æolus. this temple
is hexagonal, and on each side a flying figure of one of the
winds is represented.
eurus, the east wind, was generally depicted “as a young man
flying with great impetuosity, and often appearing in a playful
and wanton humor.” notus, or auster, the southwest wind,
“appeared generally as an old man, with gray hair, a gloomy
countenance, a head covered with clouds, a sable vesture, and
dusky wings,” for he was considered the dispenser of rain and
of all sudden and heavy showers. zephyrus, mild and gentle,
had a lapful of flowers, and, according to the athenian belief,
was wedded to flora, with whom he was perfectly happy, and
visited every land in turn. corus, the northwest wind, drove
clouds of snow before him; while aquilo, dreadful in appearance,
caused cold shivers to run down one’s back at his mere sight.
boreas, rough and shivering too, was the father of rain, snow,
hail, and tempests, and was therefore generally represented as
veiled in impenetrable clouds. his favorite place of abode was
in the hyperborean mountains, from whence he sallied forth
on wild raids. during one of these excursions he carried off
orithyia, who always fled at his approach. but all her fleetness
could not save her: she was overtaken, and borne away to the
inaccessible regions of snow and ice, where he detained her, and
made her his wife. she became the mother of zetes and calais,—who
took part in the argonautic expedition, and drove away the
harpies (p. ),—and of two daughters, cleopatra and chione.
on another occasion, boreas, having changed himself into a
horse and united himself to the mares of dardanus, king of troy,
became the father of twelve steeds so swift that none could
overtake them.
[pg ]
“unto this thy son it shall be given,
with his broad heart to win his way to heaven;
twelve labors shall he work; and all accurst
and brutal things o’erthrow, brute men the worst;
and in trachinia shall the funeral pyre
purge his mortalities away with fire;
and he shall mount amid the stars, and be
acknowledg’d kin to those who envied thee,
and sent these den-born shapes to crush his destiny.”
theocritus (hunt’s tr.).
the ancients were not content to worship the gods only, but
also offered up sacrifices to a few mortals, who, by their heroic
deeds and virtuous lives, had won both admiration and respect.
foremost among these heroes—generally designated by the title
of demigods—is hercules (heracles, alcides), son of jupiter
and alcmene, a mortal princess.
juno persecutes
hercules.
as soon as the tidings of hercules’ birth reached olympus,
juno began to plot how to destroy her rival’s child. two colossal
serpents with poisonous fangs were therefore dispatched
by her orders to attack the babe in its cradle.
the monsters crept along noiselessly, entered the palace unseen,
twined themselves around the cradle, and were about to crush
the child to death in their folds, when, to the utter astonishment
of the helpless attendants, little hercules caught them fast by the
neck in each tiny hand and strangled them, thus giving the first
proof of the marvelous strength which was to make him famous.
[pg ]
hercules an infant. (louvre, paris.)
[pg ]
“first two dread snakes at juno’s vengeful nod
climb’d round the cradle of the sleeping god;
waked by the shrilling hiss, and rustling sound,
and shrieks of fair attendants trembling round,
their gasping throats with clenching hands he holds;
and death untwists their convoluted folds.”
darwin.
when juno perceived how easily hercules had escaped from
the danger which threatened him, she deemed it useless to make
another attempt to take his life, but decided to vex his proud
spirit by inflicting many petty annoyances, and to prevent his
enjoying any lasting peace or happiness.
to achieve this purpose, she first extorted from jupiter a decree
that condemned hercules to serve his cousin eurystheus—a
mean and cowardly prince who ruled over the kingdom of
argos—for a certain number of years.
hercules’ education was carefully attended to by chiron, a
learned centaur, who taught him how to use all the different
weapons, and trained him in all kinds of athletic sports. the
years passed by happily and swiftly, until at last the time came
when hercules’ education was completed, and the whole world
lay before him, full of pleasant possibilities, and rich with many
attractions.
hercules’
choice.
the youthful hero, dismissed by his instructor, now set out to
seek his fortunes. he had not gone very far, however, before he
met two beautiful women, who immediately entered
into conversation with him, and drew from him a
confession that he was in search of adventures. the women,
arete (virtue) and kakia (vice), each offered to be his guide,
but bade him choose which he preferred to follow.
kakia, to induce him to follow her guidance, promised riches,
ease, consideration, and love; while arete, a modest maiden,
warned him that in her wake he would be obliged to wage incessant
war against evil, to endure hardships without number,
and spend his days in toil and poverty.
[pg ]
silently hercules pondered for a while over these two so dissimilar
offers, and then, mindful of his tutor’s oft-repeated instructions,
rose from his seat by the wayside, and, turning to
arete, declared himself ready to obey any command she might
choose to give him.
“young hercules with firm disdain
braved the soft smiles of pleasure’s harlot train;
to valiant toils his forceful limbs assign’d,
and gave to virtue all his mighty mind.”
darwin.
courageously he then trod along the rough and thorny path
she pointed out, and patiently performed the various tasks she
assigned him, delivering the oppressed, defending the weak, and
redressing all wrongs.
hercules’
madness.
in reward for these good actions he received the hand of
megara, daughter of creon, king of thebes, in marriage, and
by her had three children, whom he tenderly loved.
but juno was not at all satisfied to see him leading
such a peaceful and prosperous life, and to interrupt its even
course drove the hero mad.
in a fit of delirium he threw his offspring into the fire, and,
we are told, slew his dearly beloved wife. then only he recovered
his senses, and suffered agonies of sorrow and remorse
for the terrible crimes he had unwittingly committed. in his
grief he withdrew to the mountain solitudes, where he would probably
have lingered all the remainder of his life, had not mercury
come to get him, and announced that he was to serve eurystheus,
king of argos, for a twelvemonth.
hercules in
servitude.
the messenger god then offered to lead him to his appointed
taskmaster. but when hercules learned he was doomed to
be a slave, he fell into such a passion, that he
nearly lost his reason again; and instead of killing
noxious beasts, and winning the people’s blessings by his deeds
of kindness, he wandered about stupidly and aimlessly, until he
finally perceived how vain was his attempt to struggle against
[pg ]
fate, and urged by his chosen adviser, arete, voluntarily offered
his services to eurystheus, who informed him that he must accomplish
twelve great labors ere he could again be free.
nemean lion.
eager to begin the appointed tasks, hercules set out first to
find and destroy a monstrous lion, whose den was in the nemean
forest. far and wide, throughout the whole neighborhood,
this monster committed his depredations,
carrying off cattle and sheep, men, women, and children, to devour
at his ease. all warned hercules of the danger and difficulty
of the undertaking, described the failure of countless previous
attempts to slay the monster, and prophesied that he would never
return alive. the hero would not be dissuaded, but entered the
forest, tracked the lion to his den, grasped him by the throat, and
strangled him as he had strangled the snakes in his infancy.
he then skinned the monster, whose shaggy pelt became his
favorite covering.
“so from nemea’s den alcides strode,
the lion’s yellow spoil around his shoulders flow’d.”
flaccus (elton’s tr.).
hydra of
lerna.
on his return to argos to report the successful termination of
his first task, hercules was told to repair to the marshes of
lerna, where lurked a seven-headed serpent, the
hydra, and put an end to its career of rapacity,
for this snake devoured man and beast. armed with a great
sword, hercules succeeded in cutting off one of the seven heads;
but he had no sooner done so, than, to his dismay, he saw
seven other heads suddenly spring from the bleeding stump.
to prevent a repetition of this unpleasant miracle, hercules
bade his friend iolaus, who had accompanied him thither to
view his prowess, take a lighted brand and sear the wounds as
soon as inflicted. thanks to this wise plan, the monster was
finally slain, although a friendly crab sent by juno to defend
hydra continually pinched hercules’ feet. the hero, angry at
this intervention, crushed the crab, which, however, received its
[pg ]
reward, for the queen of heaven placed it in the sky as the
constellation of cancer (the crab). the country was thus freed
from its long state of thraldom; but, before leaving the scene
of his second labor, hercules dipped his arrows in the hydra’s
venomous blood, knowing well that any wound they inflicted,
however slight, would be sure to prove fatal.
stag of
cerynea.
the third task appointed by eurystheus was the capture of
the golden-horned, brazen-footed stag of cerynea, whose fleetness
was such that he seemed scarcely to touch
the ground. hercules was obliged to pursue this
animal for many a weary mile before he could overtake him; and
he only managed the capture by driving him into a deep snowdrift,
in a distant northern land, from which he extricated him,
and carried him home in triumph.
erymanthian
boar.
the same success crowned his fourth labor, the capture of the
wild boar of erymanthus in arcadia. attacked by the centaurs
during the performance of this labor, hercules
turned his deadly arrows upon them, and accidentally
wounded his beloved tutor chiron, who was coming to
settle the dispute. vainly the hero applied every healing herb.
the wound was mortal, and chiron died; but in reward for his
good offices the gods transferred him to the sky, where he is
known as the constellation sagittarius.
augean
stables.
hercules was next sent to augeas, king of elis, who had immense
droves of cattle. the stables usually occupied by these
animals were in an incredibly filthy state, as they
had not been cleaned in years; and now hercules
was given the task to remove the accumulated filth, and make a
complete purification of the premises.
close by these stables rushed a torrent, or rather a river, the
alpheus. hercules, with one glance, saw the use he could make
of this rushing stream, which he dammed and turned aside from
its course, so that the waters passed directly through the stables,
carrying away all impurities, and finally washing them perfectly
clean.
[pg ]
hercules and centaur.—bologna. (florence.)
[pg ]
“nothing else
could clean the augean stables.”
wordsworth.
when hercules saw that the work of purification was thoroughly
accomplished, he guided the stream back to its original
bed, and returned home to announce that the fifth labor was
accomplished. the fabulous filth of the augean stables, and the
radical methods employed for their cleansing, have given rise to
proverbial expressions still in current use.
cretan bull.
hercules next journeyed off to crete to accomplish his sixth
task, the capture of a mad bull given by neptune to minos,
king of the island. the god had sent the animal
with directions that he should be offered up
in sacrifice; but minos, charmed with his unusual size and
beauty, resolved to keep him, and substituted a bull from his own
herds for the religious ceremony.
angry at seeing his express command so wantonly disobeyed,
neptune maddened the bull, which rushed wildly all over the
island, causing great damage. this was the animal that hercules,
with his usual strength and skill, caught and bound fast,
thus finishing the sixth task.
diomedes’
steeds.
he then hastened on to thrace, where diomedes, the king,
kept some fine coursers, which were fed on human flesh. in order
to obtain a sufficient supply of fresh meat for his
horses, diomedes had decreed that all strangers
who ventured into his kingdom should be seized, and, when
sufficiently fat, executed, and served up in his horses’ mangers.
to punish diomedes for this long-continued barbarity, hercules
fed him to his own horses, which were then led off to eurystheus,
as a token that the seventh labor was done.
hippolyte’s
girdle.
now, at the court of eurystheus was his beautiful daughter,
admete, a vain princess, who delighted in dress and jewels, and
who was never happier than when she obtained
some new ornament or article of apparel. one day
admete heard a traveler describe a girdle worn by hippolyte,
[pg ]
queen of the amazons, and was immediately seized by the desire
to possess the ornament.
she imparted this wish to eurystheus, who, delighted to gratify
her as long as he could do so without taking any personal risk
or trouble, sent hercules in quest of the coveted jewel. the
journey to the land of the amazons—a fierce, warlike nation
of women—was long and dangerous; but hercules traveled on
undaunted, nor paused, except when his services were needed in
furthering some good work for mortals, until he reached their
land, presented himself before their queen, and boldly explained
the cause of his presence. hippolyte listened to his explanation
and request with queenly condescension, promised to consider
the matter, and in the mean while bade him feast and rest in her
palace.
hercules would have succeeded in this undertaking without
any trouble, had not juno suddenly remembered his existence,
and resolved to continue her never entirely forgotten persecutions.
in the guise of an amazon, she mingled among the women,
and artfully spread the report that hercules had really come to
kidnap their queen, and that the pretended quest of the girdle
was a mere excuse, and only intended to distract their attention
from his real purpose. the amazons yielded implicit belief to
these rumors, flew to arms, and surrounded their queen.
“the amazons array their ranks,
in painted arms of radiant sheen
around hippolyte the queen.”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
the assembled force then attacked hercules, who met their
onslaught single-handed, defeated them, and finally bore away
the prize he had risked so much to obtain. it was on his homeward
journey from this expedition that he saved hesione, laomedon’s
daughter, from the jaws of the sea monster who was about
to devour her, as he had devoured many a fair trojan maid
before her (p. ).
[pg ]
mounted amazon going to the chase.—thorwaldsen. (copenhagen.)
stymphalian
birds.
[pg ]
eurystheus, well pleased with the manner in which hercules
had accomplished eight out of the twelve tasks, bade him now go
forth and slay the dangerous, brazen-clawed birds
which hovered over the stagnant waters of lake
stymphalus. the poisoned arrows now served him in good
stead, and enabled him to put a speedy end to the whole flock.
“his arrows slew
the monsters hov’ring fell stymphalus round.”
catullus.
cattle of
geryones.
hercules was next told to capture the divine cattle of geryones,
a giant of erythea. on his way home with this marvelous
herd, hercules paused on mount aventine, where,
during the night, the loathsome giant cacus stole
some of his cows. to punish him for this theft, hercules forced
his way into his cave, attacked him, and, after a memorable encounter,
slew him. the animals were soon after delivered into
the hands of eurystheus, who then sent hercules in search of
the golden apples of the hesperides.
hesperian
apples.
this commission sadly perplexed hercules, for he did not know
in what portion of the world he would find these apples, which had
been given to juno as a wedding present, and which
she had intrusted to the care of the hesperides,
daughters of hesperus, god of the west. after numerous journeys
and many inquiries, hercules discovered that these maidens had
carried these apples off to africa, hung them on a tree in their
garden, and placed the dragon ladon at its foot to guard their
treasures night and day. unfortunately, no one could tell hercules
in what part of africa the garden of the hesperides might
be situated: so he set out at a venture, determined to travel
about until he gained some information. on his way he met
with many adventures, and saw many strange sights. for instance,
he first met the nymphs of the eridanus river, and,
questioning them about the golden apples, was told to consult
old nereus, god of the sea, who would probably be able to give
him some information on the subject.
[pg ]
hercules, having surprised this aged divinity while asleep on
the seashore, held him fast, in spite of the multitudinous transformations
he underwent in the vain hope of frightening his
would-be interlocutor away. in answer to hercules’ question, he
finally very reluctantly bade him seek prometheus, who alone
would be able to direct him aright.
in obedience to this advice, hercules went to the caucasian
mountains, where, on the brink of a mighty precipice, he found
prometheus, still bound with adamantine chains, and still a prey
to the ravenous vulture (p. ). to spring up the mountain side,
kill the cruel bird, snap the adamantine chains, and set free the
benefactor of all mankind, was the work of but a few minutes for
such a hero as hercules; and, in gratitude for the deliverance he
had so long sought in vain, prometheus directed hercules to
his brother atlas, telling him he would be sure to know where
the apples could be found.
pygmies.
hercules wended his way to africa, where atlas dwelt, and
on his way passed through the land of a diminutive race of men,
called pygmies, who were so small that they lived
in constant dread of their neighbors, so much
larger and stronger than they, and of the cranes, which passed
over their country in great flocks, and sometimes alighted to devour
their harvests.
to guard against these constant inroads, the pygmies finally
accepted the services of antæus, a giant son of gæa, who generously
offered to defend them against all their enemies. when
these little people, therefore, saw hercules’ mighty form looming
up in the dim distance, they called aloud for fear, and bade
antæus go forth and kill the new invader, who, they wrongly
fancied, had evil designs against them.
proud of his strength, antæus went to meet hercules, and defied
him. a fierce struggle was the immediate result of this challenge,
and, as the combatants were of equal size and strength,
the victory seemed very uncertain. at last hercules felt his
great strength begin to fail, and noticed that every time his
[pg ]
adversary touched the ground he seemed to renew his vigor. he
therefore resolved to try and win by strategy, and, watching his
opportunity, seized antæus round the waist, raised him from the
ground, and held him aloft in his powerful embrace.
the giant struggled with all his might to get free; but hercules
held him fast, and felt him grow weaker and weaker, now that
he was no longer sustained by his mother earth, from whom he
derived all his strength, until at last his struggles ceased, and he
hung limp and lifeless in hercules’ crushing embrace.
“lifts proud antæus from his mother-plains,
and with strong grasp the struggling giant strains;
back falls his fainting head and clammy hair,
writhe his weak limbs, and flits his life in air.”
darwin.
atlas.
now that the gigantic defender of the pygmies no longer
blocked his way, hercules traveled onward in search of atlas,
whom he finally found supporting the heavens on
his broad shoulders. atlas listened attentively to
all hercules had to say, declared he knew where the apples
could be found, and promised to get them if the hero would
only relieve him of his burden for a little while. glad to accomplish
his purpose so easily, hercules allowed the burden of the
heavens to be transferred to his shoulders, and atlas hastened off
to fulfill his part of the agreement.
from afar the giant saw the golden fruit glittering in the
sunshine. stealthily he drew near, entered the gardens, slew the
dragon in his sleep, plucked the apples, and returned unmolested
to the place where he had left hercules. but his steps became
slower and slower; and as he neared the hero, he could not help
thinking with horror of the burden he must so soon resume, and
bear for centuries, perhaps, without relief.
this thought oppressed him. freedom was so sweet, that he
resolved to keep it, and, coolly stepping up to hercules, announced
that he would carry the golden apples to eurystheus,
and leave him to support the heavens in his stead. feigning
[pg ]
a satisfaction which he was very far from feeling, hercules
acquiesced, but detained atlas for a moment, asking him to
hold the heavens until he could place a cushion on his shoulders.
good-natured, as giants proverbially are, atlas threw the apples
on the grass beside him, and assumed the incumbent weight;
but hercules, instead of preparing to resume it, picked up the
apples, leaving atlas alone, in the same plight as he had found
him, there to remain until some more compassionate hero should
come and set him free.
“there atlas, son of great iapetus,
with head inclined and ever-during arms,
sustains the spacious heavens.”
hesiod.
it was during the course of one of his mighty labors, that
hercules, with one wrench of his powerful arm, tore a cleft in
the mountains, and allowed the waters of the sea to flow into
oceanus; and ever since, the rocks on either side of the strait
of gibraltar have borne the name of hercules’ pillars.
the twelfth and last task appointed by eurystheus was the most
difficult of all to perform. hercules was commanded to descend
into hades and bring up the dog cerberus, securely bound.
“but for the last, to pluto’s drear abode
through the dark jaws of tænarus he went,
to drag the triple-headed dog to light.”
euripides (potter’s tr.).
this command, like all the others, was speedily obeyed; but
eurystheus was so terrified at the aspect of the triple-headed
dog, from the foam of whose dripping jaws the nightshade
sprang, that he took refuge in a huge jar, and refused to come
out until hercules had carried the monster back to his cave.
olympian
games.
the twelve appointed labors were finished; the time of bondage
was ended; and hercules, a free man, could wander at his
own sweet will, and enjoy the happiness of freedom. a roaming
existence had, from force of habit, become a necessity: so
[pg ]
the hero first journeyed to olympia, where he instituted games
to be celebrated every fifth year in honor of jupiter, his father.
thence he wandered from place to place, doing
good, and came to the house of admetus, where
he was surprised to find all the court in mourning.
his sympathetic inquiries soon brought forth a full account
of alcestis’ sacrifice of her own life to insure the immortality of
her husband (p. ). the hero’s heart was touched by the king’s
loneliness; and he again braved the terrors of hades, and brought
alcestis back from the grave, and restored her to her husband’s
arms.
hercules took a prominent part in many heroic enterprises.
among others, he joined in the argonautic expedition (p. ), in
the battle between the centaurs and lapithæ (p. ), in the war
of the gods and giants, and in the first siege of troy (p. ),
which proved successful.
hercules and
omphale.
but the hero, although so lately escaped from servitude, was
soon obliged to return into bondage; for in a fit
of anger he slew a man, and was condemned by
the assembled gods to serve omphale, queen of lydia, for a
certain lapse of time.
no great deeds were now required of hercules, whose strength
was derided by his new mistress, and who, governing him easily
by his admiration for her, made him submit to occupations unworthy
of a man, and, while he was busy spinning, decked herself
in his lion’s skin, and brandished his renowned club.
“his lion spoils the laughing fair demands,
and gives the distaff to his awkward hands.”
darwin.
hercules at the feet of omphale.—gleyre.
however unworthy these effeminate tasks may seem for such a
hero, they proved very agreeable indeed to hercules, who, having
fallen in love with his new mistress, seemed to wish nothing better
than to remain her slave forever, and end his days in idleness
and pleasure. great labors were awaiting his mighty arm,
[pg ]
however; and the gods, at the appointed time, freed him from his
bondage to the lydian queen, and bade him go forth and do all
the good in his power.
hercules and
deianeira
in the course of his wanderings, hercules next met deianeira,
daughter of œneus, and, having fallen in love with
her, expressed a desire to marry her. but unfortunately
another suitor, the river god achelous, had already won
the father’s consent.
“achelous came,
the river god, to ask a father’s voice,
and snatched me to his arms.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
so sure was this suitor of his attractions, that he did not even
deem it necessary to secure the maiden’s good graces; and when
hercules made known his love, she immediately promised to
marry him, if he would only free her from the lover her father
would fain force upon her. delighted to be able to win his
bride and punish his rival at the same time, hercules challenged
achelous; and now began a wrestling match, the fame of which
has come down to us through all the intervening centuries.
achelous was an opponent worthy of hercules, and, besides,
took advantage of his power to change his form at will, further
to perplex and harass the sturdy hero. at last he assumed the
shape of a bull, and with lowered horns rushed toward hercules,
intending to toss him aside. the hero, skillfully avoiding his
first onset, seized him by one of his great thickset horns, and
held it so firmly that all the bull’s efforts to free himself from his
powerful grasp were vain, until the horn broke.
the goddess of plenty, the attican fortuna, a witness of this
strange combat, appropriated the broken horn, stuffed her treasures
in its hollow, and was so well pleased with the effect, that
she decreed it should henceforth be one of her attributes. the
fight, only temporarily suspended, was now resumed with redoubled
ardor, for each of the lovers was intent upon winning
the hand of the fair deianeira.
[pg ]
fortuna. (vatican, rome.)
[pg ]
“warm, and more warm the conflict grows:
dire was the noise of rattling bows,
of front to front opposed, and hand to hand:
deep was the animated strife
for love, for conquest, and for life.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
the victory, though long uncertain, finally rested with hercules,
who triumphantly departed with his hard-won bride, for
his destiny would not permit him to tarry long in any place.
instead of wandering alone now, with none to cheer or sympathize,
hercules had deianeira ever at his side; and after many
days they came to the river evenus, whose usually shallow and
peaceful waters were swollen and turbid, for violent rainstorms
had recently swept over that portion of the country.
story of
nessus.
hercules paused for a moment to contemplate the stream,
and glanced about for some safe mode to transport deianeira
across. while he was thus considering, a centaur
by the name of nessus came to his assistance, and
proposed to carry the fair young bride to the other shore in complete
safety, if she would but consent to mount upon his broad
back.
“the hoary centaur, who was wont for hire
to bear the traveler o’er the rapid flood
of deep evenus: not with oars or sail
he stemm’d the torrent, but with nervous arm
opposed and pass’d it; me, when first a bride,
i left my father’s hospitable roof
with my alcides, in his arms he bore
athwart the current.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
hercules, only too glad to avail himself of the centaur’s kind
offer of assistance, quickly helped deianeira to mount, saw them
descend into the water, and prepared to follow, holding his bow
and arrows aloft in one hand, and breasting the waves with the
other.
now, the centaur nessus did not often have the good fortune
[pg ]
to carry such a pretty passenger as deianeira over the river, and
as he swam he made up his mind to gallop off with her as soon
as he reached the opposite shore. all his strength and energy,
therefore, were called into requisition; and when he reached the
shore, instead of pausing to allow his fair burden to dismount,
he set off as fast as he could run.
nessus’ robe.
a loud shriek from deianeira attracted hercules’ attention,
and a second later one of his poisoned arrows had brought the
would-be ravisher to the ground, pierced through
the heart. with dying accents the centaur nessus
professed repentance, and bade deianeira take his robe,—but
slightly stained with the blood which gushed from the wound
inflicted by the poisoned arrow,—and keep it carefully, for it
had magic power; and if she ever found her husband’s love waning,
he assured her, that, could she but induce him to put it on,
all his early affection would revive, as pure and fervent as during
their honeymoon.
“‘take
this white robe. it is costly. see, my blood
has stained it but a little. i did wrong:
i know it, and repent me. if there come
a time when he grows cold—for all the race
of heroes wander, nor can any love
fix theirs for long—take it and wrap him in it,
and he shall love again.’”
lewis morris.
deianeira gratefully accepted the proffered gift, and promised
to treasure it up carefully, although she sincerely hoped she
would never be called upon to make use of it. years passed by.
hercules often left deianeira to deliver the oppressed and relieve
the suffering, for people came from great distances to ask for his
aid; and although his absences were sometimes prolonged, he
always returned to her side, as loving as ever, and she had no
cause for complaint. finally duty took him back to the court of
eurytus, where he beheld iole, whom he had seen and loved in
the beginning of his career, but whom he had been obliged to
[pg ]
leave to fulfill his arduous tasks. she was still young and charming,
and his first glance into her sweet face rekindled all his
former passion. day after day he lingered by her side, forgetful
of duty, deianeira, and all but his first dream of love and happiness.
when absent, deianeira was wont to hear rumors of his
heroic achievements; but on this occasion the only report which
reached her ear was that he had returned to his allegiance to his
first love, and this roused her jealousy, so long dormant.
deianeira’s
jealousy.
finally she heard that hercules was wending his way homeward
again, and her heart bounded with joy, but only to sink
more heavily when told that he was accompanied
by iole and a numerous train. then she remembered
the long-forgotten gift of the centaur. with trembling
hands she sought the glittering robe, gave it to a messenger, and
bade him hasten to meet hercules, and prevail upon him to
wear it for his triumphant return. the messenger, lichas, hastened
to do her bidding, and deianeira waited with fast-beating
heart for the success of her venture.
“i only wish the charm may be of power
to win alcides from this virgin’s love,
and bring him back to deianeira’s arms.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
lichas acquitted himself faithfully of his errand; and hercules,
viewing the costly garment, and anxious to appear to his best
advantage before the bright eyes of iole, immediately donned
the richly embroidered robe.
hercules’
death.
he had no sooner put it on, than the centaur’s poisoned
blood began its deadly work. first he experienced a burning,
stinging sensation, which ran like fire through every
vein. vainly he tried to tear off the fatal garment.
it clung to his limbs, and the poison ate its way into his flesh,
until the pain was greater than he could bear.
farnese hercules. (national museum, naples.)
in his rage at the trick which had been played upon him, he
seized lichas—the unfortunate bearer of the poisoned robe—by
[pg ]
the foot, and flung him from the heights of mount œta down
into the sea, where he perished.
“and lichas from the top of œta threw
into th’ euboic sea.”
milton.
then, resolved to end these unendurable torments by a death
worthy of his whole life, hercules called his servants, and bade
them build his funeral pyre on the mountain peak; but they, in
tears, refused to obey, for they could not bear the thought of
parting with their beloved master. commands and entreaties
alike failed to move them: so hercules climbed up the mountain
side alone, tore up the huge oaks by their roots, flung them one
upon the other until he had raised a mighty pile, upon which he
stretched his colossal, pain-racked limbs, and bade his friend
philoctetes set fire to the stupendous mass.
at first philoctetes also refused to do his bidding; but, bribed
by the promise of the world-renowned poisoned arrows, he finally
consented to do as hercules wished, and the red flames rose
higher and higher, the wood crackled and burned, and the hero
was soon enveloped in sheets of flame, which purged him from
all mortality.
then jupiter came down from his glorious abode, caught the
noble soul in his mighty arms, and bore it off to olympus, there
to dwell in happiness forever with hebe, the fair goddess of
youth, whose hand was given him in marriage.
“till the god, the earthly part forsaken,
from the man in flames asunder taken,
drank the heavenly ethers’ purer breath.
joyous in the new, unwonted lightness,
earth’s dark, heavy burden lost in death.
high olympus gives harmonious greeting
to the hall where reigns his sire adored;
youth’s bright goddess, with a blush at meeting,
gives the nectar to her lord.”
schiller (s. g. b.’s tr.).
worship of
hercules.
[pg ]
hercules, the special divinity of athletic sports and of strength,
was principally worshiped by young men. he is
generally represented in art as a tall, powerfully
built man, with a small, bearded head, a lion’s skin carelessly
thrown over his shoulder, and leaning upon a massive club.
“great alcides, stooping with his toil,
rests on his club.”
pope.
it is said that some of the games celebrated at olympia were
held in his honor, although originally instituted by him in honor
of jupiter, his father. the nemean games, celebrated in the
forest of nemea, the scene of his first great labor, were the
principal games held in greece in commemoration of his noble
deeds and early death.
[pg ]
acrisius and
danae.
the life of acrisius, king of argos, had been a burden to
him ever since the unfortunate day when an oracle had predicted
that he would be killed by his grandson. until
then the king had been very fond of his only child,
danae, and until then, too, had thought with pride of the time
when he would bestow her hand in marriage upon the noblest of
all who came to woo.
now his plans were all changed, and his only wish was to
keep her unmated,—a somewhat difficult task, for the maiden
was very fair, and acrisius knew that the wily god of love
would endeavor to find some way to outwit him and bring his
plans to naught. after much thought, acrisius decided to lock
danae up in a brazen tower, around which he stationed guards
to prevent any one from even approaching the captive princess.
but, although safely concealed from the eyes of men, danae
was plainly seen by the everlasting gods; and jupiter, looking
down from olympus, beheld her in all her loveliness and in all
her loneliness. she was seated on top of her brazen tower, her
eyes wistfully turned toward the city, where girls of her age enjoyed
freedom, and were allowed to marry when they pleased.
the shower
of gold.
jupiter, pitying her isolation and admiring her beauty, resolved
to go down and converse with her for a little while. to
avoid being seen, he changed himself into a golden
shower, and gently dropped down on the turret
beside her, where his presence and spirited conversation soon won
the maiden’s heart.
[pg ]
“danae, in a brazen tower
where no love was, loved a shower.”
shelley.
this first successful visit was frequently repeated, and danae
no longer felt lonely and deserted, for jupiter spent most of his
time with her, pursuing his courtship most diligently, and finally
winning her to a secret marriage, to which no one offered the
slightest objection, as no one suspected his visits, which he continued
quite unmolested.
birth of
perseus.
but one morning the guards rushed in terror to acrisius’ palace
to announce that danae, his daughter, had given birth to a
son, who, on account of his beauty, was called perseus.
the king no sooner learned this astonishing
news, than he flew into a great rage, vowed that mother and
child should perish, and dispatched the guards to fetch the unfortunate
victims.
acrisius, however, was not cruel enough to stain his own
hands with his child’s blood, or to witness her execution: so he
ordered that she should be placed in an empty cask with her
helpless infant, and exposed to the fury of the waves. these
orders were speedily executed; and danae’s heart sank with terror
when she felt the cask buffeted about by the great waves far out
of sight of land, and out of all reach of help. clasping her babe
close to her bosom, she fervently prayed the gods to watch over
them both, and bring them in safety to some hospitable shore.
“when round the well-fram’d ark the blowing blast
roar’d, and the heaving whirlpools of the deep
with rough’ning surge seem’d threatening to o’erturn
the wide-tost vessel, not with tearless cheeks
the mother round her infant gently twined
her tender arm, and cried, ‘ah me! my child!
what sufferings i endure! thou sleep’st the while,
inhaling in thy milky-breathing breast
the balm of slumber.’”
simonides (elton’s tr.).
danae at
seriphus.
[pg ]
her piteous prayer was evidently heard, for, after much tossing,
the cask was finally washed ashore on the island of seriphus,
where polydectes, the king, kindly received mother
and child. here perseus, the golden-haired, grew
to manhood, and here made his first appearance in games and
combats.
in the mean while, polydectes had fallen in love with danae,
and expressed his desire to marry her; but danae did not return
his affections, and would not consent. angry at her persistent
refusal of his proposals, polydectes wished to compel her to obey,
and thereby incurred the wrath of young perseus, who loudly declared
that none should dare force his mother as long as he were
there to defend her. this boast did not at all allay the monarch’s
wrath; and, hoping to get rid of the young boaster, he bade
him go forth and slay medusa, if he wished to convince people
that his bravery was real.
the gorgons.
this medusa was one of the three gorgons. her sisters, euryale
and stheno, although immortal, had never had any claims
to beauty; but medusa, when only a girl, had been
considered very handsome indeed. her home, in
a land where the sun never shone, was very distasteful to her, so
she entreated minerva to let her go and visit the beautiful sunny
south.
but when minerva refused to grant her wish, she reviled the
goddess, and declared that nothing but a conviction that mortals
would no longer consider her beautiful if they but once beheld
medusa, could have prompted this denial. this presumptuous
remark so incensed minerva, that, to punish her for her vanity,
she changed her beautiful curling locks into hissing, writhing serpents,
and decreed that one glance into her still beautiful face
would suffice to change the beholder into stone.
“fatal beauty! thou didst seem
the phantom of some fearful dream.
extremes of horror and of love
alternate o’er our senses move,
[pg ]
as, rapt and spellbound, we survey
the horrid coils which round thee play,
and mark thy wild, enduring smile,
lit by no mortal fire the while,
formed to attract all eyes to thee,
and yet their withering blight to be;
thy power mysterious to congeal
and from life’s blood its warmth to steal,
to petrify the mortal clay
in its first gleam of wild dismay,
is a dread gift to one like thee,
cursed with a hateful destiny.”
mrs. st. john.
perseus’
quest.
the gods, who had carefully watched over perseus through his
childhood and youth, now decided to lend him their aid, so that
he might successfully accomplish the great task of
slaying medusa. pluto lent him a magic helmet,
which made the wearer invisible at will; mercury attached his
own winged sandals to the youth’s heels, to endow him with
great rapidity of flight; while minerva armed him with her own
mirrorlike shield, the dreadful ægis.
“minerva thus to perseus lent her shield;
secure of conquest, sent him to the field:
the hero acted what the queen ordain’d,
so was his fame complete.”
prior.
the grææ.
thus equipped, perseus flew northward until he came to the
land of perpetual darkness, the home of the grææ, three horrible
sisters, who possessed but one eye and one tooth,
which they handed about and used in turn, and
who were the only living beings cognizant of the place where
medusa dwelt.
invisible by virtue of his magic helmet, perseus drew near the
cave without fear of detection, and intercepted the eye while on
its way from one sister to another. as soon as it was safe in his
possession, he spoke to them, promising to restore it if they would
[pg ]
only give him accurate directions for finding medusa. the sisters,
eager to recover the treasured eye, immediately gave the
desired information; and perseus, having honorably fulfilled his
share of the contract, departed in search of medusa.
death of
medusa.
perseus at last perceived the gorgon’s home in the dim distance;
and, as he was fully aware of medusa’s petrifying proclivities,
he advanced very cautiously, holding his shield
before him at such an angle that all surrounding
objects were clearly reflected on its smooth, mirrorlike surface.
he thus discovered medusa asleep, raised his sword, and,
without looking at anything but her mirrored form, severed her
head from her body, seized it in one hand, and, holding it persistently
behind his back, flew away in great haste, lest the two
remaining gorgons should fall upon him and attempt to avenge
their sister’s death.
birth of
snakes.
perseus then swiftly winged his way over land and sea, carefully
holding his ghastly trophy behind him; and as he flew,
medusa’s blood trickled down on the hot african
sand, where it gave birth to a race of poisonous
reptiles destined to infest the region in future ages, and cause
the death of many an adventurous explorer. the drops which
fell into the sea were utilized by neptune, who created from them
the famous winged steed called pegasus (p. ).
“and the life drops from thy head
on libyan sands, by perseus shed,
sprang a scourging race from thee—
fell types of artful mystery.”
mrs. st. john.
the return journey was long and wearisome, and on his way
the hero had many adventures. once, when flying high above a
mountainous country, he caught a glimpse of atlas, his pale face
turned up to the heavens, whose weight he had patiently borne
for many a long year,—a burden which seemed all the more
grievous after the short taste of freedom he had enjoyed while
hercules stood in his place (pp. -),—
[pg ]
perseus.—cellini. (loggia de’ lanzi, florence.)
[pg ]
“supporting on his shoulders the vast pillar
of heaven and earth, a weight of cumbrous grasp.”
æschylus (potter’s tr.).
atlas
petrified.
when atlas saw perseus flying toward him, hope revived, for
he remembered that fate had decreed that it was this hero who
was to slay the gorgon; and he thought, that, if he
could but once gaze upon her stony face, he would
be free from pain and weariness forever. as soon as the hero was
within hearing, atlas therefore addressed him as follows:—
“‘hasten now, perseus, and let me look upon the gorgon’s
face, for the agony of my labor is well-nigh greater than i can
bear.’ so perseus hearkened unto the word of atlas, and he unveiled
before him the dead face of medusa. eagerly he gazed
for a moment on the changeless countenance, as though beneath
the blackness of great horror he yet saw the wreck of her ancient
beauty and pitied her for her hopeless woe. but in an instant
the straining eyes were stiff and cold; and it seemed to perseus,
as he rose again into the pale yellow air, that the gray hairs
which streamed from the giant’s head were like the snow which
rests on the peak of a great mountain, and that in place of the
trembling limbs he saw only the rents and clefts on a rough hillside.”
thus the mere sight of medusa changed atlas into the rugged
mountains which have since borne his name; and, as their summits
are lost in the clouds, the ancients supposed they sustained
the full weight of the heavenly vault.
story of
andromeda.
thence perseus flew on until he reached the seashore, where a
strange sight greeted him. away down on the “rock-bound
coast,” so near the foaming billows that their spray
continually dashed over her fair limbs, a lovely
maiden was chained fast to an overhanging rock. this maiden
was the princess andromeda. to atone for the vanity of her
mother, cassiopeia, who claimed she was fairer than any of the
sea nymphs, she had been exposed there as prey for a terrible
sea monster sent to devastate the homes along the coast.
[pg ]
perseus and andromeda.—coypel.
[pg ]
an oracle, when consulted, declared that the monster would
not depart until andromeda was sacrificed to his fury; and
perseus could even now perceive the receding procession which
had solemnly accompanied her to the appointed place of sacrifice,
and chained her fast.
at the same time, too, he saw the waters below the maiden
lashed to foam by the monster’s tail, and the scales of his hideous
body slowly rising up out of the water. fascinated by this horrible
sight, the maiden’s eyes were fixed on the monster. she did
not see the rapid approach of her deliverer, who, dauntless, drew
his sword from its scabbard, and, swooping down, attacked the
monster, cheered by the shouts of the people, who had seen him,
and now rushed back to witness the slaying of their foe.
“on the hills a shout
of joy, and on the rocks the ring of mail;
and while the hungry serpent’s gloating eyes
were fixed on me, a knight in casque of gold
and blazing shield, who with his flashing blade
fell on the monster. long the conflict raged,
till all the rocks were red with blood and slime,
and yet my champion from those horrible jaws
and dreadful coils was scathless.”
lewis morris.
of course, this fierce struggle could have but one conclusion;
and when perseus had slain the monster, freed andromeda from
her chains, and restored her to the arms of her overjoyed parents,
they immediately offered any reward he might be pleased to
claim. when he, therefore, expressed a desire to marry the
maiden he had so bravely rescued, they gladly gave him her
hand, although in early youth the princess had been promised
to her uncle phineus.
phineus
petrified.
preparations for the marriage were immediately begun; and
the former suitor, who had been too cowardly to venture a single
blow to deliver her from the monster, prepared to fight the rival
who was about to carry off his promised bride. unbidden he
[pg ]
came to the marriage feast with a number of armed followers,
and was about to carry off andromeda, when perseus suddenly
bade his adherents stand behind him, unveiled
the medusa head, and, turning its baleful face
toward phineus and his followers, changed them all into stone.
the interrupted marriage feast was now resumed; and when
it was over, perseus took his bride to seriphus. there, hearing
that polydectes had dared to ill treat his mother because she still
refused to accede to his wishes and become his wife, he changed
the importunate king into a rock by showing him his medusa
trophy, gave the kingdom to the king’s brother, and, accompanied
by wife and mother, returned to his native land. the
borrowed helmet, sandals, and shield were all duly restored to
their respective owners, and the medusa head was given to
minerva in token of gratitude for her help. greatly pleased
with this gift, the goddess set it in the center of her terrible ægis,
where it retained all its petrifying power, and served her in many
a fight.
return to
argos.
arrived at argos, perseus discovered that a usurper had
claimed his grandfather’s throne. to hurl the unlawful claimant
from his exalted seat, and compel him to make full
restitution and atonement, was but a trifle for the
hero who had conquered medusa; and acrisius, now old and
weak, was taken from the prison where he languished, and restored
to his wonted honors, by the very youth he had been taught
to fear.
but the gods’ decree was always sure to be fulfilled sooner or
later; and one day, when perseus was playing quoits, he accidentally
killed his grandfather. to remain at argos, haunted
by the memory of this involuntary crime, was too painful for
him: so he exchanged his kingdom for another, that of mycenæ,
which he ruled wisely and well. when perseus died, after
a long and glorious reign, the gods, who had always loved him,
placed him among the stars, where he can still be seen, with his
wife andromeda, and mother-in-law cassiopeia.
[pg ]
when yet but a very young man, ægeus, king of athens,
journeyed off to trœzene, where he fell in love with and married
a pretty young princess by the name of æthra. for some reason,
which mythologists do not make known, the king was forced
to return alone to athens; but ere he departed he concealed his
sword and sandals beneath a stone, bidding his wife remember,
that, as soon as the strength of their son theseus permitted, he
must raise the rock, appropriate sword and sandals, and come and
join him in athens, where he should be introduced to the people
as his son and heir. these instructions given, ægeus bade a
fond farewell to his wife and infant son, and returned home.
as the years passed by, they brought strength, beauty, and
wisdom to theseus, whose fame began to be published abroad.
at last æthra deemed him strong enough to raise the rock beneath
which his father’s trusty weapon lay; and, conducting him
to the spot where it was, she told him the whole story, and bade
him try his strength.
theseus immediately obeyed. with a mighty effort he raised
the rock, and, to his great satisfaction, found the sword and sandals
in a perfect state of preservation. sword in hand, he then
set out for athens,—a long and dangerous journey. he proceeded
slowly and cautiously, for he knew that many dangers
lurked along his pathway, and that ere he reached his father’s
city he would have to encounter both giants and monsters, who
would strive to bar his way.
periphetes.
[pg ]
he was not at all mistaken in his previsions; for trœzene was
scarcely lost to sight ere he came across the giant periphetes,
son of vulcan, who stood in the road and attacked
with a huge club, whose blows were generally fatal,
all who strove to pass. adroitly evading the giant’s first onslaught,
theseus plunged his sword deep into his huge side ere
he could renew the attack, and brought him lifeless to the ground.
sinis.
theseus then disarmed his fallen foe, and, retaining the club
for future use, continued his journey in peace, until he came to
the isthmus of corinth, where two adventures
awaited him. the first was with a cruel giant
named sinis, nicknamed the pine-bender, whose usual practice
was to bend some huge pine until its top touched the ground,
and call to any unsuspecting passer-by to seize it and lend him a
helping hand for a moment. then, as soon as the innocent
stranger had complied with his request, he would suddenly let go
the pine, which, freed from his gigantic grasp, sprang back to its
upright position, and hurled the unfortunate traveler way up
in the air, to be dashed to pieces against the rocky mountain
side.
theseus, who had already heard of the giant’s stratagem, skillfully
eluded the danger, and finally caused sinis to perish by the
same cruel death which he had dealt out to so many others.
sciron.
in one place the isthmus of corinth was exceedingly narrow,
and the only practicable pathway led along a rocky ledge,
guarded by a robber named sciron, who forced
all who tried to pass him to wash his feet. while
the traveler was thus engaged, and knelt in the narrow pathway
to do his bidding, he would suddenly raise his foot, kick him
over the side, and hurl him down into the sea below, where a
huge tortoise was ever waiting with gaping jaws to devour the
victims.
instead of yielding to sciron’s exactions, theseus drew his
sword, and by his determined bearing so terrified the robber,
that he offered him a free passage. this offer, however, did not
[pg ]
satisfy theseus, who said he would sheathe his sword only on
condition that sciron performed for him the menial office he had
imposed upon so many others. sciron dared not refuse, and
obeyed in fear and trembling; but he was doomed never to
molest any one again, for theseus kicked him over the precipice,
into the breakers, where the tortoise feasted upon his remains
with as keen a relish as upon former victims.
cercyon and
procrustes.
after disposing of another world-renowned robber, cercyon
(the wrestler), theseus encountered procrustes (the stretcher), a
cruel giant, who, under pretext of entertainment,
deluded travelers into entering his home, where
he had two beds of very different dimensions,—one unusually
short, the other unusually long. if the unfortunate traveler were
a short man, he was put to bed in the long bedstead, and his
limbs were pulled out of joint to make him fit it; but if, on the
contrary, he were tall, he was assigned the short bed, and the
superfluous length of limb was lopped off under the selfsame
pretext. taking procrustes quite unawares, theseus gave him
a faint idea of the sufferings he had inflicted upon others by
making him try each bed in turn, and then, to avoid his continuing
these evil practices, put an end to his wretched existence.
theseus successfully accomplished a few more exploits of a
similar character, and finally reached athens, where he found
that his fame had preceded him.
“in days of old, there liv’d of mighty fame,
a valiant prince, and theseus was his name:
a chief, who more in feats of arms excell’d,
the rising nor the setting sun beheld.”
morris.
medea’s
draught.
the first tidings that there reached his ear were that ægeus had
just married medea, the enchantress; but, although these tidings
were very unwelcome, he hastened on to his
father’s court, to make himself known, and receive
the welcome promised so many years before. medea,
seated by ægeus’ side, no sooner saw the young stranger draw
[pg ]
near, than she knew him, and foresaw that he had come to
demand his rights. to prevent his making known claims which
might interfere with the prospects of her future offspring, she
hastily mixed a deadly poison in a cup, which she filled with
fragrant wine, and bade ægeus offer it to the stranger.
the monarch was about to execute her apparently hospitable
purpose, when his eye suddenly rested upon the sword at theseus’
side, which he immediately recognized. one swift glance into
the youth’s open face convinced him that æthra’s son stood before
him, and he eagerly stretched out his arms to clasp him to his
heart. this sudden movement upset the goblet, and the poisonous
contents, falling upon a dog lying at the king’s feet, caused
his almost instantaneous death. seeing her crime discovered
and theseus recognized, medea quickly mounted her magic
dragon car, and fled to media, whence she never returned.
tribute to the
minotaur.
one day, some time after his arrival at athens, theseus heard
a sound of weeping and great lamentation throughout all the
city, and in reply to his wondering inquiries was
told, that ever since an unfortunate war between
the cretans and athenians, the latter, who had been vanquished,
were obliged to pay a yearly tribute of seven youths and as
many maidens, destined to serve as food for the minotaur.
further questions evolved the fact that the minotaur was a
hideous monster, the property of minos, king of crete, who
kept it in an intricate labyrinth, constructed for that express
purpose by dædalus, the far-famed architect.
“there lived and flourished long ago, in famous athens town,
one dædalus, a carpenter of genius and renown;
(’twas he who with an augur taught mechanics how to bore,—
an art which the philosophers monopolized before.)”
saxe.
dædalus and icarus.—vien.
dædalus and
icarus.
this labyrinth was so very intricate, that those who entered
could not find their way out; and even dædalus
and his son icarus, after many days’ attempt, found
they could not leave it. rather than remain imprisoned
[pg ]
forever, dædalus then manufactured wings for himself and for his
son, and determined to make use of them to effect his escape.
“now dædalus, the carpenter, had made a pair of wings,
contrived of wood and feathers and a cunning set of springs,
by means of which the wearer could ascend to any height,
and sail about among the clouds as easy as a kite.”
saxe.
after repeated cautions to his son not to venture too high,
lest the sun’s heat should melt the wax fixing the feathers to the
frame, dædalus bade icarus don his plumage and fly to a country
where they would be free, promising to follow him thither
very shortly.
“‘my icarus!’ he says; ‘i warn thee fly
along the middle track: nor low, nor high;
if low, thy plumes may flag with ocean’s spray;
if high, the sun may dart his fiery ray.’”
ovid (elton’s tr.).
delighted with this new mode of travel, icarus flew swiftly
along. little by little he forgot the danger and his father’s caution,
and rose up higher and higher, until he could bask in the
direct rays of the ardent sun. the heat, which seemed so grateful
after his chilly flight, soon softened and melted the wax on
his wings; and icarus, no longer supported by the light feathers,
sank down faster and faster, until he fell into the sea, where he
was drowned, and which, in memory of him, bears the name of
icarian to this day.
these varied details kindled theseus’ love of adventure, and
still further strengthened him in his sudden resolve to join the
mournful convoy, try his strength against the awful minotaur,
and, if possible, save his country from further similar exactions.
“while attica thus groan’d, with ills opprest;
his country’s wrongs inflam’d brave theseus’ breast;
instant his gen’rous soul resolv’d to save
cecrops’ great offspring from a timeless grave.”
catullus.
[pg ]
even his father’s tears and entreaties were powerless to move
him from his purpose, and, the hour having come, he embarked
upon the black-sailed vessel which was to bear the yearly tribute
to crete, promising to change the black sails for snowy white
ones if he were fortunate enough to return victorious.
talus.
favorable winds soon wafted the galley to distant crete, and
as they sailed along the coast, searching for the harbor, they were
challenged by the brazen giant talus, who walked
daily thrice around the whole island, killing, by contact
with his red-hot body, all who had no business to land on that
coast. knowing, however, that the black-sailed galley brought
a fresh supply of youths and maidens for the terrible minotaur,
talus let it pass unharmed; and the victims were brought into
the presence of minos, who personally inspected each new freight-load,
to make sure he was not being cheated by the athenians.
ariadne’s
clew.
at the monarch’s side stood his fair daughter ariadne, whose
tender heart was filled with compassion when she beheld the frail
maidens and gallant youths about to perish by such
a loathsome death. theseus, by right of his birth,
claimed the precedence, and proffered a request to be the first
victim,—a request which the king granted with a sardonic smile,
ere he returned unmoved to his interrupted feast.
unnoticed by all, ariadne slipped out of the palace, and, under
cover of the darkness, entered the prison where theseus was
confined. there she tremblingly offered him a ball of twine and
a sharp sword, bidding him tie one end of the twine to the entrance
of the labyrinth, and keep the other in his hand as a clew
to find the way out again should the sword enable him to kill the
dreaded minotaur. in token of gratitude for this timely assistance,
theseus solemnly promised ariadne to take her with him
to athens as his bride, were he only successful in his undertaking.
at dawn the next day theseus was conducted to the entrance
of the labyrinth, and there left to await the tender mercies of the
minotaur. like all heroes, he preferred to meet any danger
rather than remain inactive: so, mindful of ariadne’s instructions,
[pg ]
he fastened his twine to the entrance, and then boldly penetrated
into the intricate ways of the labyrinth, where many
whitening bones plainly revealed the fate of all who had preceded
him.
theseus and
the minotaur.
he had not gone very far before he encountered the minotaur,—a
creature more hideous than fancy can
paint,—and he was obliged to use all his skill and
ingenuity to avoid falling a prey to the monster’s appetite, and
all his strength to lay him low at last.
the minotaur slain, theseus hastily retraced his footsteps.
“and the slender clew,
prepar’d in secret by th’ enamor’d maid,
thro’ the curv’d labyrinth his steps convey’d.”
catullus.
theseus’
escape.
arrived at the place where his ship rode at anchor, he found
his companions and ariadne awaiting him, and, springing on
board, bade the sailors weigh anchor as quickly
as possible. they were almost out of reach of
the cretan shores, when talus came into view, and, perceiving
that his master’s prisoners were about to escape, leaned forward
to catch the vessel by its rigging. theseus, seeing this, sprang
forward, and dealt the giant such a blow, that he lost his balance
and fell into the deep sea, where he was drowned, and
where thermal springs still bear witness to the heat of his brazen
body.
ariadne
forsaken.
the returning vessel, favored by wind and tide, made but one
port, naxos; and here youths and maidens landed to view the
beautiful island. ariadne strayed apart, and threw
herself down upon the ground to rest, where, before
she was aware of it, sleep overtook her. now, although very
brave, theseus was not very constant. he had already grown
weary of ariadne’s love; and, when he saw her thus asleep, he
basely summoned his companions, embarked with them, and set
sail, leaving her alone upon the island, where bacchus soon
came to console her for the loss of her faithless lover (p. ).
[pg ]
ariadne.—rae.
theseus’
punishment.
[pg ]
theseus, having committed a deed heinous in the eyes of gods
and men, was doomed to suffer just punishment. in his preoccupation
he entirely forgot his promise to change
the black sails for white; and ægeus, from attica’s
rocky shore, seeing the sable sails when the vessel was yet
far from land, immediately concluded that his son was dead, and
in his grief cast himself into the sea since known as the ægean,
where he perished.
“as from a mountain’s snowy top are driv’n
the rolling clouds, by the rude blasts of heav’n;
so from the mem’ry of lost theseus fled
those dictates, which before his reason sway’d:
but now his father from the ramparts’ height,
all bath’d in tears, directs his eager sight;
o’er the wide sea, distended by the gale,
he spies, with dread amaze, the lurid sail.”
catullus.
theseus’ reign
and marriage.
theseus, on entering the city, heard of his father’s death; and
when he realized that it had been caused by his carelessness, he
was overwhelmed with grief and remorse. all the
cares of royalty and the wise measures he introduced
for the happiness of his people could not divert his mind
from this terrible catastrophe: so he finally resolved to resign his
authority and set out again in search of adventures, which might
help him forget his woes. he therefore made an excursion into
the land of the amazons, where hercules had preceded him,
and whence he brought back hippolyte, whom he married.
theseus was now very happy indeed, and soon all his hopes were
crowned by the birth of a son, whom he called hippolytus.
shortly after this joyful event, the amazons invaded his country
under pretext of rescuing their kidnapped queen, and in the battle
which ensued hippolyte was accidentally wounded by an arrow,
and breathed her last in theseus’ arms.
theseus next set out with an athenian army to fight pirithous,
king of the lapithæ, who had dared to declare war; but when
[pg ]
the armies were face to face, the two chiefs, seized with a sudden
liking for each other, simultaneously cast down their weapons,
and, falling on each other’s necks, embraced, and swore an eternal
friendship.
centaurs and
lapithæ
to show his devotion to this newly won friend, theseus consented
to accompany him to the court of adrastus, king of
argos, and witness his marriage to hippodamia,
daughter of the king. many guests were, of course,
present to witness the marriage ceremony, among others hercules
and a number of the centaurs. the latter, struck with admiration
for the bride’s unusual beauty, made an attempt to kidnap
her, which was frustrated by the lapithæ, seconded by theseus
and hercules. the terrible struggle which ensued between the
conflicting parties has ever been a favorite subject in art, and
is popularly known as the “battle between the centaurs and
lapithæ.”
theseus in
hades.
the hotly contested bride did not, however, enjoy a very long
life, and pirithous soon found himself, like theseus, a disconsolate
widower. to avoid similar bereavement in
future, they both resolved to secure goddesses,
who, being immortal, would share their thrones forever. aided
by pirithous, theseus carried off helen, the daughter of jupiter
(p. ), and, as she was still but a child, intrusted her to the care
of his mother, æthra, until she attained a suitable age for matrimony.
then, in return for pirithous’ kind offices, he accompanied
him to hades, where they intended to carry off proserpina.
while they were thus engaged, helen’s twin brothers, castor
and pollux, came to athens, delivered her from captivity, and
carried her home in triumph. as for theseus and pirithous,
their treacherous intention was soon discovered by pluto, who set
the first on an enchanted rock, from which he could not descend
unassisted, and bound the second to the constantly revolving
wheel of his father, ixion.
theseus.—canova. (volksgarten, vienna.)
when hercules was in hades in search of cerberus (p. ),
he delivered theseus from his unpleasant position, and thus
[pg ]
enabled him to return to his own home, where he now expected
to spend the remainder of his life in peace.
phædra and
hippolytus.
although somewhat aged by this time, theseus was still anxious
to marry, and looked about him for a wife to cheer his loneliness.
suddenly he remembered that ariadne’s
younger sister, phædra, must be a charming young
princess, and sent an embassy to obtain her hand in marriage.
the embassy proved successful, and phædra came to athens;
but, young and extremely beautiful, she was not at all delighted
with her aged husband, and, instead of falling in love with him,
bestowed all her affections upon his son, hippolytus, a virtuous
youth, who utterly refused to listen to her proposals to elope. in
her anger at finding her advances scorned, phædra went to
theseus and accused hippolytus of attempting to kidnap her.
theseus, greatly incensed at what he deemed his son’s dishonorable
behavior, implored neptune to punish the youth, who
was even then riding in his chariot close by the shore. in
answer to this prayer, a great wave suddenly arose, dashed over
the chariot, and drowned the young charioteer, whose lifeless
corpse was finally flung ashore at phædra’s feet. when the unfortunate
queen saw the result of her false accusations, she confessed
her crime, and, in her remorse and despair, hung herself.
death of
theseus.
as for theseus, soured by these repeated misfortunes, he grew
so stern and tyrannical, that he gradually alienated his people’s
affections, until at last they hated him, and banished
him to the island of scyros, where, in obedience
to a secret order, lycomedes, the king, treacherously slew
him by hurling him from the top of a steep cliff into the sea.
as usual, when too late, the athenians repented of their ingratitude,
and in a fit of tardy remorse deified this hero, and
built a magnificent temple on the acropolis in his honor. this
building, now used as a museum, contains many relics of greek
art. theseus’ bones were piously brought back, and inhumed in
athens, where he was long worshiped as a demigod.
[pg ]
at iolcus, in thessaly, there once reigned a virtuous king,
æson, with his good wife, alcimede. their happiness, however,
was soon disturbed by pelias, the king’s brother, who, aided by
an armed host, took forcible possession of the throne. æson
and alcimede, in fear of their lives, were forced to resort to a
hasty and secret flight, taking with them their only son, jason.
the king and queen soon found a place of refuge, but, afraid
lest their hiding place should be discovered and they should all
be slain by the cruel pelias, they intrusted their son to the centaur
chiron, revealing to him alone the secret of the child’s birth,
and bidding him train him up to avenge their wrongs.
chiron discharged his duties most faithfully, trained the young
prince with great care, and soon made him the wisest and most
skillful of his pupils. the years spent by jason in the diligent
acquisition of knowledge, strength, and skill, passed very quickly;
and at last the time came when chiron made known to him
the secret of his birth, and the story of the wrongs inflicted by
pelias, the usurper, upon his unfortunate parents.
jason’s
vow.
this tale aroused the young prince’s anger, and made him
solemnly vow to punish his uncle, or perish in the attempt.
chiron encouraged him to start, and in parting
bade him remember that pelias alone had injured
him, but that all the rest of the human race were entitled to any
aid he could bestow. jason listened respectfully to his tutor’s
last instructions; then, girding his sword and putting on his sandals,
he set out on his journey to iolcus.
[pg ]
it was early in the spring, and the young man had not gone
very far before he came to a stream, which, owing to the usual
freshets of the season, was almost impassable. jason, however,
quite undaunted by the rushing, foaming waters, was about to
attempt the crossing, when he saw an aged woman not far from
him, gazing in helpless despair at the waters she could not cross.
naturally kind-hearted and helpful, and, besides that, mindful
of chiron’s last recommendation, jason offered the old woman
his assistance, proposing to carry her across on his back if she
would but lend him her staff to lean upon. the old woman
gladly accepted this offer; and a few moments later, jason, bending
beneath his strange load, was battling with the rapid current.
after many an effort, breathless and almost exhausted, jason
reached the opposite bank, and, after depositing his burden there,
scrambled up beside her, casting a rueful glance at the torrent,
which had wrenched off one of his golden sandals. he was about
to part from the old dame with a kindly farewell, when she was
suddenly transformed into a large, handsome, imperious-looking
woman, whom, owing to the peacock by her side, he immediately
recognized as juno, queen of heaven. he bent low before her,
and claimed her aid and protection, which she graciously promised
ere she vanished from his sight.
with eager steps jason now pressed onward, nor paused until
he came in view of his native city. as he drew near, he noticed
an unusual concourse of people, and upon inquiry discovered
that pelias was celebrating a festival in honor of the immortal
gods. up the steep ascent leading to the temple jason hastened,
and pressed on to the innermost circle of spectators, until he
stood in full view of his enemy pelias, who, unconscious of coming
evil, continued offering the sacrifice.
the one
sandal.
at last the ceremony was completed, and the king cast an arrogant
glance over the assembled people. his eyes suddenly fell
upon jason’s naked foot, and he grew pale with
horror as there flashed into his memory the recollection
of an ancient oracle, warning him to beware of the
[pg ]
man who appeared before him wearing but one sandal. pelias
tremblingly bade the guards bring forth the uninvited stranger.
his orders were obeyed; and jason, confronting his uncle boldly,
summoned him to make a full restitution of the power he had so
unjustly seized.
phryxus and
helle.
to surrender power and wealth and return to obscurity was not
to be thought of; but pelias artfully concealed his displeasure, and
told his nephew that they would discuss the matter
and come to an amicable understanding after the
banquet, which was already spread and awaiting their presence.
during the festive meal, bards sang of all the heroic deeds accomplished
by great men; and pelias, by judicious flattery, stimulated
jason to attempt similar feats. at last the musicians recited
the story of phryxus and helle, the son and daughter of
athamas and nephele, who, to escape the cruel treatment of
their stepmother, ino (p. ), mounted a winged, golden-fleeced
ram sent by neptune to transport them to colchis.
the ram flew over land and sea; but helle, frightened at the
sight of the waves tossing far beneath her, suddenly lost her hold
on the golden fleece, and tumbled off the ram’s back into a portion
of the sea since known as the hellespont,
“where beauteous helle found a watery grave.”
meleager.
phryxus, more fortunate than his sister, reached colchis in
safety, and in gratitude to the gods sacrificed the ram they had
sent to deliver him, and hung its golden fleece on a tree, near
which he stationed a dragon to guard it night and day. the
bards then went on to relate that the glittering trophy still hung
there, awaiting a hand bold enough to slay the dragon and bear
it off.
the golden
fleece.
this tale and his liberal potations greatly excited the youth
jason; and pelias, perceiving it, hypocritically regretted his inability
to win the golden fleece, and softly insinuated that young
men of the present generation were not brave enough to risk
[pg ]
their lives in such a glorious cause. the usurper’s crafty remarks
had the desired effect; for jason suddenly sprang from his seat,
and vowed he would go in quest of the golden
fleece. pelias, quite certain that the rash youth
would lose his life in the attempt, and thus cause no more
trouble, with much difficulty restrained all expressions of joy, and
dared him to make the attempt.
“with terror struck, lest by young jason’s hand
his crown should be rent from him, pelias sought
by machinations dark to slay his foe.
from colchis’ realm to bring the golden fleece
he charged the youth.”
orphic argonautics.
the speaking
oak.
when jason, sobered and refreshed by a long night’s rest,
perceived how foolish had been his vow, he would fain have
recalled it; but, mindful of chiron’s teachings
ever to be true to his word, he resolved to depart
for colchis. to secure juno’s assistance, he began by visiting
her shrine at dodona, where the oracle, a speaking oak, assured
him of the goddess’s good will and efficacious protection. next
the speaking oak bade him cut off one of its own mighty limbs,
and carve from it a figurehead for the swift-sailing vessel which
minerva, at juno’s request, would build for his use from pine
trees grown on mount pelion.
the argo and
crew.
jason, having finished his figurehead, found that it too had
the gift of speech, and that it would occasionally vouchsafe
sage counsel in the direction of his affairs. when
quite completed, jason called his vessel the argo
(swift-sailing), and speedily collected a crew of heroes as brave
as himself, among whom were hercules, castor, pollux, peleus,
admetus, theseus, and orpheus, who were all glad to undertake
the perilous journey to lands unknown. to speed them on their
way, juno then bargained with æolus for favorable winds, and
forbade any tempest which might work them harm.
[pg ]
“then with a whistling breeze did juno fill the sail,
and argo, self-impell’d, shot swift before the gale.”
onomacritus (elton’s tr.).
story of
hylas.
on several occasions the heroes landed, either to renew their
stock of provisions or to recruit their strength, but in general
every delay brought them some misfortune. once
hercules, having landed with a youth named
hylas to cut wood for new oars, bade the youth go to a neighboring
spring and draw a pitcher of water to quench the thirst
produced by his exertions. the youth promptly departed; but
as he bent over the fountain, the nymphs, enamored with his
beauty, drew him down into their moist abode to keep them company.
hercules, after vainly waiting for hylas’ return, went in
search of him, but could find no trace of him, and, in his grief
and disappointment at the death of his young friend, refused to
continue the expedition, and, deserting the argonauts, made his
way home alone and on foot.
phineus and the
harpies.
on another occasion, when jason visited phineus, the blind
king of thrace, he heard that this monarch’s life was imbittered
by the harpies, vile monsters, part woman,
part bird, who ate or befouled all the food placed
before him, and never let him eat a mouthful in peace. having
repeated this tale to his companions, the two sons of boreas,
who were also in the argo, begged permission to drive
them away. jason could not refuse their request; and the two
youths, with drawn swords, pursued the harpies to the strophades
islands, where the birds promised to remain.
jason, sailing on in the mean while, was attacked by a flock
of brazen-feathered birds, which rained their sharp plumage down
upon the argonauts, wounding many of them sorely. the captain
of the expedition, seeing weapons were of no avail against
these foes, consulted the figurehead, and, in obedience to its
directions, clashed his arms against his shield, until, terrified by
the din, the brazen-feathered birds flew rapidly away, uttering discordant
cries of terror.
the
symplegades.
[pg ]
some time during the course of their journey the argonauts
came to the symplegades,—floating rocks which continually
crashed together, and ground to powder all objects
caught between them. jason knew he was
obliged to pass between these rocks or give up the expedition:
so, calculating that the speed of his vessel was equal to that of a
dove on the wing, he sent one out before him. the dove flew
safely between the rocks, losing only one of its tail feathers as
they again clashed together. watching his opportunity, therefore,
jason bade his men row swiftly. the argo darted through
the opening, and, when the rocks again came into contact, they
merely grazed the rudder. as a vessel had passed between them
unharmed, their power for evil left them, and they were chained
fast to the bottom of the sea, near the mouth of the bosporus,
where they remained immovable like any other rocks.
arrival at
colchis.
the argonauts, after other adventures far too numerous to
recount in detail, reached the colchian shores, and presented
themselves before æetes, the king, to whom they
made known their errand. loath to part with
his golden treasure, æetes declared, that, before jason could obtain
the fleece, he must catch and harness two wild, fire-breathing
bulls dedicated to vulcan, and make use of them to plow a stony
piece of ground sacred to mars. this done, he must sow the
field with some dragon’s teeth, as cadmus had done (p. ), conquer
the giants which would spring up, and, last of all, slay the
guardian dragon, or the fleece would never be his.
medea’s
aid.
one of these tasks would have sufficed to dismay many a brave
youth; but jason was of the dauntless kind, and merely hastened
down to his vessel to ask the figurehead
how he had better proceed. on his way to the
seashore he met the king’s daughter, medea, a beautiful young
sorceress, who had been charmed by his modest but firm bearing,
and who was quite ready to bring her magic to his aid if he would
but promise to marry her. jason, susceptible to her attractions,
and free from any conflicting ties, readily agreed to her proposal,
[pg ]
and, carrying out her directions, caught and harnessed the fiery
bulls, plowed the field, and sowed it with the dragon’s teeth.
“and how he yoked the bulls, whose breathings fiery glow’d,
and with the dragons’ teeth the furrow’d acres sow’d.”
onomacritus (elton’s tr.).
but when he saw glittering spears and helmets grow out of
the ground, and beheld the close ranks of giants in full armor,
he was filled with dismay, and would have fled had it been possible.
however, aware that such a performance would insure his
ruin, he stood his ground, and, when the phalanx was quite near
him, threw a handful of dust full in the giants’ faces. blinded
with the sand, the giants attacked one another, and in a short
time were exterminated.
“they, like swift dogs,
ranging in fierceness, on each other turn’d
tumultuous battle. on their mother earth
by their own spears they sank; like pines, or oaks,
strew’d by a whirlwind in the mountain dale.”
apollonius rhodius (elton’s tr.).
the fleece
captured.
accompanied by medea, jason next hastened to the tree
where the dragon kept guard over his treasure. an opiate prepared
by medea’s magic skill soon made the dragon
forget his charge in a profound sleep, and enabled
jason to draw near enough to sever his frightful head from
his hideous trunk. jason then tore the coveted fleece from the
branch where it had hung for many a year, and bore it in triumph
to the argo.
“exulting jason grasped the shining hide,
his last of labors, and his envied pride.
slow from the groaning branch the fleece was rent.”
flaccus (elton’s tr.).
his companions, who had made ready for a hasty departure,
were already seated at their oars; and, as soon as he had embarked
with medea and her attendants, the argo shot out of the
colchian harbor.
[pg ]
jason and the dragon.—salvator rosa.
[pg ]
“how softly stole from home the luckless-wedded maid,
through darkness of the night, in linen robe array’d;
by fate to argo led, and urged by soft desire,
nor yet regarding aught her father’s furious ire.”
onomacritus (elton’s tr.).
when morning dawned and æetes awoke, he heard that the
dragon was slain, the fleece stolen, his daughter gone, and the grecian
ship far out of sight. no time was lost in useless wailing,
but a vessel was hurriedly launched and manned, and the king
in person set out in pursuit of the fugitives, who had, moreover,
taken his most precious treasure, his only son and heir, absyrtus.
although the colchian men were good sailors and skillful rowers,
they did not catch sight of the argo until they came near the
mouth of the danube, and æetes wildly called to his daughter
to return to her home and to her father.
“‘stay thy rash flight! and, from the distant main,—
for oh! thou canst, my daughter,—turn again.
whither depart? the vessel backward steer;
thy friends, thy still fond father, wait thee here.’”
flaccus (elton’s tr.).
death of
absyrtus.
but medea had no wish to be torn away from jason’s arms,
and, instead of listening to her father’s entreaties, urged the
argonauts to redoubled efforts. little by little
the distance between the two vessels grew less;
the colchian rowers were gaining upon the greek; and medea
saw, that, unless she found means to delay her father, he would
overtake her and compel her to return. with her own hands she
therefore slew her little brother, absyrtus, and cut his body into
pieces, which she dropped over the side of the vessel one by one.
æetes, a helpless witness of this cruel, awful deed, piously collected
his son’s remains, and, in pausing to do so, lost sight of
the argo, and all hope of recovering his unnatural daughter: so
he returned sadly to colchis, where he buried his son’s remains
with due solemnity.
[pg ]
medea.—sichel.
pelias
dethroned.
[pg ]
in the mean while, pelias had reigned contentedly over thessaly,
confident that jason would never return. imagine his dismay,
therefore, when he heard that the argo had
arrived, bearing jason, now the proud possessor of
the renowned golden fleece. ere he could take measures to
maintain his usurped authority, jason appeared, and compelled
him to resign the throne in favor of the rightful king, æson.
unfortunately, æson was now so old and decrepit, that power
had no charms for him: so jason begged medea to use her
magic in his behalf, and restore him to the vigor and beauty
of his early manhood. to gratify jason, medea called all her
magic into play, and by some mysterious process restored æson
to all his former youth, strength, activity, and grace.
“medea’s spells dispersed the weight of years,
and æson stood a youth ’mid youthful peers.”
wordsworth.
the magic
recipe.
as soon as pelias’ daughters heard of this miraculous transformation,
they hastened to medea and implored her to give
them the recipe, that they might rejuvenate their
father also. the sorceress maliciously bade them
cut their father’s body into small pieces, and boil them in a caldron
with certain herbs, declaring that, if the directions were carefully
carried out, the result would be satisfactory; but, when the
too credulous maidens carried out these instructions, they only
slew the father whom they had so dearly loved.
days and years now passed happily and uneventfully for jason
and medea; but at last their affection for each other cooled, and
jason fell in love with glauce, or creusa. frantic with jealousy,
medea prepared and sent the maiden a magic robe, which she
no sooner donned than she was seized with terrible convulsions,
in which she died. medea, still full of resentment against jason,
then slew her own children, and, mounting her dragon car, departed,
leaving a message for jason, purporting that the argo
would yet cause his death.
death of
jason.
[pg ]
jason, a victim of remorse and despair, now led a weary and
sorrowful life, and every day he wandered down to the shore, where
he sat under the shade of the argo’s hulk, which was
slowly rotting away. one day, while he was sitting
there musing over his youthful adventures and medea’s
strange prophecy, a sudden gale detached a beam, which, falling
on his head, fractured his skull and caused instantaneous death.
the argonautic expedition is emblematic of the first long maritime
voyage undertaken by the greeks for commercial purposes;
while the golden fleece which jason brought back from colchis
is but a symbol of the untold riches they found in the east, and
brought back to their own native land.
[pg ]
birth of
meleager.
œneus and althæa, king and queen of calydon, in ætolia,
were very happy in the possession of a little son, meleager, only a
few days old, until they heard that the fates had decreed
the child should live only as long as the brand
then smoking and crackling on the hearth. the parents were motionless
with grief, until althæa, with true mother’s wit, snatched
the brand from the fire, plunged it into an earthen jar filled with
water, quenched the flames which were consuming it, and, carefully
laying it aside, announced her intention to keep it forever.
meleager, thus saved from an untimely death by his mother’s
presence of mind, grew up a brave and handsome youth, and
joined the argonautic expedition. while he was absent, his
father omitted the yearly sacrifice to diana, who, enraged at his
neglect, sent a monstrous boar to devour his subjects and devastate
his realm. meleager, on his return, gathered together all
the brave men of the country, and instituted a great hunt, whose
main object was the capture or death of the obnoxious boar.
the hunters.
jason, nestor, peleus, admetus, theseus, pirithous, and many
other noted heroes, came at his call; but the attention of all the
spectators was specially attracted by castor and
pollux, and by the fair atalanta, daughter of iasius,
king of arcadia. this princess had led a very adventurous
life; for when but a babe, her father, disappointed to see a
daughter instead of the longed-for son, had exposed her on
mount parthenium to the fury of the wild beasts. some hunters,
[pg ]
passing there shortly after this, found the babe fearlessly nursing
from a she-bear, and in compassion carried her home, where they
trained her to love the chase.
the grand calydonian hunt was headed by meleager and
atalanta, who were very fond of each other, and who boldly led
the rest in pursuit of the boar. from one end of the calydonian
forest to the other the boar fled, closely pursued by the hunt, and
was at last brought to bay by atalanta, who succeeded in dealing
him a mortal wound. but even in his dying struggles the boar
would have killed her, had not meleager come to her rescue and
given him his deathblow.
meleager slays
his uncles.
all the hunt now gathered around the boar’s corpse, and
watched meleager take its spoil, which he gallantly bestowed
upon atalanta. althæa’s two brothers were present
at the hunt; and, as they wished to possess the
skin, they bitterly reproved their nephew on their way home for
giving it to a stranger. they added taunts to this reproof, which
so angered meleager, that, in a sudden fit of passion, he slew
them both. when althæa saw her brothers’ corpses, and heard
that they had been slain by her son, she vowed to avenge their
death, drew the carefully cherished brand from its hiding place,
and threw it upon the fire burning brightly on her hearth. when
the last bit of the precious wood crumbled away into ashes,
meleager died. all althæa’s affection for her son returned when
his lifeless corpse was brought to her, and in her despair she committed
suicide.
atalanta’s race.—poynter.
atalanta’s
race.
in the mean while, atalanta, proud of her skill and of her
spoil, had returned to her father’s court, where, no other heir
having appeared, she was joyfully received, and
entreated to marry. many suitors came to woo
the fair princess, but most of them refrained from pressing their
suit when they heard what conditions were imposed upon all who
would obtain her hand; for atalanta disapproved of marriage,
and, anxious to keep her freedom, decreed that she should marry
only on condition that her suitor would beat her in a foot race.
[pg ]
if he were beaten, however, he must pay for his defeat by forfeiting
his life.
the golden
apples.
in spite of these barbarous terms, a few youths had tried to
outrun her; but they failed, and their lifeless heads were exposed
on the racing ground to deter all other suitors. undaunted
by these ghastly trophies, hippomenes, or
milanion, once came to atalanta and expressed a desire to race
with her. this youth had previously obtained venus’ protection,
and concealed under his garment her gift of three golden apples.
atalanta prepared for her race as usual, and, as usual, passed her
rival; but just as she did so, one of the golden apples rolled at
her feet. for a moment she paused, then stooped and picked it
up ere she resumed the race. her adversary had passed her and
won some advance; but she soon overtook him, when a second
golden apple caused a second delay. she was about to reach
the goal first, as usual, when a third golden treasure tempted her
to pause, and enabled hippomenes to win the race.
“hippomenes turns her astray
by the golden illusions he flings on her way.”
moore.
atalanta could now no longer refuse to marry, and her nuptials
were soon celebrated. in his happiness at having won such
a peerless bride, hippomenes forgot to pay the promised thanks
to venus, for which offense he and his wife were severely punished
by being transformed into a pair of lions, and doomed to
drag cybele’s car (p. ).
castor and
pollux.
the twin brothers castor and pollux, the dioscuri, or gemini,
who had greatly distinguished themselves by their
daring in the calydonian hunt, were made the
deities of boxing, wrestling, and all equestrian exercises.
“leda’s sons i’ll sound,
illustrious twins, that are
for wrestling this, and for the race renown’d.”
horace.
[pg ]
one of these twins, castor, was a mortal, and in a combat
with the sons of aphareus was slain. pollux, who was immortal,
then implored jupiter to allow him to die also, that he might not
be parted from his brother,—a proof of brotherly affection which
so touched the father of the gods, that he permitted castor
to return to life on condition that pollux would spend half his
time in hades.
later on, satisfied that even this sacrifice was none too great for
their fraternal love, he translated them both to the skies, where
they form a bright constellation, one of the signs of the zodiac.
castor and pollux are generally represented as handsome youths,
mounted on snowy chargers.
“so like they were, no mortal
might one from other know:
white as snow their armor was:
their steeds were white as snow.”
macaulay.
their appearance under certain circumstances foretold success
in war, and the romans believed that they fought at the head
of their legions at the celebrated battle of lake regillus. their
name was also given to meteors, sometimes seen at sea, which attach
themselves like balls of fire to the masts of ships,—a sure
sign, according to the sailors, of fine weather and an auspicious
journey.
“safe comes the ship to haven,
through billows and through gales,
if once the great twin brethren
sit shining on the sails.”
macaulay.
festivals celebrated in honor of these twin brethren, and
called the dioscuria, were held in many places, but specially in
sparta, their birthplace, where they had world-renowned wrestling
matches.
[pg ]
laius and jocasta, king and queen of thebes, in bœotia, were
greatly delighted at the birth of a little son. in their joy they sent
for the priests of apollo, and bade them foretell the glorious deeds
their heir would perform; but all their joy was turned to grief
when told that the child was destined to kill his father, marry his
mother, and bring great misfortunes upon his native city.
“laius once,
not from apollo, but his priests, receiv’d
an oracle, which said, it was decreed
he should be slain by his own son.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
to prevent the fulfillment of this dreadful prophecy, laius
bade a servant carry the new-born child out of the city, and end
its feeble little life. the king’s mandate was obeyed only in
part; for the servant, instead of killing the child, hung it up by its
ankles to a tree in a remote place, and left it there to perish from
hunger and exposure if it were spared by the wild beasts.
when he returned, none questioned how he had performed the
appointed task, but all sighed with relief to think that the prophecy
could never be accomplished. the child, however, was not
dead, as all supposed. a shepherd in quest of a stray lamb had
heard his cries, delivered him from his painful position, and carried
him to polybus, king of corinth, who, lacking an heir of
his own, gladly adopted the little stranger. the queen of
corinth and her handmaidens hastened with tender concern to
[pg ]
bathe the swollen ankles, and called the babe œdipus (swollen-footed).
years passed by. the young prince grew up in total ignorance
of the unfortunate circumstances under which he had made his
first appearance at court, until one day at a banquet one of his
companions, heated by drink, began to quarrel with him, and
taunted him about his origin, declaring that those whom he had
been accustomed to call parents were in no way related to him.
“a drunken rev’ler at a feast proclaim’d
that i was only the supposed son
of corinth’s king.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
œdipus
consults the
oracle.
these words, coupled with a few meaning glances hastily exchanged
by the guests, excited œdipus’ suspicions, and made
him question the queen, who, afraid lest he might
do himself an injury in the first moment of his despair
if the truth were revealed to him, had recourse
to prevarication, and quieted him by the assurance that he was
her beloved son.
something in her manner, however, left a lingering doubt in
œdipus’ mind, and made him resolve to consult the oracle of
delphi, whose words he knew would reveal the exact truth. he
therefore went to this shrine; but, as usual, the oracle answered
somewhat ambiguously, and merely warned him that fate had decreed
he should kill his father, marry his mother, and cause great
woes to his native city.
“i felt
a secret anguish, and unknown to them
sought out the pythian oracle; in vain;
touching my parents, nothing could i learn;
but dreadful were the mis’ries it denounc’d
against me; ’twas my fate, apollo said,
to wed my mother, to produce a race
accursed and abhorr’d; and last, to slay
my father.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
œdipus leaves
corinth.
[pg ]
what! kill polybus, who had ever been such an indulgent
father, and marry the queen, whom he revered as his mother!
never! rather than perpetrate these awful crimes,
and bring destruction upon the people of corinth,
whom he loved, he would wander away over the face of the
earth, and never see city or parents again.
“lest i should e’er fulfill the dire prediction,
instant i fled from corinth, by the stars
guiding my hapless journey.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
but his heart was filled with intense bitterness, and as he journeyed
he did not cease to curse the fate which drove him away
from home. after some time, he came to three crossroads; and
while he stood there, deliberating which direction to take, a
chariot, wherein an aged man was seated, came rapidly toward
him.
death of
laius.
the herald who preceded it haughtily called to the youth to
stand aside and make way for his master; but œdipus, who, as
polybus’ heir, was accustomed to be treated with
deference, resented the commanding tone, and refused
to obey. incensed at what seemed unparalleled impudence,
the herald struck the youth, who, retaliating, stretched
his assailant lifeless at his feet.
this affray attracted the attention of the master and other servants.
they immediately attacked the murderer, who slew them
all, thus unconsciously accomplishing the first part of the prophecy;
for the aged man was laius, his father, journeying incognito
from thebes to delphi, where he wished to consult the
oracle.
œdipus then leisurely pursued his way until he came to the
gates of thebes, where he found the whole city in an uproar,
“because the king had been found lifeless by the roadside, with
all his attendants slain beside him, presumably the work of a band
of highway robbers or assassins.”
[pg ]
“he fell
by strangers, murdered, for so fame reports,
by robbers in the place where three ways meet.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
of course, œdipus did not connect the murder of such a great
personage as the king of thebes by an unknown band of robbers,
with the death he had dealt to an arrogant old man, and
he therefore composedly inquired what the second calamity alluded
to might be.
the
sphinx.
with lowered voices, as if afraid of being overheard, the thebans
described the woman’s head, bird’s wings and claws, and
lion’s body, which were the outward presentment
of a terrible monster called the sphinx, which had
taken up its station without the city gates beside the highway,
and would allow none to pass in or out without propounding
a difficult riddle. then, if any hesitated to give the required
answer, or failed to give it correctly, they were mercilessly devoured
by the terrible sphinx, which no one dared attack or
could drive away.
while listening to these tidings, œdipus saw a herald pass
along the street, proclaiming that the throne and the queen’s
hand would be the reward of any man who dared encounter the
sphinx, and was fortunate enough to free the country of its terrible
presence.
the
riddle.
as œdipus attached no special value to the life made desolate
by the oracle’s predictions, he resolved to slay the dreaded
monster, and, with that purpose in view, advanced
slowly, sword in hand, along the road where lurked
the sphinx. he soon found the monster, which from afar propounded
the following enigma, warning him, at the same time, that
he forfeited his life if he failed to give the right answer:—
“tell me, what animal is that
which has four feet at morning bright,
has two at noon, and three at night?”
prior.
[pg ]
œdipus and the sphinx.—ingres. (louvre, paris.)
[pg ]
œdipus was not devoid of intelligence, by any manner of
means, and soon concluded that the animal could only be man,
who in infancy, when too weak to stand, creeps along on hands
and knees, in manhood walks erect, and in old age supports his
tottering steps with a staff.
œdipus marries
his mother.
this reply, evidently as correct as unexpected, was received
by the sphinx with a hoarse cry of disappointment and rage as it
turned to fly; but ere it could effect its purpose,
it was stayed by œdipus, who drove it at his
sword’s point over the edge of a neighboring precipice, where
it was killed. on his return to the city, œdipus was received
with cries of joy, placed on a chariot, crowned king of thebes,
and married to his own mother, jocasta, unwittingly fulfilling the
second fearful clause of the prophecy.
the
plague.
a number of happy and moderately uneventful years now
passed by, and œdipus became the father of two manly sons,
eteocles and polynices, and two beautiful daughters, ismene and
antigone; but prosperity was not doomed to favor him long.
just when he fancied himself most happy, and looked forward
to a peaceful old age, a terrible scourge visited thebes, causing
the death of many faithful subjects, and filling the
hearts of all with great terror. the people now
turned to him, beseeching him to aid them, as he had done once
before when threatened by the sphinx; and œdipus sent messengers
to consult the delphic oracle, who declared the plague
would cease only when the former king’s murderers had been
found and punished.
“the plague, he said, should cease,
when those who murder’d laius were discover’d,
and paid the forfeit of their crime by death,
or banishment.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
messengers were sent in every direction to collect all possible
information about the murder committed so long ago, and after
a short time they brought unmistakable proofs which convicted
[pg ]
œdipus of the crime. at the same time the guilty servant confessed
that he had not killed the child, but had exposed it on a
mountain, whence it was carried to corinth’s king.
death of
jocasta.
the chain of evidence was complete, and now œdipus discovered
that he had involuntarily been guilty of the three crimes to
avoid which he had fled from corinth. the rumor
of these dreadful discoveries soon reached jocasta,
who, in her despair at finding herself an accomplice, committed
suicide.
œdipus, apprised of her intention, rushed into her apartment
too late to prevent its being carried out, and found her lifeless.
this sight was more than the poor monarch could bear, and in
his despair he blinded himself with one of her ornaments.
“he pluck’d from off the robe she wore
a golden buckle that adorn’d her side,
and buried in his eyes the sharpen’d point,
crying, he ne’er again would look on her,
never would see his crimes or mis’ries more,
or those whom guiltless he could ne’er behold,
or those to whom he now must sue for aid.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
death of
œdipus.
penniless, blind, and on foot, he then left the scene of his
awful crimes, accompanied by his daughter antigone, the only
one who loved him still, and who was ready to
guide his uncertain footsteps wherever he wished
to go. after many days of weary wandering, father and daughter
reached colonus, where grew a mighty forest sacred to the
avenging deities, the furies, or eumenides.
here œdipus expressed his desire to remain, and, after bidding
his faithful daughter an affectionate farewell, he groped his way
into the dark forest alone. the wind rose, the lightning flashed,
the thunder pealed; but although, as soon as the storm was over,
a search was made for œdipus, no trace of him was ever found,
and the ancients fancied that the furies had dragged him down
to hades to receive the punishment of all his crimes.
eteocles and
polynices.
[pg ]
antigone, no longer needed by her unhappy father, slowly
wended her way back to thebes, where she found that the plague
had ceased, but that her brothers had quarreled
about the succession to the throne. a compromise
was finally decided upon, whereby it was decreed that eteocles,
the elder son, should reign one year, and at the end of that
period resign the throne to polynices for an equal space of time,
both brothers thus exercising the royal authority in turn. this
arrangement seemed satisfactory to eteocles; but when, at the
end of the first year, polynices returned from his travels in foreign
lands to claim the scepter, eteocles refused to relinquish
it, and, making use of his power, drove the claimant away.
“thou seest me banish’d from my native land,
unjustly banish’d, for no other crime
but that i strove to keep the throne of thebes,
by birthright mine, from him who drove me thence,
the young eteocles: not his the claim
by justice, nor to me his fame in arms
superior; but by soft, persuasive arts
he won the rebel city to his love.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
the seven chiefs
before thebes.
polynices’ nature was not one to endure such a slight patiently;
and he hastened off to argos, where he persuaded adrastus, the
king, to give him his daughter in marriage, and aid
him to recover his inheritance. true to his promise,
adrastus soon equipped a large army, which was led by
seven determined and renowned chiefs, ready to risk all in the
attempt, and either win or perish.
“seven valiant leaders march
to thebes, resolved to conquer or to die.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
their bravery was of no avail, however, for thebes was well
fortified and defended; and after a seven-years’ siege they found
themselves no nearer their goal than at the beginning of the war.
weary of the monotony of this quarrel, the conflicting armies
[pg ]
finally decreed that the difference should be settled by a duel
between the inimical brothers, who no sooner found themselves
face to face, than they rushed upon each other with such animosity
that both fell.
by order of jocasta’s father, creon, the corpse of eteocles received
all the honors of a greek burial, while that of polynices
was left on the plain, a prey to the birds and wild beasts.
“polynices’ wretched carcass lies
unburied, unlamented, left expos’d
a feast for hungry vultures on the plain.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
antigone’s
devotion.
then a proclamation was issued, that, if any dared bury the
body of the fallen prince, he would incur the penalty of being
buried alive. heedless of this injunction and
ismene’s prayers to refrain from endangering her
own life, antigone dug a grave for her brother’s remains, and,
unaided, fulfilled the various customary funeral rites. her task
was almost completed, when the guards discovered her, and
dragged her into the presence of creon, who, although she was a
relative and the promised wife of his son hæmon, condemned
her to death.
“let her be carried instant to the cave,
and leave her there alone, to live, or die;
her blood rests not on us: but she no longer
shall breathe on earth.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
antigone and
hæmon.
hæmon pleaded passionately for her life; but, when he saw
his prayers were vain, he ran to the place where antigone was
confined, sprang into her narrow cell, wound his
arms closely around her, and refused to leave her.
there they were walled in; antigone’s sufferings were cut mercifully
short by asphyxiation; and, when hæmon saw she was
no more, he, in utter despair, thrust his dagger into his side, and
perished too.
[pg ]
antigone and ismene.—teschendorf.
[pg ]
“on himself bent all his wrath,
full in his side the weapon fix’d, but still,
whilst life remain’d, on the soft bosom hung
of the dear maid, and his last spirit breath’d
o’er her pale cheek, discolor’d with his blood.
thus lay the wretched pair in death united,
and celebrate their nuptials in the tomb.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
ismene, the last of œdipus’ unfortunate race, died of grief,
and thus the prophecy was fully accomplished. the theban
war was not, however, entirely ended, for, when both brothers fell,
the two armies flew to attack each other; and such was their
courage, that many fell, and only one of the seven chiefs returned
to argos. there he patiently waited until the children of these
brave captains were old enough to bear arms, and then proposed
to them to attack thebes and avenge their fathers’ death.
the epigoni (or those who come after), as these youths are
collectively designated, received this proposal with rapture; and
thebes, again besieged, fell into their hands, and was duly sacked,
burned, and destroyed, as the delphic oracle had foretold so
many years before.
[pg ]
bellerophon, a brave young prince, the grandson of sisyphus,
king of corinth, had the great misfortune to kill his own brother
while hunting in the forest. his grief was, of course, intense;
and the horror he felt for the place where the catastrophe had
occurred, added to his fear lest he should incur judicial punishment
for his involuntary crime, made him flee to the court of
argos, where he took refuge with prœtus, the king, who was
also his kinsman.
anteia’s
treachery.
he had not sojourned there very long, before anteia, the
queen, fell in love with him; and although her husband, prœtus,
treated her with the utmost kindness, she made
up her mind to desert him, and tried to induce
bellerophon to elope with her. too honest to betray a man who
had treated him as a friend, the young prince refused to listen to
the queen’s proposals. his refusal was to cost him dear, however;
for, when anteia saw that the youth would never yield to
her wishes, she became very angry indeed, sought her husband,
and accused the young stranger of crimes he had never even
dreamed of committing.
prœtus, indignant at what he deemed deep treachery on the
part of an honored guest, yet reluctant to punish him with his
own hand as he deserved, sent bellerophon to iobates, king of
lycia, with a sealed message bidding him put the bearer to
death.
quite unconscious of the purport of this letter, bellerophon
traveled gayly onward, and presented himself before iobates, who
[pg ]
received him very hospitably, and, without inquiring his name or
errand, entertained him royally for many days. after some time,
bellerophon suddenly remembered the sealed message intrusted
to his care, and hastened to deliver it to iobates, with many
apologies for his forgetfulness.
the
chimæra.
with blanched cheeks and every outward sign of horror, the
king read the missive, and then fell into a deep reverie. he did
not like to take a stranger’s life, and still could
not refuse to comply with prœtus’ urgent request:
so, after much thought, he decided to send bellerophon to attack
the chimæra, a terrible monster with a lion’s head, a goat’s body,
and a dragon’s tail.
“dire chimæra’s conquest was enjoin’d;
a mingled monster, of no mortal kind;
behind, a dragon’s fiery tail was spread;
a goat’s rough body bore a lion’s head;
her pitchy nostrils flaky flames expire;
her gaping throat emits infernal fire.”
homer (pope’s tr.).
his principal motive in choosing this difficult task was, that,
although many brave men had set forth to slay the monster, none
had ever returned, for one and all had perished in the attempt.
although very courageous, bellerophon’s heart beat fast with
fear when told what great deed he must accomplish; and he left
iobates’ palace very sorrowfully, for he dearly loved the king’s
fair daughter, philonoe, and was afraid he would never see her
again.
minerva’s
advice.
while thus inwardly bewailing the ill luck which had so persistently
dogged his footsteps, bellerophon suddenly saw minerva
appear before him in all her splendor, and
heard her inquire in gentle tones the cause of his
too evident dejection. he had no sooner apprised her of the
difficult task appointed him, than she promised him her aid, and
before she vanished gave him a beautiful golden bridle, which
she bade him use to control pegasus.
[pg ]
chimæra. (egyptian museum, florence.)
[pg ]
bridle in hand, bellerophon stood pondering her words, and
gradually remembered that pegasus was a wonderful winged
steed, born from the blood which fell into the foam of the sea
from medusa’s severed head (p. ). this horse, as white as snow,
and gifted with immortal life as well as incredible speed, was the
favorite mount of apollo and the muses, who delighted in taking
aërial flights on his broad back; and bellerophon knew that from
time to time he came down to earth to drink of the cool waters
of the hippocrene (a fountain which had bubbled forth where
his hoofs first touched the earth), or to visit the equally limpid
spring of pirene, near corinth.
pegasus
bridled.
bellerophon now proceeded to the latter fountain, where, after
lingering many days in the vain hope of catching even a glimpse
of the winged steed, he finally beheld him sailing
downward in wide curves, like a bird of prey.
from his place of concealment in a neighboring thicket, bellerophon
watched his opportunity, and, while the winged steed was
grazing, he boldly vaulted upon his back.
pegasus, who had never before been ridden by a mortal, reared
and pranced, and flew up to dizzy heights; but all his efforts
failed to unseat the brave rider, who, biding his time, finally
thrust minerva’s golden bit between his teeth, and immediately
he became gentle and tractable. mounted upon this incomparable
steed, bellerophon now went in search of the winged
monster chimæra, who had given birth to the nemean lion and
to the riddle-loving sphinx.
chimæra
slain.
from an unclouded sky bellerophon and pegasus swooped
suddenly and unexpectedly down upon the terrible chimæra,
whose fiery breath and great strength were of no
avail; for after a protracted struggle bellerophon
and pegasus were victorious, and the monster lay lifeless upon
the blood-soaked ground.
this mighty deed of valor accomplished, bellerophon returned
to iobates, to report the success of his undertaking; and, although
the king was heartily glad to know the chimæra was no more,
[pg ]
he was very sorry to see bellerophon safe and sound, and tried
to devise some other plan to get rid of him.
he therefore sent him to fight the amazons; but the hero,
aided by the gods, defeated these warlike women also, and returned
to lycia, where, after escaping from an ambush posted
by the king for his destruction, he again appeared victorious at
court.
these repeated and narrow escapes from certain death convinced
iobates that the youth was under the special protection
of the gods; and this induced the king not only to forego further
attempts to slay him, but also to bestow upon the young hero his
daughter’s hand in marriage.
bellerophon, having now attained his dearest wishes, might
have settled down in peace; but his head had been utterly turned
by the many lofty flights he had taken upon pegasus’
back, and, encouraged by the fulsome flattery
of his courtiers, he finally fancied himself the equal of the
immortal gods, and wished to join them in their celestial abode.
bellerophon’s
fall.
summoning his faithful pegasus once more, he rose higher
and higher, and would probably have reached olympus’ heights,
had not jupiter sent a gadfly, which stung poor pegasus so cruelly,
that he shied viciously, and flung his too confident rider far down
to the earth below.
“bold bellerophon (so jove decreed
in wrath) fell headlong from the fields of air.”
wordsworth.
this fall, which would doubtless have killed any one but a
mythological hero, merely deprived bellerophon of his eyesight;
and ever after he groped his way disconsolately, thinking of the
happy days when he rode along the paths of air, and gazed upon
the beautiful earth at his feet.
bellerophon, mounted upon pegasus, winging his flight through
the air or fighting the chimæra, is a favorite subject in sculpture
and painting, which has frequently been treated by ancient artists,
[pg ]
a few of whose most noted works are still extant in various
museums.
this story, like many others, is merely a sun myth, in which
bellerophon, the orb of day, rides across the sky on pegasus,
the fleecy white clouds, and slays chimæra, the dread monster
of darkness, which he alone can overcome. driven from home
early in life, bellerophon wanders throughout the world like his
brilliant prototype, and, like it, ends his career in total darkness.
[pg ]
naiades and
oreades.
according to the ancients’ belief, every mountain, valley,
plain, lake, river, grove, and sea was provided with some lesser
deity, whose special duty was assigned by the powerful
gods of olympus. these were, for instance,
the naiades, beautiful water nymphs, who dwelt in the limpid
depths of the fountains, and were considered local patrons of
poetry and song.
the oreades, or mountain nymphs, were supposed to linger in
the mountain solitudes, and guide weary travelers safely through
their rocky mazes.
“mark how the climbing oreads
beckon thee to their arcades!”
emerson.
napææ and
dryades.
as for the napææ, they preferred to linger in the valleys, which
were kept green and fruitful by their watchful
care, in which task they were ably seconded by
the dryades, the nymphs of vegetation.
the very trees in the forest and along the roadside were supposed
to be each under the protection of a special divinity called
hamadryad, said to live and die with the tree intrusted to her
care.
“when the fate of death is drawing near,
first wither on the earth the beauteous trees,
the bark around them wastes, the branches fall,
and the nymph’s soul, at the same moment, leaves
the sun’s fair light.”
homer.
story of
dryope.
[pg ]
a sweet and touching story was told by the ancients of a
mortal who was changed into a hamadryad. this young girl,
whose name was dryope, was a beautiful young
princess, the daughter of baucis, so bright and
clever, that all who knew her loved her dearly. of course, as
soon as she was old enough to think of marriage, a host of suitors
asked her hand, each eager to win for his bride one so beautiful
and gifted.
“no nymph of all œchalia could compare,
for beauteous form, with dryope the fair.”
ovid (pope’s tr.).
fully aware of the importance of making a wise choice, dryope
took her time, and finally decided to marry andræmon, a worthy
young prince, who possessed every charm calculated to win a
fair girl’s heart. the young people were duly married, and daily
rejoiced in their happiness, which seemed almost too great for
earth, when they became the parents of a charming little son.
every day dryope carried the child along the banks of a
little lake close by the palace, where bloomed a profusion of gay-colored
flowers.
“a lake there was, with shelving banks around,
whose verdant summit fragrant myrtles crown’d.
those shades, unknowing of the fates, she sought,
and to the naiads flowery garlands brought;
her smiling babe (a pleasing charge) she press’d
between her arms.”
ovid (pope’s tr.).
one day, while wandering there as usual, accompanied by her
sister, she saw a lotus blossom, and pointed it out to her little
son. he no sooner saw the brilliant flower, than he stretched
out his little hands. to please him, the fond mother plucked it
and gave it to him.
she had scarcely done so, when she noticed drops of blood
trickling from the broken stem; and while she stood there, speechless
[pg ]
with wonder, a voice was heard accusing her of having slain
lotis, a nymph, who, to escape the pursuit of priapus, god of
the shade, had assumed the guise of a flower.
“lotis the nymph (if rural tales be true),
as from priapus’ lawless love she flew,
forsook her form; and fixing here became
a flowery plant, which still preserves her name.”
ovid (pope’s tr.).
recovering from her first speechless terror, dryope turned to
flee, with a pitiful cry of compassion on her pale lips, but, to her
astonishment, she could not leave the spot: her feet seemed rooted
to the ground. she cast a rapid glance downward to ascertain
what could so impede her progress, and noticed the rough bark
of a tree growing with fearful rapidity all around her.
higher and higher it rose, from her knees to her waist, and
still it crept upward, in spite of her frantic attempts to tear it
away from her shapely limbs. in despair she raised her trembling
hands and arms to heaven to implore aid; but, ere the words
were spoken, her arms were transformed into twisted branches,
and her hands were filled with leaves.
nothing human now remained of poor dryope except her sweet,
tear-stained face; but this too would soon vanish under the all-involving
bark. she therefore took hasty leave of her father,
sister, husband, and son, who, attracted by her first cry, had rushed
to give her all the assistance in their power. the last words
were quickly spoken, but none too soon, for the bark closed over
the soft lips and hid the lovely features from view.
“she ceased at once to speak, and ceased to be,
and all the nymph was lost within the tree:
yet latent life through her new branches reign’d,
and long the plant a human heat retain’d.”
ovid (pope’s tr.).
one of dryope’s last requests had been that her child might
often play beneath her shady branches; and when the passing
[pg ]
winds rustled through her leaves, the ancients said it was
“dryope’s lone lulling of her child.”
satyrs and pan.
the male divinities of the woods, which were also very numerous,
were mostly satyrs,—curious beings with a man’s body
and a goat’s legs, hair, and horns. they were
all passionately fond of music and revelry, and
were wont to indulge in dancing at all times and in all places.
the most famous among all the satyrs was silenus, bacchus’
tutor; and pan, or consentes, god of the shepherds, and the personification
of nature. the latter was the reputed son of mercury
and a charming young nymph named penelope; and we are
told, that, when his mother first beheld him, she was aghast, for
he was the most homely as well as the most extraordinary little
creature she had ever seen. his body was all covered with
goat’s hair, and his feet and ears were also those of a goat.
amused at the sight of this grotesque little divinity, mercury
carried him off to olympus, where all the gods turned him into
ridicule. pan was widely worshiped in olden times, however;
and the ancients not only decked his altars with flowers, but sang
his praises, and celebrated festivals in his honor.
“he is great and he is just,
he is ever good, and must
be honored. daffodillies,
roses, pinks, and loved lilies,
let us fling, while we sing,
ever holy! ever holy!
ever honored! ever young!
the great pan is ever sung!”
beaumont and fletcher.
story
of syrinx.
pan was equally devoted to music, the dance, and pretty nymphs.
he saw one of the nymphs, syrinx, whom he immediately
loved; but unfortunately for him, she, frightened
at his appearance, fled. exasperated by her persistent
avoidance of him, pan once pursued and was about to
overtake her, when she paused, and implored gæa to protect her.
[pg ]
the prayer was scarcely ended, when she found herself changed
into a clump of reeds, which the panting lover embraced, thinking
he had caught the maiden, who had stood in that very spot
a few moments before.
his deception and disappointment were so severe, that they
wrung from him a prolonged sigh, which, passing through the
rustling reeds, produced plaintive tones. pan, seeing syrinx had
gone forever, took seven pieces of the reed, of unequal lengths,
bound them together, and fashioned from them a musical instrument,
which was called by the name of the fair nymph.
“fair, trembling syrinx fled
arcadian pan, with such a fearful dread.
poor nymph!—poor pan!—how he did weep to find
naught but a lovely sighing of the wind
along the reedy stream; a half-heard strain
full of sweet desolation—balmy pain.”
keats.
pan was supposed to delight in slyly overtaking belated travelers
and inspiring them with sudden and unfounded fears,—from
him called “panic.” he is generally represented with a syrinx and
shepherd’s crook, and a pine garland around his misshapen head.
silvan deities.
the romans also worshiped three other divinities of nature
entirely unknown to the greeks; i.e., silvanus, faunus, and
fauna, the latter’s wife, who had charge over the
woods and plants. priapus, god of the shade,
was also a rural deity, but his worship was only known along
the shores of the hellespont.
flora and
zephyrus.
the fairest among all the lesser gods was doubtless flora,
goddess of flowers, who married zephyrus, the gentle god of the
south wind, and wandered happily with him from
place to place, scattering her favors with lavish
generosity. she was principally worshiped by young girls, and
the only offerings ever seen on her altars were fruits and garlands
of beautiful flowers. her festivals, generally celebrated in the
month of may, were called the floralia.
[pg ]
“a favorable opportunity.”—thumann. (vertumnus and pomona.)
[pg ]
“crowds of nymphs,
soft voiced, and young, and gay,
in woven baskets bringing ears of corn,
roses and pinks and violets to adorn
the shrine of flora in her early may.”
keats.
vertumnus and
pomona.
vertumnus and pomona were the special divinities of the garden
and orchard. they are represented with pruning knives and
shears, gardening implements, and fruits and flowers.
pomona was very coy indeed, and had no
desire to marry. vertumnus, enamored of her charms, did his
best to make her change her mind, but she would not even listen
to his pleadings.
at last the lover had recourse to stratagem, disguised himself
as an aged crone, entered pomona’s garden, and inquired how
it happened that such a very charming young woman should
remain so long unmarried. then, having received a mocking answer,
he began to argue with her, and finally extracted an avowal,
that, among all the suitors, one alone was worthy of her love,
vertumnus. vertumnus seized the favorable opportunity, revealed
himself, and clasped her to his breast. pomona, perceiving
that she had hopelessly betrayed herself, no longer refused
to wed, but allowed him to share her labors, and help her turn
the luscious fruit to ripen in the autumn sunshine.
sea deities.
the lesser divinities of the sea were almost as numerous as
those of the land, and included the lovely oceanides
and nereides, together with their male companions
the tritons, who generally formed neptune’s regal train.
story of
glaucus.
one of the lesser sea gods, glaucus, was once a poor fisherman,
who earned his daily bread by selling the fish he caught in
his nets. on one occasion he made an extra fine
haul, and threw his net full of fish down upon a
certain kind of grass, which the flapping fish immediately nibbled,
and, as if endowed with extraordinary powers, bounded back
into the waves and swam away.
[pg ]
greatly surprised at this occurrence, glaucus began chewing
a few blades of this peculiar grass, and immediately felt an insane
desire to plunge into the sea,—a desire which soon became so
intense, that he could no longer resist it, but dived down into
the water. the mere contact with the salt waves sufficed to
change his nature; and swimming about comfortably in the element,
where he now found himself perfectly at home, he began
to explore the depths of the sea.
“‘i plung’d for life or death. to interknit
one’s senses with so dense a breathing stuff
might seem a work of pain; so not enough
can i admire how crystal-smooth it felt,
and buoyant round my limbs. at first i dwelt
whole days and days in sheer astonishment;
forgetful utterly of self-intent;
moving but with the mighty ebb and flow.
then, like a new fledg’d bird that first doth show
his spreaded feathers to the morrow chill,
i try’d in fear the pinions of my will.
’twas freedom! and at once i visited
the ceaseless wonders of this ocean-bed.’”
keats.
glaucus was worshiped most particularly by the fishermen and
boatmen, whose vessels he was supposed to guard from evil, and
whose nets were often filled to overflow through his intervention.
[pg ]
jupiter, father of the gods, once fell deeply in love with a
beautiful sea nymph named thetis, the daughter of nereus and
doris,—
“thetis of the silver feet, and child
of the gray ancient of the deep.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
jupiter and
thetis.
he was very anxious indeed to marry her, but, before taking
such an important step, deemed it prudent to consult the fates,
who alone could inform him whether this union
would be for his happiness or not. it was very
fortunate for him that he did so, for the three sisters told him
that thetis was destined to be the mother of a son who would
far outshine his father.
jupiter carefully pondered this reply, and concluded to renounce
the marriage rather than run any risk of being forced
to surrender his power to one greater than he. thetis’ hand he
then decreed should be given in marriage to peleus, king of
phthia, who had loved her faithfully, and had long sued in vain.
thetis, however, was not at all anxious to accept the hand of
a mere mortal after having enjoyed the attention of the gods (for
neptune also had wooed her), and demurred, until jupiter promised
his own and the gods’ attendance at the marriage feast.
the prospect of this signal honor reconciled the maiden, and
the wedding preparations were made in the coral caves of her
father, nereus, beneath the foam-crested waves.
[pg ]
thither, mindful of his promise, came jupiter, with all the
gods of olympus.
“then, with his queen, the father of the gods
came down from high olympus’ bright abodes;
came down, with all th’ attending deities.”
catullus.
the guests took their seats, and pledged the bride and groom
in brimming cups of wine,—bacchus’ wedding gift to thetis.
all was joy and merriment, when an uninvited guest suddenly
appeared in the banquet-hall. all present immediately recognized
eris, or discordia, goddess of discord, whose snaky locks,
sour looks, and violent temper had caused her to be omitted from
the wedding list,—
“the abominable, that uninvited came
into the fair peleian banquet-hall.”
tennyson.
the apple of
discord.
this omission angered her, and made her determine to have
her revenge by troubling the harmony which evidently reigned
among all the guests. for a moment she stood
beside the bountiful board, then threw upon it a
golden apple, and, exhaling over the assembly her poisoned breath,
she vanished. the general attention was, of course, turned upon
the golden fruit, whereon the inscription “to the fairest” was
clearly traced.
all the ladies were at first inclined to contend for the prize;
but little by little all the claimants withdrew except juno,
minerva, and venus, who hotly disputed for its possession. juno
declared that the queen of the gods, in her majesty and power,
surely had the best right; minerva, that the beauty of wisdom
and knowledge far surpassed external charms; and venus smiled,
and archly requested to be informed who might assert greater
claims than the goddess of beauty.
the dispute grew more and more bitter, and the irate goddesses
called upon the guests to award the prize to the most deserving;
[pg ]
but the guests, one and all, refused to act as umpires, for the
apple could be given to but one, and the two others would be sure
to vent their anger and disappointment upon the judge who passed
over their charms in favor of a third. the final decision was
therefore referred to paris, who, although performing the lowly
duties of a shepherd, was the son of priam and hecuba, king
and queen of troy.
when but a babe, paris had been exposed on a mountain to
perish, because an oracle had predicted that he would cause the
death of his family and the downfall of his native city. although
thus cruelly treated, he had not perished, but had been adopted
by a shepherd, who made him follow his own calling.
paris and
œnone.
when paris reached manhood, he was a very handsome and
attractive young man, and won the love of œnone, a beautiful
nymph to whom he was secretly united. their
happiness, however, was but fleeting, for the fates
had decreed that paris’ love for the fair œnone would soon die.
“the fate,
that rules the will of jove, had spun the days
of paris and œnone.”
quintus smyrnæus (elton’s tr.).
judgment of
paris.
instead of lingering by the fair nymph’s side, paris wandered
off to a lonely mountain top, where the three goddesses sought
him to judge their quarrel. minerva, in glittering
armor, first appeared before his dazzled eyes,
and proffered the bribe of extensive wisdom if he would but give
her the preference.
juno, queen of heaven, next appeared in royal robes and
insignia, and whispered that he should have great wealth and
unlimited power were he only to award the prize to her.
“she to paris made
proffer of royal power, ample rule
unquestion’d, overflowing revenue
wherewith to embellish state, ‘from many a vale
[pg ]
and river-sunder’d champaign clothed with corn,
or labor’d mine undrainable of ore.
honor,’ she said, ‘and homage, tax and toll,
from many an inland town and haven large,
mast-throng’d beneath her shadowing citadel
in glassy bays among her tallest towers.’”
tennyson.
but all minerva’s and juno’s charms and bribes were forgotten
when venus, in her magic cestus, appeared before the judge.
this artful simplicity was the result of much thought, for we
are told that
“venus oft with anxious care
adjusted twice a single hair.”
cowper.
then, trembling lest her efforts should prove vain, she gently
drew near the youth, and softly promised him a bride as fair as
herself, in return for the coveted golden apple.
won either by her superior attractions or by her alluring bribe,
paris no longer hesitated, but placed the prize in her extended
palm.
“ere yet her speech was finished, he consign’d
to her soft hand the fruit of burnished rind;
and foam-born venus grasp’d the graceful meed,
of war, of evil war, the quickening seed.”
coluthus (elton’s tr.).
this act of partiality, of course, called down upon him the wrath
and hatred of juno and minerva, who, biding their time, watched
for a suitable opportunity to avenge themselves; while venus,
triumphant, and anxious to redeem her promise, directed paris
to return to troy, make himself known to his parents,—who, the
goddess promised, would welcome him warmly,—and obtain
from them a fleet in which he might sail to greece.
paris. (vatican, rome.)
in obedience to these instructions, paris ruthlessly abandoned
the fair and faithful œnone, and, joining a band of youthful
shepherds, went to troy, under pretext of witnessing a solemn
[pg ]
festival. there he took part in the athletic games, distinguished
himself, and attracted the attention of his sister cassandra.
paris’ return
to troy.
this princess was noted for her beauty, and it is
said had even been wooed by apollo, who, hoping
to win her favor, bestowed upon her the gift of prophecy.
for some reason the god’s suit had not prospered; and, as he
could not take back the power conferred, he annulled it by making
her hearers refuse to credit her words.
cassandra immediately called her parents’ attention to the extraordinary
likeness paris bore to her other brothers; and then,
breaking out into a prophetic strain, she foretold that he would
bring destruction upon his native city. priam and hecuba,
scorning her prophecy, joyfully received their long-lost son, lovingly
compelled him to take up his abode in their palace, and
promised to atone for their past neglect by granting his every
wish.
paris sails for
greece.
still advised by venus, paris soon expressed a desire to sail
for greece, under the pretext of rescuing hesione, his father’s
sister, whom hercules had carried off, after besieging
troy. he was promptly provided with
several well-manned galleys, and soon after appeared at the court
of menelaus, king of sparta, whose young wife, helen, was the
most beautiful woman of her time, if we are to believe the testimony
of her contemporaries.
“full threescore girls, in sportive flight we stray’d,
like youths anointing, where along the glade
the baths of cool eurotas limpid play’d.
but none, of all, with helen might compare,
nor one seem’d faultless of the fairest fair.
as morn, with vermeil visage, looks from high,
when solemn night has vanish’d suddenly;
when winter melts, and frees the frozen hours,
and spring’s green bough is gemm’d with silvery flowers:
so bloom’d the virgin helen in our eyes,
with full voluptuous limbs, and towering size:
[pg ]
in shape, in height, in stately presence fair,
straight as a furrow gliding from the share;
a cypress of the gardens, spiring high,
a courser in the cars of thessaly.
so rose-complexion’d helen charm’d the sight;
our sparta’s grace, our glory, and delight.”
theocritus (elton’s tr.).
helen’s
suitors.
a daughter of jupiter and leda (whom jove had courted in
the guise of a snow-white swan), helen had many suitors who
ardently strove to win her favor. the noblest,
bravest, and best came to woo and hoped to win;
but all were left in suspense, as the maiden did not show any
preference, and refused to make known her choice.
tyndareus, helen’s stepfather, thinking the rejected suitors
might attempt to steal her away from any husband she selected,
proposed that all the candidates for her hand should take a
solemn oath, binding themselves to respect the marital rights of
the favored suitor, and help him regain possession of his wife
should any one venture to kidnap her.
“this was cause
to tyndarus her father of much doubt,
to give, or not to give her, and how best
to make good fortune his: at length this thought
occurr’d, that each to each the wooers give
their oath, and plight their hands, and on the flames
pour the libations, and with solemn vows
bind their firm faith that him, who should obtain
the virgin for his bride, they all would aid;
if any dar’d to seize and bear her off,
and drive by force her husband from her bed,
all would unite in arms, and lay his town,
greek or barbaric, level with the ground.”
euripides (potter’s tr.).
all agreed to this proposal, the oath was taken, and helen,
whose deliberations had come to an end, bestowed her hand
upon menelaus, king of sparta.
abduction of
helen.
[pg ]
on his arrival at sparta, in lacedæmonia, paris was received
with graceful hospitality by menelaus and helen. he had not
sojourned there many days, however, before the
king was called away from home, and departed,
confiding to his wife the care of entertaining his princely guest.
during his absence, paris, urged by venus, courted helen so
successfully, that she finally consented to elope with him, and
allowed herself to be borne away in triumph to troy.
“then from her husband’s stranger-sheltering home
he tempted helen o’er the ocean foam.”
coluthus (elton’s tr.).
preparations
for war.
menelaus, on his return from crete, discovered his guest’s
treachery, and swore never to rest satisfied until he had recovered
his truant wife, and punished her seducer. messengers
were sent in haste in every direction, to summon
helen’s former suitors to keep their oath, and join menelaus
at aulis with men and weapons. all came promptly at his call
except ulysses, king of ithaca, who, to console himself for
helen’s refusal of his suit, had married her cousin, penelope, and
had now no dearer wish than to linger by her side and admire
his infant son, telemachus.
ulysses feigns
madness.
in the presence of the messenger palamedes, ulysses feigned
insanity, hoping thereby to elude the tedious journey to troy;
but the messenger was not so easily duped, and
cleverly determined to ascertain the truth by stratagem.
one day, therefore, when the king was plowing the seashore
with an ox and horse harnessed together, and sowing this
strange field with salt, palamedes placed the babe telemachus
in the furrow, directly in front of the plow, and marked how
skillfully ulysses turned his ill-assorted team aside to avoid harming
his heir. this action sufficed to prove to palamedes that
the king had not lost all control of his senses, and enabled him
to force ulysses to obey menelaus’ summons.
abduction of helen.—deutsch.
agamemnon
made chief.
at aulis the assembled army with unanimous consent elected
[pg ]
agamemnon, menelaus’ brother, chief of the expedition, which
numbered, among many others, nestor, noted for his wise counsel;
ajax, gigantic in strength and courage; and diomedes,
the renowned warrior.
the troops were assembled, the vessels freighted; but before
they departed, the chiefs considered it expedient to consult an
oracle, to ascertain whether their expedition was destined to succeed.
in a somewhat veiled and ambiguous manner, they received
answer that troy could never be taken without the aid of
the son of peleus and thetis, achilles, of whom the fates had
predicted that he would surpass his father in greatness (p. ).
achilles’ early
life.
thetis loved this only child so dearly, that when he was but a
babe, she had carried him to the banks of the styx, whose
waters had the magic power of rendering all the
parts they touched invulnerable. premising that
her son would be a great warrior, and thus exposed to great
danger, she plunged him wholly into the tide with the exception
of one heel, by which she held him, and then returned home.
some time after, an oracle foretold that achilles would die beneath
the walls of troy from a wound in his heel, the only vulnerable
part of his body. with many tears thetis vowed that her
son should never leave her to encounter such a fate, and intrusted
the care of his education to the centaur chiron, who had taught
all the greatest heroes in turn.
from this instructor achilles learned the arts of war, wrestling,
poetry, music, and song,—all, in short, that an accomplished greek
warrior was expected to know,—and, when his studies were finished,
returned to his father’s court to gladden his fond mother’s
heart by his presence.
thetis’ joy was all turned to grief, however, when rumors of
the war imminent between greece and troy came to her ears.
she knew her son would soon be summoned, and, to prevent his
going, sent him off to the court of lycomedes, where, under
some pretext, he was prevailed upon to assume a disguise and
mingle with the king’s daughters and their handmaidens.
[pg ]
one messenger after another was dispatched to summon
achilles to join the fleet at aulis, but one after another returned
without having seen him, or being able to ascertain where he was
hiding. the greeks, however anxious to depart, dared not sail
without him. they were in despair, until ulysses, the wily, proposed
a plan, and offered to carry it out.
“ulysses, man of many arts,
son of laertes, reared in ithaca,
that rugged isle, and skilled in every form
of shrewd device and action wisely planned.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
ulysses discovers
achilles.
arrayed in peddler’s garb, with a pack upon his shoulders,
ulysses entered lycomedes’ palace, where he shrewdly suspected
achilles was concealed, and offered his wares for
sale. the maidens selected trinkets; but one of
them, closely veiled, seized a weapon concealed among the ornaments,
and brandished it with such skill, that ulysses saw through
the assumed disguise, explained his presence and purpose, and
by his eloquence persuaded the young achilles to accompany
him to aulis.
the greeks were now ready to embark; but no favorable
wind came to swell the sails, which day after day hung limp
and motionless against the tall masts of their vessels.
“the troops
collected and imbodied, here we sit
inactive, and from aulis wish to sail
in vain.”
euripides (potter’s tr.).
sacrifice of
iphigenia.
calchas, the soothsayer of the expedition, was again consulted,
to discover how they might best win the favor of the gods; and
the reply given purported that no favorable wind
would blow until iphigenia, daughter of agamemnon,
was offered up in sacrifice to appease the everlasting gods.
many other propitiatory methods were tried; but as they all
[pg ]
proved ineffective, agamemnon, urged by his companions, sent
for his daughter, feigning that he wished to celebrate her nuptials
with achilles before his departure.
“i wrote, i seal’d
a letter to my wife, that she should send
her daughter, to achilles as a bride
affianc’d.”
euripides (potter’s tr.).
iphigenia came to her father secretly delighted at being the
chosen bride of such a hero; but, instead of being led to the
hymeneal altar, she was dragged to the place of sacrifice, where
the priest, with uplifted knife, was about to end her sufferings,
when diana suddenly appeared, snatched her up in a cloud, and
left in her stead a deer, which was duly sacrificed, while iphigenia
was borne in safety to tauris, where she became a priestess
in one of the goddess’s temples.
arrival at
troy.
the gods were now propitious, and the wind slowly rose,
filled the sails of the waiting vessels, and wafted them swiftly and
steadily over the sea to the trojan shores, where
an army stood ready to prevent the greek troops
from disembarking. the invaders were eager to land to measure
their strength against the trojans; yet all hesitated to leave
the ships, for an oracle had foretold that the first warrior who attempted
to land would meet with instant death.
“‘the delphic oracle foretold
that the first greek who touched the trojan strand
should die.’”
wordsworth.
protesilaus and
laodamia.
protesilaus, a brave chief, seeing his comrades’ irresolution,
and animated by a spirit of self-sacrifice, sprang boldly ashore,
and perished, slain by the enemy, as soon as his
foot had touched the foreign soil. when the tidings
of his death reached his beloved wife, laodamia, whom he
had left in thessaly, they well-nigh broke her heart; and in her
[pg ]
despair she entreated the gods to let her die, or allow her to see
her lord once more, were it but for a moment. her appeal was
so touching, that the gods could not refuse to hear it, and bade
mercury conduct her husband’s shade back to earth, to tarry
with her for three hours’ time.
“‘such grace hath crowned thy prayer,
laodamia! that at jove’s command
thy husband walks the paths of upper air:
he comes to tarry with thee three hours’ space;
accept the gift, behold him face to face!’”
wordsworth.
with an inarticulate cry of joy, laodamia beheld the beloved
countenance of protesilaus once more, and from his own lips
heard the detailed account of his early death. the three hours
passed all too quickly in delicious intercourse; and when mercury
reappeared to lead him back to hades, the loving wife, unable
to endure a second parting, died of grief.
the same grave, it is said, was the resting place of this united
pair, and kind-hearted nymphs planted elm trees over their
remains. these trees grew “until they were high enough to
command a view of troy, and then withered away, while fresh
branches sprang from the roots.”
“upon the side
of hellespont (such faith was entertained)
a knot of spiry trees for ages grew
from out the tomb of him for whom she died;
and ever, when such stature they had gained
that ilium’s walls were subject to their view,
the trees’ tall summits withered at the sight;
a constant interchange of growth and blight!”
wordsworth.
hostilities had now begun, and the war between the conflicting
hosts was waged with equal courage and skill. during nine
long years of uninterrupted strife, the greeks’ efforts to enter
troy, or ilium, as it was also called, were vain, as were also the
[pg ]
trojans’ attempts to force the foe to leave their shores. this
memorable struggle is the theme of many poems. the oldest and
most renowned of all, the iliad, begins with the story of the tenth
and last year’s events.
chryseis and
briseis.
among a number of captives taken in a skirmish by the hellenic
troops, were two beautiful maidens, chryseis, daughter of
chryses, priest of apollo, and briseis. the prisoners
were, as usual, allotted to various chiefs, and
agamemnon received the priest’s daughter as reward for his
bravery, while achilles triumphantly led to his tent the equally
fair briseis.
when chryses heard that his child had fallen into the hands
of the enemy, he hastened to agamemnon’s tent to offer a rich
ransom for her recovery; but the aged father’s entreaties were all
unheeded, and he was dismissed with many heartless taunts.
exasperated by this cruel treatment, he raised his hands to
heaven, and implored apollo to avenge the insults he had received
by sending down upon the greeks all manner of evil.
this prayer was no sooner heard than answered, by the sun god’s
sending a terrible plague to decimate the enemy’s troops.
“the aged man indignantly withdrew;
and phœbus—for the priest was dear to him—
granted his prayer, and sent among the greeks
a deadly shaft. the people of the camp
were perishing in heaps.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
the greeks, in terror, now consulted an oracle to know why
this calamity had come upon them, and how they might check
the progress of the deadly disease which was so rapidly reducing
their forces. they were told that the plague would never cease
until agamemnon surrendered his captive, and thus disarmed
apollo’s wrath, which had been kindled by his rude refusal to
comply with the aged priest’s request.
all the greek chiefs, assembled in council, decided to send
achilles to agamemnon to apprise him of their wish that he
[pg ]
should set chryseis free,—a wish which he immediately consented
to grant, if briseis were given him in exchange.
the plague was raging throughout the camp; the cries of the
sufferers rent the air; many had already succumbed to the
scourge, and all were threatened with an inglorious death.
achilles, mindful of all this, and anxious to save his beloved
companions, consented to comply with this unreasonable request;
but at the same time he swore, that, if agamemnon really took
his captive away, he would not strike another blow.
chryseis was immediately consigned to the care of a herald,
who led her back to her aged father’s arms. ready to forgive
all, now that his child was restored to him, chryses implored
apollo to stay his hand, and the plague instantly ceased.
as for agamemnon, he sent his slaves to achilles’ tent to lead
away briseis; and the hero, true to his promise, laid aside his
armor, determined to fight no more.
“the great achilles, swift of foot, remained
within his ships, indignant for the sake
of the fair-haired briseis.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
achilles’
wrath.
thetis, hearing of the wanton insult offered her son, left her
coral caves, ascended to olympus, cast herself at jupiter’s feet,
and with many tears tremulously prayed he would
avenge achilles and make the greeks fail in all
their attempts as long as her son’s wrath remained unappeased.
jupiter, touched by her beauty and distress, frowned until the
very firmament shook, and swore to make the greeks rue the
day they left their native shores,
“to give achilles honor and to cause
myriads of greeks to perish by their fleet.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
agamemnon
misled.
in consequence of a treacherous dream purposely sent by
jupiter to delude him, agamemnon again assembled his troops,
and proposed a new onslaught upon the trojan forces. but
[pg ]
when the army was drawn up in battle array, hector, the eldest
son of priam, and therefore leader of his army, stepping forward,
proposed that the prolonged quarrel should be
definitely settled by a single combat between paris
and menelaus.
“hector then stood forth and said:—
‘hearken, ye trojans and ye nobly-armed
achaians, to what paris says by me.
he bids the trojans and the greeks lay down
their shining arms upon the teeming earth,
and he and menelaus, loved of mars,
will strive in single combat, on the ground
between the hosts, for helen and her wealth;
and he who shall o’ercome, and prove himself
the better warrior, to his home shall bear
the treasure and the woman, while the rest
shall frame a solemn covenant of peace.’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
menelaus and
paris fight.
this proposal having been received favorably, menelaus and
paris soon engaged in a duel, which was witnessed by both
armies, by helen and priam from the trojan
walls, and by the everlasting gods from the wooded
heights of mount ida; but in the very midst of the fight, venus,
seeing her favorite about to succumb, suddenly snatched him
away from the battlefield, and bore him unseen to his chamber,
where he was joined by helen, who bitterly reproached him for
his cowardly flight.
indignant at this interference on venus’ part, the gods decreed
that the war should be renewed; and minerva, assuming the
form of a trojan warrior, aimed an arrow at menelaus, who was
vainly seeking his vanished opponent. this act of treachery was
the signal for a general call to arms and a renewal of hostilities.
countless deeds of valor were now performed by the heroes on
both sides, and also by the gods, who mingled in the ranks and
even fought against each other, until recalled by jupiter, and forbidden
to fight any more.
hector and
andromache.
[pg ]
for a little while fortune seemed to favor the greeks; and
hector, hastening back to troy, bade his mother go to the temple
with all her women, and endeavor by her prayers
and gifts to propitiate minerva and obtain her aid.
then he hastened off in search of his wife andromache and
little son astyanax, whom he wished to embrace once more
before rushing out to battle and possible death.
he found his palace deserted, and, upon questioning the
women, heard that his wife had gone to the scæan gate, where
he now drove as fast as his noble steeds could drag him. there,
at the gate, took place the parting scene, which has deservedly
been called the most pathetic in all the iliad, in which andromache
vainly tried to detain her husband within the walls, while
hector gently reproved her, and demonstrated that his duty
called him out upon the field of battle, where he must hold his
own if he would not see the city taken, the trojans slain, and
the women, including his mother and beloved andromache,
borne away into bitter captivity.
parting of hector and andromache.—maignan.
“andromache
pressed to his side meanwhile, and, all in tears,
clung to his hand, and, thus beginning, said:—
‘too brave! thy valor yet will cause thy death.
thou hast no pity on thy tender child,
nor me, unhappy one, who soon must be
thy widow. all the greeks will rush on thee
to take thy life. a happier lot were mine,
if i must lose thee, to go down to earth,
for i shall have no hope when thou art gone,—
nothing but sorrow. father have i none,
and no dear mother.
hector, thou
art father and dear mother now to me,
and brother and my youthful spouse besides.
in pity keep within the fortress here,
nor make thy child an orphan nor thy wife
a widow.’
[pg ]
then answered hector, great in war: ‘all this
i bear in mind, dear wife; but i should stand
ashamed before the men and long-robed dames
of troy, were i to keep aloof and shun
the conflict, coward-like.’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
then he stretched out his arms for his infant son, who, however,
shrank back affrighted at the sight of his brilliant helmet
and nodding plumes, and would not go to him until he had set
the gleaming headdress aside. after a passionate prayer for his
little heir’s future welfare, hector gave the child back to andromache,
and, with a last farewell embrace, sprang into his chariot
and drove away.
“‘sorrow not thus, beloved one, for me.
no living man can send me to the shades
before my time; no man of woman born,
coward or brave, can shun his destiny.
but go thou home, and tend thy labors there,—
the web, the distaff,—and command thy maids
to speed the work. the cares of war pertain
to all men born in troy, and most to me.’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
greeks
repelled.
paris, ashamed now of his former flight, soon joined his brother
upon the battlefield, and together they performed many deeds
of valor. the time had now come when jupiter
was about to redeem the promise given to thetis,
for little by little the greeks were forced to yield before the
might of the trojans, who, stimulated by their partial success,
and fired by hector’s example, performed miracles of valor, and
finally drove their assailants into their intrenchments.
death and defeat now dogged the very footsteps of the greek
forces, who were driven, inch by inch, away from the walls, ever
nearer the place where their vessels rode at anchor. they now
ardently longed for the assistance of achilles, whose mere presence,
in days gone by, had filled the trojan hearts with terror;
[pg ]
but the hero, although briseis had been returned unmolested,
paid no heed to their entreaties for aid, and remained a sullen
and indifferent spectator of their flight, while the trojans
began to set fire to some of the vessels of their fleet.
“the goddess-born achilles, swift of foot,
beside his ships still brooded o’er his wrath,
nor came to counsel with the illustrious chiefs,
nor to the war, but suffered idleness
to eat his heart away; for well he loved
clamor and combat.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
discouraged by all these reverses, in spite of their brave resistance,
the greeks, in despair, concluded that the gods had entirely
forsaken them, and beat a hasty and ignominious retreat
to the shore, closely followed by the enemy, who uttered loud
cries of triumph.
patroclus dons
achilles’ armor.
patroclus, achilles’ intimate friend, then hastened to the hero’s
side to inform him of his comrades’ flight, and implore him once
more to rescue them from inevitable death. but
achilles, summoning all his pride to his assistance,
did not waver in his resolve. suddenly patroclus remembered
that the mere sight of achilles’ armor might suffice to arrest
the enemy’s advance and produce a diversion in favor of the
greeks: so he asked permission to wear it and lead the myrmidons,
achilles’ trusty followers, into the fray.
“send me at least into the war,
and let me lead thy myrmidons, that thus
the greeks may have some gleam of hope. and give
the armor from thy shoulders. i will wear
thy mail, and then the trojans, at the sight,
may think i am achilles, and may pause
from fighting, and the warlike sons of greece,
tired as they are, may breathe once more, and gain
a respite from the conflict.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
[pg ]
achilles had sworn, it is true, not to return to the scene of
strife, but was quite willing to lend men and arms, if they might
be of any use, and immediately placed them at his friend’s disposal.
hastily patroclus donned the glittering armor, called
aloud to the myrmidons to follow his lead, and rushed forth to
encounter the enemy.
death of
patroclus.
the trojans paused in dismay, thinking achilles had come, and
were about to take flight, when all at once they discovered the
fraud. with renewed courage, they opposed the
greek onslaught. many heroes bit the dust in
this encounter, among others sarpedon, the son of jupiter and
europa (p. ),—whose remains were borne away from the battlefield
by the twin divinities sleep and death,—ere hector, son
of priam, and chief among the trojan warriors, challenged patroclus
to single combat. needless to say, the two closed in
deadly battle, and fought with equal valor, until patroclus, already
exhausted by his previous efforts, and betrayed by the
gods, finally succumbed.
“the hero fell
with clashing mail, and all the greeks beheld
his fall with grief.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
with a loud cry of victory, hector wrenched the armor off
the mangled corpse, and quickly withdrew to array himself in the
brilliant spoils. the tidings of patroclus’ fall spread rapidly all
through the grecian camp, and reached achilles, who wept aloud
when he heard that his beloved friend, who had left him but a
short time before full of life and energy, was now no more. so
noisily did the hero mourn his loss, that thetis, in the quiet
ocean depths, heard his groans, and rushed to his side to ascertain
their cause.
achilles’
grief.
into his mother’s sympathetic ear achilles poured the whole
story of his grief and loss, while she gently strove
to turn his thoughts aside from the sad event,
and arouse an interest for some pursuit less dangerous than
[pg ]
war. all her efforts were vain, however; for achilles’ soul
thirsted for revenge, and he repeatedly swore he would go forth
and slay his friend’s murderer.
“no wish
have i to live, or to concern myself
in men’s affairs, save this: that hector first,
pierced by my spear, shall yield his life, and pay
the debt of vengeance for patroclus slain.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
then, in sudden dread lest hector should fall by another’s
hand, or withdraw from the battlefield and thus escape his
vengeance, achilles would have rushed from his tent unarmed;
but his mother prevailed upon him to wait until the morrow,
when she promised to bring him a full suit of armor from vulcan’s
own hand. rapidly thetis then traversed the wide space
which separates the coast of asia minor from mount ætna,
where vulcan labored at his forge.
“she found him there
sweating and toiling, and with busy hand
plying the bellows.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
achilles’
armor.
arrived before him, she breathlessly made known her errand,
and the god promised that the arms should be ready within
the given time, and immediately set to work to
fashion them. by his skillful hands the marvelous
weapons were forged; and when the first streak of light appeared
above the horizon, he consigned them to thetis, who hastened
back to her son’s tent, where she found him still bewailing the
loss of patroclus.
thetis bearing the armor of achilles.—gérard.
during thetis’ absence, messengers had come to achilles’ tent
to warn him that patroclus’ body was still in the enemy’s hands,
and to implore him to come and rescue the precious corpse.
mindful of his promise to his mother, achilles still refused to
fight, but, springing upon the rampart, uttered his mighty war-cry,
the sound of which filled the enemy’s hearts with terror, and made
[pg ]
them yield to the well-directed onslaught of ajax and diomedes,
who finally succeeded in recovering the body, which they then
reverently bore to achilles’ tent.
to console achilles for his friend’s death, thetis exhibited
the glorious armor she had just obtained, helped him put it on,
and then bade him go forth and conquer.
“‘leave we the dead, my son, since it hath pleased
the gods that he should fall; and now receive
this sumptuous armor, forged by vulcan’s hand,
beautiful, such as no man ever wore.’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
death of
hector.
thus armed, mounted in his chariot drawn by his favorite
steeds, and driven by his faithful charioteer automedon, achilles
went forth to battle, and finally seeing hector,
whom alone he wished to meet, he rushed upon
him with a hoarse cry of rage. the trojan hero, at the mere
sight of the deadly hatred which shone in achilles’ eyes, turned
to flee. achilles pursued him, and taunted him with his cowardice,
until hector turned and fought with all the courage and
recklessness of despair.
their blows fell like hail, a cloud of dust enveloped their
struggling forms, and the anxious witnesses only heard the dull
thud of the blows and the metallic clash of the weapons. suddenly
there came a loud cry, then all was still; and when the
dust-cloud had blown away, the trojans from the ramparts,
where they had waited in agony for the issue of the fight, beheld
achilles tear the armor from their champion’s body, bind the
corpse to his chariot, and drive nine times round the city walls,
hector’s princely head dragging in the dust. priam, hecuba,
and andromache, hector’s beautiful young wife, tearfully watched
this ignominious treatment, and finally saw achilles drive off to
the spot where patroclus’ funeral pile was laid, and there abandon
the corpse.
achilles then returned to his tent, where for a long time he
[pg ]
continued to mourn his friend’s untimely end, refusing to be
comforted.
the gods’
decree.
the gods, from their celestial abode, had also witnessed this
heartrending scene, and now jupiter sent iris to thetis, and
bade her hasten down to achilles and command
him to restore hector’s body to his mourning family.
he also directed mercury to lead priam, unseen, into
achilles’ tent, to claim and bear away his son’s desecrated corpse.
thetis, seeking achilles in his tent, announced the will of jove:—
“i am come
a messenger from jove, who bids me say
the immortals are offended, and himself
the most, that thou shouldst in thy spite detain
the corse of hector at the beaked ships,
refusing its release. comply thou, then,
and take the ransom and restore the dead.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
return of
hector’s body.
mercury acquitted himself with his usual dispatch, and soon
guided priam in safety through the grecian camp
to achilles’ tent, where the aged king fell at the
hero’s feet, humbly pleading for his son’s body, and proffering
a princely ransom in exchange.
achilles, no longer able to refuse this entreaty, and touched by
a father’s tears, consigned hector’s corpse to the old man’s care,
and promised an armistice of fourteen days, that the funeral rites
in both camps might be celebrated with all due pomp and solemnity;
and with the burial of hector the iliad comes to a close.
death of
penthesilea.
at the end of the truce the hostilities were renewed, and the
trojans were reinforced by the arrival of penthesilea, queen of
the amazons, who, with a chosen troop of warrior
maidens, came to offer her aid. the brave queen
afforded them, however, only temporary relief, as she was slain
by achilles in their very first encounter.
he, too, however, was doomed to die “in the flower of his
youth and beauty,” and the fates had almost finished spinning
[pg ]
his thread of life. in an early skirmish, while in close pursuit
of the trojans, thetis’ son had once caught sight of polyxena,
daughter of priam, and had been deeply smitten by her girlish
charms. he now vainly tried to make peace between the conflicting
nations, hoping that, were the war but ended, he might
obtain her hand in marriage.
death of
achilles.
his efforts to make peace failed; but at last he prevailed upon
priam to celebrate his betrothal with polyxena, with the stipulation
that the marriage would take place as soon
as the war was over. the betrothal ceremony
was held without the city gates; and achilles was just about to
part from his blushing betrothed, when paris, ever treacherous,
stole behind him and shot a poisoned arrow into his vulnerable
heel, thus slaying the hero who had caused so many brave warriors
to bite the dust.
“thus great achilles, who had shown his zeal
in healing wounds, died of a wounded heel.”
o. w. holmes.
his armor—the glorious armor forged by vulcan—was hotly
contested for by ulysses and ajax. the former finally obtained
the coveted weapons; and ajax’ grief at their loss was so intense,
that he became insane, and killed himself in a fit of frenzy, while
polyxena, inconsolable at her betrothed’s death, committed suicide
on the magnificent tomb erected over his remains on the
trojan plain.
philoctetes’
arrows.
the oracles, silent so long, now announced that troy could
never be taken without the poisoned arrows of hercules, then in
the keeping of philoctetes (p. ). this hero
had started with the expedition, but had been put
ashore on the island of lemnos on account of a wound in his
foot, which had become so offensive that none of the ship’s company
could endure his presence on board.
ten long years had already elapsed since then, and, although
a party of greeks immediately set out in search of him, they had
[pg ]
but little hope of finding him alive. they nevertheless wended
their way to the cave where they had deposited him, where, to
their unbounded surprise, they still found him. the wound had
not healed, but he had managed to exist by killing such game
as came within reach of his hand.
“exposed to the inclement skies,
deserted and forlorn he lies;
no friend or fellow-mourner there,
to soothe his sorrows, and divide his care;
or seek the healing plant, of power to ’suage
his aching wound, and mitigate its rage.”
sophocles (francklin’s tr.).
incensed by the greeks’ former cruel desertion, no entreaty
could now induce philoctetes to accompany the messengers to
troy, until hercules appeared to him in a dream, and bade him
go without delay, for there he would find machaon (p. ),
æsculapius’ son, who was to heal his wound.
death of paris
and œnone.
the dream was realized. philoctetes, whole once more, joined
the greek host, and caused great dismay in the enemy’s ranks
with his poisoned arrows. one of his deadly
missiles even struck paris, and, as the poison entered
his veins, it caused him grievous suffering. paris then remembered
that his first love, œnone, who knew all remedies and
the best modes of applying them, had once told him to send for
her should he ever be wounded. he therefore sent for œnone;
but she, justly offended by the base desertion and long neglect of
her lover, refused her aid, and let him die in torture. when he
was dead, œnone repented of this decision; and when the flames
of his funeral pyre rose around him, she rushed into their midst,
and was burned to death on his corpse.
“but when she gain’d the broader vale and saw
the ring of faces redden’d by the flames
infolding that dark body which had lain
of old in her embrace, paused—and then ask’d
falteringly, ‘who lies on yonder pyre?’
[pg ]
but every man was mute for reverence.
then moving quickly forward till the heat
smote on her brow, she lifted up a voice
of shrill command, ‘who burns upon the pyre?’
whereon their oldest and their boldest said,
‘he, whom thou would’st not heal!’ and all at once
the morning light of happy marriage broke,
thro’ all the clouded years of widowhood,
and muffling up her comely head, and crying
‘husband!’ she leapt upon the funeral pile,
and mixt herself with him and past in fire.”
tennyson.
the
palladium.
two of priam’s sons had already expired, and yet troy had
not fallen into the hands of the greeks, who now heard another
prophecy, to the effect that troy could never
be taken as long as the palladium—a sacred statue
of minerva, said to have fallen from heaven—remained within
its walls (p. ). so ulysses and diomedes in disguise effected
an entrance into the city one night, and after many difficulties
succeeded in escaping with the precious image.
the wooden
horse.
men and chiefs, impatient of further delay, now joyfully hailed
ulysses’ proposal to take the city by stratagem. they therefore
secretly built a colossal wooden horse, within
whose hollow sides a number of brave warriors
might lie concealed. the main army feigned weariness of the
endless enterprise, and embarked, leaving the horse as a pretended
offering to minerva; while sinon, a shrewd slave, remained
to persuade the trojans to drag the horse within their
gates and keep him there, a lasting monument of their hard-won
triumph.
to the unbounded joy of the long-besieged trojans, the greek
fleet then sailed away, until the island of tenedos hid the ships
from view. all the inhabitants of troy poured out of the city
to view the wooden horse, and question sinon, who pretended
to have great cause of complaint against the greeks, and strongly
advised them to secure their last offering to minerva.
[pg ]
the trojans hailed this idea with rapture; but laocoon, a
trojan priest, implored them to leave the horse alone, lest they
should bring untold evil upon their heads.
“‘wretched countrymen,’ he cries,
‘what monstrous madness blinds your eyes?
perchance—who knows?—these planks of deal
a grecian ambuscade conceal,
or ’tis a pile to o’erlook the town,
and pour from high invaders down,
or fraud lurks somewhere to destroy:
mistrust, mistrust it, men of troy!’”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
death of
laocoon.
deaf to all warnings and entreaties, they dragged the colossal
image into the very heart of their city, tearing down a portion
of their ramparts to allow its passage, while laocoon
hastened down to the shore to offer sacrifice
to the gods. as he stood there by the improvised altar, with
one of his sons on either side to assist him in his office, two huge
serpents came out of the sea, coiled themselves around him and
his sons, and crushed and bit them to death.
“unswerving they
toward laocoon hold their way;
first round his two young sons they wreathe,
and grind their limbs with savage teeth:
then, as with arms he comes to aid,
the wretched father they invade
and twine in giant folds: twice round
his stalwart waist their spires are wound,
twice round his neck, while over all
their heads and crests tower high and tall.
he strains his strength their knots to tear,
while gore and slime his fillets smear,
and to the unregardful skies
sends up his agonizing cries.”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
[pg ]
laocoon. (vatican, rome.)
[pg ]
the awestruck witnesses of this terrible scene, of course, declared
that the gods resented his interference concerning the
wooden horse, and had justly punished the sacrilegious hand
which had dared strike it with a spear, merely to demonstrate,
that, being hollow, it might contain an armed band. ever since
then, laocoon and his sons’ struggle with the serpents has been
a favorite subject for poets and artists.
fall of troy.
in the mean while, the greeks had been hiding behind tenedos;
but when night came on, they returned to the site of their
ten-years’ encampment, and were let into the city
by sinon, who also released their companions from
their prison within the wooden horse. although taken by surprise,
the city guards made desperate attempts to repel the greeks;
but it was now too late, for the enemy had already broken into
houses and palaces, and were killing, pillaging, and burning all in
their way.
“the melancholy years,
the miserable melancholy years,
crept onward till the midnight terror came,
and by the glare of burning streets i saw
palace and temple reel in ruin and fall,
and the long-baffled legions, bursting in
through gate and bastion, blunted sword and spear
with unresisted slaughter.”
lewis morris.
the royal family, even, was not exempt from the general
massacre; and the aged priam, who lived to see his last son
perish before his eyes, finally found relief in death.
return of the
greeks.
their object accomplished, the greeks immediately sailed for
home, their vessels heavily laden with plunder and slaves. but
the homeward journey was not as joyful as might
have been expected; and many, after escaping
from the enemy’s hands, perished in the waves, or found death
lying in wait for them by their own fireside.
menelaus, with his wife helen, who, in spite of the added ten
[pg ]
years, retained all her youthful beauty, were detained in egypt by
contrary winds, sent to punish them for omitting the usual sacrifice
to the gods. he at last consulted proteus, who revealed
how the wrath of the gods could best be allayed, and how favorable
winds could be secured to waft him home.
as for agamemnon, leader of the greeks, he returned to argos
only to be murdered by his wife clytæmnestra and her paramour
ægisthus.
“‘ægisthus, bent upon my death,
plotted against me with my guilty wife,
and bade me to his house, and slew me there,
even at the banquet.’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
then, mortally afraid lest orestes, agamemnon’s son, should
avenge his father’s death, ægisthus prepared to slay him too; but
electra, the boy’s sister, discovering this intention, helped him
to escape, and placed him under the fatherly protection of strophius,
king of phocis, whose son, pylades, became his inseparable
friend. in fact, their devotion to each other was so great,
that it has become proverbial in every tongue.
electra had not forgotten her father’s base murder, although
years had elapsed since it occurred; and when orestes had
attained manhood, she bade him come and punish those who had
committed the crime. orestes came, slew ægisthus and clytæmnestra,
and then, terrified at what he had done, took flight, but
only to be pursued by the furies and nemesis, goddess of revenge,
sent by the gods to punish him for taking justice into his
own hands.
arrived at delphi, orestes consulted the oracle, and learned
that his crime would be forgiven if he brought a statue of diana
in tauris back to greece. the young prince hastened thither,
accompanied by the ever-faithful pylades, who never left his side;
and there, in a temple, he found his long-lost sister iphigenia,
who helped him obtain the image he sought, and accompanied
him back to his native land, where nemesis left him forever.
[pg ]
the greek chiefs, on their return from troy, were, as we have
seen, all more or less visited by the wrath of the gods; but none
of them endured as many hardships as ulysses (odysseus), king
of ithaca, the hero of homer’s world-renowned epic the odyssey.
during ten long years he roamed the seas, driven away from his
native land by adverse winds, sailing about from place to place,
losing his ships and companions, until at last the gods allowed
him to return home. his marvelous adventures and numerous
mishaps during these ten years form the theme of the odyssey,
which is about as follows.
siege of
ismarus.
after leaving troy in ruins, ulysses embarked with his men
and spoils, and, favored by a good wind, soon came within sight
of ismarus, the home of the worthy and wealthy
ciconians. to increase the riches he was carrying
home, he proposed to his army to land and storm the city,—a
proposal which was enthusiastically received and immediately
carried out.
but when the men collected near the fleet, instead of embarking
as ulysses urged them to do, they began to drink the rich wine,
to roast oxen whole, and to indulge in games and revelry. while
they were thus employed and entirely off their guard, the neighbors
and allies of the ciconians came upon them unawares, and
put many to death.
the greeks, although taken by surprise, fought bravely; but
it was only when the sun was fast sinking, that they finally embarked,
and left the fatal ciconian shores.
[pg ]
“onward we sailed, lamenting bitterly
our comrades slain, yet happy to escape
from death ourselves.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
the
lotus-eaters.
a hurricane soon arose. the flying clouds blotted the stars
from view. the vessels, with broken masts and torn sails, were
driven far out of their course, and, after ten days,
reached the land of the lotophagi or lotus-eaters,—a
people whose sole food consisted of lotus fruit and
blossoms.
three of ulysses’ best men were sent ashore to reconnoiter:
but they had not gone very far before they met the natives, seated
under their favorite trees, banqueting on their sweet food. these
received the strangers hospitably, and made them partake of the
lotus blossoms; but no sooner had the three men done so, than all
recollection of their waiting companions or distant homes passed
from their minds, while a dreamy, lethargic sensation stole over
them, and made them long to recline there and feast forever.
“whoever tasted once of that sweet food
wished not to see his native country more,
nor give his friends the knowledge of his fate.
and then my messengers desired to dwell
among the lotus-eaters, and to feed
upon the lotus, never to return.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
ulysses impatiently watched for their return; then, seeing they
did not appear, feared some evil had befallen them, and set out,
with a few well-armed men, to go in search of them. instead of
finding them in chains, as he fully expected, he soon perceived
them feasting among the lotus-eaters. their eyes had lost all
animation, and rested upon him in a vague, dreamy way, which
aroused his suspicions. at the same moment some of the lotus-eaters
advanced to invite him and his troop to join in their
feast.
[pg ]
“branches they bore of that enchanted stem,
laden with flower and fruit, whereof they gave
to each, but whoso did receive of them,
and taste, to him the gushing of the wave
far, far away did seem to mourn and rave
on alien shores; and if his fellow spake,
his voice was thin, as voices from the grave;
and deep asleep he seem’d, yet all awake,
and music in his ears his beating heart did make.”
tennyson.
in peremptory tones ulysses quickly forbade his men to taste
of the magic food, directed them to seize and bind their unwilling
comrades, and forcibly take them back to their ships. there the
magic effect of the lotus food soon wore away, and the men
rowed steadily westward, until they came to the island of sicily,
then inhabited by the cyclopes, a rude race of one-eyed giants.
“a single ball of sight was fix’d
in their mid-forehead: hence the cyclops’ name:
for that one circular eye was broad infix’d
in the mid-forehead:—strength was theirs, and force,
and craft of curious toil.”
hesiod (elton’s tr.).
the main part of the fleet was stationed at another island not
far distant, but ulysses and twelve companions landed in sicily
in search of food. the prospect was promising, for on the plains
and hillsides great flocks of sheep cropped the tender grass; and
ulysses and his followers soon came to a great cave filled with
rich stores of milk and cheese. this was the abode of polyphemus,
son of neptune, the largest and fiercest among the
gigantic cyclopean race. the greeks’ first impulse was to help
themselves, since no one was there to say them nay; but they
finally decided to await the master’s home-coming, and courteously
ask his assistance. they had moored their vessel under
an overhanging cliff, where no one would be likely to find it,
and had therefore no fear lest their means of escape should be
cut off.
[pg ]
triumph of galatea.—raphael.
polyphemus
and galatea.
[pg ]
polyphemus, the ugly giant in whose cave they were waiting,
had once seen the charming sea nymph galatea riding in her
pearl-shell chariot drawn by bounding dolphins.
her unsurpassed loveliness made a vivid impression
upon him, and he was soon deeply in love with her. he
neglected his flocks, shunned his companions, and spent all his
time near the seashore, watching for her, and bitterly cursing his
fate, which prevented his seeking her in her native element, for
the gods had cursed the race of cyclops with an unconquerable
aversion to water. he
—“lov’d
not in the little present-making style,
with baskets of new fruit and pots of roses,
but with consuming passion. many a time
would his flocks go home by themselves at eve,
leaving him wasting by the dark seashore,
and sunrise would behold him wasting still.”
theocritus (hunt’s tr.).
to induce galatea to leave the salt sea waves and linger by
his side on the white sandy beach, polyphemus constantly made
the most extravagant promises; but the dainty nymph merely
laughed at all his professions, and strolled on the shore only
when he was sound asleep. although she made fun of his love,
she was not so obdurate to the suit of acis, a very fascinating
young shepherd, who had no need to call her repeatedly; for she
always yielded to his first appeal, joyfully joined him, and sat
beside him under the shade of some great rock, listening to his
tender wooing.
acis and galatea (evening).—claude lorraine. (st. petersburg.)
polyphemus once accidentally came upon them thus, ere they
were aware of his proximity. for a moment he glared down
upon them; then, seizing a huge rock, he vowed his rival acis
should not live to enjoy the love which was denied him, and
hurled it down upon the unsuspecting lovers. galatea, the goddess,
being immortal, escaped unhurt; but poor acis, her beloved,
was crushed to death. the stream of blood from his mangled
[pg ]
remains was changed by the gods into an exhaustless stream
of limpid water, which ever hastened down to the sea to join
galatea.
polyphemus’
cave.
ulysses and his companions, waiting in the cave, soon felt the
ground shake beneath their feet, and saw the sheep throng into
the cave and take their usual places; then behind
them came the horrible apparition of polyphemus,
who picked up a huge rock and placed it before the opening of
the cave, preventing all egress. ulysses’ companions had shrunk
with fear into the darkest corners of the cave, whence they
watched the giant milk his ewes, dispose of his cheeses, and
make his evening meal. but the firelight soon revealed the intruders;
and polyphemus immediately demanded who they were,
whence they came, and what they were seeking.
ulysses, ever wily, replied that his name was no man, that he
and his companions were shipwrecked mariners, and that they
would fain receive his hospitality. in answer to this statement,
the cyclops stretched forth his huge hand and grasped two of the
sailors, whom he proceeded to devour for dessert. then, his
frightful repast being ended, he lay down on the rushes and
fell asleep, his loud snores reverberating like thunder through
the great cave.
ulysses silently crept to his side, sword in hand, and was about
to kill him, when he suddenly recollected that neither he nor
his men could move the rock at the cave’s mouth, and that they
would never be able to escape. he therefore resolved to have
recourse to a stratagem.
when morning came, the giant rose, milked his flock, made his
cheese, arranged the vessels, and then, without the least warning,
again seized and devoured two of the greeks. his brawny arm
next pushed aside the rock, and he stood beside it with watchful
eye, until all his herd had passed out; then, replacing the stone
to prevent the escape of his prisoners, he went off to the distant
pasture ground.
during his absence, ulysses and his men devised a cunning
[pg ]
plan whereby they hoped to effect their escape, and made all
their preparations to insure its complete success. a huge pine
club which they found in the cave was duly pointed, hardened
in the fire, and set aside for future use.
when the darkness began to fall over the earth, polyphemus
again rolled the stone away to admit his flocks, keeping careful
guard upon the greeks. the sheep all in, he replaced the rock,
performed his usual evening duties, and then devoured two of
ulysses’ crew.
ulysses blinds
polyphemus.
when this part of the evening meal was over, ulysses drew near
and offered him a leather flask full of heady wine, which the giant
took down at a gulp, little suspecting its effect.
very soon he sank into a deep drunken sleep; and
then the men, at a sign from ulysses, heated the point of the huge
club and put out his sole eye, in spite of his frightful cries and
execrations, which soon attracted the attention of the other
cyclopes.
they thronged without the cave, clamoring to know who was
hurting him. “no man!” replied the cyclops, howling with
pain, “no man!” which answer convinced his would-be helpers
that he needed no assistance, and made them disperse.
“‘if no man does thee violence, and thou
art quite alone, reflect that none escape
diseases; they are sent by jove.’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
ulysses’
escape.
deserted by his companions, polyphemus spent the night in
agony; and, when the anxious lowing of his herd roused him
at break of day, he fumblingly milked them, and
prepared to let them go forth, as usual, in search
of their morning meal. to avoid the greeks escaping, he rolled
the stone only partly aside, and allowed the sheep to pass out a
few at a time, carefully running his hand over each broad back
to make sure that none of the prisoners were mounted upon them.
ulysses, in the mean while, having observed this maneuver,
[pg ]
fastened his companions under the rams, reserving one for his
own use, and watched them pass out one after the other undetected.
then, clinging to the wool of the largest ram, he too
was slowly dragged out; while polyphemus petted the ram, and
inquired how he came to pass out last of all.
“‘my favorite ram, how art thou now the last
to leave the cave? it hath not been thy wont
to let the sheep go first, but thou didst come
earliest to feed among the flowery grass,
walking with stately strides, and thou wert first
at the fresh stream, and first at eve to seek
the stable; now thou art the last of all.
grievest thou for thy master, who has lost
his eye, put out by a deceitful wretch
and his vile crew?’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
ulysses, having thus escaped, sprang to his feet, set his companions
free, rushed with them down to the seashore, taking the
choice animals on board, and then, when his men had rowed
some distance, raised his voice and taunted polyphemus, revealing
at the same time his identity.
“‘ha! cyclops! those whom in thy rocky cave
thou, in thy brutal fury, hast devoured,
were friends of one not unexpert in war;
amply have thy own guilty deeds returned
upon thee. cruel one! who didst not fear
to eat the strangers sheltered by thy roof,
jove and the other gods avenge them thus!
cyclops, if any man of mortal birth
note thine unseemly blindness, and inquire
the occasion, tell him that laertes’ son,
ulysses, the destroyer of walled towns,
whose home is ithaca, put out thine eye.’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
with a cry of rage, polyphemus then ran down to the shore,
tore up some huge rocks, which he hurled in the direction whence
[pg ]
the taunting voice came, and in his rage almost destroyed the
greeks; for one piece of rock fell very near their vessel, and
they were forced to redouble their efforts to row out of reach
and prevent disaster.
gift of æolus.
the greeks now sailed on until they reached the æolian
islands, where dwelt æolus, king and father of the winds. he
had heard of ulysses’ prowess, received him kindly,
and at parting gave him a leather bag containing
all the contrary winds, which ulysses was thus at liberty to
retain imprisoned until he had safely reached home (p. ).
day and night ulysses’ barks now bounded over the blue
waves. on the ninth evening the shores of ithaca were discerned
by the eager eyes on board, and all made their preparations
for landing early the next morning. for the first time
since he had left the æolian shores, ulysses now indulged in
sleep; and while he was lost in oblivion his sailors opened the
leather bag, intending to rob their master of a portion of his
treasure, for they imagined that æolus had given him much
gold.
the bag was no sooner opened, than the contrary winds, weary
and cramped with their uncomfortable position, sprang out with a
rush and a roar, and in a few moments stirred up a terrible
storm, which tore the ships from their anchors, and soon drove
them far out to sea.
after untold suffering, the greeks landed again upon the
æolian isle, and ulysses sought the king, to beseech his aid
once more; but this time the god received him coldly, and bade
him depart, as his cruelty to polyphemus had awakened the
gods’ wrath.
“‘hence with thee! leave our island instantly,
vilest of living men! it may not be
that i receive or aid as he departs
one who is hated by the blessed gods,—
and thou art hated by the gods. away!’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
the
læstrygonians.
[pg ]
sorrowfully now the greeks embarked; but, instead of being
hurried along by favorable winds, they were obliged to row
against wind and waves, and only after many days
came to the land of the læstrygonians, where fresh
losses awaited them. these people were cannibals, who were in
the habit of slaying all the strangers who visited their shores, to
satisfy their horrible appetites. when they saw the vessels enter
their harbor, they sunk some of them by casting huge rocks at
them from their tall cliffs, and speared and devoured the unfortunate
crews.
ulysses, ever cautious, had lingered without the harbor; and
when, from afar, he saw his companions’ horrible fate, he bade
his men strike the waves with their “sounding oars” and escape.
circe, the
enchantress.
the greeks went on again until they came to ææa, an island
inhabited by the golden-haired enchantress circe, sister of æetes,
and aunt of medea. here ulysses’ crew was divided
into two parties, one of which, led by eurylochus,
set out to explore the island, while the other, headed by
ulysses, remained to guard the ships. through a dense forest,
peopled with strangely gentle wild beasts, eurylochus led his
force, until they came in sight of the beautiful palace home
of circe. from afar they could hear her sweet voice raised in
song, as she wove a beautiful web for her own adornment: so
they pressed eagerly on, and entered the palace hall, eurylochus
alone lingering on the porch, fearing lest some fraud might suddenly
be revealed.
circe received her self-invited guests most graciously, seated
them on tapestry-covered couches, and bade her numerous handmaidens
speedily set before them all manner of good cheer,—an
order which was immediately carried out. the men feasted greedily,
for they had fasted for many days, and circe watched them with
ill-concealed disgust. suddenly she started from her seat, waved
her wand over their heads, and bade them assume the form of
swine (which obscene animals their gluttony suggested), and hie
them to their sties.
[pg ]
circe and the friends of ulysses.—rivière.
[pg ]
“then instantly
she touched them with a wand, and shut them up
in sties, transformed to swine in head and voice,
bristles and shape, though still the human mind
remained to them. thus sorrowing they were driven
into their cells, where circe flung to them
acorns of oak and ilex, and the fruit
of cornel, such as nourish wallowing swine.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
eurylochus, meanwhile, vainly awaited their return, and finally
resolved to go back alone to the ships and report what had happened.
sword in hand, ulysses then set out alone to rescue his
comrades; but he had not gone far before he met a youth,—mercury
in disguise,—who warned him not to approach any
nearer circe, and told him of his companions’ transformation.
ulysses and
circe.
as ulysses would not be dissuaded from his purpose, mercury
gave him some moly, an herb warranted to preserve
him from circe’s magic spells, and sundry
important directions, which were all duly listened to and observed.
pressing onward, ulysses reached the palace, entered the banquet
room, drank circe’s mixture, which was rendered ineffective
by the moly’s power, and, when she waved her wand over his
head and bade him join his fellows, drew his sword and rushed
upon her, threatening to take her life if she did not immediately
restore his friends to their human forms, and promise to do them
no further harm.
circe, terrified at the threat, agreed to comply with all his
demands; and in a few moments ulysses was again surrounded
by his companions, who were touchingly grateful for their rescue.
circe now prepared a second feast, and entertained them all so
well, that ulysses lingered there for one whole year.
“and there from day to day
we lingered a full year, and banqueted
nobly on plenteous meats and delicate wines.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
ulysses visits
cimmeria.
[pg ]
at the end of that time, ulysses’ companions began to long
for their own homes, and prevailed upon their chief to leave the
fair enchantress circe. at first she was loath to let
him go; but, seeing that her efforts to detain him
longer would be of no avail, she bade him seek the cimmerian
shores, and there consult the seer tiresias. this land, which lay
on the confines of pluto’s dark realm, was inhabited by shadows,
the spirits of the dead, condemned to sojourn there a while ere
they were admitted into hades.
ulysses embarked, and, according to circe’s directions, let his
vessel drift along until its prow grated on a pebbly beach, where
he landed. then, walking straight before him, he came to a
spot whence he could hear the roar of the phlegethon as it joined
the acheron, and here he dug a trench with his sword.
the trench finished, he killed two black victims, furnished by
circe, and made their blood flow into the trench. immediately
all the spirits crowded about him, eager to drink the fresh blood;
but ulysses, with drawn sword, forced them back, until at last
tiresias, the blind seer, approached.
he was allowed to stoop down and drink; and, as soon as he
had done so, he recovered the power of human speech, and warned
ulysses of the many trials still awaiting him. then, his prophecy
concluded, he vanished; but ulysses lingered a little longer to
allow his mother to drink some blood, and explain how she came
to be here in the spirit land.
many others came and conversed with him; but at last he was
forced to depart, and return to ææa, where he lingered to perform
the funeral rites for elpenor,—one of his followers, a youth
who had fallen asleep on one of the palace turrets, and by an inadvertent
movement had fallen to the ground, where he had been
found dead.
siren. (acropolis museum, athens.)
the sirens.
these obsequies over, the greeks, favored by a fresh wind, left
circe’s isle, and sailed along until they drew near
the rocky ledge where the sirens had their abode.
these maidens were wont to sit on the rocks and sing entrancing
[pg ]
songs, which allured the mariners until they turned aside from
their course, and their vessels were dashed to pieces on the rocks.
according to circe’s advice, ulysses bade his men bind him
fast to the mast, disregard his cries and gestures of command,
and keep on their course until the dangerous rocks were lost to
view; but, before he allowed them to execute these orders, he
stopped their ears with melted wax, so they could not hear a
sound, for he alone could hear the sirens’ song and live.
the men then bound him hand and foot to the mast, returned
to their oars, and rowed steadily on. soon the sirens’ melody
fell upon ulysses’ charmed ears; but, although he commanded
and implored his men to set him free and alter their course, they
kept steadily on until no sound of the magic song could reach
them, when they once more set their leader free.
charybdis
and scylla.
now, although this danger had been safely passed, ulysses
was troubled in spirit, for he knew he would soon be obliged
to steer his course between two dread monsters,
charybdis and scylla, who lay so close together,
that, while striving to avoid one, it was almost impossible not to
fall an easy prey to the other.
charybdis’ den lay under a rock crowned with a single wild
fig tree; and three times daily she ingulfed the surrounding
waters, drawing even large galleys into her capacious jaws.
as for scylla, she too dwelt in a cave, whence her six ugly
heads protruded to devour any prey that came within reach.
“no mariner can boast
that he has passed by scylla with a crew
unharmed; she snatches from the deck, and bears
away in each grim mouth, a living man.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
this selfsame scylla, once a lovely maiden, had won the heart
of the sea god glaucus (p. ), but coquettishly tormented him
until he implored circe to give him some love potion strong
enough to compel her love.
[pg ]
circe, who had long nursed a secret passion for glaucus, was
angry at him, and jealous of her rival, and, instead of a love
potion, prepared a loathsome drug, which she bade him pour
into the water where scylla was wont to bathe. glaucus faithfully
did as she commanded; but when scylla plunged into the water,
her body, and not her feelings, changed, and she became a loathsome
monster, a terror to gods and men.
when in sight of the fig tree, ulysses, cased in armor, stood
on the prow to attack scylla should she attempt to seize one
of his crew. the sound of the rushing waters whirling around
charybdis made all on board tremble with fear, and the pilot
steered nearer still to dread scylla’s den.
suddenly a piercing cry was heard, as the monster seized six
of the men and devoured them. the rest passed on unharmed;
but since then, in speaking of conflicting dangers, it has been
customary to use the expression, “falling from charybdis into
scylla.”
cattle of the
sun.
only too glad to effect an escape at any price, the greeks
again rowed on until they sighted trinacria, the island of the sun,
where phaetusa and lampetia watched over the
sun god’s sacred herds. the men wished to land
here to rest; but ulysses reminded them that tiresias, the blind
seer, had warned them to avoid it, lest by slaying any of the
sacred animals they should incur divine wrath.
the men, however, worn out with the toil of many days’ rowing,
entreated so piteously to be allowed to rest, voluntarily
pledging themselves to be content with their own provisions and
not to slay a single animal, that ulysses reluctantly yielded to
their entreaties, and all went ashore.
after they had duly rested, they were still detained by unfavorable
winds, until all their provisions were exhausted, and
the few birds and fishes they managed to secure no longer sufficed
to still the pangs of hunger.
led by eurylochus, some of the men, during one of ulysses’
temporary absences, caught and slew some of the sun god’s
[pg ]
cattle. to the general amazement and terror, the meat lowed
while roasting on the spit, and the empty skins moved and crawled
as if alive. all these sounds and sights could not, however, deter
the sailors, who were bound to have a good feast, which they
kept up for seven days, ere ulysses could make them leave the
trinacrian shores.
in the mean while, lampetia had hastened to apollo to apprise
him of the crime committed by ulysses’ men. in anger he appeared
before the assembled gods and demanded amends, threatening
to withdraw the light of his countenance if he were not
properly indemnified. jupiter, to appease his hot anger, immediately
promised that all the offenders should perish.
“‘still shine, o sun! among the deathless gods
and mortal men, upon the nourishing earth.
soon will i cleave, with a white thunderbolt,
their galley in the midst of the black sea!’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
this promise he immediately fulfilled by drowning all except
ulysses, who alone had not partaken of the sacred flesh, and
who, after clinging to the rudder for nine long days, a plaything
for the wind and waves, was washed ashore on the island of
ogygia, where the fair sea nymph calypso had taken up her
abode.
ulysses and
calypso.
there he was kindly and most hospitably entertained during
eight long years; but he could not depart, as he had no vessel or
crew to bear him away. at last minerva, who had
always befriended him, prevailed upon jupiter to
allow him to return to ithaca. mercury was sent to ogygia to bid
calypso furnish all things necessary for his comfort, and aid in
the construction of a huge raft, whereon our hero found himself
afloat after many years of reluctant lingering on the land.
all seemed well now; but neptune suddenly became aware
that his old enemy, the torturer of polyphemus, was about to
escape from his clutches. with one blow of his trident he stirred
[pg ]
up one of those sudden tempests whose fury nothing can withstand,
shattered ulysses’ raft, and buffeted him about on the
waves, until the goddess leucothea (p. ), seeing his distress,
helped him to reach the phæacian shore.
nausicaa and
ulysses.
too weary to think of aught but rest, ulysses dragged himself
into a neighboring wood, where he fell asleep on a bed of dry
leaves. while he was thus resting, minerva visited
nausicaa, daughter of alcinous, king of the phæacians,
in a dream, and bade her go down to the shore and wash
her linen robes in readiness for her wedding day, which the goddess
assured her was near at hand. nausicaa obeyed, and
drove with her maidens down to the shore, where, after their
labors were duly finished, they all indulged in a game of ball,
with the usual accompaniment of shrill cries and much laughter.
their cries awoke ulysses, who came on the scene just in time
to save their ball from the waves, and claimed nausicaa’s protection
for a shipwrecked mariner.
she graciously permitted him to follow her to her father’s palace,
and presented him to alcinous and arete, who bade him
welcome, and invited him to join in the games then taking place.
he did so, and displayed such strength and skill that his identity
was revealed. alcinous then promised to send him safely home
in a phæacian bark, which reached ithaca in safety, and deposited
ulysses, asleep, on his native shore.
the petrified
ship.
when neptune discovered that the phæacians had outwitted
him, he was so angry that he changed the returning
vessel into a rock, which blocked the harbor
and put an end to further maritime excursions on their part.
“he drew near
and smote it with his open palm, and made
the ship a rock, fast rooted in the bed
of the deep sea.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
penelope. (vatican, rome.)
ulysses’ return
to ithaca.
disguised as a beggar by minerva’s kindly care, ulysses sought
the lowly dwelling of eumæus, his swineherd, and from him
[pg ]
learned all he wished to know about his wife and son. he heard
that penelope was fairly besieged with suitors, who were even
now feasting and reveling in his palace, whence
they refused to depart until she had made choice
of a second husband; and also that telemachus, now a young
man, indignant and displeased with the suitors’ conduct, and
guided and accompanied by his tutor mentor, had set out in
search of the father whom he could not believe dead.
mentor was minerva in disguise, who guided the young man
to the courts of nestor and menelaus, and finally in a dream
bade him return to ithaca, where he would find the parent he
sought. the young prince immediately obeyed, and landed near
eumæus’ hut, escaping a clever ambuscade posted by the suitors
at the entrance of the port.
minerva now permitted the father and son to recognize each
other, in spite of their twenty years’ separation, and together they
planned how best to punish the insolent suitors. they finally
agreed that telemachus should return to the palace and make no
mention of his father’s return; while ulysses, still in the guise of
a beggar, should enter his home and claim the usual hospitality.
all was executed as they had planned. no one recognized
the long-expected hero in the miserable old beggar—no one save
his aged nurse euryclea, and his faithful old dog argus, who
died for joy at his long-lost master’s feet.
“while over argus the black night of death
came suddenly as soon as he had seen
ulysses, absent now for twenty years.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
penelope’s
web.
penelope, hearing that a stranger was within her gates, sent for
him, to inquire whether he knew aught of her husband. she too
failed to pierce his disguise, and languidly continued
a piece of work which she cleverly used to
baffle her suitors; for once, when urged to marry, she had replied
that she would do so as soon as her work was finished.
[pg ]
as she was a diligent worker, the suitors expected soon to hear
her decision, little knowing that she raveled at night all the web
so carefully woven during the day.
“three full years
she practiced thus, and by the fraud deceived
the grecian youths.”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
ulysses’ bow.
at last the subterfuge was discovered, and the unfortunate
penelope was forced to finish her work; but ere it was quite
done, she found another expedient to postpone
her choice of a husband. she brought ulysses’
bow, and announced that she would marry the man who could
bend it and send an arrow through twelve rings which she pointed
out.
“‘i bring to you
the mighty bow that great ulysses bore.
whoe’er among you he may be whose hand
shall bend this bow, and send through these twelve rings
an arrow, him i follow hence, and leave
this beautiful abode of my young years,
with all its plenty,—though its memory,
i think, will haunt me even in my dreams.’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
death of the
suitors.
the suitors all vainly strove to bend the mighty bow, which
was then seized by the disguised ulysses, while the youths
laughed aloud in scorn, until telemachus bade
them let the old man try his strength. to the
amazement of all, ulysses easily performed the required feat;
and then, turning his aim toward antinous, the handsomest and
most treacherous of all the suitors, he pierced his heart.
a scene of wild commotion ensued, in which ulysses, telemachus,
eumæus, and minerva disguised as mentor, opposed
and slew all the wooers. penelope, unconscious of all this
bloodshed, slept in her room, until she was gently awakened by
euryclea, who announced the return of her long-absent husband.
[pg ]
“‘awake, penelope, dear child, and see
with thine own eyes what thou hast pined for long.
ulysses has returned; thy lord is here,
though late, and he has slain the arrogant crew
of suitors, who disgraced his house, and made
his wealth a spoil, and dared insult his son.’”
homer (bryant’s tr.).
but penelope had too long believed her husband dead to
credit this marvelous news; and it was only after ulysses had
given her an infallible proof of his identity, by telling her a secret
which was shared by her alone, that she received him.
ulysses’ last
journey.
ulysses was now safe at home, after twenty years of warfare
and adventure, and at first greatly enjoyed the quiet and peace
of his home life; but after a while these tame joys
grew wearisome, and he decided to renew his
wanderings. he therefore prepared a fleet, and sailed “out into
the west,” whence he never returned. the greeks, however,
averred that he had gone in search of the isles of the blest,
where he dwelt in perfect peace, and enjoyed the constant society
of heroes as brave and renowned as himself.
“‘come, my friends,
’tis not too late to seek a newer world.
push off, and sitting well in order smite
the sounding furrows; for my purpose holds
to sail beyond the sunset, and the baths
of all the western stars, until i die.
it may be that the gulfs will wash us down:
it may be we shall touch the happy isles,
and see the great achilles, whom we knew.
tho’ much is taken, much abides: and tho’
we are not now that strength which in old days
moved earth and heaven; that which we are, we are;
one equal temper of heroic hearts,
made weak by time and fate, but strong in will
to strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.’”
tennyson.
[pg ]
you have already heard how the greeks entered the city of
troy in the dead of night, massacred the inhabitants, and set fire
to the beautiful buildings which had been the king’s pride and
delight. now you shall hear how virgil relates the escape of
some of the trojans from general destruction.
unconscious of coming danger, æneas, son of venus and
anchises, lay fast asleep in his palace; but the gods had not
doomed him to perish, and sent the shade of hector to warn
him in a dream to arise, leave the city, and fly to some distant
land.
“‘ah, goddess-born,’ he warns me, ‘fly!
escape these flames: greece holds the walls;
proud ilium from her summit falls.
think not of king’s or country’s claims:
country and king, alas! are names:
could troy be saved by hands of men,
this hand had saved her then, e’en then.
the gods of her domestic shrines
that country to your care consigns:
receive them now, to share your fate:
provide them mansions strong and great,
the city’s walls, which heaven has willed
beyond the seas you yet shall build.’”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
æneas goes to
save priam.
awakened at last by the ever-increasing tumult without,
æneas seized his arms and hastened forth, attended by many
of his fellow-citizens, to ascertain the cause of the great uproar.
[pg ]
a few minutes later he discovered that the greek army had
entered the town, and was even now killing, plundering, and
burning without mercy. the men were all slain,
but the fairest women were dragged away to be
sold as slaves in greece; and among them æneas beheld in the
hands of agamemnon’s soldiers the unfortunate daughter of
priam, cassandra, whom the gods had endowed with prophetic
powers (p. ), but whom no one would heed.
æneas, seeing ere long that there was no hope of saving the
doomed city, quickly disguised himself in a greek armor which
he tore from the corpse of one of his foes, and rushed on to the
palace, hoping to save the aged king, who, at the first alarm, had
seized his weapons, determined to fight to the very last.
hecuba, his wife, was clinging to him, imploring him to remain,
when suddenly polites, their son, rushed into their presence,
closely followed by pyrrhus, or neoptolemus, son of achilles,
who thrust his sword into the youth, and then murdered priam
also.
“so priam’s fortunes closed at last:
so passed he, seeing as he passed
his troy in flames, his royal tower
laid low in dust by hostile power,
who once o’er land and peoples proud
sat, while before him asia bowed:
now on the shore behold him dead,
a nameless trunk, a trunkless head.”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
æneas, who arrived just too late to hinder this frightful catastrophe,
now suddenly remembered that a similar fate awaited his
aged father anchises, his wife creusa, and little son iulus, who
were at home without any protector near them. the hero therefore
madly cut his way through the foe, and rushed through the
once magnificent palace, which was now stripped of its rarest
treasures and desecrated by an enemy’s tread.
venus appears
to æneas.
there, in one of the abandoned halls, he saw helen, the fair
[pg ]
cause of all this war and bloodshed,—who, after paris’ death, had
married deiphobus, his brother,—and for a moment he determined
to take her life; but ere he could do so,
venus, his mother, stayed his hand, and bade him
remember that the immortal gods had long ago decreed that the
city should fall, and that helen was merely the pretext used to
induce the rival nations to fly to arms.
further to convince him of the truth of her assertions, she
enabled him to see what was hidden from mortal eyes: i.e.,
neptune, minerva, juno, and jupiter even, fighting and leveling
the walls with mighty blows. she then vehemently implored
her son to leave this scene of carnage, and fly, with his family and
followers, to some safe place without the city, whence he could
embark, and sail away to a more fortunate land; and her entreaties
finally prevailed.
anchises’
escape.
æneas rushed home and bade his father prepare to leave troy;
but anchises obstinately refused to leave his post, until he saw
a bright flame hover for a moment above his
grandson’s head, which sign he interpreted as an
omen that his race should endure. he no longer resisted; and,
as he was too weak to walk, æneas bade him hold the lares
and penates, and, taking him on his back, carried him off, while
with one hand he led his little son, and bade creusa closely follow
him.
“‘come, mount my shoulders, dear my sire:
such load my strength shall never tire.
now, whether fortune smiles or lowers,
one risk, one safety shall be ours.
my son shall journey at my side,
my wife her steps by mine shall guide,
at distance safe.’”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
creusa’s
ghost.
a trysting place near a ruined temple had already been appointed
for his servants, and thither æneas turned his steps.
when he arrived there, he found many awaiting him, and counted
[pg ]
them carefully to make sure none were missing. all were there
except creusa, his beloved young wife; and he retraced his steps
with anxious haste, hoping to find her still alive.
but on the threshold of his once happy home
he met her disembodied spirit, and heard her bid him seek the
banks of the tiber, where a beautiful young bride would comfort
him for her loss. this speech ended, creusa’s ghost vanished,
and æneas sadly returned to the ruined temple, where he
found many fugitives ready to follow him wherever he went,
and eager to obey his every command. their preparations for
departure were speedily completed, the sails unfurled, and the
little exiled band soon lost sight of the shores of troy.
“weeping i quit the port, the shore,
the plains where ilium stood before,
and homeless launch upon the main,
son, friends, and home gods in my train.”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
arrival in
thrace.
although they had escaped from burning troy and the swords
of the greeks, their trials had only just begun. after many days’
sailing, they landed in thrace, viewed the country,
decided to settle there, and began to trace the
foundations of a new city, which they decided to call the æneadæ,
in honor of their leader.
their next care was to offer a sacrifice to the gods; but when
æneas, with due ceremony, cut down a sapling, he was startled
to see blood flow from its severed stem. at the same time a
mysterious voice was heard, bidding him forbear, for his former
friend polydorus, sent to thrace to conceal some treasures, had
been murdered there by an avaricious king, and this grove of
trees had sprouted from the spear handles driven into his unhappy
breast.
delos and
crete.
after paying the customary funeral rites to appease the soul
of his unfortunate friend, æneas easily prevailed
upon his followers to leave these inhospitable shores
and seek another resting place. they rowed over the briny
[pg ]
deep until they came to delos, where they stopped to consult
the oracle, who bade them seek the cradle of their race, and settle
there.
“‘stout dardan hearts, the realm of earth
where first your nation sprang to birth,
that realm shall now receive you back:
go, seek your ancient mother’s track.
there shall æneas’ house, renewed
for ages, rule a world subdued.’”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
this obscure command left them uncertain what course to
pursue, until the aged anchises remembered that one of his ancestors,
teucer, had once reigned in crete. thither they sailed,
and hoped to settle; but a terrible pestilence came upon them,
and decimated their already sparse ranks.
æneas’
vision.
one night æneas had a vision, in which his household gods
bade him seek the italian or hesperian shores; and when, on
waking, he imparted this advice to anchises, the
latter remembered a long-forgotten prophecy of
cassandra, purporting that they would settle there, and also that
dardanus, their first progenitor, was reported to have come from
thence.
“there is a land, by greece of old
surnamed hesperia, rich its mold,
its children brave and free:
œnotrians were its settlers: fame
now gives the race its leader’s name,
and calls it italy.
here dardanus was born, our king,
and old iasius, whence we spring:
here our authentic seat.”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
celæno,
the harpy.
ere many days æneas and his trusty followers were once
more afloat, and forced to battle with fierce storms sent by juno
to hinder their advance. exhausted, they landed on the strophades
islands, where they proposed to recruit their strength by
[pg ]
a hearty meal; but no sooner was their table spread, than the
meats were devoured and destroyed by the loathsome harpies.
a terrible prophecy uttered by celæno, one of
these monsters,—half woman and half bird,—made
them embark again in great haste, and row on until they
came to epirus, where they again effected a landing. in this
country they met the sorrowing andromache, hector’s widow,
the slave of king helenus, who entertained them royally and
sent them on their way again, with many kindly cautions to beware
of the cyclopes and avoid charybdis and scylla by circumnavigating
the whole island of sicily.
rescue of
achemenides.
this advice was duly followed by æneas, who, while rounding
one of the promontories of the island, saw and rescued achemenides,
one of ulysses’ companions, accidentally left
behind when they escaped from the rage of polyphemus,
the cyclops. this giant now came down to the shore,
and was regarded with unconcealed horror by the trojans, who
rowed away in haste. soon after, æneas moored his ships in the
harbors of sicania and drepanum, and while there lost his aged
father anchises.
“there
i lose my stay in every care,
my sire anchises!”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
juno, in the mean while, had not been idle, and gloated over
the dangers she had forced the unhappy trojans to encounter
during the seven years which had already elapsed since they first
sailed from troy. she was not yet weary of persecuting them,
however; and as soon as she saw them once more afloat, she
hurried off to æolus, and bade him let loose his fiercest children,
and scatter the fleet by a terrible storm.
“‘o æolus! since the sire of all
has made the wind obey thy call
to raise or lay the foam,
a race i hate now plows the sea,
[pg ]
transporting troy to italy
and home gods reft of home:
lash thou thy winds, their ships submerge,
or toss them weltering o’er the surge.’”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
the
tempest.
this request was immediately granted. the vessels, tossed
hither and thither, lost sight of each other. some were stranded,
some sank, and still the tempest raged on with
unabated fury, and death stared the unhappy trojans
in the face. the commotion on the deep finally aroused
neptune, who came to the surface just in time to see all the
misfortunes which had overwhelmed æneas. he imperiously
sent the winds away, and lent a helping hand to float the stranded
ships once more.
“‘back to your master instant flee,
and tell him, not to him but me
the imperial trident of the sea
fell by the lot’s award.’”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
the trojans, grateful for his timely aid, and reassured by the
calm which now reigned supreme, steered for the nearest port,
where they anchored their seven vessels, all that now remained
of their once large fleet.
arrival in
libya.
æneas and achates, his faithful friend, immediately set out to
view the land, and ere long encountered venus, disguised as a
mortal, who informed them that they had landed
upon the libyan coast, which was under the sway
of dido, a fugitive from tyre. dido’s husband, sychæus, king
of tyre, the possessor of untold riches, had been murdered by
pygmalion, his brother-in-law; but the queen was kept in complete
ignorance of this crime, until visited in a dream by the shade
of sychæus, which bade her fly with his treasures, whose place of
concealment she alone knew.
dido obeyed the ghost’s commands, and, accompanied by a
number of faithful subjects, landed on the libyan coast, where
[pg ]
she entreated the inhabitants to sell her as much land as an ox-hide
would inclose. this seemingly modest request was immediately
granted; but the libyans regretted their compliance
when they saw the ox-hide cut up into tiny strips, which inclosed
a considerable tract of land, the site of dido’s beautiful capital,
carthage.
æneas and
dido.
thither venus advised her son to proceed and claim the
queen’s protection. æneas and achates obediently hastened
onward, and entered the town unseen, for venus
had enveloped them both in a mist. their attention
was first attracted by the festive appearance of the people
assembled together, and by the beauty of the queen, giving audience
to some of their companions, who had miraculously escaped
from the waves.
these men spoke to the queen of their renowned chief, whose
fame had already reached her ear; and she gladly promised to
send out a search party to discover him, and aid him if necessary.
“‘i will send
and search the coast from end to end,
if haply, wandering up and down,
he bide in woodland or in town.’”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
at these gracious words, æneas stepped forward, the mist vanished,
and he stood before the queen in all his manly beauty.
dido then led her guests to the banquet hall, where they recounted
their adventures by land and sea, while partaking of the
viands and wines set before them. at this feast, cupid, at
venus’ request, assumed the face and form of iulus, æneas’
young son, and, reclining on the queen’s bosom, secretly thrust
one of his darts into her heart, and made her fall in love with
æneas.
æneas at the court of dido.—guerin.
day after day now passed in revelry and pleasure, and still
æneas lingered by dido’s side, forgetful of the new kingdom
he was destined to found. one whole year passed thus; and the
[pg ]
gods, impatient of delay, finally sent mercury to remind æneas
of his duty.
to avoid dido’s tears and recriminations, the hero kept his
preparations for departure a complete secret, and finally set sail
while she was wrapt in slumber. when she awoke and looked
out of her palace window, it was only to see the last vessel sink
beneath the horizon.
death of
dido.
concealing her grief, and pretending an anger she did not feel,
she bade her servants make a funeral pyre, and place upon it all
the objects æneas had used during his sojourn in
her palace; then, on top of it all, she set an effigy
of her false lover, set fire to the pyre, sprang into the midst of
the flames, and there stabbed herself.
“‘yet let me die: thus, thus i go
exulting to the shades below.
let the false dardan feel the blaze
that burns me pouring on his gaze,
and bear along, to cheer his way,
the funeral presage of to-day.’”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
from the mast of his vessel æneas saw the rising column of
smoke, and his heart sank within him; for he suspected its fatal
import, and honestly mourned the death of the beautiful queen.
funeral
games.
the trojans sailed onward until the threatening clouds made
them take refuge in the sicanian port, where they celebrated the
usual games to commemorate anchises’ death,
which had occurred there just one year previous.
while the men were engaged in the customary naval, foot, and
horse races, boxing, wrestling, and archery matches, the women
gathered together, and, instigated by juno, began to bewail the
hard lot which compelled them to encounter again the perils of
the sea. their discontent ultimately reached such a pitch that
they set fire to the vessels. when æneas heard of this new
misfortune, he rushed down to the shore, tore his costly festal
[pg ]
garments, and cried to heaven for assistance in this his time of
direst need.
“‘dread sire, if ilium’s lorn estate
deserve not yet thine utter hate,
if still thine ancient faithfulness
give heed to mortals in distress,
oh, let the fleet escape the flame!
oh, save from death troy’s dying name!’”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
apparition of
anchises.
this prayer was instantly answered by a sudden severe shower,
which quenched the devouring flames. soon after this miracle,
anchises appeared to æneas, and bade him leave
the women, children, and aged men in sicily, and
travel on to cumæ, where he was to consult the sibyl, visit the
infernal regions, and there receive further advice from him.
“first seek the halls of dis below,
pass deep avernus’ vale, and meet
your father in his own retreat.”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
æneas again dutifully obeyed; but when venus saw him afloat
once more, she hastened to neptune, and bade him watch over
her unfortunate son. neptune listened very graciously to her
appeal, and promised to take but one of all the many lives intrusted
to his care. that one was æneas’ pilot, palinurus, who,
falling asleep at the helm, fell overboard and was drowned.
the cumæan
sibyl.
as for the fleet, it reached the cumæan shore in safety; and
æneas hastened off to the sibyl’s cave, made known his wish
to visit hades, and entreated her to serve as his
guide in that perilous journey. she consented,
but at the same time informed him that he must first obtain a
golden twig, which grew in a dark forest.
“none may reach the shades without
the passport of that golden sprout.”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
[pg ]
cumæan sibyl.—domenichino. (borghese gallery, rome.)
[pg ]
almost despairing, æneas now prayed for assistance; for how
could he find a tiny golden sprig in the midst of the dense forest
foliage without the gods’ aid? in answer to this appeal, venus,
ever mindful of her son, sent two of her snowy doves to lead
the way and alight on the tree, where æneas readily found the
object of his search.
armed with this branch as key, he and the sibyl boldly entered
the lower regions, where all the ghastly sights and
sounds we have already described (p. ) met them on every side.
charon quickly ferried them over the acheron, on whose bank
they saw the wandering shade of palinurus, who had no obolus
to pay his way across, and that of dido, with a gaping wound
in her breast.
they did not pause, however, until they reached the elysian
fields, where they found anchises, gravely considering among
the unborn souls those who were destined to animate his race
and make it illustrious in the future. these he carefully pointed
out to æneas, foretelling their future achievements, and called
by name romulus, brutus, camillus, the gracchi, cæsar,—in
fact, all the heroes of roman history.
“anchises showed æneas, in long line,
the illustrious shades of those who were to shine
one day the glory of the italian shore.”
tomas de iriarte.
arrival in
latium.
after a prolonged conversation with his father, æneas returned
to his companions, and led them to the mouth of the tiber, whose
course they followed until they reached latium,
where their wanderings were to cease. latinus,
king of the country, received them hospitably, and promised the
hand of his daughter lavinia in marriage to æneas.
lavinia was very beautiful, and had already had many suitors,
among whom turnus, a neighboring prince, boasted of the most
exalted rank. the queen, amata, specially favored this youth’s
suit; and the king would gladly have received him for a son-in-law,
[pg ]
had he not twice been warned by the gods to reserve his
daughter for a foreign prince, who had now appeared.
in spite of all the years which had elapsed since paris scorned
her attractions and bribes (p. ), juno had not yet forgotten her
hatred of the trojan race, and, afraid lest her enemy’s course
should now prove too smooth, she sent alecto, the fury, down upon
earth to stir up war, and goad amata to madness. the fury
executed both commands, and amata fled to the woods, where
she concealed her daughter lavinia, to keep her safe for turnus,
whom she preferred to æneas.
war with the
latins.
as iulus and some companions had unfortunately wounded
the pet stag of silvia, daughter of the head shepherd, a brawl
ensued, which, fomented by alecto, soon developed
into a bloody war. hostilities having thus begun,
turnus, with the various latin chiefs, immediately besought latinus
to open the gates of janus’ temple. he refused; but juno,
afraid lest even now her plans might be set at naught, came
down from olympus, and with her own hand flung wide the
brazen doors. this unexpected apparition kindled a general
ardor; new troops enlisted; and even camilla, the volscian
warrior-maiden, came to proffer her aid to turnus.
“last marches forth for latium’s sake
camilla fair, the volscian maid,
a troop of horsemen in her wake
in pomp of gleaming steel arrayed;
stern warrior queen!”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
story of
camilla.
when but a babe in arms, camilla had been carried off by her
father, as he fled before the volscian troops. when he came
to the amasenus river, he found his pursuers close
at his heels. tying his infant daughter to his spear,
he hurled her to the opposite bank, which, thanks to diana’s
aid, she reached unharmed, while her father plunged into the
waves to join her. in his gratitude to find her safe, he
[pg ]
dedicated her to diana, who trained her to love the chase and all
manly pursuits.
surprised to see latinus’ friendly offers of hospitality so suddenly
withdrawn, æneas made rapid preparations for war, and
sailed farther up the tiber to secure the aid of evander, king
of the tuscans, the hereditary foe of the latins. this monarch,
too old to lead his troops in person, nevertheless promised his
aid, and sent his beloved son pallas in his stead to command the
troops he supplied.
nisus and
euryalus.
juno, still implacable, had in the mean while sent iris to apprise
turnus of æneas’ departure, and to urge him to set fire to the
remainder of the fleet,—a suggestion which turnus
joyfully obeyed. the trojans, headed by young
iulus, æneas’ son, defended themselves with their usual courage;
but, seeing the enemy would soon overpower them, they dispatched
nisus and euryalus, two of their number, to warn æneas
of their danger, and entreat him to hasten up with his reënforcements.
these unfortunate youths passed through the camp unseen,
but farther on fell into the hands of a troop of volscian
horsemen, who cruelly put them to death, and then hurried
with the rutules to lend assistance to turnus. next some of
the trojan vessels were fired by the enemy; but, instead of
being consumed by the flames, they were changed into water
nymphs by the intervention of the gods, and, sailing down the
tiber, met æneas, and warned him to hasten to his son’s rescue.
“his vessels change their guise,
and each and all as nereids rise.”
virgil.
the
armor.
in the mean while, venus, who befriended the trojans, had
sought vulcan’s detested abode, and had prevailed upon him to
forge a beautiful armor for æneas. on the shield,
which is minutely described in one of the books of
virgil’s celebrated epic poem, the æneid, were depicted many
of the stirring scenes in the lives of the future descendants of
[pg ]
æneas, the heroes of roman history. as soon as this armor was
completed, venus brought it to her son, who donned it with visible
pleasure, and, encouraged by his mother’s words, prepared
to meet the latins and hold his own.
venus and juno were not the only deities interested in the
coming struggle; for all the gods, having watched æneas’ career,
were anxious about his fate. seeing this, and fearful lest their
interference should still further endanger the hero whom he
favored, jupiter assembled the gods on high olympus, and
sternly forbade their taking any active part in the coming strife,
under penalty of his severe displeasure.
æneas’
arrival.
æneas and his tuscan allies arrived on the battle scene just
in time to give the necessary support to the almost exhausted
trojans; and now the fight raged more fiercely
than ever, and prodigies of valor were accomplished
on both sides, until finally young pallas fell, slain by
turnus. when aware of the death of this promising young
prince, æneas’ heart was filled with grief, for he could imagine
the sorrow of the aged evander when he saw his son’s corpse
brought home for burial; and he then and there registered a
solemn vow to avenge pallas’ death by slaying turnus, and immediately
hastened forth to keep his word.
juno’s
treachery.
in the mean while, juno, suspecting what his purpose would
be, and afraid to allow turnus to encounter such a formidable
antagonist as æneas, had determined to lure her
favorite away from the field. to compass this,
she assumed the form of æneas, challenged turnus, and, as soon
as he began the fight, fled toward the river, and took refuge on
one of the vessels, closely pursued by him. no sooner did she
see the rutule chief safe on board, than she loosed the vessel
from its moorings, and allowed it to drift down the stream, bearing
turnus away from the scene of battle. aware now of the
delusion practiced, turnus raved, and accused the gods, and
then eagerly watched for an opportunity to land, and make his
way, alone and on foot, back to the scene of conflict.
æneas’
prowess.
[pg ]
during turnus’ involuntary absence, æneas had ranged all over
the battlefield in search of him, and had encountered and slain
many warriors, among others lausus and his aged
father mezentius, two allies of latinus, who had
specially distinguished themselves by their great valor. the
dead and dying covered the field, when latinus, weary of bloodshed,
summoned a council, and again vainly tried to make peace.
but his efforts were of no avail. the war was renewed more
fiercely than ever; and in the next encounter, camilla, the brave
volscian maiden, fell at last, breathing a fervent entreaty that
turnus should hasten to the succor of his despairing people if he
would not see them all slain and the town in the hands of the
trojans.
“‘go: my last charge to turnus tell,
to haste with succor, and repel
the trojans from the town—farewell.’”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
æneas’
wound.
shortly after her death, in the very midst of the fray, æneas
suddenly felt himself wounded by an arrow sent by some mysterious
hand. he hastened to seek the aid of the
leech iapis; but, in spite of his ministrations, the
barb could not be removed nor the wound dressed, until venus
brought a magic herb, which instantly healed the hero, and
enabled him to return to the fight with unabated strength and
energy.
the tide was now decidedly turning in favor of the trojans;
for amata, the latin queen, sorry for her ill-advised opposition
to her daughter’s marriage with æneas, brought lavinia home
and hung herself in a fit of remorse.
death of
turnus.
æneas, appearing once more on the battlefield, finally encountered
the long-sought turnus, who had made his way back,
and was now driving about in his chariot, jealously
guarded by his sister juturna, who, the better to
watch over his safety, had taken the place of his chariot driver.
the two heroes, having met, instantly closed in deadly fight;
[pg ]
but, in spite of turnus’ bravery, he was finally obliged to succumb,
and sank to the ground, frankly acknowledging himself
beaten as he exhaled his last sigh.
“‘yours is the victory: latian bands
have seen me stretch imploring hands:
the bride lavinia is your own:
thus far let foeman’s hate be shown.’”
virgil (conington’s tr.).
æneas’
progeny.
with the death of turnus the war came to an end. a lasting
peace was made with latinus; and the brave trojan hero, whose
woes were now over, was united in marriage with
lavinia. in concert with latinus, he ruled the
latins, and founded a city, which he called lavinia in honor
of his bride, and which became for a time the capital of latium.
æneas, as the gods had predicted, became the father of a
son named æneas silvia, who founded alba longa, where his
descendants reigned for many a year, and where one of his race,
the vestal virgin ilia, after marrying mars, gave birth to remus
and romulus, the founders of rome (p. ).
[pg ]
“i shall indeed interpret all that i can, but i cannot interpret all that i
should like.”—grimm.
early
theories.
in attempting an analysis of the foregoing myths, and an explanation
of their origin, it is impossible, in a work of this kind,
to do more than give a very superficial idea of
the scientific theories of various eminent mythologists,
who, on this subject, like doctors, are sure to disagree.
these myths, comprising “the entire intellectual stock of the
age to which they belonged,” existed as “floating talk among
the people” long ere they passed into the literature of the nation;
and while to us mythology is merely “an affair of historical or
antiquarian study, we must remember that the interpretation of
myths was once a thing full of vital interest to men whose moral
and religious beliefs were deeply concerned.” received at first
with implicit faith, these myths became a stumbling block as
civilization advanced. cultured man recoiled from much of the
grossness which had appeared quite natural to his ancestors in a
savage state, and made an attempt to find out their primitive
meaning, or an explanation which would satisfy his purer taste.
with the latter object in view, the sages and writers of old interpreted
all that seemed “silly and senseless” in mythology as
physical allegories,—a system subsequently carried to extremes
by many heathen philosophers in the vain hope of evading christian
satire.
learned men have also explained these selfsame myths as
[pg ]
historical facts disguised as metaphors, or as moral allegories,
which the choice of hercules (p. ) undoubtedly is. euhemerus
( b.c.) was the pioneer of the former theory, and
bacon an exponent of the latter. euhemerus’ method was exaggerated
by his disciples, who declared zeus was merely a king of
crete; his war with the giants, an attempt to repress a sedition;
danae’s shower of gold (p. ), the money with which her guards
were bribed; prometheus, a maker of clay images, “whence it
was hyperbolically said he created man out of clay;” and atlas,
an astronomer, who was therefore spoken of as supporting the
weight of the heavens. this mode of interpretation was carried
to such an extreme that it became ridiculous, and the inevitable
reaction took place. in the course of time, however, the germ
of truth it contained was again brought to light; and very few
persons now refuse to believe that some of the heroic myths have
some slight historical basis, the “silly and senseless” element being
classed as accretions similar to the fabulous tales attached to the
indubitably historical name of charlemagne. during the seventeenth
century, some philosophers, incited by “the resemblance
between biblical narrative and ancient myths, came to the conclusion
that the bible contained a pure and the myths a distorted
form of an original revelation.” but within the past century new
theories have gradually gained ground: for the philologists have
attempted to prove that the myths arose from a “disease of
language;” while the anthropologists, basing their theory on
comparative mythology, declare “it is man, it is human thought
and human language combined, which naturally and necessarily
produced the strange conglomerate of ancient fable.”
modern
theories.
as these two last-named schools have either successfully confuted
or incorporated the theories of all their predecessors, a
brief outline of their respective beliefs will not be
out of place. while philology compares only the
“myths of races which speak languages of the same family” (as
will shortly be demonstrated), anthropology resorts to all folklore,
and seeks for the origin of myths, not in language, which it
[pg ]
considers only as a subordinate cause, but in the “condition of
thought through which all races have passed.”
anthropological
theory.
the anthropologists, or comparative mythologists, do not deny
that during the moderate allowance of two hundred and fifty
thousand years, which they allot to the human race
on earth, the myths may have spread from a single
center, and either by migration, or by slave or wife stealing, or
by other natural or accidental methods, may have “wandered
all around the globe;” but they principally base their arguments
on the fact that just as flint arrowheads are found in all parts of
the world, differing but slightly in form and manufacture, so the
myths of all nations “resemble each other, because they were
formed to meet the same needs, out of the same materials.”
they argue that this similarity exists, “not because the people
came from the same stock” (which is the philologist’s view), “but
because they passed through the same savage intellectual condition.”
by countless examples taken from the folklore of all
parts of the earth, they prove that the savage considers himself
akin to beasts (generally to the one whose image is used as a tribal
or family badge or totem), and “regards even plants, inanimate
objects, and the most abstract phenomena, as persons with human
parts and passions.” to the savage, “sun, moon, and stars are persons,
but savage persons;” and, as he believes “many of his own
tribe fellows to have the power of assuming the form of animals,”
he concedes the same privilege and power to sun, moon, and stars,
etc. this school further prove that all pre-christian religions have
idols representing beasts, that all mythologies represent the gods
as fond of appearing in animal forms, and declare, that, although
the greeks were a thoroughly civilized people, we can still find
in their mythology and religion “abundant survivals of savage
manners and savage myths.” they claim, that, during the myth-making
age, the ancestors of the greeks were about on an intellectual
level with the present australian bushmen, and that
“everything in civilized mythologies which we regard as irrational,
seems only part of the accepted and rational order of things
[pg ]
to the contemporary savages, and in the past seemed equally
rational and natural to savages concerning whom we have historical
information.” of course it is difficult, not to say impossible,
for civilized man to put himself in the savage’s place, and regard
things from his point of view. the nearest approach to primitive
intelligence which comes under our immediate observation is
the working of the minds of small children, who, before they can
talk intelligibly, whip the table or chair against which they have
bumped their heads, and later on delight in weaving the most extraordinary
tales. a little four-year-old seized a book and began
to “read a story;” that is to say, to improvise a very improbable
and highly colored tale of a pony. forced to pause from
lack of breath, she resumed the thread of her narrative with the
words, “now, this dog;” and, when it was suggested that the
story was about a pony, she emphatically replied, “well, this pony
was a dog,” and continued. now, either because she perceived
that the transformation had attracted attention, or to satisfy the
childish inborn taste for the marvelous, in the course of the next
few minutes the pony underwent as many transformations as
proteus, all of which apparently seemed perfectly natural to her.
the anthropologists explain the tales of the various transformations
of jupiter and his animal progeny “as in many cases survivals
of the totemistic belief in descent from beasts,” while the
mythologists explain them as “allegories of the fruitful union
of heaven and earth, of rain and grain.” the former school also
declare that the myth of cupid and psyche, which has its parallel
in stories found in all parts of the world, was invented to explain
curious marriage customs (for in some countries it is unlawful for
the husband to see his wife’s face until after she has given birth to
her first child, and in others a wife may not speak her husband’s
name): the latter school interpret the same myth as a beautiful
allegory of the soul and the union of faith and love.
philological
theory.
the philologists’ interpretation of myths is not only the most
accredited at the present time, but also the most poetical. we
therefore give a brief synopsis of their theory, together with
[pg ]
an analysis, from their point of view, of the principal myths told
at length in the course of this work. according to this school,
“myths are the result of a disease of language, as
the pearl is the result of a disease of the oyster;”
the key to all mythologies lies in language; and the original names
of the gods, “ascertained by comparative philology, will be found,
as a rule, to denote elemental or physical phenomena,” that is,
phenomena of the sunshine, the clouds, rain, winds, fire, etc.
to make their process of reasoning plain, it should be explained,
that as french, spanish, and italian are derived from the latin,
even so latin, greek, and sanskrit have a common source in a
much older language; that, even if latin were entirely lost, the
similarity of the word “bridge,” for instance (pons in latin), in
french (pont), in spanish (puente), and in italian (ponte), would
justify the conclusion that these terms had their origin in a common
language, and that the people who spoke it were familiar
with bridges, which they evidently called by some name phonetically
the same.
further to prove their position, they demonstrate the similarity
of the most common words in all the languages of the same
family, showing (as is the case with the word “father” in the accompanying
table) that they undergo but few changes in sixteen
different languages.
sanskrit, pitri.
zend, paitar.
persian, pader.
erse, athair.
italian, padre.
spanish, padre.
french, père.
saxon, fæder.
latin, pater.
greek, pronounced pätair.
gothic, vatar.
german, vater.
dutch, fader.
danish, fader.
swedish, fader.
english, father.
the most learned of all these philologists argues that during
the first or rhematic period, there existed a tribe in central asia
which spoke a monosyllabic language, in which lay the germs of
the turanian, aryan, and semitic forms of speech. this
[pg ]
rhematic period was followed by the nomadic or agglutinative age,
when, little by little, the languages “received once for all that
peculiar impress of their formative system which we still find in
all the dialects and national idioms comprised under the name of
aryan or semitic;” that is to say, in the hindoo, persian, greek,
roman, celt, slav, and teutonic languages, and in some three
thousand kindred dialects.
after the agglutinative period, and previous to the national era
and “the appearance of the first traces of literature,” he places
“a period represented everywhere by the same characteristic
features, called the mythological or mythopœic age.”
it was during this period that the main part of the vast fund
of mythic lore is supposed to have crystallized; for primitive man,
knowing nothing whatever of physical laws, cause and effect,
and the “necessary regularity of things,” yet seeking an explanation
of the natural phenomena, described them in the only way
possible to him, and attributed to all inanimate objects his own
sentiments and passions, fancying them influenced by the same
things, in the same way. this tendency to personify or animate
everything is universal among savages, who are nothing but men
in the primitive state; and “in early philosophy throughout the
world, the sun, moon, and stars are alive, and, as it were, human
in their nature.” “poetry has so far kept alive in our minds the
old animative theory of nature, that it is no great effort in us to
fancy the waterspout a huge giant or a sea monster, and to depict,
in what we call appropriate metaphor, its march across the
field of ocean.”
as the names of the greek gods and heroes have in a great
measure been found to correspond with the sanskrit names of
physical things, we have been able to read some of the first
thoughts of primitive man; and “the obvious meaning” of many
words “did much to preserve vestiges of plain sense in classic
legend, in spite of all the efforts of the commentators.”
according to the philologists, therefore, these thoughts had
already assumed a definite form in the remote epoch when many
[pg ]
nations, now scattered over the face of the earth, occupied the
same country, spoke the same language, and formed but one
people. of course, “as long as such beings as heaven or sun
are consciously talked of in mythic language, the meaning of their
legends is open to no question, and the action ascribed to them
will as a rule be natural and appropriate;” but with the gradual diffusion
of this one people to various parts of the earth, the original
meaning of these words was entirely lost, and they came to be
looked upon eventually simply as the names of deities or heroes—very
much in the way that the word “good-by” has long survived
its original form as a conscious prayer, “god be with you!” and
the word “ostracism” has lost all connection with an oyster shell.
the primitive meaning of a myth died away with the original
meaning of a word; and it is because “the greek had forgotten
that zeus (jupiter) meant ‘the bright sky,’ that he could make
him king” over a company of manlike deities on olympus.
we can best explain how the many anomalies occur, and how
the myths got so tangled up together that now it is almost
impossible to disentangle them and trace them back to their
original meanings, by comparing their descent through the ages
to the course of a snowball, which, rolling down a mountain side,
gathers to itself snow, earth, rocks, etc., until, in the vast agglomeration
of kindred and foreign substances, the original nucleus
is entirely lost to sight.
the fact that there are many different myths to explain the
same phenomenon can readily be accounted for by the old saying,
“circumstances alter cases.” thus the heat of the sun, for
example, so beneficial at certain times, may prove baleful and
injurious at others.
the philologists, who believe that all myths (except the imitative
myths, of which the tale of berenice is a fair example)
were originally nature myths, have divided them into a few large
classes, which include the myths of the sky, the sun, dawn, daylight,
night, moon, earth, sea, clouds, fire, wind, and finally those
of the underworld and of the demons of drought and darkness.
[pg ]
uranus.
taking them in the order in which they are presented in this
work, we find among the myths of the sky, uranus, whose name,
like that of the old hindoo god varuna, is derived
from the sanskrit root var (“to veil, conceal,
or cover”). this god was therefore a personification of the heavens,
which are spread out like a veil, and cover all the earth; and
we are further told that he hurled the thunder and lightning, his cyclop
children, down from his abode into the abyss called tartarus.
jupiter.
zeus (or jupiter), whose name is the same as the hindoo
dyaus pitar, the god and personification of the bright sky or the
heavens, has likewise been traced to the sanskrit
root div or dyu, meaning “to shine;” and there is
also a noun dyu in that language which means either “sky” or
“day.” in early times the name was applied to the one god,
and was therefore “retained by the greeks and all other kindred
people to express all they felt toward god;” but as the
word also meant the visible sky, with its ever-changing aspect,
some of the phrases used to describe it came, in the course of
time, to denote vile and fickle actions, and apparently inconsistent
behavior.
juno.
the name of hera (or juno), the heavenly light, and therefore
the complement and consort of the sky, is supposed to be derived
from the sanskrit soar (“the bright sky”) and surya
(“the sun”); and all the manifold changes which
at first merely denoted the varying atmosphere, by being personified,
gradually gave the impression of the jealous, capricious,
vengeful person whom poets and writers have taken pleasure in
depicting ever since.
argus.
another personification of the sky, this time under the nocturnal
and starry aspect, is argus, whose many bright eyes never
closed all at once, but kept constant watch over
the moon (io)—confided to his care by the heavenly
light (juno)—until at last their beams were quenched by
the wind and rain (mercury).
[pg ]
europa.
the myths of the sun, from which it is almost impossible to
separate those of the dawn, are probably more numerous than
any others, and have some main features of resemblance
in all cases. the first sun myth mentioned
in the course of this work is the story of europa, in which
europa is “the broad spreading light,” born in phœnicia (the
“purple land of morn”), the child of telephassa (“she who
shines from afar”), carried away from her eastern birthplace by
the sky (jupiter), closely pursued by the sun (her brother cadmus),
who, after passing through many lands, slays a dragon (the
usual demon of drought or darkness), and sets (dies) at last without
having ever overtaken the light of dawn (europa).
apollo.
apollo, whose name of helios is pure greek for “the sun,”
had therefore not lost all physical significance for the hellenic
race, who worshiped in him the radiant personification
of the orb of day. another of his appellations,
phœbus (“the lord of life and light”), still further
emphasizes his character; and we are informed that he was
born of the sky (jupiter) and of the dark night (leto), in the
“bright land” (delos), whence he daily starts on his westward
journey.
like all other solar heroes, apollo is beautiful and golden-haired,
radiant and genial, armed with unerring weapons, which
he wields for good or evil, as the mood sways him. he is forced
to labor, against his will at times, for the benefit of man, as, for
instance, when he serves admetus and laomedon; and the
cattle, by which he evidently sets such store, are the fleecy
clouds, pasturing “in the infinite meadows of heaven,” whose full
udders drop down rain and fatness upon the land, which are
stolen away either by the wind (mercury), or the storm demon
(cacus), or the impious companions of ulysses, who pay for
their sacrilegious temerity with their lives.
coronis.
the sun’s affinity for the dawn is depicted by his love for
coronis, who, however beloved, falls beneath his bright darts;
[pg ]
and, as “the sun was regarded naturally as the restorer of life”
after the blighting influence of winter and disease, so their offspring
(æsculapius) was naturally supposed to have
been endowed with marvelous curative powers.
the sun, for the same reason, was supposed to wage continual
warfare against cold, sickness, and disease, and to use his bright
beams or arrows against the demon of drought, darkness, or illness
(python), which in some form or other inevitably appears in
every solar myth.
daphne.
in the story of daphne, a name derived from dahana, the
sanskrit dawn, we find another version of the same story, where
the sun, although enamored with the dawn, causes
her death. as some mythologists have interpreted
it, daphne is a personification of the morning dew, which vanishes
beneath the sun’s hot breath, and leaves no trace of its
passage except in the luxuriant verdure.
cephalus and
procris.
in cephalus and procris the sun again appears, and his unerring
spear unwittingly causes the death of his beloved procris
“while she lingers in a thicket (a place where the
dew lingers longest).” this interpretation has been
further confirmed by philological researches, which prove that
the name “procris” originated from a sanskrit word meaning
“to sprinkle;” and the stories evidently arose from three simple
phrases,—“‘the sun loves the dew,’ ‘the morning loves the
sun,’ and ‘the sun kills the dew.’”
orpheus and
eurydice.
in the tale of orpheus and eurydice, while some mythologists
see in him a personification of the winds, which “tear up trees
as they course along, chanting their wild music,”
others see an emblem of “the morning, with its
short-lived beauty.” eurydice, whose name, like that of europa,
comes from a sanskrit word denoting “the broad spreading flush
of the dawn across the sky,” is, of course, a personification of that
light, slain by “the serpent of darkness at twilight.”
orpheus is also sometimes considered as the sun, plunging into
an abyss of darkness, in hopes of overtaking the vanishing dawn,
[pg ]
eurydice; and as the light (eurydice) reappears opposite the
place where he disappeared, but is no more seen after the sun
himself has fairly risen, “they say that orpheus has turned around
too soon to look at her, and so was parted from the wife he loved
so dearly.”
his death in the forest, when his strength had all forsaken
him, and his severed head floated down the stream murmuring
“eurydice,” may also, perchance, have been intended to represent
either the last faint breath of the expiring wind, or the setting
of the sun in blood-tinged clouds.
phaeton.
in the story of phaeton, whose name means “the bright and
shining one,” a description of the golden palace and car of the
sun is given us. we are told that the venturesome
young charioteer, by usurping his father’s place,
causes incalculable mischief, and, in punishment for his mismanagement
of the solar steeds (the fleecy white clouds), is hurled
from his exalted seat by a thunderbolt launched by the hand of
jupiter.
“this story arose from phrases which spoke of drought as
caused by the chariot of helios, when driven by some one who
knew not how to guide his horses; and the smiting of phaeton
by the bolt of zeus is the ending of the time of drought by a
sudden storm of thunder.”
endymion.
the story of diana and endymion has also been interpreted
as a sun myth, in which the name “endymion” refers specially
to the dying or setting sun, who sinks to rest on
mount latmus (“the land of forgetfulness,” derived
from the same root as “leto”). müller, the great authority
in philology, tells us, that, in the ancient poetical and proverbial
language of elis, people said, “selene loves and watches endymion,”
instead of saying, “it is getting late;” “selene embraces
endymion,” instead of, “the sun is setting and the moon is
rising;” “selene kisses endymion into sleep,” instead of, “it is
night.”
these expressions remained long after their real meaning had
[pg ]
ceased to be understood; and, as the human mind is generally as
anxious for a reason as ready to invent one, a story arose without
any conscious effort, that endymion must have been a young lad
loved by a young maiden, selene.
adonis.
in the story of adonis some mythologists find another sun
myth, in which adonis, the short-lived sun, is slain
by the boar, the demon of darkness, and passionately
mourned by the dawn or twilight (venus), who utterly refuses
to exist without him.
tantalus.
in the story of tantalus (the sun), who in time of drought
offers to jupiter the flesh of his own offspring, pelops (the withered
fruits), and in punishment for his impiety
is doomed to hunger and torturing thirst, we have
again merely a story founded upon an expression used in time
of drought, when the sun’s heat, becoming too intense, burns up
the fruit his fostering rays had produced, and men exclaimed,
“tantalus is slaying and roasting his own child!”
sisyphus.
in the same way the stone which sisyphus painfully forced up
a steep ascent, only to see it go rolling down and plunge into
a dark abyss enveloped in a great cloud of dust,
has been interpreted to represent the sun, which
is no “sooner pushed up to the zenith, than it rolls down to the
horizon.”
ixion.
the name of ixion has been identified with the sanskrit word
akshanah, denoting one who is bound to a wheel, and has been
proved akin “to the greek axôn, the latin axis,
and the english axle.” this whirling wheel of
fire is the bright orb of day, to which he was bound by order of
jupiter (the sky) because he dared insult juno (the queen of the
blue air); while dia, his wife, is the dawn, the counterpart of
europa, coronis, daphne, procris, eurydice, and venus, in the
foregoing illustrations.
hercules.
one of the greatest of all the solar heroes is doubtless the
demigod hercules, born at argos (a word signifying “brightness”)
from the sky (jupiter) and the dawn (alcmene), who, in
[pg ]
early infancy, throttles the serpents of darkness, and who, with
untiring strength and patience, plods through life, never resting,
and always on his journey performing twelve great
tasks, interpreted to represent either the twelve
signs of the zodiac, or the twelve months of the solar year, or
the twelve hours of daylight.
iole.
like apollo and cadmus, hercules is forced to labor for
mankind against his will. we see him early in life united to
megara, and, like tantalus, slaying his own offspring
in a sudden fit of madness. he loves and
is soon forced to leave iole, the violet-colored clouds. he performs
great deeds, slays innumerable demons of drought and
darkness on his way, and visits the enchanted land of the hesperides,—a
symbol of the western sky and clouds at sunset.
deianeira.
the main part of his life is spent with deianeira (“the destroying
spouse”), a personification of the daylight; but toward the
end of his career he again encounters iole, now
the beautiful twilight. it is then that deianeira
(the daylight), jealous of her rival’s charms, sends him the bloody
nessus robe, which he has no sooner donned, than he tears it
from his bleeding limbs, ascends the burning pile, and ends his
career in one grand blaze,—the emblem of the sun setting in a
framework of flaming crimson clouds.
like all solar heroes, he too has unerring poisoned weapons
(“the word ios, ‘a spear,’ is the same in sound as the word ios,
‘poison’”), of which he is shorn only at death.
perseus.
perseus also belongs to this category of myths. danae, his
mother, either the earth (dano means “burnt earth”) or the dawn,
a daughter of acrisius (darkness), is born in argos
(brightness). loved by jupiter, the all-embracing
sky, she gives birth to the golden-haired perseus, a personification
of the radiant orb of day; and he, like many another
solar hero, is cast adrift immediately after his birth, owing to an
ominous prophecy that he will slay the darkness from which he
originally sprang.
[pg ]
as soon as perseus attains manhood, he is forced to journey
against his will into the distant land of the mists (the grææ), and
conquer the terrible medusa, “the starlit night, solemn in its
beauty, but doomed to die when the sun rises.” he accomplishes
this by means of his irresistible sword, the piercing rays of the
sun, and then passes on to encounter the monster of drought,
and to marry andromeda, another personification of the dawn,
the offspring of celeus and cassiopeia, who also represent night
and darkness.
in company with andromeda, perseus, whose name also signifies
“the destroyer,” revisits his native land, and fulfills the
prophecy by slaying acrisius (the darkness), whence he originally
sprang.
theseus.
in the athenian solar myth, theseus is the sun, born of ægeus
(the sea, derived from aisso, “to move quickly like the waves”)
and æthra (the pure air). he lingers in his birthplace,
trœzene, until he has acquired strength
enough to wield his invincible sword, then journeys onward in
search of his father, performing countless great deeds for the benefit
of mankind. he slays the minotaur, the terrible monster of
darkness, and carries off the dawn (ariadne); whom he is, however,
forced to abandon shortly after on the island of naxos.
in his subsequent career we find him the involuntary cause of
his father’s death, then warring against the centaurs (personifications
of the clouds, through which the victorious sun is sometimes
forced to fight his way), then again plunging for a short
space of time into the depths of tartarus, whence he emerges
once more; and finally we see him uniting his fate to phædra
(the twilight), a sister of the beautiful dawn he loved in his youth.
he ends his eventful career by being hurled headlong from a
cliff into the sea,—an emblem of the sun, which often seems to
plunge into the waves at eventide.
argonauts.
in the story of the argonautic expedition we have athamas,
who marries nephele (the mist). their children are phryxus
and helle (the cold and warm air, or personifications of the
[pg ]
clouds), carried off to the far east by the ram—whose golden
fleece was but an emblem of the rays of the sun—to enable
them to escape from the baleful influence of their
stepmother ino (the broad daylight), who would
fain encompass their destruction.
medea.
helle, an emblem of the condensation of vapor, falls from
her exalted seat into the sea, where she is lost. the ship argo
“is a symbol of the earth as a parent, which contains
in itself the germs of all living things.” its
crew is composed mainly of solar heroes, all in quest of the
golden fleece (the rays of the sun), which jason recovers by the
aid of medea (the dawn), after slaying the dragon (the demon of
drought). æetes, medea’s father, is a personification of the
darkness, which vainly attempts to recover his children, the
dawn and light (?), after they have been borne away by the all-conquering
sun.
glauce.
glauce (the broad daylight) next charms jason; and the
poisoned robe which causes her death is woven by medea, now
the evening twilight, who mounts her dragon car
and flies to the far east, forsaking her husband (the
sun) in his old age, when he is about to sink into the sleep of
death.
meleager.
meleager is also a solar hero. after joining the argonautic
expedition, and wandering far and wide, he returns home, slays
the boar (or drought fiend), loves, but parts from,
atalanta (the dawn maiden), and is finally slain
by his own mother, who casts into the flames the brand upon
which his existence depends.
œdipus.
in the theban solar myth, laius (derived from the same root
as “leto” and “latmus”) is the emblem of darkness, who, after
marrying jocasta (like iole, a personification of
the violet-tinted clouds of dawn), becomes the
father of œdipus, doomed by fate to be the murderer of his father.
early in life œdipus is exposed on the barren hillside to perish,—an
emblem of the horizontal rays of the rising sun, which
[pg ]
seem to lie for a while upon the mountain slopes, ere they rise
to begin their journey.
he too, like cadmus, apollo, hercules, perseus, theseus,
and jason, is forced to wander far from home, and, after a prolonged
journey, encounters and slays laius (the darkness),
from whom he derived his existence, and kills the dread monster
of drought, the sphinx, whose very name means “one who binds
fast,”—a creature who had imprisoned the rain in the clouds,
and thus caused great distress.
urged on by unrelenting fate, he marries his own mother,
jocasta, now the violet-tinted twilight, and ends his life amid
lightning flashes and rolls of thunder, after being accompanied to
the end of his course by antigone (“the pale light which springs
up opposite the sun at his setting”). this story—which at first
was merely intended to signify that the sun (œdipus) must slay
the darkness (laius) and linger for a while beside the violet-colored
clouds (jocasta)—having lost its physical meaning, the
thebans added the tragic sequel, for it seemed but poetic justice
that the author of such crimes should receive signal punishment.
eumenides.
as the eumenides, or erinnyes, were at first merely the searching
light of day, from which nothing can be hidden, they came
gradually to be considered the detectives and
avengers of crime, and were therefore said to take
possession of a criminal at the end of his course, and hurry him
down into darkness to inflict horrible torments upon him.
bellerophon.
in the story of bellerophon, although the name originally
came from bellero (some “power of darkness, drought, winter,
or moral evil”) and from phon or phontes (a word
derived from the sanskrit han-tâ, “the killer”),
the greeks, having forgotten the signification of the first part of
the word, declared this hero was the murderer of bellero, his
brother, for which involuntary crime he was driven from home,
and forced to wander about in search of shelter.
we find this hero, although enticed by anteia (the dawn),
virtuously hastening away, then sent against his will to fight
[pg ]
the chimæra (the monster of drought), whom he overcomes,
thanks to his weapon and to pegasus (the clouds), born from
the mist of the sea, beneath whose hoofs fresh fountains were
wont to spring.
bellerophon, after many journeys, is finally united to philonoe,
a personification of the twilight, and ends his career by being
hurled from the zenith into utter darkness by one of jupiter’s
deadly thunderbolts.
“the fall of bellerophon is the rapid descent of the sun
toward evening, and the alein plain is that broad expanse of
somber light through which the sun sometimes seems to travel
sullenly and alone to his setting.”
trojan war.
in the story of the trojan war there are several sun myths;
for paris, menelaus, agamemnon, and achilles have equal
claims to be considered personifications of the sun.
they love œnone, helen, clytæmnestra, briseis,
various impersonations of the dawn, and forsake, or are forsaken
by, their ladyloves, whom they meet again at the end of their
career: for paris sees œnone, and expires with her on the burning
pile; menelaus recovers helen, with whom he vanishes in
the far west; agamemnon rejoins clytæmnestra, and dies by her
hand in a bloody bath; while achilles, after a period of sullen
gloom, meets with an untimely death shortly after recovering the
beautiful briseis.
like perseus and œdipus, paris is exposed in early infancy,
and lives to fulfill his destiny, and cause, though indirectly, the
death of his parents.
in this myth, helen (the beautiful dawn or twilight), whose
name corresponds phonetically with the sanskrit sarama, born of
the sky (jupiter) and of the night (leda, derived from the same
root as “leto,” “latmus,” and “laius”), is carried away by paris,
whom some mythologists identify with the hindoo panis (or
“night demons”) instead of the sun. in this character he entices
away the fickle twilight (helen) during her husband’s temporary
absence, and bears her off to the far east, where, after struggling
[pg ]
for a while to retain possession of her and her treasures, he is
finally forced to relinquish her, and she returns to her husband
and her allegiance.
the siege of troy has thus been interpreted to signify “a
repetition of the daily siege of the east by the solar powers, that
every evening are robbed of their brightest treasures in the west.”
achilles, like several of his brother heroes, “fights in no
quarrel of his own; his wrath is the sun hiding his face behind
the clouds; the myrmidons are his attendant beams, who no
longer appear when the sun is hidden; patroclus is the feeble
reflection of the sun’s splendor, and stands to him in precisely
the same relation as phaeton to helios,” and, like him, meets
with an early death.
ulysses.
in the story of ulysses we find a reproduction of the story of
hercules and perseus: for ulysses, early in life, after wedding
penelope, is forced to leave her to fight for another;
and on his return, although longing to rejoin
his morning bride, he cannot turn aside from the course
marked out for him. he is detained by circe (the moon),
who weaves airy tissues, and by calypso (the nymph of darkness);
but neither can keep him forever, and he returns home
enveloped in an impenetrable disguise, after having visited the
phæacian land (the land of clouds or mists). it is only after
he has slain the suitors of penelope (the weaver of bright evening
clouds) that he casts aside his beggar’s garb to linger for a
short time beside her ere he vanishes in the west.
minerva.
the greater part of the dawn myths have been explained
simultaneously with the sun myths, with which they are inextricably
interwoven. one personification of the
dawn, however, stands apart. it is minerva, whose
greek name, athene, is derived, like daphne, from the sanskrit
dahana, or ahana (meaning “the light of daybreak”), and we
are thus enabled to understand why the greeks described her as
sprung from the forehead of zeus (the heavens). she gradually
became the impersonation of the illuminating and knowledge-giving
[pg ]
light of the sky; for in sanskrit the same word also means
“to wake” and “to know,” while the latins connected her name
of minerva with mens, the same as the greek ménos and the
english mind.
diana, io, and
circe.
in the moon myths the most important personification is first
diana, the horned huntress, “for to the ancients the moon was
not a lifeless ball of stones and clods.” diana,
like apollo, her twin brother, was also a child of
the sky (jupiter) and of night (latona), and, like him, was born
in the “bright land” (delos). she also possessed bright and unerring
arrows, and in the course of her nightly journey she looked
lovingly down upon the sleeping face of the setting sun (endymion).
io and circe, already mentioned, are also personifications of
the moon, and io’s wanderings represent its journeys across
the sky.
gæa and
rhea.
in the earth myths, beside those already mentioned in connection
with the sun myths, we have gæa and
rhea, the mothers and consorts of the sky and of
time, who swallows his own children, “the days, as they come
each in order.”
ceres and
proserpina.
we have also ceres or demeter, “the mother of all things,”
and more particularly of “the maiden” cora (or proserpina),
whose loss she grievously mourned; for she had
been carried away by pluto to the underworld,
whence she could only emerge at the command of jupiter.
during the time of ceres’ mourning, the earth remained barren,
and it seemed as though all mortal things must die. but when
proserpina (the spring or vegetation) returned from her sojourn
under the ground, people said “that the daughter of the earth
was returning in all her beauty; and when summer faded into
winter, they said that the beautiful child had been stolen away
[pg ]
from her mother by dark beings, who kept her imprisoned beneath
the earth.” the sorrow of ceres was therefore merely a
poetical way of expressing “the gloom which falls on the earth
during the cheerless months of winter.”
danae and
semele.
danae, as a personification of the earth, was quickened by the
golden shower, the light of the morning, which streamed in upon
the darkness of the night. semele has also been
interpreted as the earth, the chosen bride of the
sky, who brings forth her offspring in the midst of the thunder
and lightning of a summer storm.
oceanus and
neptune.
the myths of the sea comprise, of course, oceanus and neptune
(the earth-shaker), whose name is connected with such words
as “potent” and “despot,” and whose “green
hair circles all the earth.” we are further informed
that he loves the earth (ceres), whom he embraces, and that he
marries the graceful undulating amphitrite, whose gliding charms
appeal to him. neptune’s palace is beneath the deep waters
near greece, and he is said to ride about his realm in a swift
chariot drawn by golden or white maned steeds.
nereus.
nereus, another personification of the sea, whose name is derived
from nao (“to flow”), is quite inseparable from his native
element, even in the greeks’ conception of him,
as are also the tritons, oceanides, nereides, and
the alluring sirens; who, however, have also been viewed as personifications
of the winds.
charon.
the cloud myths, to which frequent allusion has already been
made, comprise not only the cattle of the sun, the centaurs,
nephele, phryxus, helle, and pegasus, but as, “in
primitive aryan lore, the sky itself was a blue
sea, and the clouds were ships sailing over it,” so charon’s boat
was supposed to be one of these vessels, and the gilded shallop
[pg ]
in which the sun daily made his pilgrimage back to the far east,
another.
niobe.
as the ancient aryan had the same word to denote cloud and
mountain (“for the piles of vapor on the horizon were so like
alpine ranges”), the cloud and mountain myths
are often the same. in the story of niobe we
have one of the cloud myths. according to some mythologists,
niobe herself is a personification of the clouds. her many children,
the mists, are fully as beautiful as apollo and diana, by
whose bright darts they are ruthlessly slain. niobe grieves so
sorely at their untimely death, that she dissolves in a rain of tears,
which turns into hard ice on the mountain summit. according
to other authorities, she was a personification of winter, and
her tears represented the thaw occasioned by the sunbeams
(apollo’s arrows).
cyclopes.
the fire myths also form quite a large class, and comprise the
cyclopes (the thunder and lightning), children of heaven and
earth, whose single blazing eye has been considered
an emblem of the sun. they forge the terrible
thunderbolts, the weapons of the sky (jupiter), by means
of which he is enabled to triumph over all his enemies, and rule
supreme.
titans.
the titans are emblems of the subterranean fires and the volcanic
forces of nature, which, hidden deep underground, occasionally
emerge, heave up great masses of rock,
and hurl them about with an accompaniment of
deafening roars, while their ponderous tread causes the very
earth beneath them to tremble.
prometheus.
in this group we also find prometheus, whose name has been
traced to the sanskrit pramantha (or “fire drill”). learned men
have therefore proved that the “beneficent titan,
who stole fire from heaven and bestowed it upon
mankind as the richest of boons,” was originally nothing but
[pg ]
the lightning (“the celestial drill which churns fire out of the
clouds”); but the greeks had so entirely forgotten this etymological
meaning, that they interpreted his name as the “fore-thinker,”
and considered him endowed with extraordinary prophetic
powers.
vulcan.
vulcan (or hephæstus), strictly “the brightness of the flame,”
another fire hero, is represented as very puny at birth, because the
flame comes from a tiny spark. his name is derived
from the hindoo agni, whence come the
latin ignis and the english verb to ignite. vulcan dwells by
preference in the heart of volcanoes, where the intense heat
keeps the metals in fusion, and so malleable that he can mold
them at will; and, as “the association of the heavenly fire with
the life-giving forces of nature is very common,” the hindoo
agni was considered the patron of marriage as well as of fire;
and the greeks, to carry out this idea, united their fire god,
hephæstus, to the goddess of marriage, aphrodite.
vesta.
the greek hestia (or latin vesta) was also a personification
of fire; and, her name having retained its primitive meaning to
a great extent, “she continued to the end, as she
had been from the beginning, the household altar,
the sanctuary of peace and equity, and the source of all happiness
and wealth.” her office was not limited merely to the
hearths of households and cities, for it was supposed “that in
the center of the earth there was a hearth which answered to the
hearth placed in the center of the universe.”
mercury.
in the myths of the wind, mercury (or hermes) was one of
the principal personifications. according to the ancients, he was
born of the sky (jupiter) and the plains (maia),
and after a very few hours’ existence assumed gigantic
proportions, stole away the cattle of the sun (the clouds),
and, after fanning up a great fire in which he consumed some of
the herd, glided back into his cradle at dawn. with a low,
[pg ]
mocking chuckle at the recollection of the pranks he had played,
he sank finally into rest. his name, derived from the sanskrit
sarameias, means “the breeze of a summer morning;” and it is
in his capacity of god of the wind that he is supposed to waft
away the souls of the dead; for “the ancients held that in the
wind were the souls of the dead.” mercury is the “lying, tricksome
wind god who invented music,” for his music is but “the
melody of the winds, which can awaken feelings of joy and sorrow,
of regret and yearning, of fear and hope, of vehement gladness
and utter despair.”
mars.
another personification of the wind was mars (or ares), born
of the sky (jupiter) and of the heavenly light (juno) in the bleak
land of thrace, rejoicing in din and in the noise of
warfare. his nature is further revealed by his inconstancy
and capriciousness; and whenever he is overcome,
he is noted for his great roar. his name comes from the same
root as maruts, the indian god, and means the “grinder” or
“crusher.” it was first applied “to the storms which throw
heaven and earth into confusion, and hence the idea of ares is
confined to mere disorder and tumult.”
otus and
ephialtes.
otus and ephialtes, the gigantic sons of neptune, were also
at first merely personifications of the wind and hurricanes. the
name of the latter indicates “one who leaps.”
although very short-lived, these giants were supposed
to increase rapidly in size, and assume colossal proportions,
which inspired the hearts of men and gods with terror, until they
saw them finally slain by the unfailing arrows of the sun.
pan, æolus, and
the harpies.
pan, æolus, his numerous progeny, and the harpies, were also
wind divinities who never entirely lost their original
character with the greeks, and were therefore
worshiped merely as personifications of the elements.
cerberus
and pluto.
the myths of drought, darkness, and of the underworld have
sufficiently been dwelt upon as personified by python, the hydra,
[pg ]
geryones, the gorgons, grææ, minotaur, sphinx, chimæra, etc.;
but their main personifications were cerberus (the grim three-headed
guardian of the nether world) and pluto (or
aïdes), whose name means “the wealth-giver,” or
“the unseen,” who greedily drew all things down into his realm,
never to relinquish his grasp upon them.
such is the physical explanation of the various poetical myths
which form the staple of classic literature, and which have been a
fount of inspiration for poets and artists of all ages.
[pg ]
see larger image
{transcription:
chaos (m) married nyx (f).
their child was erebus (m).
erebus (m) married nyx (f).
their children were hemera (f), æther (m), charon (m), eris (f),
somnus (m) and mors (m).
hemera (f) married æther (m).
their children were gæa (f), eros (m) and pontus (m).
gæa (f) had a child, uranus (m).
uranus (m) married gæa (f).
their children were oceanus (m), thetis (f), cœus (m), phœbe (f), iapetus (m),
hyperion (m), crius (m), themis (f), ilia (f), cronus (m), rhea (f), mnemosyne (f),
brontes (m), steropes (m), arges (m), briareus (m), cottus (m), gyes (m), typhœus (m),
enceladus (m), antæus (m), harpies (f), tityus (m) and nereus (m).
oceanus (m) married thetis (f).
their children were achelous (m), alpheus (m), peneus (m), inachus (m), proteus (m),
doris (f), metis (f), clymene (f), æthra (f), calypso (f), clytie (f) and electra (f).
achelous (m) married calliope (f).
their children were sirens (f).
alpheus (m) married arethusa (f).
peneus (m) married gæa (f).
their child was daphne (f).
inachus (m) had a child, io (f).
doris (f) married nereus (m).
their children were amphitrite (f), dione (f), arethusa (f), galatea (f),
thetis (f) and clymene (f).
amphitrite (f) married neptune (m).
their child was triton (m).
dione (f) married jupiter (m).
their child was venus (f).
galatea (f) married acis (m).
thetis (f) married peleus (m).
their child was achilles (m).
achilles (m) had a child, pyrrhus (m).
pyrrhus (m) married hermione (f).
hermione’s parents were menelaus (m) and helen (f).
menelaus (m) had a sibling, agamemnon (m).
their parent was atreus (m).
atreus’ (m) parent was pelops (m).
pelops (m) had a sibling, niobe (f).
their parent was tantalus (m).
niobe (f) married amphion (m).
amphion (m) had a sibling, zethus (m).
their parents were jupiter (m) and antiope (f).
antiope (f) also married lycus (m), and lycus (m) also married dirce (f).
agamemnon (m) married clytæmnestra (f).
their children were iphigenia (f), electra (f) and orestes (m).
electra (f) married pylades (m).
clytæmnestra (f) had three siblings, helen (f), castor (m) and pollux (m)
their parents were tyndareus (m) and leda (f).
leda (f) also married jupiter (m).
clymene (f) married apollo (m).
their children were heliades (f) and phaeton (m).
metis (f) married jupiter (m).
their child was minerva (f).
clymene (f) married iapetus (m).
æthra (f) married atlas (m).
their children were pleiades (f) and maia (f).
maia (f) married jupiter (m).
their child was mercury (m).
mercury (m) married penelope (f).
their child was pan (m).
penelope (f) also married ulysses (m).
their child was telemachus (m).
calypso (f) married ulysses (m).
electra (f) married jupiter (m).
their child was dardanus (m).
dardanus (m) married batea (f), whose parent was teucer (m).
their descendants were laomedon (m) and themis (f).
laomedon (m) had three children, priam (m), hesione (f) and tithonus (m).
priam (m) married hecuba (f).
their children were hector (m), paris (m), cassandra (f), polites (m),
polyxena (f) and deiphobus (m).
hector (m) married andromache (f).
paris (m) married helen (f).
deiphobus (m) married helen (f).
hesione (f) married telamon (m).
their child was ajax (m).
tithonus (m) married aurora (f).
themis (f) married capys (m).
their child was anchises (m).
anchises (m) married venus (f).
their child was æneas (m).
æneas (m) married lavinia (f).
their child was æneas silvia (m).
æneas (m) also married creusa (f).
their child was iulus (m).
æneas silvia’s (m) descendant was numitor (m).
numitor (m) had a child, ilia (f).
ilia (f) married mars (m).
their children were remus (m) and romulus (m).
cœus (m) married phœbe (f).
their child was latona (f).
latona (f) married jupiter (m).
their children were apollo (m) and diana (f).
apollo (m) married diana (f).
apollo (m) also married coronis (f).
their child was æsculapius (m).
coronis (f) had a sibling, ixion (m)
their parent was mars (m).
ixion (m) married dia (f).
their children were centaurs (m) and pirithous (m).
æsculapius (m) had two children, machaon (m) and hygeia (f).
pirithous married hippodamia (f).
iapetus (m) married clymene (f).
their children were menetius (m), atlas (m), hesperus (m), epimetheus (m) and
prometheus (m).
hesperus (m) had a child, hesperides (f).
epimetheus (m) married pandora (f).
their child was pyrrha (f).
prometheus (m) had a child, deucalion (m).
pyrrha (f) married deucalion (m).
their child was hellen (m).
hellen (m) had three children, æolus (m), dorus (m) and xuthus (m).
æolus (m) had two children, salmoneus (m) and sisyphus (m).
salmoneus (m) had a child, tyro (f).
tyro (f) married neptune (m).
their children were æson (m), pelias (m) and neleus (m).
æson (m) had a child, jason (m).
jason (m) married medea (f).
medea (f) had a sibling, absyrtus (m).
their parent was æetes (m).
æetes (m) had two siblings, pasiphæ (f) and circe (f).
their parent was sol (m).
neleus (m) had a child, nestor (m).
sisyphus (m) had a child, glaucus (m).
glaucus (m) had a child, bellerophon (m).
bellerophon (m) married philonoë (f).
xuthus (m) had two children, ion (m) and achæus (m).
hyperion (m) married gæa (f).
their child was aurora (f).
aurora (f) married æolus (m).
their children were boreas (m), corus (m), eurus (m), notus (m), aquilo (m) and
zephyrus (m).
boreas (m) married orithyia (f).
their children were zetus (m), calais (m), cleopatra (f) and chione (f).
zephyrus (m) married flora (f).
themis (f) married jupiter (m).
their children were parcæ (f) and horæ (f).
cronus (m) married rhea (f).
their children were vesta (f), juno (f), jupiter (m), neptune (m), ceres (f) and pluto (m).
juno (f) married jupiter (m).
their children were mars (m), vulcan (m) and hebe (f).
mars (m) married venus (f).
their children were anteros (m), cupid (m) and harmonia (f).
cupid (m) married psyche (f).
harmonia (f) married cadmus (m).
vulcan (m) married medusa (f).
their children were cacus (m), periphetes (m) and cercyon (m).
hebe (f) married hercules (m).
jupiter (m) married io (f).
their child was epaphus (m).
epaphus (m) had a child, libya (f).
libya (f) married neptune (m).
their children were agenor (m) and belus (m).
agenor (m) married telephassa (f).
their children were cadmus (m), cilix (m), phœnix (m) and europa (f).
cadmus (m) married harmonia (f).
their children were ino (f), autonoe (f), agave (f), semele (f) and polydorus (m).
ino (f) married athamas (m).
their children were palæmon (m) and learchus (m).
athamas (m) also married nephele (f).
their children were phryxus (m) and helle (f).
autonoe (f) married aristæus (m).
their child was actæon (m).
agave (f) had a child, pentheus (m).
semele (f) married jupiter (m).
their child was bacchus (m).
bacchus (m) married ariadne (f).
polydorus (m) had a child, labdacus (m).
labdacus (m) had a child, laius (m).
laius (m) married jocasta (f).
their child was œdipus (m).
œdipus married jocasta (f).
their children were eteocles (m), polynices (m), antigone (f) and
ismene (f).
europa (f) married jupiter (m).
their children were sarpedon (m), rhadamanthus (m) and minos (m).
minos’ (m) descendant was minos (m).
minos (m) married pasiphae (f).
their children were phædra (f) and ariadne (f).
phaedra (f) married theseus (m), whose parents were ægeus (m) and æthra (f).
theseus (m) also married hippolyte (f).
their child was hippolytus (m).
ariadne (f) married bacchus (m).
belus (m) had four children, pygmalion (m), dido (f), danaus (m) and ægyptus (m).
dido (f) married sychæus (m).
danaus’ (m) children were the danaides (f).
ægyptus (m) had  sons.
the danaides (f) married the  sons.
their descendant was acrisius (m).
acrisius (m) had a child, danae (f).
danae (f) married jupiter (m).
their child was perseus (m).
perseus (m) married andromeda (f), whose parents were celeus (m) and
cassiopeia (f).
their children were alcæus (m), electryon (m) and sthenelus (m).
alcæus (m) had a child, amphitryon (m).
electryon (m) had a child, alcmene (f).
amphitryon (m) married alcmene (f).
their child was iphicles (m).
iphicles (m) had a child, iolaus (m).
alcmene (f) also married jupiter (m).
their child was hercules (m).
hercules (m) married deianeira (f), whose sibling was meleager (m),
and whose parents were œneus (m) and althæa (f).
their child was hyllus (m), who married iole (f).
sthenelus (m) had a child, eurystheus (m).
eurystheus (m) had a child, admete (f).
neptune (m) married amphitrite (f).
their child was triton (m).
ceres (f) married jupiter (m).
their child was proserpina (f).
pluto (m) married proserpina (f).
mnemosyne (f) married jupiter (m).
their children were clio (f), calliope (f), thalia (f), euterpe (f), urania (f),
melpomene (f), terpsichore (f), polyhymnia (f) and erato (f).
clio (f) had a child, hymen (m).
calliope (f) had a child, orpheus (m).
orpheus (m) married eurydice (f).
typhœus (m) had three children, hydra (m), cerberus (m) and chimæra (m).
chimæra (m) had two children, nemean lion (m) and sphinx (f).
pontus (m) had a child, phorcys (m).
phorcys (m) had four children, bellona (f), stheno (f), euryale (f) and medusa (f).
medusa (f) married neptune (m).
their children were pegasus (m) and polyphemus (m).
somnus (m) had a child, morpheus (m).}
[pg ]
addison, , , ,
æschylus, .
akenside, .
apollonius, .
apollonius rhodius, , .
arion, .
aristophanes, .
arnold, edwin, , , .
arnold, matthew, .
beaumont and fletcher, .
bion, , .
boyesen, , .
browning, e. b., , , .
bryant, , , ,
byron, , , ,
catullus, , , ,
chapman, .
coluthus, , .
conington, , , ,
cornwall, .
cowper, , , .
croxall, , .
darwin, , , ,
dryden, , , ,
elton, , , ,
emerson, .
euripides, , , ,
eusden, .
flaccus, , , ,
fletcher, .
francklin, , , ,
frere, .
goldsmith, .
gray, .
hemans, , .
h. h. (helen hunt jackson), .
hesiod, , , ,
holmes, .
homer, , , ,
homeric hymn, , .
horace, , , .
hunt, , , .
ingelow, , .
iriarte, tomas de, .
keats, , , ,
landon, .
longfellow, , , ,
lowell, , , ,
lucan, .
macaulay, , .
martinez de la rosa, .
melanippides, .
meleager, , .
meredith, owen, .
milton, , , ,
moore, , , ,
morris, , , ,
moschus, , .
nonnus, .
[pg ]
onomacritus, , , .
orphic argonautics, .
orphic hymn, .
ovid, , , ,
pike, .
pindar, , .
pitt, , , .
pope, , , ,
potter, , , ,
prior, , , ,
quintus smyrnæus, .
st. john, , .
saxe, , , ,
schiller, , .
scott, .
shakespeare, , , .
shelley, , , .
simonides, .
somerville, .
sophocles, , , ,
southey, .
spenser, , , .
statius, , .
swift, .
tennyson, , , ,
theocritus, , , .
timocreon of rhodes, .
virgil, , , ,
warton, .
wordsworth, , , ,
worsley, .
young, .
[pg ]
ab-syr´tus.
son of king æetes of colchis;
slain by medea, .
a-by´dus.
a city of asia minor;
the home of leander, -.
a-chæ´us.
grandson of hellen, and ancestor of the achaians, .
a-cha´i-ans.
inhabitants of the province of achaia, .
a-cha´tes.
friend and inseparable companion of æneas, ,
ach-e-lo´us.
river in greece, bearing the name of its god, .
ach-e-men´i-des.
ulysses’ sailor, rescued from polyphemus by æneas,
ach´e-ron.
. river in hades, ;
ulysses visits, ;
æneas crosses, .
. father of furies, .
a-chil´les.
son of peleus and thetis, -;
surrenders briseis, , ;
the greeks appeal to, -;
slays hector, -;
death, ;
in happy isles, ;
father of pyrrhus, ;
significance, , .
a´cis.
youth loved by galatea, and slain by polyphemus, .
a-cris´i-us.
king of argos, and father of danae, ,
significance, , .
a-crop´o-lis.
hill in athens, the site of the parthenon and theseus’ temple,
ac-tæ´on.
hunter changed to a stag by diana, ,
ad-me´te.
daughter of eurystheus, covets hippolyte’s girdle,
ad-me´tus.
king of thessaly, served by apollo, and saved from death by alcestis,
hercules restores alcestis to, ;
one of the argonauts, ;
in calydonian hunt, ;
significance, .
a-do´nis.
hunter loved by venus and slain by a boar, -;
significance, , .
a-dras´tus.
king of argos;
his horse arion, ;
father of hippodamia, ;
sends expedition against thebes, .
æ´a-cus.
one of the three judges of the dead in hades, .
æ-æ´a.
island inhabited by circe and visited by ulysses, -.
æ-e´tes.
king of colchis, father of medea and absyrtus, ,
brother of circe, ;
significance, .
æ-ge´an sea.
delos chained in, ;
arion borne by dolphins in, , ;
named after ægeus, .
æ-ge´us.
king of athens;
father of theseus, , ,
drowns himself, ;
significance, .
æ´gis.
shield or breastplate of minerva and jupiter, ;
loaned to perseus, ;
bears medusa’s head, .
æ-gis´thus.
murderer of agamemnon;
slain by orestes, .
æg´le.
one of the heliades;
changed to a poplar tree, .
æ-gyp´tus.
brother of danaus, .
æ-ne´a-dæ.
city which æneas proposed to found in thrace, .
æ-ne´as.
son of venus and anchises, ;
æneas’ descendants, ;
worship introduced into italy by, ;
hero of virgil’s æneid, -.
[pg ]
æ-ne´as sil´vi-a.
son of æneas;
founder of alba longa, .
æ-ne´id.
virgil’s epic poem on the adventures of æneas,
æ-o´li-a.
. same as æolian islands.
. in asia minor, near ægean sea, .
æ-o´li-an islands.
the home of æolus, god of the winds, ,
supposed to be lipari islands, .
æ-o´li-an race.
descendants of æolus, son of hellen, .
æ´o-lus.
. god of the winds, -;
juno’s bargain with, ;
gift to ulysses, ;
destruction of æneas’ fleet, ;
significance, .
. son of hellen, founder of the æolian race, .
æs-cu-la´pi-us.
son of apollo and coronis, ,
machaon, son of, ;
significance, .
æ´son.
father of jason, ;
rejuvenated by medea, .
æ´ther.
god of light, ;
dethroned, .
æ´thra.
princess of trœzene, ;
mother of theseus, ;
helen intrusted to, ;
significance, .
æt´na.
volcano in sicily, ;
the tomb of enceladus, ;
forge of vulcan, , ,
ceres’ visit to, .
æ-to´li-a.
country between epirus and locris, .
af´ri-ca.
hercules’ visit to, ,
afterthought.
name given to epimetheus, .
ag-a-mem´non.
chief of the expedition against troy, -;
return of, ;
troops of, ;
significance, .
a-ga´ve.
mother of pentheus;
infuriated by bacchus, slays her son, .
a-ge´nor.
father of europa, cadmus, cilix, phœnix, -.
ag-la´ia.
one of the graces;
an attendant of venus, .
a-ï´des.
same as pluto;
significance, .
a-ï-do´neus.
same as pluto, god of the infernal regions, .
a´jax.
greek hero in trojan war, ;
patroclus’ corpse recovered by, ;
insanity of, .
al´ba lon´ga.
city in italy founded by æneas silvia, .
al-ces´tis.
wife of admetus;
dies to save his life, ;
restored by hercules, .
al-ci´des.
same as hercules, ;
lion skin of, ;
deianeira accompanies, ;
deianeira’s charm for, ;
pose of, .
al-cim´e-de.
queen of iolcus;
mother of jason, .
al-cin´o-us.
phæacian king, enables ulysses to reach ithaca,
al-cip´pe.
daughter of mars;
carried off by halirrhothius, .
alc-me´ne.
wife of jupiter, and mother of hercules, ,
significance, .
a-lec´to.
one of the furies, ;
sent by juno to kindle war between æneas and the latins,
a-lec´try-on.
servant of mars;
changed to a cock, , .
al-phe´us.
. river of peloponnesus;
dammed to clean augean stable, .
. the river god who pursued arethusa, -.
al-thæ´a.
mother of meleager, , .
am-al-the´a.
goat which nursed jupiter, .
am-a-se´nus.
river over which metabus flung camilla, .
a-ma´ta.
wife of latinus, ;
driven mad by alecto, ;
suicide of, .
am´a-zons.
nation of warlike women;
hercules visits, ;
theseus visits, ;
bellerophon visits, ;
queen of the, .
am-bro´si-a.
celestial food used by the gods, ;
gods deprived of, .
am´mon.
temple of jupiter in libya, .
a´mor.
same as eros, cupid, etc.;
god of love, ;
son of venus and mars, .
am-phi´on.
son of jupiter and antiope;
musician;
king of thebes, -.
am-phi-tri´te.
same as salacia, queen of the sea;
wife of neptune, , ;
train of, ;
significance, .
[pg ]
an-chi´ses.
husband of venus, ;
father of æneas, -;
prophecy recalled by, ;
death of, ;
death anniversary of, ;
æneas’ visit to, -.
an-ci´le.
shield of mars, guarded by the salii in rome, .
an-dræ´mon.
husband of dryope;
saw her changed to a tree, .
an-drom´a-che.
wife of hector;
parting of hector and, -;
grief of, ;
captivity of, .
an-drom´e-da.
daughter of celeus and cassiopeia;
saved by perseus, -;
significance, .
an-tæ´us.
giant son of gæa;
defender of the pygmies;
slain by hercules, , .
an-te´i-a.
wife of prœtus;
accuses bellerophon falsely, ;
significance, .
an´te-ros.
god of passion, , ;
son of venus and mars, .
an-tig´o-ne.
daughter of œdipus and jocasta;
buried alive, -;
significance, .
an-tin´o-us.
one of penelope’s suitors;
slain by ulysses, .
an-ti´o-pe.
wife of jupiter;
mother of amphion and zethus;
persecuted by dirce, .
a-pha´re-us.
father of castor’s murderer, .
aph-ro-di´te.
same as venus, dione, etc., ,
significance, .
a-pol´lo.
same as phœbus, sol, and helios, -;
god of the sun, music, poetry, and medicine, ;
diana’s brother, ;
niobe’s sons slain by, ;
mars and venus seen by, , ;
mercury steals cattle of, -;
giants slain by, ;
walls built by, , ;
marpessa claimed by, ;
vesta loved by, ;
janus, son of, ;
oracles of, , ;
steed of, ;
cassandra loved by, ;
chryses appeals to, , ;
ulysses incurs anger of, ;
significance, , ,
aq´ui-lo.
west wind, son of æolus and aurora, ,
a-rach´ne.
minerva’s needlework contest with, ,
ar-ca´di-a.
province of peloponnesus, ,
mercury’s birthplace, .
ar´cas.
son of jupiter and callisto;
constellation of the little bear, .
a-re-o-pa-gi´tæ.
judges of the criminal court of athens, .
a-re-op´a-gus.
hill near athens;
site of the parthenon, .
a´res.
same as mars, ;
significance, .
a-re´te.
. goddess of virtue;
takes charge of hercules, -.
. wife of alcinous;
mother of nausicaa, .
ar-e-thu´sa.
nymph of diana;
changed to a fountain, -.
ar´ges (sheet-lightning).
a cyclop;
son of uranus and gæa, .
ar´go.
vessel in which jason set sail in search of the golden fleece,
significance, .
ar-go-nau´tic expedition
in search of golden fleece, ;
zetes and calais in, ;
hercules in, ;
meleager in, ;
significance, , .
ar´go-nauts.
name given to jason and crew, -;
significance, .
ar´gos.
city in argolis, dedicated to juno, -;
eurystheus, king of, -;
acrisius, king of, , ;
adrastus, king of, , ;
prœtus, king of, ;
agamemnon’s return to, ;
significance, , .
ar´gus.
. name of myriad-eyed giant who watched io, -;
significance, .
. name of ulysses’ faithful hound, .
a-ri-ad´ne.
daughter of minos;
theseus aided by, , ;
deserted by theseus, , ;
marries bacchus, ;
significance, .
a-ri´on.
. winged steed;
the offspring of neptune and ceres, .
. musician;
thrown into the sea by pirates, saved by a dolphin, ,
ar-is-tæ´us.
youth who indirectly causes eurydice’s death, .
ar´te-mis.
same as diana, goddess of the moon and the chase, ,
[pg ]
as-cal´a-phus.
spirit in hades who saw proserpina eat pomegranate seeds,
a´si-a mi´nor.
west of asia;
bacchus’ visit to, ;
vesta’s shrine in, ;
thetis’ flight from, .
as-kle´pi-os.
same as æsculapius;
son of apollo and coronis, .
as-ty´a-nax.
infant son of hector and andromache, .
at-a-lan´ta.
maiden who takes part in calydonian hunt and races with milanion or
hippomenes, -;
significance, .
ath´a-mas.
king of thebes;
father of phryxus and helle, ;
ino in madness slain by, ;
significance, .
a-the´ne.
same as minerva, ;
tutelary goddess of athens, ;
significance, .
a-the´ni-ans.
inhabitants of athens, ;
tribute of, , ;
ingratitude of, .
ath´ens.
minerva’s festivals at, ;
tribunal at, , ;
contest for, ;
ægeus, king of, ;
theseus’ arrival at, , ;
ariadne elopes to, ;
castor and pollux’ visit to, ;
theseus, king of, ;
peleus, king of, .
at´las.
. mountains.
. one of iapetus’ sons, ;
daughters of, ;
heavens supported by, -;
perseus petrifies, -;
significance, .
at´ro-pos.
one of the fates;
cuts the thread of life, .
at´ti-ca.
province of greece;
cecrops founds city in, ;
oppression of, ;
shores of, .
au-ge´as.
king of elis;
his stables were cleansed by hercules, -.
au´lis.
port in bœotia, the meeting-place of the greek expedition against
troy, , .
au-ro´ra.
same as eos, goddess of dawn;
attendant of apollo, , ;
jealousy of, ;
tithonus loved by, ;
æolus’ wife, .
aus´ter.
southwest wind, same as notus;
a son of æolus and aurora, .
au-tom´e-don.
achilles’ charioteer, .
av´en-tine.
one of the seven hills on which rome is built, .
a-ver´nus.
lake near naples;
the entrance to hades in italy, ;
æneas’ visit to, .
bab´y-lon.
the home of pyramus and thisbe, .
bac-cha-na´li-a.
festivals in honor of bacchus, .
bac-chan´tes.
female followers of bacchus, ,
orpheus slain by, , .
bac´chus.
same as dionysus, god of wine and revelry;
son of jupiter and semele, -;
vulcan visited by, ;
ariadne rescued by, ;
tutor of, ;
gift from, .
bau´cis.
. the mortal who showed hospitality to jupiter and mercury;
wife of philemon, , .
. father of dryope (changed to a tree), .
bel-ler´o-phon.
demigod;
mounts pegasus and slays the dread chimæra,
significance, , .
bel-lo´na.
goddess of war;
attendant of mars, .
ber-e-ni´ce.
queen whose hair was changed into a comet, ,
ber´o-e.
nurse of semele, whose form juno assumes to arouse semele’s
jealousy, , .
bi´ton.
brother of cleobis;
draws his mother to the temple, .
bœ-o´ti-a.
province in greece, whose principal city was thebes, ,
bo´re-as.
north wind;
son of æolus and aurora;
kidnaps orithyia, -;
sons of, .
bos´po-rus.
channel connecting black sea and sea of marmora, on route of argonauts,
brass age.
third age of world, .
bri-a´re-us.
one of the centimani;
son of uranus and gæa, ;
umpire, .
bri-se´is.
captive of achilles during trojan war;
claimed by agamemnon, , ,
significance, .
bron´tes (thunder).
a cyclop;
son of uranus and gæa, .
bru´tus.
unborn soul of roman hero, seen by anchises in hades,
[pg ]
ca´cus.
son of vulcan, ;
giant slain by hercules on mount aventine, ;
significance, .
cad´mus.
brother of europa;
founder of thebes, -;
husband of harmonia, ;
daughter of, ;
dragon-tooth seed of, ;
significance, , ,
ca-du´ce-us.
wand given to mercury by apollo, .
cæ´sar.
unborn soul of roman hero, seen by anchises in hades,
cal´a-is.
son of boreas and orithyia, .
cal´chas.
soothsayer of the greeks during the trojan war, .
cal-li´o-pe.
one of the nine muses, loved by apollo, ;
mother of orpheus, .
cal-lis´to.
maiden loved by jupiter;
changed into a bear by juno;
the great bear, .
cal´y-don.
home of meleager;
site of calydonian hunt, .
cal-y-do´ni-an hunt.
organized by meleager to slay a boar, -.
ca-lyp´so.
nymph who detained ulysses on ogygia seven years, ;
significance, .
ca-mil´la.
volscian maiden;
fights, and is slain by, æneas, ,
dedicated to diana, .
ca-mil´lus.
unborn soul of roman hero, seen by anchises in hades,
cam´pus mar´ti-us.
roman exercising grounds sacred to mars, .
can´cer.
crab which attacked hercules to defend the hydra;
a constellation, .
cap´i-tol.
temple dedicated to jupiter in rome, .
car´thage.
a city in africa, built by dido, visited by æneas,
cas-san´dra.
daughter of priam;
her prophecies, though true, were always disbelieved,
captivity of, .
cas-si-o-pe´ia.
mother of andromeda, ;
a constellation, ;
significance, .
cas´tor.
one of the dioscuri or gemini, ,
rescue of helen by, ;
argonauts joined by, ;
calydonian hunt joined by, .
cau-ca´si-an mountains.
same as caucasus;
prometheus chained to, , .
ce´crops.
founder of athens, ;
descendants of, .
ce-læ´no.
one of the harpies;
frightens æneas by prophesying harm, .
ce´le-us.
. king of eleusis;
father of triptolemus, .
. father of andromeda;
significance, .
cen´taurs.
children of ixion, half man, half horse;
chiron, , ,
hercules fights, ;
battle of, , ;
nessus, -;
significance, , .
cen-tim´a-ni (hundred-handed).
three sons of uranus and gæa, ,
ceph´a-lus.
hunter loved by procris and aurora, ,
significance, .
cer´be-rus.
three-headed dog which guarded the entrance of hades,
hercules captures, , ;
significance, .
cer´cy-on.
son of vulcan, ;
encountered by theseus, .
ce-re-a´li-a.
festivals in honor of ceres, goddess of agriculture,
ce´res.
same as demeter, goddess of agriculture and civilization,
cronus disgorges, ;
psyche consults, , ;
neptune loves, ;
pelops’ shoulder eaten by, ;
significance, , .
cer-y-ne´a.
town of achaia, .
cer-y-ne´ian stag.
stag taken by hercules;
one of his labors, .
ces´tus.
venus’ magic, love-inspiring girdle, ,
ce´yx.
king of thessaly;
shipwrecked, and changed with his wife halcyone into birds,
cha´os.
the first of all divinities, who ruled over confusion,
ejection of, ;
daughter of, .
char´i-tes.
the three graces;
attendants of venus, .
cha´ron.
the boatman who ferries the souls over acheron, ;
æneas ferried by, ;
significance, .
cha-ryb´dis.
whirlpool near the coast of sicily, ,
[pg ]
chi-mæ´ra.
monster slain by bellerophon, -;
significance, , .
chi´o-ne.
daughter of boreas and orithyia, .
chi´os.
one of the islands of the archipelago, .
chi´ron.
learned centaur, , ,
death of, .
chry-se´is.
daughter of chryses;
taken by agamemnon, , .
chry´ses.
father of chryseis;
priest of apollo;
brings a plague on the greek camp, ,
ci-co´ni-ans.
inhabitants of ismarus, visited by ulysses, .
ci-lic´i-a.
province in asia minor, between æolia and troas,
ci´lix.
brother of europa;
founder of cilicia, , .
cim-me´ri-an shores.
land visited by ulysses to consult tiresias, .
cir´ce.
sister of æetes;
sorceress who changes ulysses’ men into swine,
significance, , .
cle´o-bis.
brother of biton;
a devoted son, .
cle-o-pa´tra.
daughter of boreas and orithyia, .
cli´o.
one of the nine muses, .
clo´tho.
one of the fates;
she spins the thread of life, .
clym´e-ne.
. wife of iapetus;
an ocean nymph, .
. nymph loved by apollo;
mother of phaeton, , .
clyt-æm-nes´tra.
wife of agamemnon;
slain by orestes, ;
significance, .
clyt´i-e.
maiden who loves apollo, and is changed into a sunflower,
co-cy´tus.
river in hades, formed of tears of the condemned,
cœ´us.
one of the titans;
son of uranus and gæa, .
col´chi-an land.
ram bears phryxus to, ;
argonauts arrive at, ;
argonauts depart from, ;
sailors of, .
col´chis.
land in asia ruled by æetes, where the golden fleece was kept,
return from, .
co-lo´nus.
forest sacred to furies, where œdipus vanished in a storm,
co-los´sus.
statue of apollo in the island of rhodes, .
con-sen´tes.
same as pan, god of the universe and of nature, .
co´pre-us.
son of pelops;
owner of the marvelous horse arion, .
co´ra.
same as proserpina, goddess of vegetation, ;
significance, .
cor´inth.
city and isthmus between greece proper and the peloponnesus,
sisyphus, king of, , ;
sciron at, ;
polybus, king of, -, .
co-ro´na.
constellation, also known as ariadne’s crown, .
co-ro´nis.
maiden loved by apollo;
mother of æsculapius, , ;
significance, , .
co´rus.
northwest wind;
son of æolus and aurora, -.
cor-y-ban´tes.
same as curetes;
rhea’s priests, .
cot´tus.
one of the centimani;
son of uranus and gæa, .
cre´on.
father of jocasta and of megara, ;
king of thebes, .
cre´tan bull.
hercules captures, .
crete.
island home of minos, , ,
menelaus’ journey to, ;
æneas’ sojourn in, ;
zeus, king of, .
cre-u´sa.
. wife of æneas;
killed in attempting to fly from troy, -.
. same as glauce;
maiden loved by jason, .
cri´us.
one of the titans;
son of uranus and gæa, .
cro´nus.
same as saturn;
a titan who rules supreme;
father of jupiter, -, ,
daughters of, , ,
son of, .
cru´mis-sa.
island where neptune carried theophane;
birthplace of the golden-fleeced ram, .
cu´mæ.
cave where the sibyl gave her prophecies, .
cu´pid, or cu-pi´do.
same as amor, god of love;
son of venus and mars, , ;
growth of, ;
darts of, , ,
psyche and, -, .
[pg ]
cu-re´tes.
same as corybantes;
rhea’s priests, .
cy´a-ne.
river which tried to stop pluto when he kidnapped proserpina,
cyb´e-le.
same as rhea, goddess of the earth, ;
chariot of, .
cy-clo´pes.
three children of uranus and gæa, ,
thunderbolts forged by, , ,
orion visits the, ;
vulcan and the, ;
island of the, ;
æneas warned against, ;
significance, , .
cy´clops.
polyphemus the, -, .
cyc´nus.
intimate friend of phaeton, .
cyl-le´ne.
mountain upon which mercury was born, ,
cyn´thi-a.
same as diana, goddess of the moon and the chase, ,
cyn´thi-us.
name given to apollo, god of the sun and fine arts, .
cyp-a-ris´sus.
friend of apollo;
turned to a cypress tree, .
cy´prus.
island in the mediterranean sacred to venus, ,
cyth-e-re´a.
name given to venus, goddess of beauty, love, and laughter,
dæd´a-lus.
architect who planned the cretan labyrinth, -;
inventor of sails, .
dan´a-e.
maiden visited by jupiter as a golden shower;
mother of perseus, -;
significance, , ,
da-na´i-des.
daughters of danaus, who slay their husbands, ,
dan´a-us.
king of argos;
father of the fifty danaides, .
dan´ube.
river of europe;
medea slays absyrtus near its mouth, .
daph´ne.
maiden loved by apollo, and changed into a laurel tree,
significance, , ,
dar´da-nus.
ancient king of troy, who gives his name to his race,
mares of, .
de-i-a-nei´ra.
wife of hercules, -;
causes hercules’ death by using the nessus robe,
significance, .
de-iph´o-bus.
son of priam and hecuba;
married helen after the death of paris, .
de´los.
floating island;
birthplace of apollo and diana, ;
shrine of apollo at, , ,
significance, , .
del´phi.
shrine of apollo, famed for its oracles, ,
ceyx visits, ;
œdipus consults oracle at, ,
orestes at, .
del´uge.
caused by jupiter’s wrath, ;
slime from, .
de-me´ter.
same as ceres;
goddess of agriculture, , ;
significance, .
de´mi-os (dread).
attendant or son of mars, .
des´ti-ny.
one of the ancient deities not subjected to jupiter, .
deu-ca´li-on.
only male survivor of deluge;
father of hellen, , .
di´a.
maiden loved and deserted by ixion, king of the lapithæ,
significance, .
di-a´na.
goddess of the moon and chase;
daughter of jupiter and latona, -;
birth of, ;
nymphs of, , ;
arrows of, ;
arethusa protected by, ;
œneus neglects, ;
iphigenia saved by, ;
temple of, ;
camilla rescued by, , ;
significance, , ,
di´do.
queen of tyre and carthage;
loved and deserted by æneas, -;
æneas sees, in hades, .
di-o-me´des.
. greek hero during trojan war, ;
recovers patroclus’ body, ;
helps ulysses secure the palladium, .
. the possessor of horses taken by hercules, .
di-o´ne.
. name given to venus, goddess of beauty, love, laughter, etc.,
. mother of venus by jupiter;
goddess of moisture, .
di-o-nys´i-a.
festivals held in greece in honor of bacchus, .
di-o-nys´us.
same as bacchus, god of wine and revelry, .
di-os-cu´ri.
collective name given to castor and pollux, .
di-os-cu´ri-a.
festivals in honor of castor and pollux, .
[pg ]
dir´ce.
wife of lycus;
bound to a bull by amphion and zethus, -.
dis.
same as pluto, god of infernal regions, ,
dis-cor´di-a, or eris.
goddess of discord, ;
she appears at peleus’ marriage feast, .
do-do´na.
temple and grove sacred to jupiter, ,
dol´phin.
constellation, .
do´ri-an race.
descendants of dorus, .
do´ris.
wife of nereus, , .
do´rus.
son of hellen;
ancestor of dorian race, .
dreams.
spirits in cave of somnus;
passed out through gates of ivory and horn, ,
mercury, leader of, .
drep´a-num.
land visited by æneas, where anchises died, .
dry´a-des.
plant nymphs, supposed to watch over vegetation, .
dry´o-pe.
princess changed into a tree, -.
dull´ness.
obscure deity put to flight by minerva, ,
earth.
æther and hemera create the, ;
divisions of the, ;
realm of the, ;
the mother of all, ;
oath by the, ;
antæus, son of the, ;
significance, .
e´cho.
nymph who pined for love of narcissus;
changed to a voice, , ;
answers cephalus, ;
mocks ariadne, .
egg.
earth hatched from a mythical, .
e´gypt.
gods take refuge in, ;
io takes refuge in, ;
menelaus and helen detained in, .
e-lec´tra.
daughter of agamemnon;
saves orestes, .
el-eu-sin´i-a.
festivals at eleusis, in honor of ceres and proserpina,
e-leu´sis.
city in greece visited by ceres during her search for proserpina,
e´lis.
province of the peloponnesus;
alpheus in, ;
augeas, king of, ;
significance, .
el-pe´nor.
follower of ulysses;
dies in island of ææa, .
e-lys´i-an fields.
abode of the blessed in hades, ,
cleobis and biton conveyed to, ;
adonis conveyed to, .
en-cel´a-dus.
giant defeated by jupiter;
buried under mt. ætna, .
en-dym´i-on.
youth loved by diana, who carries him to a cave on mt. latmus,
significance, , ,
en´na.
plain in sicily;
favorite resort of proserpina, .
e-ny´o.
name given to bellona, goddess of war, .
e´os.
name given to aurora, goddess of dawn, ,
jealousy of, , ;
winds, offspring of, .
ep´a-phus.
son of jupiter and io;
founder of memphis, .
eph´e-sus.
city in asia minor sacred to diana, .
eph-i-al´tes.
giant son of neptune, ;
brother of otus;
imprisons mars, ;
significance, .
e-pig´o-ni.
sons of the seven chiefs who besieged thebes, .
ep-i-me´theus (afterthought).
son of iapetus, ;
husband of pandora, -, .
e-pi´rus.
country visited by æneas, who meets andromache there,
er´a-to.
one of the muses;
daughter of jupiter and mnemosyne, .
er´e-bus.
god of darkness, ;
marries his mother, night, ;
progenitor of egg, ;
dethroned, .
e-rid´a-nus.
river into which phaeton fell from the sun chariot, ;
hercules consults nymphs of, .
e-rin´ny-es.
collective name given to the furies, ;
significance, .
e´ris.
same as discordia, goddess of discord and strife, ;
apple cast by, .
er-i-sich´thon.
an unbeliever;
punished by famine, .
e´ros.
same as cupid, ;
child of light and day, ;
arrows of, , ;
egg produces, ;
causes man’s creation, ;
man’s life given by, .
er-y-man´thus.
place where hercules slew the wild boar, .
[pg ]
er-y-the´a.
island home of geryones;
visited by hercules, .
e-te´o-cles.
son of œdipus and jocasta, ;
reigns one year, ;
slain by his brother, .
e-thi-o´pi-a.
country visited by bacchus, .
e-thi-o´pi-ans.
happy race of africa, south of the river oceanus;
visited by the gods, .
eu-bœ´an or eu-bo´ic sea.
sea where hercules cast lichas, .
eu-mæ´us.
swineherd visited by ulysses on his return to ithaca,
ulysses aided by, .
eu-men´i-des.
collective name given to furies, ;
forest sacred to, ;
significance, .
eu-phros´y-ne.
one of the three graces or charites;
attendant of venus, .
eu-ro´pa.
daughter of agenor;
wife of jupiter, -, ;
mother of minos, rhadamanthus, and sarpedon, ,
significance, .
eu-ro´tas.
river near sparta, where helen bathed, .
eu´rus.
east wind;
son of æolus and aurora, -.
eu-ry´a-le.
one of the three terrible gorgons, .
eu-ry´a-lus.
youth sent with nisus to warn æneas that his son was in danger,
eu-ry-cle´a.
nurse of ulysses;
recognizes him after twenty years’ absence, ;
penelope awakened by, .
eu-ryd´i-ce.
wife of orpheus, who seeks her in hades, -;
significance, -.
eu-ryl´o-chus.
leader of ulysses’ men, ;
escaped circe’s spell, ;
ulysses’ men misled by, .
eu-ryn´o-me.
wife of jupiter;
mother of the graces, .
eu-rys´theus.
hercules’ taskmaster;
appointed twelve labors, -.
eu´ry-tus.
iole’s father;
visited twice by hercules, .
eu-ter´pe.
one of the muses;
presided over music, .
eux´ine sea.
same as pontus euxinus, or the black sea, .
e-van´der.
king of tuscans;
ally of æneas;
father of pallas, , .
e-ve´nus.
father of marpessa;
drowned himself in river of same name, ;
hercules crosses, .
fa´ma.
attendant of jupiter, goddess of fame, .
fates.
three sisters;
also known as mœræ or parcæ, .
fau´na.
wife of faunus;
a rural divinity of the romans, .
fau´nus.
rural divinity of the romans;
husband of fauna, .
flo´ra.
goddess of flowers, , ;
wife of zephyrus, , .
flo-ra´li-a.
festivals in may in honor of flora, .
forethought.
name given to prometheus, .
for-tu´na.
. goddess of fortune;
an attendant of jupiter, .
. goddess of plenty, .
fo´rum.
chief place in rome where public matters were discussed,
fu´ries.
the eumenides, or avenging deities, ;
œdipus punished by, ;
orestes pursued by, .
gæ´a.
same as tellus and terra, ;
wife of uranus, ;
reign of, ;
conspiracy of, ;
typhœus created by, ;
enceladus created by, ;
antæus, son of, ;
syrinx protected by, ;
significance, .
gal-a-te´a.
. nymph loved by polyphemus and acis, -.
. statue loved by pygmalion, who prays venus to give it life,
gan´y-mede.
trojan prince carried off by jupiter to act as cup-bearer,
ge.
same as gæa, tellus, terra, the earth, .
gem´i-ni.
same as dioscuri;
castor and pollux, .
ge-ry´o-nes.
giant whose cattle are taken by hercules, ;
significance, .
glau´ce.
maiden loved by jason;
slain by medea, ;
significance, .
glau´cus.
fisherman changed to a sea god, ,
lover of scylla, , .
[pg ]
golden age.
first age of the ancient world, when all was bliss, ;
janus’ reign, .
gor´gons.
three sisters,—euryale, stheno, and medusa,
ægis decorated by head of one of, ;
significance, .
grac´chi, the.
unborn souls of roman heroes, seen by anchises in hades,
gra´ces.
same as gratiæ;
the three attendants of venus, .
gra-di´vus.
name given to mars when leader of armies, .
græ´æ.
three sisters with but one eye and tooth among them,
significance, , .
gra´ti-æ.
same as graces, or charites;
venus’ attendants, .
great bear.
constellation formed by callisto, .
gre´ci-an.
mythology, ;
camp, .
greece.
highest peak in, ;
alphabet introduced into, ;
nations of, ;
art in, ;
cecrops comes to, ;
pelops takes refuge in, ;
paris visits, ;
war between troy and, ;
orestes’ return to, ;
captives taken to, .
greek divinities, ;
panathenæa, ;
fleet, .
greeks.
departure of, ;
plague visits, ;
defeat of, , ;
return of, ;
agamemnon, chief of, ;
attack ciconians, ;
polyphemus visited by, -;
circe visited by, ;
a civilized nation, .
gy´es.
one of the three centimani;
son of uranus and gæa, .
ha´des.
the infernal region, kingdom of pluto, -;
hercules’ visit to, , ,
orpheus’ visit to, -;
adonis’ visit to, ;
psyche’s visit to, ;
mercury conducts souls to, ,
proserpina’s visit to, ,
lara conducted to, ;
theseus’ visit to, ;
pollux in, ;
œdipus in, ;
ulysses’ visit to, ;
æneas’ visit to, .
hæ´mon.
son of creon;
lover of antigone, .
hal-cy´o-ne.
wife of ceyx, king of thessaly, ,
hal-irr-ho´thi-us.
son of neptune;
slain by mars, .
ham-a-dry´a-des.
nymphs who lived and died with the trees they inhabited,
har-mo´ni-a.
daughter of mars and venus, ,
wife of cadmus, ;
mother of semele, .
har´pies.
monsters, half woman, half bird;
banished to strophades islands, ;
æneas sees, ;
significance, .
heav´en.
creation of, ;
realm of, ;
atlas, supporter of, ;
significance, , .
he´be.
goddess of youth;
cup-bearer of the gods, ;
wife of hercules, .
he´brus.
river in which the bacchantes cast orpheus’ remains,
hec´a-te.
name given to proserpina as queen of hades, .
hec´tor.
son of priam;
leader of trojan army, -;
slain by achilles, ;
priam buries, ;
shade of, ;
widow of, .
hec´u-ba.
wife of priam;
mother of paris and hector, ,
hector seen by, ;
captivity of, .
hel´en.
daughter of jupiter and leda;
wife of menelaus;
kidnapped by paris, -;
kidnapped by theseus, ;
paris upbraided by, ;
return of, ;
æneas wishes to slay, ;
significance, .
hel´e-nus.
king of epirus, whose slave andromache became after the death of hector,
he-li´a-des.
sisters of phaeton;
changed into trees, .
hel´i-con.
mountain in greece, sacred to apollo and muses, ,
he´li-os.
name of apollo as god of the sun, ,
significance, , ,
hel´le.
daughter of athamas and nephele;
drowned in the hellespont, ;
significance, , ,
hel´len.
son of deucalion;
ancestor of the hellenes, .
hel-le´nes.
name given to ancient greeks, .
[pg ]
hel´les-pont.
name given to the strait from helle, ;
leander swims across the, -.
he-me´ra (day).
one of the first divinities, who rules with æther (light),
heph-æs-ti´a.
festivals in honor of hephæstus, or vulcan, .
he-phæs´tus.
name given to vulcan, god of the forge, ;
significance, .
he´ra, or he´re.
name given to juno, queen of heaven, and goddess of the atmosphere and of
marriage, ;
significance, .
her´a-cles.
same as hercules;
son of jupiter and alcmene, .
he-ræ´um.
town dedicated to the service of juno, .
her´cu-les.
same as heracles, god of all athletic games, -;
prometheus delivered by, ;
hades visited by, ;
hesione delivered by, ;
centaurs defeated by, ;
argonautic expedition joined by, ,
arrows of, ;
apparition of, ;
significance, , ,
her´mes.
same as mercury, messenger of the gods, ;
significance, .
her-mi´o-ne.
same as harmonia;
daughter of venus and mars, .
he´ro.
maiden loved by leander, who swam the hellespont to visit her,
he-si´o-ne.
daughter of laomedon;
rescued from sea monster by hercules, ,
hes-pe´ri-a.
ancient name of italy, so called by æneas,
hes-per´i-des.
daughters of hesperus, guardians of golden apples,
significance, .
hes´pe-rus.
god of the west;
father of the hesperides, , .
hes´ti-a.
same as vesta, goddess of the family hearth, ;
significance, .
him´e-rus.
god of the desire of love;
attendant in venus’ numerous train, .
hip-po-cre´ne.
fountain created by pegasus, .
hip-po-da-mi´a.
wife of pirithous;
almost carried off by the centaurs, .
hip-pol´y-te.
queen of the amazons, , ;
theseus’ wife, .
hip-pol´y-tus.
son of theseus and hippolyte, ;
loved by phædra, .
hip-pom´e-nes.
same as milanion;
lover of atalanta, .
hope.
the good spirit in pandora’s box;
an ancient deity, -.
ho´ræ.
collective name of the seasons;
venus’ attendants, .
horn gate.
gate leading from cave of somnus to outer world, ,
hours.
attendants of apollo, ;
attendants of venus, .
hundred-handed, the.
same as centimani, .
hup´nos.
same as somnus, god of sleep, .
hy-a-cin´thus.
youth loved by apollo and zephyrus;
changed to a flower, .
hy´dra.
monster serpent slain by hercules in the swamp of lerna,
significance, .
hy-ge´ia.
daughter of æsculapius;
watched over health of man, .
hy´las.
youth loved by hercules;
stolen by the water nymphs, .
hy´men.
god of marriage;
attendant of venus, .
hy-met´tus.
mountain in attica, .
hyp-er-bo´re-an mountains.
the mountains separating the land of the hyperboreans from thrace,
hyp-er-bo´re-ans.
people north of oceanus, a virtuous race, .
hy-pe´ri-on.
the titan who had charge of the sun chariot, ,
hyp-erm-nes´tra.
daughter of danaus;
saves her husband, .
i-ap´e-tus.
one of the titans;
father of prometheus, , ,
i-a´pis.
leech consulted by æneas;
cures æneas with venus’ aid, .
i-a´si-us.
same as iasion;
father of atalanta, , .
ic´a-rus.
son of dædalus;
fell into the icarian sea, -.
i´da.
mountain in crete, and near troy also, ,
[pg ]
i´das.
a mortal befriended by neptune;
elopes with marpessa, .
il´i-a.
. one of the titanides;
daughter of uranus and gæa, .
. priestess of vesta;
wife of mars;
mother of romulus and remus, ,
il´i-ad.
homer’s epic poem on the trojan war, ,
il´i-um.
same as troy whence comes the iliad’s name, ,
in´a-chus.
river god (father of io), , .
infernal regions.
judges in the, ;
orpheus visits, -;
adonis visits, ;
pluto’s realm, ;
proserpina’s sojourn in, ;
æneas visits, .
i´no.
same as leucothea;
second wife of athamas;
daughter of cadmus and harmonia, ,
significance, .
i´o.
maiden loved by jupiter;
changed into a heifer, -;
significance, , .
i-ob´a-tes.
king of lycia;
recipient of the sealed letter carried by bellerophon,
i-o-la´us.
friend of hercules;
helped slay the hydra, .
i-ol´cus.
kingdom of æson and jason;
usurped by pelias, .
i´o-le.
maiden loved by hercules, , ;
significance, , .
i´on.
grandson of hellen;
ancestor of ionian race, .
i-o´ni-an race.
race descended from ion, grandson of hellen, .
i-o´ni-an sea.
sea west of greece, named after io, ,
iph-i-ge-ni´a.
daughter of agamemnon;
sacrificed to diana, , ;
orestes finds, .
i´ris (the rainbow).
attendant of juno, , ,
iron age.
fourth and last age previous to the deluge, .
isles of the blest.
islands west of oceanus, inhabited by the virtuous dead,
ulysses searches for, .
is´ma-rus.
town in thrace, spoiled by ulysses, .
is-me´ne.
daughter of œdipus and jocasta, ;
dies of grief, .
isth´mi-an games.
games held in honor of neptune, at corinth, every four years,
it´a-ly.
saturn retires to, ;
ceres returns to, ;
janus, king of, .
ith´a-ca.
ulysses’ island kingdom, ,
ulysses arrives in sight of, ;
ulysses returns to, , ;
telemachus returns to, ;
home of penelope.
i-u´lus.
æneas’ son;
æneas saves, ;
cupid assumes form of, ;
stag wounded by, ;
brave defense by, .
ivory gate.
gate leading from cave of somnus to outer world, ,
ix-i´on.
criminal in tartarus;
bound to wheel of fire, , ,
significance, .
ja-nic´u-lum.
city on the tiber, founded by janus, .
ja´nus.
god of all beginnings, of entrances, gates, etc.,
opening of temple of, .
ja´nus quad´ri-fons.
a square temple dedicated to janus, .
ja´son.
son of æson;
captured the golden fleece, -;
significance, , .
jo-cas´ta.
wife of laius, ;
marries œdipus, her son, ;
commits suicide, ;
significance, , .
jove.
same as jupiter, ;
birth of, ;
day of, ;
leda courted by, ;
decree of, .
ju´no.
birth of, ;
flight of, ;
jupiter’s wife, ;
same as hera, -;
jealousy of, , ,
mars, son of, ;
