of th. de dillmont, dornach, alsace,
and at all booksellers, and embroidery shops.
price, english bound with gilt edges:
english editionsh. .—
french editionfr. .
german editionmk. .—
preface.
the absolute want of any comprehensive book on
needlework—such an one as contains both verbal and
pictorial descriptions of everything included under the
name of needlework—has led me to put into the serviceable
form of an encyclopedia, all the knowledge and
experience, which years of unceasing study and practice
have enabled me to accumulate on the subject, with the
hope that diligent female workers of all ages, may be able,
by its means to instruct themselves in every branch of
plain and fancy needlework.
all the patterns given, even the most insignificant,
were worked afresh for the purpose, and thus, not merely
faithful representations, but also lucid and intelligible
explanations of the same, are secured.
in order that my readers may have something besides
the dull theory, the work is enlivened by a number of
useful patterns, some new, some derived from the artistic
productions of such countries and epochs as have
become famous by special excellence in the domain of
needlework.
though, at first sight, the reproduction of many of
these patterns may seem to present insuperable difficulties,
they will, after a careful study of the text, and exact attention
to the directions given, prove easy to carry out.
many of these interesting designs are drawn from
private collections, whose owners, with great kindness,
placed their treasures at my disposal, to copy and borrow
from at discretion, for which i desire to take the present
opportunity, of tendering them my warmest thanks.
the choice of colours and material—a difficult matter
to many—my readers will find rendered comparatively
easy to them by the notes affixed to the illustrations; and
i may point out, that most of the patterns were worked
with d.m.c cottons, which enjoy the well-earned reputation
of being, the very best of their kind, in the market
of the world.
experience has convinced me that, in many instances,
these cottons may with advantage take the place of wool,
linen thread, and even silk.
if this work meet with indulgent judges, and prove
really useful, i shall find ample reward in that fact for
the trouble and difficulties that have unavoidably attended
its completion.
preface.page
stitches
seams
gathering
sewing on cord and flaps
button-holes
sewing on buttons
binding slits
sewing on piping
fixing whale-bones—herring-boning
linen darning
satin or twill darning
damask darning
fine-drawing
patching
hem-stitching
open-work patterns
cutting out threads at the corners
cut open-work
patterns for cut open-work
net embroidery
net patterns
net darning
damask stitches
stitches
different kinds of scallops
eyelet holes
six ways of making dots
venetian embroidery
patterns and alphabets
encroaching satin stitch
oriental stitch
plaited stitch and mosaic stitch
persian stitch
straight and encroaching flat stitch patterns
chinese embroidery
raised embroidery
turkish embroidery
implements and materials for gold embroidery
stitches used in gold embroidery
patterns for gold embroidery
marking out the embroidery ground
tapestry stitches
tapestry patterns
stitches for linen embroidery
patterns for linen embroidery
position of the hands
casting on
stitches
stocking knitting
scalloped edge
heels
toes
mending knitting
piqué patterns
patent knitting
turkish stitch
knitting patterns
position of the hands
stitches
method for copying tapestry patterns in crochet
crochet with soutache or lacet
crochet square, hexagon and star
tunisian crochet
hairpin crochet
patterns for hairpin crochet
crochet lace patterns
crochet counterpanes
crochet stars
crochet collar
crochet chair-back
position of the hands
knots
patterns of scallops and medallions
materials and implements
formation of the knots
macramé shuttles
macramé patterns
implements and materials
stitches
patterns produced in netting
mounting the netting on the frame
stars and wheels
grounds and lace
embroidery on netting
netted insertion
materials
tacking down the braids
bars of different kinds
insertion stitches
lace stitches
needle-made picots
irish lace patterns
pillow lace and the implements for its manufacture
«stitches» or passings
patterns or grounds
armenian lace
laces in knotted stitch
reticella-lace
venetian-lace
brussels-lace
knotted cord
balls for trimmings
tambour work
smyrna stitch
malta stitch
triangular turkish stitch
turkish embroidery
appliqué-work
morocco embroidery
spanish embroidery
different kinds of linen stitches
pattern for linen stitches
pattern for roumanian stitch
pattern for piqué embroidery
embroideries with soutache
chinese subject
tracing and drawing the designs
the preparation of the stuffs and the subdivision of the patterns
to transpose and repeat patterns by means of looking glasses
to alter the proportions of a pattern by dividing the ground into squares
to prepare the paste for appliqué work
to stiffen new needlework
to wash ordinary lace
to wash real lace
to stiffen lace
to iron lace
to pin out lace
to wash coloured cottons and work done with the same
materials
☞by the same author☜
(album of cross-stitch embroidery)
 plates with  designs, and a complete treatise
on the embroidery itself.
quarto; artistic boards, price s. d.
fig. .
to be had by applying to the author and editor
th. de dillmont, dornach, alsace, and at all the leading
booksellers and embroidery shops.
printed by brustlein & co.,
mulhouse (alsace)
end of project gutenberg's encyclopedia of needlework, by thérèse de dillmont
***** this file should be named -h.htm or -h.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
 http://www.gutenberg.org//////
produced by susan skinner, julie barkley and the online
distributed proofreading team at http://www.pgdp.net. this
file is gratefully uploaded to the pg collection in honor
of distributed proofreaders having posted over ,
ebooks.
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).
section . general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph .e..
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
.e.. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs .e.
through .e. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .e. or
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .e. through .e. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
.e.. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
.e.. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .e. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
.e.. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph .e..
.e.. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .e. or .e..
.e.. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- you pay a royalty fee of % of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is
 owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
 has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
 project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments
 must be paid within  days following each date on which you
 prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
 returns. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
 sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
 address specified in section , "information about donations to
 the project gutenberg literary archive foundation."
- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within  days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
 license. you must require such a user to return or
 destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
 and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
 project gutenberg-tm works.
- you provide, in accordance with paragraph .f., a full refund of any
 money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days
 of receipt of the work.
- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.
.e.. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the
foundation as set forth in section  below.
.f.. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
.f.. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right
of replacement or refund" described in paragraph .f., the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
.f.. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
.f.. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .f., this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
.f.. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
.f.. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.
section . information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm
project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in , the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations.
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections  and 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
section . information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
(c)() educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification
number is -. its (c)() letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state's laws.
the foundation's principal office is located at  melan dr. s.
