. sharps, flats, naturals, double-sharps and double-flats, occurring
in the course of the composition (i.e., after the key signature) are
called accidentals, whether they actually cause a staff degree to
represent a different pitch as in fig.  or simply make clear a
notation about which there might otherwise be some doubt as in fig. ,
measure two. the effect of such accidentals terminates at the bar.
[listen]
. in the case of a tie across a bar an accidental remains in force
until the combined value of the tied notes expires. in fig.  first
measure, third beat, an accidental sharp makes the third space represent
the pitch c sharp. by virtue of the tie across the bar the third space
continues to represent c sharp thru the first beat of the second
measure, but for the remainder of the measure the third space will
represent c unless the sharp is repeated as in fig. .
[listen]
. the following rules for making staff degrees represent pitches
different from those of the diatonic scale will be found useful by the
beginner in the study of music notation. these[pg ] rules are quoted from
"the worcester musical manual," by charles i. rice.
. to sharp a natural degree, use a sharp. fig. .
. to sharp a sharped degree, use a double sharp. fig. .
. to sharp a flatted degree, use a natural. fig. .
. to flat a natural degree, use a flat. fig. .
. to flat a flatted degree, use a double flat. fig. .
. to flat a sharped degree, use a natural. fig. .
[listen]
. when two different notations represent the same pitch, the word
enharmonic is applied. thus we may say that f sharp and g flat (on
keyboard instruments at least) are enharmonically the same.
this word enharmonic is used in such expressions as enharmonic change,
enharmonic keys, enharmonic interval, enharmonic modulation, enharmonic
relation, etc., and in all such combinations it has the same meaning,
viz.—a change in notation but no change in the pitch represented.
. a note is a character expressing relative duration, which when
placed on a staff indicates that a certain tone is to be sounded for a
certain relative length of time. the pitch of the tone to be sounded is
shown by the position of the note on the staff, while the length of time
it is to be prolonged is shown by the shape of the note. thus e.g., a
half-note on the second line of the treble staff indicates that a
specific pitch (g') is to be played or sung for a period of time twice
as long as would be indicated by a quarter-note in the same composition.
. a rest is a character which indicates a rhythmic silence of a
certain relative length.[pg ]
. the notes and rests in common use are as follows:
whole-note. an open note-head without stem.
half-note. an open note-head with stem.
quarter-note. a closed note-head with stem.
eighth-note. a closed note-head with stem and one hook.
sixteenth-note. a closed note-head with stem and two hooks.
thirty-second-note. a closed note-head with stem and three hooks.
whole-rest.
half-rest.
quarter-rest.
eighth-rest.
sixteenth-rest.
thirty-second-rest.
. the english names for these notes are:
whole-note—semi-breve.
half-note—minim.
quarter-note—crotchet.
eighth-note—quaver.
sixteenth-note—semi-quaver.
thirty-second-note—demi-semi-quaver.
the corresponding rests are referred to by the same system of
nomenclature: e.g., semi-breve rest, etc.
. sixty-fourth and one-hundred-and-twenty-eighth-notes are
occasionally found, but are not in common use. the double-whole-note
(breve), made or
, is still used,
especially in english music, which frequently employs the half-note as
the beat-unit. thus in four-half measure the breve would be necessary to
indicate a tone having four beats.
. the whole-rest has a peculiarity of usage not common to any of the
other duration symbols, viz., that it is often employed as a
measure-rest, filling an entire measure of beats, no matter what the
measure-signature may be. thus, not only in four-quarter-measure, but in
two-quarter, three-quarter, six-eighth, and other varieties, the
whole-rest fills the[pg ] entire measure, having a value sometimes greater,
sometimes less than the corresponding whole-note. because of this
peculiarity of usage the whole-rest is termed takt-pausa
(measure-rest) by the germans.
. a bar is a vertical line across the staff, dividing it into
measures. the word bar is often used synonymously with measure by
orchestral conductors and others; thus, "begin at the fourteenth bar
after j." this use of the word, although popular, is incorrect.
. a double-bar consists of two vertical lines across the staff, at
least one of the two being a heavy line. the double bar marks the end of
a division, movement, or entire composition.
[pg ]
abbreviations, signs, etc.
. a double bar (or single heavy bar) with either two or four dots
indicates that a section is to be repeated. if the repeat marks occur at
only one point the entire preceding part is to be repeated, but if the
marks occur twice (the first time at the right of the bar but the second
time at the left), only the section thus enclosed by the marks is to be
repeated.
. sometimes a different cadence (or ending) is to be used for the
repetition, and this is indicated as in fig. .
. the italian word bis is occasionally used to indicate that a
certain passage or section is to be repeated. this use is becoming
obsolete.
. the words da capo (d.c.) mean literally "from the head," i.e.,
repeat from the beginning. the words dal segno (d.s.) indicate a
repetition from the sign ( or
) instead of
from the beginning.
in the case of both d.c. and d.s. the word fine (meaning literally
the end) is ordinarily used to designate the point at which the
repeated section is to terminate. the fermata () was
formerly in common use for this same purpose, but is seldom so employed
at present.[pg ]
d.c. (sin[]) al fine means—repeat from the beginning
to the word "fine."
d.c. al
 means—repeat to the fermata (or
hold).
d.c. senza repetizione, or d.c. ma senza repetizione,
both mean—repeat from the beginning, but without observing other
repeat marks during the repetition.
d.c. e poi la coda means—repeat the first section only to
the mark , then skip to the coda. (see p. ,
sec. , for discussion of coda).
. in certain cases where the repetition of characteristic figures can
be indicated without causing confusion, it is the practice of composers
(especially in orchestral music) to make use of certain signs of
repetition. some of the commonest of these abbreviations are shown in
the following examples.
[listen]
in fig.  the repetition of an entire measure is called for.
[listen]
. the word simile
(sometimes segue) indicates that a certain effect previously begun is
to be continued, as e.g., staccato playing, pedalling, style of bowing
in violin music, etc. the word segue is also occasionally used to show
that an accompaniment figure (especially in orchestral music) is to be
continued.
. when some part is to rest for two or more measures several methods
of notation are possible. a rest of two measures is usually indicated
thus
. three measures thus
. four measures
thus
. rests of more than[pg ] four measures are usually
indicated in one of the following ways:
. sometimes the
number of measures is written directly on the staff, thus;
. the letters g.p. (general pause, or grosse pause), the words lunga
pausa, or simply the word lunga, are sometimes written over a rest to
show that there is to be a prolonged pause or rest in all parts. such
expressions are found only in ensemble music, i.e., music in which
several performers are engaged at the same time.
. the fermata or hold
 over a note or chord
indicates that the tone is to be prolonged, the duration of the
prolongation depending upon the character of the music and the taste of
the performer or conductor. it has already been noted that the hold over
a bar was formerly used to designate the end of the composition, as the
word fine is employed at present, but this usage has practically
disappeared and the hold over the bar now usually indicates a short rest
between two sections of a composition.
. the sign va...... (an abbreviation of all'ottava,
literally at the octave) above the staff, indicates that all tones are to be
sounded an octave higher than the notes would indicate. when found below
the staff the same sign serves to indicate that the tones are to be
sounded an octave lower. the term va bassa has also this latter
signification.
. sometimes the word loco (in place) is used to show that the part
is no longer to be sounded an octave higher (or lower), but this is more
often indicated by the termination of the dotted (or wavy) line.
. the sign col  (coll'ottava—with
the octave) shows that the
tones an octave higher or lower are to be sounded with the tones
indicated by the printed notes. 
. for the sake of definiteness in referring to pitches, a particular
name is applied to each octave, and all pitches in[pg ] the octave are
referred to by means of a uniform nomenclature. the following figure
will make this system clear:
thus e.g., "great g" (written simply g), is the g represented by the
first line of the bass staff. small a (written a), is represented by the
fifth line of the bass staff. two-lined g, (written
is represented by the space above the fifth line, treble staff.
three-lined c, (written
), is represented by the
second added line above the treble staff, etc. the one-lined octave
may be described as the octave from middle c to the b represented by
the third line of the treble staff, and any tone within that octave is
referred to as "one-lined." thus—one-lined d, one-lined g, etc.
in scientific works on acoustics, etc., the pitches in the sub
octave (or sub-contra octave as it is often called) are
referred to as c, d, e, etc.; those in the contra
octave as c, d, etc.; in the great octave, as c,
d, etc.; in the small octave as c, d, etc.
[pg ]
abbreviations, signs, etc., (continued)
. a dot after a note shows that the value of the note is to be half
again as great as it would be without the dot, i.e., the value is to
be three-halves that of the original note.
. when two dots follow the note the second dot adds half as much as
the first dot has added, i.e., the entire value is seven-fourths that
of the original note.
. when three dots follow the note the third dot adds one-half the
value added by the second, i.e., the entire value of the triple-dotted
note is fifteen-eighths that of the original note.
. a dot over or under a note is called the staccato mark and
indicates that the tone is to be sounded and then instantly released.
 in music for organ and for some other instruments the
staccato note is sometimes interpreted differently, this depending on
the character of the instrument.
on stringed instruments of the violin family the staccato
effect is usually secured by a long, rapid stroke of the bow
for each tone; in the case of harp and drum the hand is
quickly brought in contact with the vibrating body, thus
stopping the tone instantly. on the organ the tone is often
prolonged to one-half the value of the printed note before the
keys are released.
. the wedge-shaped dash over the note (staccatissimo) was formerly
employed to indicate a tone still more detached[pg ] than that indicated by
the dot, but this sign is really superfluous, and is seldom used at
present. 
. a tie is a curved line connecting the heads of two notes that call
for the same tone. it indicates that they are to be sounded as one tone
having a duration equal to the combined value of both notes. e.g., a
half-note tied to a quarter-note would indicate a tone equal in
duration-length to that shown by a dotted half-note; two half-notes tied
would indicate a tone equal in duration to that shown by a whole-note.
(see examples under sections , , and
fig.  illustrates the more common variety of tie, while fig.  shows
an example of the enharmonic[] tie.
[listen]
. the slur is used in so many different ways that it is impossible
to give a general definition. it consists of a curved line, sometimes
very short (in which case it looks like the tie), but sometimes very
long, connecting ten, fifteen, or more notes. some of the more common
uses of the slur are:
a. to indicate legato (sustained or connected) tones, as contrasted
with staccato (detached) ones.
in violin music this implies playing all tones thus slurred in
one bow; in music for the voice and for wind instruments it
implies singing or playing them in one breath.
b. as a phrase-mark, in the interpretation of which the first tone of
the phrase is often accented slightly, and the last one shortened in
value.
this interpretation of the phrase is especially common when
the phrase is short (as in the two-note phrase), and when the
tones constituting the phrase are of short duration, e.g.,
the phrase given in fig.  would be played approximately as
written in fig. .
[listen]
[pg ]
but if the notes are of greater value, especially in slow
tempi, the slur merely indicates legato, i.e., sustained or
connected rendition. fig.  illustrates such a case.
[listen]
this is a matter of such diverse usage that it is difficult to
generalize regarding it. the tendency seems at present to be
in the direction of using the slur (in instrumental music)
as a phrase-mark exclusively, it being understood that unless
there is some direction to the contrary, the tones are to be
performed in a connected manner.
c. in vocal music, to show that two or more tones are to be sung to one
syllable of text. see fig. .
[listen]
in notes of small denomination (eighths and smaller) this same
thing is often indicated by stroking the stems together as
in fig. . this can only be done in cases where the natural
grouping of notes in the measure will not be destroyed.
[listen]
d. to mark special note-groups (triplets, etc.), in which case the slur
is accompanied by a figure indicating the number of notes in the group.
see fig.  (a)
the most common of these irregular note-groups is the
triplet, which consists of three notes to be performed in
the time ordinarily given to two of the same value. sometimes
the triplet consists of only two notes as in fig.  (b). in
such a case the first two of the three notes composing the
triplet are considered to be tied.
[listen]
[pg ]
when the triplet form is perfectly obvious, the fig.  (as
well as the slur) may be omitted.
other examples of irregular note-groups, together with the
names commonly applied, follow.
. the combination of slur or tie and dots over the notes indicates
that the tones are to be somewhat detached, but not sharply so.
this effect is sometimes erroneously termed portamento (lit.
carrying), but this term is more properly reserved for an
entirely different effect, viz., when a singer, or player on
a stringed instrument, passes from a high tone to a low one
(or vice versa) touching lightly on some or all of the
diatonic tones between the two melody tones.
. the horizontal dash over a note
 indicates that the
tone is to be slightly accented, and sustained. this mark is also
sometimes used after a staccato passage to show that the tones are no
longer to be performed in detached fashion, but are to be sustained.
this latter use is especially common in music for stringed instruments.
. the combination of dash and dot over a note
indicates that the tone is to be slightly accented and separated from
its neighboring tones.
. accent marks are made in a variety of fashions. the most common
forms follow. sf
fz. all indicate that a certain tone or chord is to be differentiated
from its neighboring tones or chords by receiving a certain relative
amount of stress.
. in music for keyboard instruments it is sometimes necessary to
indicate that a certain part is to be played by a certain hand. the
abbreviations r.h. (right hand), m.d. (mano destra, it.), and m.d. (main
droite, fr.), designate that a passage or tone is to be played with the
right hand, while l.h. (left hand), m.s. (mano sinistra, it.), and m.g.
(main gauche, fr.), show that the left hand is to be employed.[pg ]
. the wavy line placed vertically beside a chord
indicates that the tones are to be sounded consecutively instead of
simultaneously, beginning with the lowest tone, all tones being
sustained until the duration-value of the chord has expired. this is
called arpeggio playing. when the wavy line extends through the entire
chord (covering both staffs) as in fig. , all the tones of the chord
are to be played one after another, beginning with the lowest: but if
there is a separate wavy line for each staff as at fig.  then the
lowest tone represented on the upper staff is to be played
simultaneously with the lowest tone represented on the bass staff.
[listen]
the word arpeggio (plural arpeggi) is a derivation of the
italian word arpa (meaning harp), and from this word arpa
and its corresponding verb arpeggiare (to play on the harp)
are derived also a number of other terms commonly used in
instrumental music. among these are—arpeggiamento,
arpeggiando, arpeggiato, etc., all of these terms referring to
a harp style of performance, the tones being sounded one
after another in rapid succession instead of simultaneously as
on the piano.
. the sign
 over a note indicates that
the tone is to be begun softly, gradually increased in power, and as
gradually decreased again, ending as softly as it began. in vocal music
this effect is called messa di voce.
. in music for stringed instruments of the violin family, the sign
 indicates down-bow and the sign
up-bow. in cello music the down-bow sign is sometimes written
[pg ]
embellishments
. embellishments (or graces) (fr. agréments) are ornamental tones,
either represented in full in the score or indicated by certain signs.
the following are the embellishments most commonly found: trill (or
shake), mordent, inverted mordent (or prall trill), turn (gruppetto),
inverted turn, appoggiatura and acciaccatura.
usage varies greatly in the interpretation of the signs representing
these embellishments and it is impossible to give examples of all the
different forms. the following definitions represent therefore only the
most commonly found examples and the most generally accepted
interpretations.
. the trill (or shake) consists of the rapid alternation of two
tones to the full value of the printed note. the lower of these two
tones is represented by the printed note, while the upper one is the
next higher tone in the diatonic scale of the key in which the
composition is written. the interval between the two tones may therefore
be either a half-step or a whole-step.
whether the trill is to begin with the principal tone
(represented by the printed note) or with the one above is a
matter of some dispute among theorists and performers, but it
may safely be said that the majority of modern writers on the
subject would have it begin on the principal tone rather than
on the tone above. fig. .
when the principal note is preceded by a small note on the
degree above, it is of course understood that the trill begins
on the tone above. fig. .
the trill is indicated by the sign
[listen]
[pg ]
[listen]
the above examples would be termed perfect trills because they close
with a turn. by inference, an imperfect trill is one closing without a
turn.
. the mordent
 consists of three tones; first the
one represented by the printed note; second the one next below it in the
diatonic scale; third the one represented by the printed note again.
[listen]
. the double (or long) mordent has five tones (sometimes seven)
instead of three, the first two of the three tones of the regular
mordent being repeated once or more. (see fig. .)
in the case of both mordent and double-mordent the tones are sounded as
quickly as possible, the time taken by the embellishment being
subtracted from the value of the principal note as printed.
[listen]
. the inverted mordent
 (note the absence
of the vertical line) is like the mordent except that the tone below is
replaced by the tone above in each case. this ornament is sometimes
called a "transient shake" because it is really only a part of the more
elaborate grace called "trill." (see fig. .)[pg ]
[listen]
the confusion at present attending the interpretation of the
last two embellishments described, might be largely obviated
if the suggestion of a recent writer[] to call the one the
upward mordent, and the other the downward mordent were to
be universally adopted.
. the turn consists of four tones; first, the diatonic scale-tone
above the principal tone; second, the principal tone itself; third, the
tone below the principal tone; and fourth, the principal tone again.
when the sign ( or
) occurs over a note
of small value in rapid tempo (fig. ) the turn consists of four tones
of equal value; but if it occurs over a note of greater value, or in a
slow tempo, the tones are usually played quickly (like the mordent), and
the fourth tone is then held until the time-value of the note has
expired. (fig. .)
[listen]
. when the turn-sign is placed a little to the right of the note the
principal tone is sounded first and held to almost its full time-value,
then the turn is played just before the next tone of the melody. in this
case the four tones are of equal length as in the first example. (see
fig. .)
[listen]
the student should note the difference between these two
effects; in the case of a turn over the note the turn comes
at the beginning, but in the case of the sign after the note
the turn comes at the very end. but in both cases the time
taken by the embel[pg ]lishment is taken from the time-value of
the principal note. for further details see grove's dictionary
of music and musicians, vol. v, p. . also elson, op. cit.
p. .
. sometimes an accidental occurs with the turn, and in this case when
written above the sign it refers to the highest tone of the turn, but
when written below, to the lowest (fig. ).
[listen]
. in the inverted turn the order of tones is reversed, the lowest
one coming first, the principal tone next, the highest tone third, and
the principal tone again, last.
[listen]
. the appoggiatura (lit. leaning note) consists of an ornamental
tone introduced before a tone of a melody, thus delaying the melody tone
until the ornamental tone has been heard. the time taken for this
ornamental tone is taken from that of the melody tone.
the appoggiatura was formerly classified into long
appoggiatura and short appoggiatura, but modern writers
seem to consider the term "short appoggiatura" to be
synonymous with acciaccatura[], and to avoid confusion the
word acciaccatura will be used in this sense, and defined
under its own heading.
. three rules for the interpretation of the appoggiatura are commonly
cited, viz.:
() when it is possible to divide the principal tone into
halves, then the appoggiatura receives one-half the value of
the printed note. (fig. .)[pg ]
() when the principal note is dotted (division into halves
being therefore not possible), the appoggiatura receives
two-thirds of the value. (fig. .)
() when the principal note is tied to a note of smaller
denomination the appoggiatura receives the value of the first
of the two notes. (fig. .)
[listen]
. the acciaccatura (or short appoggiatura) is written like the
appoggiatura except that it has a light stroke across its stem.
 it has no definite duration-value, but is sounded as
quickly as possible, taking its time from that of the principal tone.
the appoggiatura is always accented, but the acciaccatura never is, the
stress always falling on the melody tone. (see grove, op. cit. vol. i,
p. .)
the use of embellishments is on the wane, and the student of
to-day needs the above information only to aid him in the
interpretation of music written in previous centuries. in the
early days of instrumental music it was necessary to introduce
graces of all sorts because the instruments in use were not
capable of sustaining tone for any length of time; but with
the advent of the modern piano with its comparatively great
sustaining power, and also with the advent in vocal music of a
new style of singing (german lieder singing as contrasted with
italian coloratura singing), ornamental tones were used less
and less, and when found now are usually written out in full
in the score instead of being indicated by signs.
[pg ]
scales
. a scale (from scala, a latin word meaning ladder; ger.
ton-leiter) is an ascending or descending series of tones, progressing
according to some definite system, and all bearing (in the case of
tonality scales at least) a very intimate relation to the first
tone—the key-tone or tonic. (see p. ,
sec. ; also note  at
bottom of p. .)
many different kinds of scales have existed in various musical
eras, the point of resemblance among them all being the fact
that they have all more or less recognized the octave as the
natural limit of the series. the difference among the various
scales has been in the selection of intervals between the
scale-tones, and, consequently, in the number of tones within
the octave. thus e.g., in our major scale the intervals
between the tones are all whole-steps except two (which are
half-steps), and the result is a scale of eight tones
(including in this number both the key-tone and its octave):
but in the so-called pentatonic scale of the chinese and
other older civilizations we find larger intervals (e.g.,
the step-and-a-half), and consequently a smaller number of
tones within the octave. thus in the scale upon which many of
the older scotch folk songs are based the intervals are
arranged as follows:
wholestep
wholestep
step-and-a-half
wholestep
step-and-a-half
the result is a scale of six tones, corresponding
approximately with c—d—e—g—a—c in our modern system.
the term pentatonic is thus seen to be a misnomer since the
sixth tone is necessary for the completion of the series, just
as the eighth tone is essential in our diatonic scales.
the following chinese tune (called "jasmine") is based on the
pentatonic scale.
[listen]
[pg ]
. in studying the theory of the scale the student should bear in mind
the fact that a scale is not an arbitrary series of tones which some one
has invented, and which others are required to make use of. it is rather
the result of accustoming the ear to certain melodic combinations (which
were originally hit upon by accident), and finally analyzing and
systematizing these combinations into a certain definite order or
arrangement. the application of this idea may be verified when it is
recalled that most primitive peoples have invented melodies of some
sort, but that only in modern times, and particularly since the
development of instrumental music, have these melodies been analyzed,
and the scale upon which they have been based, discovered, the inventors
of the melodies being themselves wholly ignorant of the existence of
such scales.
. a key is a number of tones grouping themselves naturally (both
melodically and harmonically) about a central tone—the key tone. the
word tonality is often used synonymously with key in this sense.
the difference between key and scale is therefore this,
that while both key and scale employ the same tone
material, by key we mean the material in general, without
any particular order or arrangement in mind, while by scale
we mean the same tones, but now arranged into a regular
ascending or descending series. it should be noted in this
connection also that not all scales present an equally good
opportunity of having their tones used as a basis for tonality
or key-feeling: neither the chromatic nor the whole-step scale
possess the necessary characteristics for being used as
tonality scales in the same sense that our major and minor
scales are so used.
. there are three general classes of scales extant at the present
time, viz.: () diatonic; () chromatic; () whole-tone.[]
. the word diatonic means "through the tones" (i.e., through the
tones of the key), and is applied to both major and minor scales of our
modern tonality system. in general a diatonic scale may be defined as
one which proceeds by half-steps and whole-steps. there is, however, one
exception to[pg ] this principle, viz., in the progression six to seven in
the harmonic minor scale, which is of course a step-and-a-half. (see p. ,
sec. .)
. a major diatonic scale is one in which the intervals between the
tones are arranged as follows:
wholestep
wholestep
halfstep
wholestep
wholestep
wholestep
halfstep
in other words, a major diatonic scale is one in which the intervals
between three and four, and between seven and eight are half-steps, all
the others being whole-steps. a composition based on this scale is said
to be written in the major mode, or in a major key. the major diatonic
scale may begin on any one of the twelve pitches c, c♯ or d♭,
d, d♯ or e♭, e, f, f♯ or g♭, g, g♯ or
a♭, a, a♯ or b♭, b, but in each case it is the same
scale because the intervals between its tones are the same. we have then
one major scale only, but this scale may be written in many different
positions, and may be sung or played beginning on any one of a number of
different pitches.
. it is interesting to note that the major scale consists of two
identical series of four tones each; i.e., the first four tones of the
scale are separated from one another by exactly the same intervals and
these intervals appear in exactly the same order as in the case of the
last four tones of the scale. fig.  will make this clear. the first
four tones of any diatonic scale (major or minor) are often referred to
as the lower tetrachord[] and the upper four tones as the upper
tetrachord.
[listen]
[pg ]
it is interesting further to note that the upper tetrachord of any
sharp scale is always used without change as the lower tetrachord of
the next major scale involving sharps, while the lower tetrachord of any
flat scale is used as the upper tetrachord of the next flat scale. see
figs.  and .
[listen]
. from the standpoint of staff notation the major scale may be written
in fifteen different positions, as follows:
[listen]
[pg ]
it will be observed that in the above series of scales those beginning
on f♯ and g♭ call for the same keys on the piano, i.e.,
while the notation is different, the actual tones of the scale are the
same. the scales of c♯ and d♭ likewise employ the same tones.
when two scales thus employ the same tones[pg ] but differ in notation they
are said to be enharmonic, (cf. p. ,
sec. .)
note.—the student is advised to adopt some uniform method
of writing scales, preferably the one followed in those given
above, the necessary sharps and flats appearing before the
notes in the scale and then repeated collectively at the end
as a signature. he is also advised to repeat these scales and
signatures over and over until absolute familiarity is
attained. e.g.,
e—f♯—g♯—a—b—c♯—d♯—e; signature,
four sharps, f, c, g, and d.
[pg ]
scales (continued)
. the minor diatonic scale is used in several slightly different
forms, but the characteristic interval between the first and third tones
(which differentiates it from the major scale) remains the same in every
case. this interval between the first and third tones consists of four
half-steps in the major scale and of three half-steps in the minor scale
and this difference in size has given rise to the designation major
for the scale having the larger third, and minor for the scale having
the smaller one.
. the original (or primitive) form of the minor scale has its tones
arranged as follows.
wholestep
halfstep
wholestep
wholestep
halfstep
wholestep
wholestep
as its name implies, this is the oldest of the three forms (being
derived from the old greek aeolian scale), but because of the absence of
a "leading tone" it is suitable for the simplest one-part music only,
and is therefore little used at present.
. the harmonic minor scale is like the primitive form except that it
substitutes a tone one half-step higher for the seventh tone of the
older (i.e., the primitive) form. this change was made because the
development of writing music in several parts (particularly harmonic
part-writing) made necessary a "leading tone," i.e., a tone with a
strong tendency to move on up to the key-tone as a closing point. in
order[pg ] to secure a tone with such a strongly upward tendency the
interval between seven and eight had to be reduced in size to a
half-step. it should be noted that this change in the seventh tone of
the scale caused an interval of a step-and-a-half between the sixth and
seventh tones of the scale.
wholestep
halfstep
wholestep
wholestep
halfstep
step anda half
halfstep
. the melodic minor scale substitutes a tone one half-step higher
than six as well as one a half-step higher than seven, but this change
is made in the ascending scale only, the descending scale being like the
primitive form. the higher sixth (commonly referred to as the "raised
sixth") was used to get rid of the unmelodic interval of a
step-and-a-half[] (augmented second), while the return to the
primitive form in descending is made because the ascending form is too
much like the tonic major scale.
wholestep
halfstep
wholestep
wholestep
wholestep
wholestep
halfstep
wholestep
halfstep
wholestep
wholestep
halfstep
wholestep
this form is used only to a very limited extent, and then principally in
vocal music, the harmonic form being in almost universal use in spite of
the augmented second.
. the minor scale in its various positions (up to five sharps and five
flats) and in all three forms follows: a composition based on any one of
these forms (or upon a mixture of them, which often occurs) is said to
be in the minor mode. it will be noted that the first four tones are
alike in all three forms; i.e., the lower tetrachord in the minor
scale is invariable no matter, what may happen to the upper tetrachord.
the sign + marks the step-and-a-half.[pg ]
[enlarge]
[listen to a minor
scales]
note.—the student is advised to recite the harmonic form
of the minor scale as was suggested in the case of the major
scale, noting that the "raised seventh" does not affect the
key-signature. e.g.,—e—f♯—g—a—b—c—d♯—e;
signature, one sharp, f.[pg ]
. a minor scale having the same signature as a major scale is said to
be its relative minor. e.g.,—e is the relative minor of g, c of
e♭, d of f, etc., the small letter being used to refer to the minor
key or scale, while the capital letter indicates the major key or scale
unless accompanied by the word minor. relative keys are therefore
defined as those having the same signature. g and e are relative keys,
as are also a and f♯, etc.
. a minor scale beginning with the same tone as a major scale is
referred to as its tonic minor. thus, e.g., c with three flats in
its signature is the tonic minor of c with all degrees in natural
condition; e with one sharp is the tonic minor of e with four sharps,
etc. tonic keys are therefore those having the same key-tone.
. the eight tones of the diatonic scale (both major and minor) are
often referred to by specific names, as follows:
. tonic—the tone. (this refers to the fact that the tonic
is the principal tone, or generating tone of the key, i.e.,
it is the tone.)
. super-tonic—above the tone.
. mediant—midway between tonic and dominant.
. sub-dominant—the under dominant. (this name does not
refer to the position of the tone under the dominant but to
the fact that the fifth below the tonic is also a dominant
tone—the under dominant—just as the fifth above is the upper
dominant).
. dominant—the governing tone. (from the latin word
dominus meaning master.)
. super-dominant—above the dominant. or
sub-mediant—midway between tonic and sub-dominant.
. leading tone—the tone which demands resolution to the
tonic (one-half step above it).
. octave—the eighth tone.[pg ]
. the syllables commonly applied to the various major and minor scales
in teaching sight-singing are as follows:[]
major—do, re, mi, fa, sol, la, ti, do.
minor[]—original—la, ti, do, re, mi, fa, sol, la.
harmonic—la, ti, do, re, mi, fa, si, la.
melodic —la, ti, do, re, mi, fi, si, la,
it is interesting to study the changes in both spelling and
pronunciation that have occurred (and are still occurring) in
these syllables. the first one (ut) was changed to do as
early as the sixteenth century because of the difficulty of
producing a good singing tone on ut. for the same reason and
also in order to avoid having two diatonic syllables with the
same initial letter, the tonic-sol-fa system (invented in
england about  and systematized about ) changed si to
ti and this change has been almost universally adopted by
teachers of sight-singing in this country. the more elaborate
tonic-sol-fa spelling of the diatonic syllables (doh, lah,
etc.), has not, however, been favorably received in this
country and the tendency seems to be toward still further
simplification rather than toward elaboration. it is probable
that further changes in both spelling and pronunciation will
be made in the near future, one such change that seems
especially desirable being some other syllable than re for the
second tone of the major scale, so that the present syllable
may be reserved for "flat-two," thus providing a uniform
vowel-sound for all intermediate tones of the descending
chromatic scale, as is already the case in the ascending form.[pg ]
. the chromatic scale[] is one which proceeds always by
half-steps. its intervals are therefore always equal no matter with what
tone it begins. since, however, we have (from the standpoint of the
piano keyboard) five pairs of tones[] which are enharmonically the
same, it may readily be seen that the chromatic scale might be notated
in all sorts of fashions, and this is in fact the real status of the
matter, there being no one method uniformly agreed upon by composers.
parry (grove's dictionary, article chromatic) recommends
writing the scale with such accidentals as can occur in
chromatic chords without changing the key in which the passage
occurs. thus, taking c as a type, "the first accidental will
be d♭, as the upper note of the minor ninth on the tonic;
the next will be e♭, the minor third of the key; the next
f♯, the major third of the super-tonic—all of which can
occur without causing modulation—and the remaining two will
be a♭ and b♭, the minor sixth and seventh of the
key." according to this plan the chromatic scale beginning
with c would be spelled—c, d♭, d, e♭, e, f,
f♯, g, a♭, a, b♭, b, c—the form being the
same both ascending and descending. this is of course written
exclusively from a harmonic standpoint and the advantage of
such a form is its definiteness.
. for sight-singing purposes the chromatic scale[] is usually
written by representing the intermediate tones in ascending by sharps,
(in some cases naturals and double-sharps), and the intermediate tones
in descending by flats (sometimes naturals and double-flats). the
chromatic scale in nine different positions, written from this
standpoint, follows, and the syllables most commonly applied in
sight-singing have also been added. in the first two scales the student
of harmony is asked to note that because of the very common prac[pg ]tice of
modulating to the dominant and sub-dominant keys, the intermediate tones
♯ and ♭ are quite universally used in both ascending and
descending melody passages. in other words the scales that follow would
more nearly represent actual usage if in each case ♯ (fi) were
substituted for ♭ (se) in the descending scale; and if ♭
(te) were substituted for ♯ (li) in the ascending form.
[listen to c chromatic scale]
[pg ]
note.—in writing chromatic scales from this sight-singing
standpoint the student is urged to adopt a three-step process;
first, writing the major diatonic scale both ascending and
descending; second, marking the half-steps; third, inserting
accidental notes calling for the intermediate tones. in the
above chromatic scales these intermediate tones have been
represented by black note-heads so as to differentiate them
from the notes representing diatonic scale tones.
. the whole-step scale (the third type mentioned in
sec. ) is, as
its name implies, a scale in which the intervals between the tones
consist in every instance of whole-steps. this reduces the number of
tones in the scale to seven. beginning with c the scale reads: c, d, e,
f♯ or g♭, a♭, b♭, c. this scale has been used
somewhat extensively by the ultramodern french school of composition
represented by debussy, ravel, and others, but is not making any
progress toward universal adoption. the remarks of a recent english
writer[] on this subject may be interesting to the student who is
puzzled by the apparent present-day tendencies of french music. he says:
"the student of some interesting modern developments will also
speedily discover that the adoption of the so-called
whole-tone scale as a basis of music is, except upon a keyed
instrument tuned to the compromise of equal temperament,
unnatural and impossible. no player upon a stringed instrument
can play the scale of whole-tones and arrive at an octave
which is in tune with the starting note, unless he
deliberately changes one of the notes on the road and alters
it while playing it. the obvious result of the application of
the whole-tone scale to an orchestra or a string quartet would
be to force them to adopt the equal temperament of the
pianoforte, and play every interval except the octave out of
tune. when this modification had taken hold all music in the
pure scale would be distorted and destroyed, unless string
players were to face the[pg ] practically impossible drudgery of
studying both the equal temperament and the pure scale from
the start, and were able to tackle either form at a moment's
notice. a thorough knowledge of the natural genesis of the
scale of western nations will be the best antidote to fads
founded upon ignorance of it. it is a curious commentary upon
this question that wagner, in the opening of the third act of
tristan (bars  to ), experimented with the whole-tone
scale and drew his pen through it, as was to be expected from
a composer whose every work proves the writer to have had the
pure scale inbred in him."
there may be some difference of opinion among acousticians as to whether
mr. stanford is correct in his scientific assumptions regarding the
difference between "tempered" and "pure" scales,[] but even so, there
is a far more potent reason why the whole-step scale will probably never
become popular as the major and minor scales now are, viz., the fact
that it offers no possibility of inculcating tonality feeling, which
has always been the basis of even the simplest primitive music. tonality
scales give rise to a feeling of alternate periods of contraction and
relaxation—an active tone (or chord) followed by a passive one, but no
such effect is possible in the whole-step scale, and it seems suitable
therefore only for that class of music whose outlines are purposely
intended to be vague and indefinite—the impressionistic style of music
writing.
[pg ]
auxiliary words and endings
. being a list of articles, adverbs, conjunctions, prepositions, and
endings, often utilized in compounding terms relating to musical
effects.
a—preposition—variously translated to, at, for, by, in, with, towards.
a cappella—in church style.
a capriccio—at the fancy of the performer.
à deux mains—for two hands.
a mezza voce—with half voice.
à la, or alla—in the manner of. alla marcia—in the style of a
march.
assai—very, or very much. allegro assai—very fast.
ben—well. ben marcato—well marked.
coi, con, col, colla, colle, collo—with, or with the.
con amore—with tenderness.
colla voce—with the voice.
come—as, like. come primo—as at first.
contra—against. in compound words means "an octave below."
da—from. da capo—from the head.
di—by, with, of, for. di bravura—with daring.
di molto—exceedingly—very much. allegro di molto—exceedingly
rapid.
doppio—double. doppio movimento—double movement.
e, ed, et—and. cresc. et accel.—louder and faster.
ensemble—together, the opposite of solo.
il, la, l', le—the. il basso—the bass. l'istesso tempo—the same
speed.
il più—the most. il più forte possible—as loudly as possible.
issimo—italian superlative ending. forte—fortissimo.
ino, etto—italian diminutive endings. andante—andantino.
poco—pochetto.
meno—less. meno forte—less loud.
mente—the ending which changes a noun or adjective to an adverb.
largo largamente.
mezzo or mezza—half, or medium. mezzo forte—medium loud.
molto—much, or very much. molto cresc.—very much louder.
nel, nella, etc.—in the, or at the. nel battere—at the down beat.
non—not. non tanto—not too much.
ossia—or else. ossia più facile—or else more easily.
per—for. per il violino—for the violin.
peu—little. un peu cresc.—a little increase in tone.
più—more. più forte—more loudly.[pg ]
poco—little. poco a poco—little by little.
poi—then. e poi la coda—and then the coda.
possibile—possible.
forte possibile—as loudly as possible.
quasi—in the manner of. allegro quasi andante—a fairly rapid
movement, yet in the style of an andante; almost as slow as an andante.
sans—without. sans pedales—without pedals.
sempre—always, or continually. sempre forte—a long passage to be
played forte throughout its entirety.
senza—without. senza accompagnamento—without accompaniment.
sino, sin—as far as. see p. , note.
solo—alone. opposite of ensemble.
sub—under or lower. sub-dominant—the under dominant.
tanto—same as troppo, q.v.
tre—three. tre corde—three strings.
très—very. très vivement—very lively.
troppo—too much. non tanto allegro, or non troppo allegro—not
too fast.
una, un, uno—one, or a. una corda—one string. un peu—a little.
a working knowledge of these auxiliary terms will aid the student
greatly in arriving at the meaning of hundreds of terms without stopping
to look up each individual one.
[pg ]
measure
. from the standpoint of the eye, a measure is that portion of the
staff found between two bars, (in certain cases this space may be less
than a measure, as e.g., at the beginning and end of a movement); but
from the standpoint of the ear a single, isolated measure is not
possible, and the term must therefore be defined in the plural form.
measures are similarly accented groups of evenly-spaced beats, each
group having at least one accented and one non-accented beat. the
strongest accent falls normally on the first beat in the measure.
two essential characteristics are involved in the ordinary musical
measure:
() a group of even beats (or pulses), always felt, though not always
actually sounded, one or more of these beats being stronger than the
rest;
() certain rhythmic figures ( etc.) which form the
actual musical content of these groups.
the student will note the essential difference between rhythm
and measure. rhythm is the regular recurrence of accent in a
series of beats (or pulses), while measure is the grouping of
these beats according to some specified system. in listening
to a piece of music, two hearers a and b may feel the rhythm
equally strongly, but a may subjectively group the beats
into—one, two | one, two |—etc., while b feels the
groups as—one, two, three, four | one, two, three,
four |—etc. rhythm is thus seen to be a fundamental thing,
inherent in the music itself, while measure is to a certain
extent at least an arbitrary grouping which musicians have
adopted for practical purposes.
. in syncopation the normal system of accenting is temporarily
suspended and the accented tone falls on the regularly unaccented part
of the measure. syncopation may therefore be defined as the temporary
interruption of a normal[pg ] series of accents, i.e., accenting a beat
that is usually not accented. thus e.g., in fig. , measure one has
the regular system of accents normally found in four-quarter-measure,
(strong accent on one, secondary accent on three); but measure three
has only one accent, and it falls on the second beat.
[listen]
. measures are usually classified as simple and compound. a
simple measure is one which has but a single accent, i.e., the
measure cannot be divided into smaller constituent groups. there are two
main classes of simple measures, two-beat measure, and three-beat
measure. a compound measure is (as its name implies) one made up by
combining two or more simple measures, or by the elaboration of a single
measure (in slow tempo) into several constituent groups. the principal
compound measures are four-beat and six-beat, both being referred to as
compound-duple measures. five-beat, seven-beat, nine-beat, and
twelve-beat measures are also classified as compound measures.
an english writer[] classifies measures as duple, triple, or
quadruple, specifying that a simple measure is one in which
each beat is represented by a note whose value can be divided
into halves ( etc.) and that a compound measure
is one in which each beat is represented by a dotted-note,
whose value can be divided into three parts, ().
there is thus seen to be considerable difference of opinion as
to the meaning of the words simple and compound when
applied in this connection, the principal question at issue
being whether four-beat measure is an individual variety, or
whether it is a variety compounded out of two-beat measures,
either by placing two of these in a group or by the
elaboration of a single measure into a larger number of beats,
as is often necessary in slow tempi. perhaps the easiest way
out of the difficulty is to admit that both may be true—but
in different compositions. that is, it is frequently
impossible to tell whether a composition that is being
listened to is in two-beat, or in four-beat measure; and yet
it is sometimes possible so to discriminate. since, however,
one cannot in the majority of cases distinguish between
two-beat and four-beat measures, it will probably be best to
leave the original classification intact and regard four-beat
measure as a compound variety.
[pg ]
. the commonest varieties of measure are:
. duple (sometimes called even measure, or even time), in
which there are two beats, the first one being accented.
examples of duple measure are /, /, /, two-quarter,[]
two-eighth, and two-half measure, respectively.
. triple, (the old perfect measure), in which there are
three beats, the first one being accented, the second and
third unaccented. examples are /, /, /, three-eighth,
three-quarter, and three-half measure, respectively.
. quadruple, in which there are four beats, the first and
third being accented (primary accent on one, secondary
accent on three), the second and fourth unaccented. (see
note above, under sec. .)
. sextuple, in which there are six beats, the first and
fourth being accented, the others not. in rapid tempi this is
always taken as compound duple measure, a dotted quarter note
having a beat. it will be noted that the two measures
 are identical in effect with
. other varieties of measure sometimes found are / and /, but
these are practically always taken as three-beat and four-beat measures
respectively, being equivalent to these if each group of three tones is
thought of as a triplet.
 is identical in effect with
. quintuple (five-beat) and septuple (seven-beat) measures are
occasionally met with, but these are rare and will always be sporadic.
the five-beat measure is taken as a combination of three and two, or of
two and three (sometimes a mixture of both in the same composition),
while the[pg ] seven-beat measure is taken in groups of four and three, or
of three and four.
. the sign is usually understood to mean
four-quarter measure, and the sign
, two-half measure,
but usage varies somewhat, and the second sign is sometimes used to
indicate four-half measure. it may safely be said however that the sign
 always indicates
that a half-note has a beat. may occasionally be found indicating four-half measure
but this is rare.
the student will note that the sign
 is
not a letter c, but an incomplete circle, differentiating
two-beat (imperfect) measure from three-beat (perfect)
measure. see appendix a, p.
[pg ]
tempo
. the word time in musical nomenclature has been greatly abused,
having been used to indicate:
() rhythm; as "the time was wrong."
() variety of measure-signature; as "two-four time."
() rate of speed; as "the time was too slow."
to obviate the confusion naturally resulting from this three-fold and
inexact use of the word, many teachers of music are adopting certain
changes in terminology as noted in sections ,
, and . such
changes may cause some confusion at first, but seem to be necessary if
our musical terminology is to be at all exact.
. the first of the changes mentioned in the above paragraph is to
substitute the word rhythm for the word time when correcting
mistakes involving misplaced accent, etc. e.g., "your rhythm in the
third measure of the lower score was wrong," instead of "your
time—was wrong."
. the second change mentioned would eliminate such blind and
misleading expressions as "two-four time," "three-four time," "four-four
time," "six-eight time," etc., and substitute therefor such
self-explanatory designations as "two-quarter measure," "three-quarter
measure," "four-quarter measure," "six-eighth measure," etc. e.g.,
"the first movement of the beethoven sonata op. , no. , is in
four-quarter measure."
. the third change referred to above would substitute the word
tempo (plural—tempi) for the word time in all allusions to rate
of speed. e.g., "the scherzo was played in very rapid tempo."[pg ]
the word tempo has been used in this connection so long by
professional musicians that there can be no possible objection
to it on the ground of its being a foreign word. in fact there
is a decided advantage in having a word that is understood in
all countries where modern music (i.e., civilized music) is
performed, and just here is found the principal reason for the
popularity of the italian language in musical terminology.
schumann, macdowell and other well known composers have tried
to break down this popularity by using their own respective
vernaculars in both tempo and dynamic indications, but in
spite of these attempts the italian language is still quite
universally used for this purpose, and deservedly so, for if
we are to have a music notation that is universal, so that
an american is able to play music written by a frenchman or a
german, or a russian, then we ought also to have a certain
number of expressions referring to tempo, etc., which will be
understood by all, i.e., a music terminology that is
universal. the italian language was the first in the field, is
the most universally known in this particular at the present
time, and is entirely adequate. it should therefore be
retained in use as a sort of musical esperanto.
. there are several ways of finding the correct tempo of a
composition:
. from the metronomic indication found at the beginning of
many compositions. thus e.g., the mark m.m.  (maelzel's
metronome ) means that if the metronome (either maelzel's or
some other reliable make) is set with the sliding weight at
the figure  there will be  clicks per minute, and they
will serve to indicate to the player or singer the rate at
which the beats (or pulses) should follow one another. this is
undoubtedly the most accurate means of determining tempi in
spite of slight inaccuracies in metronomes[] and of the
mistakes which composers themselves often make in giving
metronomic indications.
. another means of determining the tempo of a composition is
to play it at different tempi and then to choose the one that
"feels right" for that particular piece of music. this is
perhaps the best means of getting at the correct tempo but is
open only to the[pg ] musician of long experience, sure judgment,
and sound scholarship.
. a third method of finding tempi is through the
interpretation of certain words used quite universally by
composers to indicate the approximate rate of speed and the
general mood of compositions. the difficulty with this method
is that one can hardly find two composers who employ the same
word to indicate the same tempo, so that no absolute rate of
speed can be indicated, and in the last analysis the conductor
or performer must fall back on the second method cited
above—i.e., individual judgment.
. in spite of the inexactness of use in the case of expressions
relating to tempo, these expressions are nevertheless extremely useful
in giving at least a hint of what was in the composer's mind as he
conceived the music that we are trying to interpret. since a number of
the terms overlap in meaning, and since the meaning of no single term is
absolute, these expressions relating to tempo are best studied in
groups. perhaps the most convenient grouping is as follows:
. grave (lit. weighty, serious), larghissimo,
adagissimo, and lentissimo—indicating the very slowest
tempo used in rendering music.
. largo,[] adagio,[] and lento—indicating quite a
slow tempo.
. larghetto (i.e., a little largo) and adagietto (a
little adagio)—a slow tempo, but not quite so slow as
largo, etc.
. andante (going, or walking, as contrasted with running)
and andantino—indicating a moderately slow tempo.[pg ]
andantino is now quite universally taken slightly faster
than andante, in spite of the fact that if andante means
"going," and if "ino" is the diminutive ending, then
andantino means "going less," i.e., more slowly!
. moderato—a moderate tempo.
. allegro and allegretto[]—a moderately quick tempo,
allegretto being usually interpreted as meaning a tempo
somewhat slower than allegro.
the word allegro means literally happy, joyous, and this
literal meaning is still sometimes applicable, but in the
majority of instances the term refers only to rate of speed.
. vivo, vivace, (lit. lively)—a tempo between allegro
and presto.
. presto, prestissimo, vivacissimo, and prestissimo
possibile—the most rapid tempo possible.
[pg ]
tempo (continued)
. innumerable combinations of the words defined in sec.  with one
another and with other words occur. some of these combinations with
their approximate meanings follow. the meaning of any such expression
not found in the list may usually be arrived at by consulting the terms
defined in paragraph  and recalling the use of certain auxiliary
terms quoted in chapter ix.
largo assai—very slow.
largo di molto—very slow.
largo ma non troppo—slow, but not too slow.
largo un poco—slow, but not so slow as largo. (cf.
larghetto.)
lentemente—slowly.
lentando—with increasing slowness.
très lentement—very slowly.
lentissamente—very slowly.
lentissamamente—very slowly.
lento assai—very slowly.
lento a capriccio—slowly but capriciously.
lento di molto—very slowly.
andante affettuoso—moderately slow, and with tenderness and
pathos.
andante amabile—moderately slow, and lovingly.
andante cantabile—moderately slow, and in singing style.
andante grazioso—moderately slow, and gracefully.
andante maestoso—moderately slow, and majestically.
andante con moto—slightly faster than andante.
andante (ma) non troppo—not too slowly.
andante pastorale—moderately slow, and in simple and
unaffected style; (lit. rural, pastoral).
andante quasi allegro—almost as rapid in tempo as
allegro; (lit. an andante in the style of allegro).
andante sostenuto—moderately slow and sustained.
allegrissimo—much faster than allegro. (the superlative
degree of allegro.)
allegro agitato—a moderately rapid tempo, and in agitated
style.
allegro appassionata—a moderately rapid tempo, and in
passionate style.
allegro assai (very allegro)—faster than allegro.
allegro commodo—a conveniently rapid tempo.
allegro con brio—an allegro played in brilliant style.
faster than allegro.[pg ]
allegro con fuoco—an allegro played with fire, i.e.,
with extreme animation. faster than allegro.
allegro con spirito—an allegro performed with spirit.
allegro con moto—faster than allegro.
allegro di bravura—an allegro performed in brilliant
style, i.e., demanding great skill in execution.
allegro furioso (furiously)—quicker than allegro; very
brilliant.
allegro giusto—an allegro movement, but in exact rhythm.
allegro ma grazioso—an allegro played in graceful style.
allegro (ma) non tanto—an allegro movement, but not too
rapid.
allegro (ma) non troppo—an allegro movement, but not too
rapid.
allegro (ma) non presto—an allegro movement, but not too
rapid.
allegro moderato—slower than allegro.
allegro vivace—faster than allegro.
presto assai—as rapidly as possible.
presto (ma) non troppo—a presto movement, but not too
rapid.
. there are certain terms which indicate a modification of the
normal tempo of a movement, these being divided into two classes, (a)
those terms which indicate in general a slower tempo, and (b) those
which indicate in general a more rapid tempo. the further subdivisions
of these two classes are shown below.
(a) terms indicating a slower tempo.
. terms indicating a gradual retard.
ritenente, (rit.), ritenuto (rit.), ritardando
(rit.), rallentando (rall.), slentando.
. terms indicating a tempo which is to become definitely
slower at once.
più lento (lit. more slowly), meno mosso (lit. less
movement).
. terms indicating a slower tempo combined with an increase
in power.
largando, allargando. these words are both derived from
largo, meaning large, broad.
(for terms indicating both slower tempo and softer tone, see
page ,
sec. .)
the student should note the difference between groups  and 
as given above: the terms in group  indicate that each
measure, and even each pulse in the measure, is a little
slower than the preceding one, while such terms as più lento
and meno mosso[pg ] indicate a rate of speed becoming instantly
slower and extending over an entire phrase or passage. some
composers (e.g., beethoven and couperin) have evidently had
this same distinction in mind between rallentando and
ritardando on the one hand, and ritenuto and ritenente
on the other, considering the former (rall. and rit.) to
indicate a gradually slackening speed, and the latter
(ritenuto and ritenente) to indicate a definitely slower
rate. the majority of composers do not however differentiate
between them in this way, and it will therefore hardly be
worth while for the student to try to remember the
distinction.
(b) terms indicating a more rapid tempo.
. terms indicating a gradual acceleration.
accelerando, affrettando
(this term implies some degree of excitement also), stringendo,
poco a poco animato.
. terms indicating a tempo which is to become definitely
faster at once.
più allegro, più tosto, più mosso, stretto, un poco
animato.
. after any modification in tempo (either faster or slower) has been
suggested it is usual to indicate a return to the normal rate by some
such expression as a tempo (lit. in time), a tempo primo (lit. in
the first time), tempo primo, or tempo.
. tempo rubato (or a tempo rubato) means literally in robbed
time, i.e., duration taken from one measure or beat and given to
another, but in modern practice the term is quite generally applied to
any irregularity of rhythm or tempo not definitely indicated in the
score.
the terms ad libitum, (ad lib.), a piacere, and a capriccio,
also indicate a modification of the tempo at the will of the performer.
ad libitum means at liberty; a piacere, at pleasure; and a
capriccio, at the caprice (of the performer).
. the term tempo giusto is the opposite of tempo rubato (and of
the other terms defined in paragraph ). it means literally in exact
time. (tempo giusto is sometimes translated quite rapidly,[] but
this is very unusual.)
[pg ]
. l'istesso tempo means—at the same rate of speed. e.g., when a
measure signature changes from / to / with a change in beat-note
from a quarter to a dotted-quarter, but with the same tempo carried
through the entire movement.
. tenuto (ten.) indicates that a tone or chord is to be held to
its full value. this word is sometimes used after a staccato passage to
show that the staccato effect is to be discontinued, but is often used
merely as a warning not to slight a melody-tone—i.e., to give it its
full value.
. veloce means—swiftly, and is applied to brilliant passages
(e.g., cadenzas) which are to be played as rapidly as possible without
much regard for measure rhythm. the words rapidamente, brillante and
volante (flying) have the same meaning as veloce.
. the following expressions referring to tempo are also in common
use but cannot easily be classified with any of the groups already
defined.
con moto—with motion; i.e., not too slow.
pesante—slowly, heavily.
doppio movimento—twice as rapid as before.
tempo ordinario—in ordinary tempo.
tempo commodo—in convenient tempo.
sempre lento malinconico assai—always slowly and in a very
melancholy style.
animando, animato, con anima—with animation.
agitato—agitated.
. tempo di marcia is given by riemann (dictionary of music, p. )
as equivalent to andante, m.m. -. the same writer gives tempo di
menuetto as equivalent to allegretto, and tempo di valso as
equivalent to allegro moderato (which he regards as indicating a more
rapid tempo than allegretto).
[pg ]
dynamics
. the word dynamics (cf. dynamic—the opposite of static) as used
in the nomenclature of music has to do with the various degrees of power
(i.e., the comparative loudness and softness) of tones.
as in the case of words referring to tempo, the expressions referring to
dynamics are always relative, never absolute; it is possible to
indicate that one measure is to be louder than another, but it is not
possible (nor desirable) to indicate exactly how loud either is to be.
thus dynamics, perhaps even more than tempo, will be seen to depend on
the taste of the performer or conductor.
the following words referring to dynamics are in common use:
pianisissimo (ppp)—as softly as possible. (it will be
noted that this is a sort of hyper-superlative of piano.)
pianissimo (pp)—very softly. (the superlative of
piano.)
piano (p)—softly.
mezzo piano (mp)—medium softly.
mezzo forte (mf)—medium loudly.
forte (f)—loudly (lit. strong).
fortissimo (ff)—very loudly. (the superlative of
forte.)
fortisissimo (fff)—as loudly as possible.
the lack of a one-word comparative degree in the case of both
piano and forte seems to necessitate the hyper-superlative
degree as given above, but the practice of using four, or even
five p's or f's is not desirable.
. the terms defined in sec.  are often combined with others, as
e.g.,
pianissimo possibile—as softly as possible.
piano assai—very softly.
fortissimo possibile—as loudly as possible.
forte piano (fp)—loud, followed at once by soft.[pg ]
as in the case of terms relating to tempo, the meaning of many other
expressions relating to dynamics may easily be arrived at by recalling
the list of auxiliary terms quoted under sec. .
. the terms sforzando, forzando, sforzato and forzato all
indicate a strong accent on a single tone or chord. these words are
abbreviated as follows:—sf,fz, and sfz, the abbreviation being
placed directly above (sometimes below) the note or chord affected. the
signs and
 are also
commonly used to indicate such an accent.
in interpreting these accent marks the student must bear in
mind again the fact that they have a relative rather than an
absolute meaning: the mark sf occurring in the midst of a
piano passage will indicate a much milder form of accent
than would the same mark occurring in the midst of a forte
passage.
. the words rinforzando and rinforzato (abb.—rinf. and rfz.)
mean literally reinforced, and are used to indicate a sudden increase
in power usually extending over an entire phrase or passage instead of
applying only to a single tone or chord as in the case of sforzando,
etc.
. crescendo (abb.—cresc. or
) means a gradual
increase in power. it will be noted that this word does not mean loud,
nor does it mean a sudden increase in power unless accompanied by some
auxiliary term such as subito, or molto.
broadly speaking there are two varieties of crescendo: () that in
which the same tone increases in power while being prolonged; () that
in which succeeding tones are each sounded more strongly than the
preceding one. the first variety is possible only on instruments giving
forth a tone which can be varied after it begins. thus e.g., the
human voice, the violin, the organ enclosed in a swell box, and certain
wind instruments, are all capable of sounding a tone softly at first and
gradually increasing the volume until the maximal point of power has
been reached. but on the piano, organ not enclosed in a swell-box,
kettle drum, etc., the power of the[pg ] tone cannot be varied after the
tone has once been sounded, and a crescendo effect is therefore
possible only in a passage, in rendering which each succeeding tone is
struck more forcibly than its immediate predecessor. this second variety
of crescendo offers a means of dramatic effect which may be employed
most strikingly, as e.g., when a long passage begins very softly and
increases in power little by little until the utmost resources of the
instrument or orchestra have been reached. a notable example of such an
effect is found in the transition from the third to the fourth movements
of the beethoven fifth symphony.
the difference between sforzando, rinforzando, and
crescendo should now be noted: sforzando indicates that a
single tone or chord is to be louder; rinforzando, that an
entire passage is to be louder, beginning with its first tone;
but crescendo indicates that there is to be a gradual
increase in power, this increase sometimes occurring during
the sounding of a single tone, but more often in a passage.
. certain combinations of the word crescendo with other words are
so common that they should be especially noted. among these are:
crescendo al fortissimo—keep on gradually increasing in
power until the fortissimo (or very loud) point has been
reached.
crescendo subito—increase in power suddenly (or rapidly).
crescendo poco a poco—increase in power very, very
gradually.
crescendo poi diminuendo—first increase, then diminish the
tone.
crescendo e diminuendo—same as cresc. poi dim.
crescendo molto—increase in power very greatly.
crescendo ed animando poco a poco—growing gradually louder
in tone and quicker in tempo.
crescendo ed affrettando—gradually louder and faster.
crescendo poco a poco sin al fine—crescendo gradually even
up to the very end.
. decrescendo (decresc. or
) means a gradual
diminishing of the tone. it is the opposite of crescendo. the word
diminuendo is synonymous with decrescendo.
decrescendo (or diminuendo) al pianissimo means—decrease
gradually in power until the pianissimo (or very soft) point is
reached.[pg ]
. a number of terms referring to both softer tone and slower tempo
are in use. the most common of these are:—mancando, moriente,[]
morendo, perdendo (from perdere—to lose), perdendosi,
calando, and smorzando.[] such expressions are usually
translated—"gradually dying away."
. in piano music the abbreviation ped. indicates that the damper
pedal (the one at the right) is to be depressed, while the sign
 shows that it is to be released. in many modern editions
this depression and release of the damper pedal are more accurately
indicated by the sign
the term senza sordini is also occasionally found in old
editions, indicating that the damper pedal is to be depressed,
while con sordini shows that it is to be released. these
expressions are taken from a usage in music for stringed
instruments, in which the term con sordini means that the
mute (a small clamp of metal, ivory or hardwood) is to be
affixed to the bridge, this causing a modification in both
power and quality of the tone. the damper on the piano does
not in any way correspond to the mute thus used on stringed
instruments, and the terms above explained as sometimes
occurring in piano music are not to be recommended, even
though beethoven used them in this sense in all his earlier
sonatas.
. the words una corda (lit.—one string) indicate that the "soft
pedal" (the one at the left) is to be depressed, while the words tre
corde (lit. three strings) or tutte le corde (all the strings) show
that the same pedal is to be released. these expressions refer to the
fact that on grand pianos the "soft pedal" when depressed moves the
hammers to one side so that instead of striking three strings they
strike only two (in the older pianos only one, hence una corda), all
three strings (tre corde) being struck again after the release of the
pedal.
. other terms relating either directly or indirectly to the subject
of dynamics are:
con alcuna licenza—with some degree of license.
con amore—with tenderness.
con bravura—with boldness.
con celerita—with rapidity.
con delicato—with delicacy.
con energico—with energy.
con espressione—with expression.[pg ]
con forza—with force.
con fuoco—with fire and passion.
con grand' espressione—with great expression.
con grazia—with grace.
con melinconia—with melancholy.
con passione—with passion.
con spirito—with spirit.
con tenerezza—with tenderness.
delicato—delicately.
dolce—sweetly, gently.
dolcissimo—most sweetly.
dolce e cantabile—gently and with singing tone.
dolente }
doloroso } plaintively or sorrowfully.
espressivo—expressively.
grandioso—grandly, pompously.
grazioso—gracefully.
giocoso—humorously, (cf. jocose).
giojoso—joyfully, (cf. joyous).
lacrimando, lacrimoso—sorrowfully.
legato—smoothly.
leggiero—lightly.
leggierissimo—most lightly; almost a staccato.
lusingando—caressingly, coaxingly, tenderly.
maesta, maestoso—majestically.
martellando, martellato—strongly accented,
(lit.—hammered).
marziale—martial—war-like.
mesto—pensively.
mezzo voce—with half voice.
misterioso—mysteriously.
parlando—well accented or enunciated; applied to melody
playing. (the word parlando means literally-speaking.)
pastorale—in simple and unaffected style, (lit.—pastoral,
rural).
pomposo—pompously.
precipitoso—precipitously.
recitativo—well enunciated. (this meaning applies only in
instrumental music in which a melody is to stand out above the
accompaniment. for def. of recitative in vocal music, see p. .)
risoluto—firmly, resolutely.
scherzando, scherzoso, etc.—jokingly. these terms are
derived from the word scherzo meaning a musical joke.
semplice—simply.
sempre marcatissimo—always well marked, i.e., strongly
accented.
sentimento—with sentiment.
solenne—solemn.
sotto voce—in subdued voice.
spiritoso—with spirit.[pg ]
strepitoso—precipitously.
tranquillo—tranquilly.
tristamente—sadly.
. many other terms are encountered which on their face sometimes seem
to be quite formidable, but which yield readily to analysis. thus
e.g., crescendo poco a poco al forte ed un pochettino accelerando,
is seen to mean merely—"increase gradually to forte and accelerate a
very little bit." a liberal application of common sense will aid greatly
in the interpretation of such expressions.
[pg ]
terms relating to forms and styles
. a form in music is a specific arrangement of the various parts of
a composition resulting in a structure so characteristic that it is
easily recognized by the ear. thus e.g., although every fugue is
different from all other fugues in actual material, yet the arrangement
of the various parts is so characteristic that no one who knows the
fugue form has any doubt as to what kind of a composition he is
hearing whenever a fugue is played. the word form is therefore seen to
be somewhat synonymous with the word plan as used in architecture; it
is the structure or design underlying music. examples of form are the
canon, the fugue, the sonata, etc.
speaking broadly we may say that form in any art consists in
the placing together of certain parts in such relations of
proportion and symmetry as to make a unified whole. in music
this implies unity of tonality and of general rhythmic effect,
as well as unity in the grouping of the various parts of the
work (phrases, periods, movements) so as to weld them into one
whole, giving the impression of completeness to the hearer.
. the primal basis of form is the repetition of some characteristic
effect, and the problem of the composer is to bring about these
repetitions in such a way that the ear will recognize them as being the
same material and will nevertheless not grow weary of them. this is
accomplished by varying the material (cf. thematic development), by
introducing contrasting material, and by choice of key.
. the student should note at the outset of this topic the difference
in meaning between the terms form and style:[pg ] a form is a plan
for building a certain definite kind of composition, but a style is
merely a manner of writing. thus e.g., the fugue is a
form—i.e., it is a plan, which although capable of variation in
details, is yet carried out fairly definitely in every case; but
counterpoint is merely a style or manner of writing (just as gothic
architecture is a style of building), which may be cast into any one of
several forms.
. the material found in the following sections is an attempt to
explain in simple language certain terms relating to forms and
styles which are in common use; in many cases the definition is too
meagre to give anything but a very general idea, but it is hoped that
the student will at least be set to thinking and that he will eventually
be led to a more detailed and scholarly study of the subject. (the
article "form" and the separate articles under each term here defined,
as found in grove's dictionary, are especially recommended. for examples
of the various forms described, see also mason and surette—"the
appreciation of music," supplementary volume.)
. in a very general way there may be said to be two styles of
musical composition, the monophonic (or homophonic)—the
one-voiced—and the polyphonic—the many voiced. the polyphonic[]
style antedates the monophonic historically.
. in monophonic music there is one voice which has a pronounced
melody, the other voices (if present) supporting this melody as a
harmonic (and often rhythmic) background. an example of this is the
ordinary hymn-tune with its melody in the highest part, and with three
other voices forming a "four-part harmony." the sonata, symphony, opera,
modern piano piece, etc., are also largely monophonic, though
polyphonic passages by way of contrast are often to be found.[pg ]
. in polyphonic music each voice is to a certain extent melodically
interesting, and the "harmony" is the result of combining several
melodies in such a way as to give a pleasing effect, instead of treating
a melody by adding chords as an accompaniment or support. counterpoint,
canon, round, fugue, etc., are all polyphonic in style. the word
contrapuntal is often used synonymously with polyphonic.
(sections  to
  relate especially to terms describing
polyphonic music.)
. counterpoint is the art of adding one or more parts or melodies
to a given melody, the latter being known as the "cantus firmus," or
subject. it may therefore be broadly defined as "the art of combining
melodies."
the word counterpoint comes from the three words "punctus
contra punctum," meaning "point against point." the word
point as here used refers to the punctus—one of the neumae
of the mediaeval system, these neumae being the immediate
predecessors of modern notes.
both vocal and instrumental music have been written in
contrapuntal style. the familiar two- and three-part
"inventions" by bach are excellent examples of instrumental
counterpoint, while such choruses as those in "the messiah" by
handel illustrate the highest type of vocal counterpoint.
. imitation is the repetition by one part, of a subject or theme
previously introduced by another part. if the imitation is exact, the
term strict imitation is applied, but if only approximate, then the
term free imitation is used in referring to it. the repetition need
not have the exact pitches of the subject in order to be strict; on
the contrary the imitation is usually at the interval of an octave, or a
fifth, or a second, etc. fig.  shows an example of strict imitation in
which the third part comes in an octave lower than the first part.
. a canon is a contrapuntal composition in the style of strict
imitation, one part repeating exactly (but at any interval) what another
part has played or sung. the term "canonic style" is sometimes applied
to music in which the imitation is not exact. an example of three-part
canon is given in fig. .[pg ]
[listen]
the word canon means law, and was applied to this
particular form of composition because the rules relating to
its composition were invariable. it is because of this
non-flexibility that the canon is so little used as a form
at the present time: the modern composer demands a plan of
writing that is capable of being varied to such an extent as
to give him room for the exercise of his own particular
individuality of conception, and this the canon does not do.
for this same reason too the fugue and the sonata have
successively gone out of fashion and from schumann down to the
present time composers have as it were created their own
forms, the difficulty in listening arising from the fact that
no one but the composer himself could recognize the form as
a form[pg ] because it had not been adopted to a great enough
extent by other composers to make it in any sense universal.
the result is that in much present-day music it is very
difficult for the hearer to discover any trace of familiar
design, and the impression made by such music is in
consequence much less definite than that made by music of the
classic school. it is probable that a reaction from this state
of affairs will come in the near future, for in any art it is
necessary that there should be at least enough semblance of
structure to make the art work capable of standing as a
universal thing rather than as the mere temporary expression
of some particular composer or of some period of composition.
. the common school round is an example of canon, each voice
repeating exactly what the first voice has sung, while this first voice
is going on with its melody. the round is therefore defined as a
variety of canon in which the imitation is always in unison with the
subject.
. the fugue (latin, fuga = flight) is a form of contrapuntal
composition in which the imitation is always in the dominant key,
i.e., a fifth above or a fourth below. the imitation (called "the
answer") may be an exact repetition of the subject (sometimes called
"the question"), but is usually not so.
the fugue differs from the canon also in that the subject is
given in complete form before the answer begins, while in the
canon the imitation begins while the subject is still going
on. the fugue is not nearly so strict in form as the canon
and gives the composer much greater opportunity for expressing
musical ideas. a canon may be perfect in form and yet be
very poor music; this same statement might of course be made
about any form, but is especially true in the stricter ones.
[pg ]
terms relating to forms and styles (continued)
(sections  to
  relate particularly to terms used in
descriptions of monophonic music[].)
. a phrase is a short musical thought (at least two measures in
length) closing with either a complete or an incomplete cadence. the
typical phrase is four measures long. the two-measure phrase is
often called section. the word phrase as used in music terminology
corresponds with the same word as used in language study.
. a period is a little piece of music typically eight measures
long, either complete in itself or forming one of the clearly defined
divisions of a larger form. the period (when complete in itself) is
the smallest monophonic form.
the essential characteristic of the regular period is the fact that it
usually consists of two balanced phrases (often called antecedent and
consequent or thesis and antithesis), the first phrase giving rise
to the feeling of incompleteness (by means of a cadence in another key,
deceptive cadence, etc.,) the second phrase giving the effect of
completeness by means of a definite cadence at the close.
the second half of the period is sometimes a literal
repetition of the first half, in all respects except the
cadence, but in many cases too it is a repetition of only one
of the elements—rhythm, intervals, or general outline. figs.
 and  show examples of both types. the principle almost
invariably holds that the simpler the music (cf. folk-tunes)
the more obvious the form of the period, while the more
complex the music, the less regular the period.[pg ]
[listen to fig. ]
[listen to fig. ]
. the primary forms are built up by combining two or more periods.
the small two-part primary form (often called song-form or
lied-form) consists of two periods so placed that the second
constitutes a consequent or antithesis to the first. the second half of
this second period is often exactly the same as the second half of the
first period, thus binding the two periods together into absolute unity.
the theme of the choral movement of the ninth symphony (beethoven)
quoted below is a perfect example of this form. other examples are
"drink to me only with thine eyes," and "the last rose of summer."
[listen]
[pg ]
the small three-part primary form is like the two-part primary form
except that it has a section of contrasting material interpolated
between the two periods. this middle part is usually an eight-measure
phrase.
the large two- and three-part primary forms usually have
sixteen-measure periods instead of eight-measure ones, but are otherwise
similar in construction.
these various primary forms are used in constructing many
varieties of compositions, among them the theme and
variations, the polka, the waltz, the march, etc., as
well as most of the shorter movements in sonatas, quartets,
etc. they are used in vocal music also, but are less apt to be
regular here because the form of vocal music is largely
dependent upon the structure of the text.
. a theme is a fragment of melody used as the subject of a fugue,
as the basis of the development section in "sonata form," etc. sometimes
it is a complete tune (often in period form), on which variations are
made, as e.g., in the familiar theme and variations.
. thematic development consists in taking a short theme (or several
short themes) and by means of transposition, interval expansion and
contraction, rhythmic augmentation and diminution, inversion, tonality
changes, etc., building out of it a lengthy composition or section of a
composition. fig.  b, c, d, e, and f show how the theme
given in fig.  (a) may be varied in a few of these ways. there are
hundreds of other fashions in which this same theme might be varied
without destroying its identity. for other examples of thematic
development see the development section of sonata op. , no. , as
analyzed in appendix e.
[listen]
[pg ]
for further illustrations of development in the case of this
same theme, see—christiani—the principles of expression in
pianoforte playing, p. , ff. from which the foregoing
themes have been adapted.
. a rondo is an instrumental composition (in homophonic style) in
which a certain theme appears several times almost always in the same
form (i.e., not thematically varied), the repetitions of this theme
being separated by contrasting material.
the rondo is the oldest of the larger monophonic forms and has been
used in many different ways, but perhaps its most characteristic
construction is as follows: () principal subject; () second subject in
dominant key; () principal subject; () third subject; () first
subject again; () second subject, in tonic key; () coda (or ending).
the student should note particularly the problem of repetition and
contrast (mentioned in sec. ) as here worked out, as the rondo was
the first monophonic form in which this matter was at all satisfactorily
solved, and its construction is especially interesting because it is
readily seen to be one of the direct predecessors of the highest form of
all—the sonata. examples of rondos may be found in any volume of
sonatas or sonatinas.
. a suite is a set of instrumental dances all in the same or in
nearly related keys. the first dance is usually preceded by an
introduction or prelude, and the various dances are so grouped as to
secure contrast of movement—a quick dance being usually followed by a
slower one.[pg ]
the suite is interesting to students of the development of
music as being the first form in several movements to be
generally adopted by composers. it retained its popularity
from the beginning of the seventeenth to the end of the
eighteenth centuries, being finally displaced by the sonata,
whose immediate predecessor it is thus seen to be.
the suite was formerly written for solo instrument only (harpsichord,
clavichord, piano) but modern composers like dvořák, lachner,
moszkowski, and others have written suites for full orchestra also.
. among the dances commonly found in suites are the following:
allemande—duple or quadruple measure.
bolero—triple measure.
bourée—duple or quadruple measure.
chaconne—triple measure.
courante—a very old dance in triple measure.
csardas—hungarian dance in duple or quadruple measure.
gavotte—quadruple measure.
gigue (or jig)—duple measure.
habanera—spanish dance in triple measure.
minuet—slow dance in triple measure.
mazurka—polish dance in triple measure.
polonaise—polish dance in triple measure.
rigaudon—lively dance in duple or triple measure.
sarabande—triple measure.
tarantella—swift italian dance in sextuple measure.
the allemande is especially interesting to students of music form
because of its relation to the sonata, it being the prototype of the
sonata-allegro (i.e., the first movement of the sonata). the
sarabande and courante are likewise interesting as the prototypes of
the second movement, and the bourée, minuet, etc., for their
connection with the third movement.
. the scherzo (lit. musical joke) is a fanciful instrumental
composition. it was used by beethoven as the third movement of the
sonata instead of the more limited minuet, but is also often found as an
independent piece.
. a sonata is an instrumental composition of three or more
movements (usually four), the first and last of which are[pg ] almost always
in rapid tempo. each of these movements is a piece of music with a unity
of its own, but they are all merged together in a larger whole with a
broad underlying unity of larger scope. the composition receives its
name from the fact that its first movement is cast in sonata-form.
(see sec.  for description of sonata-form.)
when the sonata has four movements, these are usually arranged as
follows:
. a quick movement (allegro, presto, etc.), often
preceded by a slower introduction.
. a slow movement (largo, andante, adagio, etc.).
. a minuet or scherzo, often with a trio added, in which case
the part preceding the trio is repeated after the trio is
played.
. a quick movement—the finale, sometimes a rondo, sometimes
another sonata-form, sometimes a theme with variations.
these movements are all in closely related keys, but in a variety of
contrasting rhythms.
. a trio is a sonata for three instruments (such as piano, violin,
and cello), while a quartet is a sonata for four instruments, the most
common quartet combination being as follows: first and second violins,
viola, and violoncello.
the term chamber music is often applied to instrumental music for
trio, quartet, quintet, and other similar combinations which are
suitable for a small room rather than for a large concert hall.
the words trio and quartet are also applied to vocal works
for three and four voices respectively, these having no
relation whatsoever to the sonata as described above. the word
trio is also applied to the middle section of minuets,
scherzas, marches, etc., the term originating in the old usage
of writing this part for three instruments only.
. a concerto is a sonata for a solo instrument with orchestral
accompaniment, the form being usually somewhat modified so as to adapt
it to a composition in which there must[pg ] necessarily be opportunity for
a good deal of technical display. there are usually but three movements
in the concerto.
the great majority of concertos are for piano and orchestra,
but examples of concertos for violin, cello, flute, oboe, and
other solo instruments (all with orchestral accompaniment)
have also been written. a few modern composers have applied
the term concerto to certain large organ works (with no
orchestral accompaniment, the composition being written for
just the one instrument), but this use of the word is so
contrary to the accepted definition that it is hardly
justifiable.
when a concerto is played on two pianos (without orchestra),
this does not mean that there is no orchestral part, but that
there is no orchestra to play it, and so the parts that should
be played by the orchestral instruments have simply been
arranged for a second piano (sometimes organ).
. a symphony is a sonata for full orchestra. in general its
construction is the same as that of the sonata, but it is usually of
much larger proportions and has in it much greater variety of both tonal
and rhythmic material. the symphony is generally conceded to be the
highest type of instrumental music ever evolved.
the symphony was accepted as a standard form in the time of
haydn (-) and was developed enormously by haydn
himself, mozart (-), and beethoven (-),
reaching perhaps its highest point in the famous "nine
symphonies" of the last-named composer. later symphony writers
whose works are at present being performed include schumann,
tschaikowsky, and dvořák.
the word symphony was formerly used synonymously with ritornelle,
both words being applied to instrumental interludes between parts of
vocal works, but this usage has now entirely disappeared.
. sonata-form (sometimes called sonata-allegro) is a plan for the
construction of instrumental music (sonatas, quartets, symphonies,
etc.), in which three rather definite divisions always occur, the third
division being a more or less literal repetition of the first.
these three parts of sonata-form with their usual
subdivisions are:
i. exposition
() principal theme (or first subject).
() link-episode (or modulation group).
() secondary theme (or song group), always in a nearly
related key.
() closing group.
() coda.
[pg ]
ii. development section
treating the themes introduced in the exposition in an almost
infinite variety of fashions, according to the principles of
thematic development. (see sec. ).
iii. recapitulation (or reprise)
consisting essentially of the same subdivisions found in the
exposition, but differing from this first section in one
essential point, viz., that instead of stating the secondary
theme in a related key, the entire recapitulation is in the
principal key. this third section is always followed by a
coda (which may either be very short or quite extended),
bringing the whole movement to a more definite close.
the second part of sonata-form (the development section) is
sometimes the longest and most intricate of the three
divisions, and it is at this point that the composer has an
opportunity of displaying to the full his originality and
inventive skill. it is principally because of this development
section that the sonata is so far superior as a form to its
predecessors. for an analyzed example of sonata-form, see
appendix e. the student is advised to take other sonatas and
go through the first movements with a view to finding at least
the three main divisions mentioned above. in some cases the
form will of course be so irregular that all the parts
indicated cannot be discovered, but the general outlines of
the scheme will always be present.
. a sonatina, as its name implies, is a little sonata. it differs
from the sonata proper principally in having little or no development,
the second section being of slight importance as compared with the
corresponding section of a sonata.
a grand sonata is like an ordinary sonata in form, but is of unusually
large dimensions.
. program music is instrumental music which is supposed to convey
to the listener an image or a succession of images that will arouse in
him certain emotions which have been previously aroused in the
composer's mind by some scene, event, or idea. the clue to the general
idea is usually given at the beginning of the music in the form of a
poem or a short description of the thing in the mind of the composer,
but there are many examples in which there is no clue whatsoever except
the title of the composition.
program music represents a mean between pure music (cf.
the piano sonata or the string quartet) on the one hand, and
descriptive music (in which actual imitations of bird-calls,
whistles, the blowing of the wind, the galloping of horses,
the rolling of thunder, etc., occur), on the other. most
program music is written for the orchestra, examples being
liszt's "the preludes," strauss' "till eulenspiegel," etc.[pg ]
. a symphonic poem (or tone poem) is an orchestral composition of
large dimensions (resembling the symphony in size), usually embodying
the program idea. it has no prescribed form and seems indeed to be often
characterized by an almost total lack of design, but there are also
examples of symphonic poems in which the same theme runs throughout the
entire composition, being adapted at the various points at which it
occurs to the particular moods expressed by the program at those
points.
the symphonic poem was invented by liszt (-) and has
since been used extensively by strauss, saint-saëns and
others. it came into existence as a part of the general
movement which has caused the fugue and the sonata
successively to go out of fashion, viz., the tendency to
invent forms which would not hamper the composer in any way,
but would leave him absolutely free to express his ideas in
his own individual way.
[pg ]
terms relating to vocal music
. an anthem is a sacred choral composition, usually based on
biblical or liturgical[] words. it may or may not have an instrumental
accompaniment, and is usually written in four parts, but may have five,
six, eight, or more.
the word anthem is derived from antifona (or antiphona),
meaning a psalm or hymn sung responsively, i.e.,
antiphonally, by two choirs, or by choir and congregation.
a full anthem is one containing no solo parts; a solo anthem is one
in which the solo part is predominant over the chorus, while a verse
anthem is one in which the chorus parts alternate with passages for
concerted solo voices (i.e., trios, quartets, etc.).
. a capella (sometimes spelled cappella) or alla capella music
is part-singing (either sacred or secular) without accompaniment.
this term means literally "in chapel style," and refers to the
fact that in the early days of the church all singing was
unaccompanied.
. a motet is a sacred choral composition in contrapuntal style. it
has no solo parts, thus corresponding to the madrigal (q.v.) in secular
music. the motet is intended for a capella performance, but is often
given with organ accompaniment.
. a choral is a hymn-tune of the german protestant church. it is
usually harmonized in four voices. the choral (sometimes spelled
chorale) is described as having "a plain melody, a strong harmony, and
a stately rhythm." it differs from the ordinary english and american
hymn-tune in being[pg ] usually sung at a much slower tempo, and in having a
pause at the end of each line of text.
. the mass is the liturgy for the celebration of the lord's supper
in the service of the roman catholic church. as used in the terminology
of music the word refers to the six hymns which are always included when
a composer writes a musical mass, and which form the basis of the
celebration of the communion.[] these six hymns are as follows:
kyrie.
gloria (including the gratias agimus, qui tollis,
quoniam, cum sancto spirito).
credo (including the et incarnatus, crucifixus, and et
resurrexit).
sanctus (including the hosanna).
benedictus.
agnus dei (including the dona nobis).
the requiem mass is the "mass for the dead" and differs
considerably from the ordinary mass. both regular and requiem
masses have been written by many of the great composers
(bach, beethoven, verdi, gounod), and in many cases these
masses are so complex that they are not practicable for the
actual service of the church, and are therefore performed only
by large choral societies, as concert works.
. a cantata is a vocal composition for chorus and soloists, the
text being either sacred or secular. the accompaniment may be written
for piano, organ, or orchestra.
when sacred in character the cantata differs from the
oratorio in being shorter and less dramatic, in not usually
having definite characters, and in being written for church
use, while the oratorio is intended for concert performance.
when secular in subject the cantata differs from the opera
in not usually having definite characters, and in being always
rendered without scenery or action.
examples of the sacred cantata are: stainer's "the
crucifixion," clough-leighter's "the righteous branch," and
gaul's "the holy city." examples of the secular cantata are:
bruch's "armenius," coleridge-taylor's "hiawatha."
. an oratorio is a composition on a large scale for chorus,
soloists, and orchestra, the text usually dealing with some religious
subject. the oratorio, as noted above, is not[pg ] intended for the church
service, but is written for concert performance.
. an opera is a composition for vocal soloists, chorus, and
orchestra, with characters, action, scenery, and dramatic movement. it
is a drama set to music.
grand opera is opera with a serious plot, in which
everything is sung, there being no spoken dialog at all.
opera comique is a species of opera in which part of the
dialog is spoken and part sung. opera comique is not
synonymous with comic opera, for the plot of opera comique
is as often serious as not. in fact the entire distinction
between the terms grand opera and opera comique is being
broken down, the latter term referring merely to operas first
given at the opera comique in paris, and the former term to
those given at the grand opera house in the same city.
a comic opera is a humorous opera, the plot providing many
amusing situations and the whole ending happily. it
corresponds with the comedy in literature.
a light opera is one with an exceedingly trivial plot, in
which songs, dances, and pretty scenery contribute to the
amusement of the audience. the music is lively, but usually as
trivial as the plot.
the term music drama was used by wagner in referring to his
own operas, and is also sometimes applied to other modern
operas in which the dramatic element is supposed to
predominate over the musical.
. a libretto (lit.—little book) is the word-text of an opera,
oratorio, cantata, or some other similar work.
. recitative is a style of vocal solo common to operas, oratorios,
and cantatas, especially those written some time ago. its main
characteristic is that the word-text is of paramount importance, both
rhythm and tone-progression being governed by rhetorical rather than by
musical considerations.
recitative undoubtedly originated in the intoning of the
priest in the ritualistic service of the church, but when
applied to the opera it became an important means of securing
dramatic effects, especially in situations in which the action
of the play moved along rapidly. recitative is thus seen to
be a species of musical declamation.
in the early examples of recitative there was scarcely any
accompaniment, often only one instrument (like the cello)
being employed to play a sort of obbligato melody: when full
chords were played they were not written out in the score, but
were merely indicated in a more or less general way by certain
signs and figures. (see "thorough-bass," p. ,
sec. .)
but about the middle of the seventeenth century a slightly
different style of recitative was invented, and in this type
the orchestra was employed much more freely in the
accompaniment, especially in the parts between the phrases of
the text, but to some extent also to support the voice while
singing. this new style was called recitativo stromento
(i.e., accompanied recitative), while the original type was
called recitativo secco (i.e., dry recitative).[pg ]
during the last century the style of recitative has been
still further developed by gluck and wagner, both of whom used
the orchestra as an independent entity, with interesting
melodies, harmonies and rhythms all its own, while the vocal
part is a sort of obbligato to this accompaniment. but even in
this latest phase of recitative, it is the word-text that
decides the style of both melody and rhythm in the voice part.
fig.  shows an example of dry recitative, taken from "the
messiah."
[listen]
. aria is likewise a style of vocal solo found in operas, etc., but
its predominating characteristic is diametrically opposed to that of the
recitative. in the aria the word-text is usually entirely subordinate
to the melody, and the latter is often very ornate, containing trills,
runs, etc.
the rendition of this ornate style of music is often referred to as
"coloratura singing," but it should be noted that not all arias are
coloratura in style.
the familiar solos from the messiah—"rejoice greatly," and
"the trumpet shall sound" are good examples of the aria style.[pg ]
. a lied (ger. = song) is a vocal solo in which the text, the
melody, and the accompaniment contribute more or less equally to the
effect of the whole.
strictly speaking the word lied means "a poem to be sung,"
and this meaning will explain at once the difference between
the lied on the one hand, and the italian recitative and
aria on the other, for in the lied the text is of great
importance, but the music is also interesting, while in the
recitative the text was important but the music very slight,
and in the aria the text was usually inconsequential while the
music held the center of interest.
the most pronounced characteristic of the lied is the fact that it
usually portrays a single mood, sentiment, or picture, thus differing
from the ballad, which is narrative in style. it will be noted that this
"single mood, or sentiment, or picture" was originally conceived by the
poet who wrote the word-text, and that the composer in writing music to
this text has first tried to get at the thought of the poet, and has
then attempted to compose music which would intensify and make more
vivid that thought. this intensification of the poet's thought comes as
often through the rhythm, harmony, and dynamics of the accompaniment as
through the expressiveness of the voice part.
the style of song-writing in which each verse is sung to the
same tune is called the "strophe form," while that in which
each verse has a different melody is often referred to as the
"continuous" or "through-composed" form (ger.
durch-componiert).
. a ballad was originally a short, simple song, the words being in
narrative style, i.e., the word-text telling a story. in the earlier
ballads each verse of the poem was usually sung to the same tune
(strophe form), but in the art-ballad as developed by loewe and others
the continuous style of composition is employed, this giving the
composer greater opportunities of making vivid through his music the
events described by the poem. these later ballads are in consequence
neither "short" nor "simple" but compare in structure with the lied
itself.[pg ]
. a folk-song is a short song sung by and usually originating among
the common people. its dominant characteristic is usually simplicity,
this applying to word-text, melody, and accompaniment (if there is one).
the text of the folk-song is usually based on some event connected
with ordinary life, but there are also many examples in which historical
and legendary happenings are dealt with. auld lang syne, and comin' thru
the rye, are examples of folk-songs.
there has been some difference of opinion as to whether a
song, the composer of which is known, can ever constitute a
real folk-song: recent writers seem to be taking the
sensible view of the matter, viz.: that if a song has the
characteristics of a folk- rather than an art-song, and if it
remains popular for some time among the common people, then it
is just as much a folk-song whether the composer happens to
be known or not.
. a madrigal is a secular vocal composition having from three to
eight parts. it is in contrapuntal style, like the motet, and is usually
sung a capella.
. a glee is a vocal composition in three or more parts, being
usually more simple in style than the madrigal, and sometimes having
more than one movement. the glee may be either gay or sad in mood, and
seems to be a composition peculiar to the english people.
. a part-song is a composition for two or more voices, (usually
four) to be sung a capella. it is written in monophonic rather than in
polyphonic style, thus differing from the madrigal and glee. morley's
"now is the month of maying" is an example of the part-song, as is
also sullivan's "o hush thee, my baby." the term part-song is often
loosely applied to glees, madrigals, etc.
[pg ]
rhythm, melody, harmony and intervals
. the four elements commonly attributed to music (in the order of
their development) are: rhythm, melody, harmony, and timbre (or
tone-color).
. rhythm is the regular recurrence of accent. in music it is more
specifically the regular recurrence of groups of accented and
non-accented beats (or pulses)—according to some specified
measure-system. since rhythm implies continuity, there must usually be
at least two such measure groups in order to make musical rhythm
possible. (see p. , sec. .)
. a melody is a succession of single tones of various pitches so
arranged that the effect of the whole will be unified, coherent, and
pleasing to the ear.
the soprano part of hymn-tunes and other simple harmonized
compositions is often referred to as "the melody."
. harmony is the science of chord construction and combination.
the term harmony refers to tones sounding simultaneously,
i.e., to chords, as differentiated from tones sounding
consecutively, as in melody. the word harmony may therefore
be applied to any group of tones of different pitches sounded
as a chord, although specifically we usually refer to a
succession of such chords when we speak of "harmony." it is
possible to use the same combination of tones in either melody
or harmony; in fact these two elements as applied to modern
music have developed together and the style of present-day
melody is directly based upon the development that has
recently taken place in harmonic construction.
harmony (as contrasted with counterpoint) first began to
be an important factor in music about  a.d., i.e., at
the time when opera and oratorio came into existence, when
form was established, and when our modern major and minor
scales were adopted. before this practically all music was
composed on a contrapuntal basis.
. timbre is that peculiar quality of sound which enables one to
distinguish a tone produced by one instrument (or[pg ] voice) from a tone
produced by an equal number of vibrations on another instrument.
the word timbre is synonymous with the terms quality of
tone, and tone quality (ger.—klang-farbe), the excuse for
using it being that it expresses adequately in one word an
idea that in our language takes at least two: this excuse
would disappear (and incidentally a much-mispronounced word
would be eliminated) if the single word quality were to be
adopted as the equivalent of timbre. thus, e.g., the
soprano voice singing c' has a quality different from the
contralto voice singing the same tone.
(the remainder of this chapter and all of chapter xviii deal
with terms commonly encountered in the study of harmony.
courses in this subject usually begin with a study of scales,
but since this subject has already been somewhat extensively
treated, this chapter will omit it, and will begin with the
next topic in harmony study, viz.—the interval.)
. an interval is the relation of two tones with regard to pitch. if
the two tones are sounded simultaneously the result is an harmonic
interval, but if sounded consecutively the result is a melodic
interval. fig.  represents the pitches f' and a' as a harmonic
interval, while fig.  represents the same pitches arranged as a
melodic interval.
[listen]
. in classifying intervals two facts should be constantly kept in
mind:
() the number name of the interval (third, fifth, sixth,
etc.), is derived from the order of letters as found in the
diatonic scale. thus the interval c—e is a third because e
is the third tone from c (counting c as one) in the diatonic
scale. c—g is a fifth because g is the fifth tone above c
in the diatonic scale.
it should be noted however that the same number-names apply
even though one or both letters of the interval are qualified
by sharps, flats, etc. thus e.g., c—g♯ is still a
fifth, as are also c♯—g♭ and c♭—g♯.
() in determining the specific name of any interval
(perfect fifth, major third, etc.), the half-step and
whole-step (often referred to respectively as minor[pg ] second,
and major second) are used as units of measurement.
the half-step is usually defined as "the smallest usable
interval between two tones." thus, c—c♯ is a
half-step, as are also b—c, f—g♭, etc.
a whole-step consists of two half-steps. c—d is a
whole-step, as are also b♭—c, e—f♯,
f♯—g♯, g♭—a♭, etc.
the expressions half-step and whole-step are much to be
preferred to half-tone and whole-tone, as being more clear
and definite. thus e.g., the sentence "the two tones are a
half-step apart" is much better than "the two tones are a
half-tone apart."
. a prime is the relation between two tones whose pitches are
properly represented by the same degree of the staff.
a perfect prime is one whose tones have the same pitch.
middle c sounded by piano and violin at the same time would
offer an example.
an augmented prime is one whose second tone is one half-step
higher than the first. ex. c—c♯.
. a second is the relation between two tones whose pitches are
properly represented by adjacent degrees of the staff. (the first line
and first space are adjacent degrees, as are also the third line and
fourth space.)
a minor second is one comprising one half-step. ex. b—c.
a major second is one comprising two half-steps. ex.
an augmented second is one comprising three half-steps. ex.
. a third is an interval comprising two seconds.
a diminished third has two minor seconds (i.e., two
half-steps). c—e♭♭.
a minor third has one minor and one major second (i.e.,
three half-steps). c—e♭.
a major third has two major seconds (i.e., four
half-steps). c—e.
. a fourth is an interval comprising three seconds.[pg ]
a diminished fourth has two minor and one major second.
a perfect fourth has one minor and two major seconds. c—f.
an augmented fourth (tritone) has three major seconds.
. a fifth is an interval comprising four seconds.
a diminished fifth has two minor and two major seconds.
a perfect fifth has one minor and three major seconds. c—g.
an augmented fifth has four major seconds. c—g♯.
. a sixth is an interval comprising five seconds.
a minor sixth has two minor and three major seconds.
a major sixth has one minor and four major seconds. c—a.
an augmented sixth has five major seconds. c—a♯.
. a seventh is an interval comprising six seconds.
a diminished seventh has three minor and three major
seconds. c—b♭♭.
a minor seventh has two minor and four major seconds.
a major seventh has one minor and five major seconds. c—b.
. an octave is an interval comprising seven seconds.
a diminished octave has three minor and four major seconds.
a perfect octave has two minor and five major seconds. c—c.
an augmented octave has one minor and six major seconds.
. a ninth is usually treated as a second, a tenth as a third,
etc. the interval of two octaves is often referred to as a fifteenth.[pg ]
. if the major diatonic scale be written and the interval between
each tone and the key-tone noted, it will be observed that the intervals
are all either major or perfect. see fig. .
[listen]
in this connection also it will be noted that the interval next smaller
than major is always minor, while that next smaller than perfect
or minor is always diminished: but that the interval next larger
than both major and perfect is augmented.
. an interval is said to be inverted when the tone originally the
upper becomes the lower. thus c—e, a major third, inverted becomes
e—c, a minor sixth.
[pg ]
chords, cadences, etc.
. a chord is a combination of several tones sounding together and
bearing an harmonic relation to each other. the simplest chord is the
triad, which consists of a fundamental tone called the root, with
the third and fifth above it. c—e—g is a triad, as are also d—f—a,
f—a—c, and g—b—d.
. triads are classified as major, minor, diminished, or
augmented.
a major triad has a major third and a perfect fifth, i.e.,
it is a major third with a minor third on top of it. ex.
a minor triad has a minor third and a perfect fifth, i.e.,
it is a minor third with a major third on top of it. ex.
a diminished triad has a minor third and a diminished fifth,
i.e., it is a minor third with another minor third on top of
it. ex. c—e♭—g♭.
an augmented triad has a major third and an augmented fifth,
i.e., it is a major third with another major third on top of
it. ex. c—e—g♯.
. a triad may be built on any scale-tone, but those on i, iv, and v,
are used so much oftener than the others that they are often called the
common chords. in referring to triads the roman numerals are used to
show on what scale-tone the triad is based, the size of the numeral
(with other signs) indicating the kind of triad found on each tone of
the scale. thus e.g., the large i shows that the triad on the first
tone (in major) is a major triad, the small ii shows that the[pg ] triad
on the second tone is minor, etc. the following figure will make this
clear.
[listen]
the triads in the minor scale are as follows:
[listen]
. a triad is said to be in fundamental position when its root is
the lowest tone. it is said to be in the first inversion when the
third is the lowest tone, and in the second inversion when the fifth
is the lowest tone. thus e.g., in fig.  the same chord (c—e—g) is
arranged in three different positions, at (a) in fundamental position,
at (b) in the first inversion, and at (c) in the second inversion.
[listen]
. when the root is not the bass note, figures are sometimes used to
show what chord is to be played or written. thus, e.g., the figure 
over a bass note means that the note given is the third of a chord,
the root being found by going up a sixth from the bass note: i.e., the
chord is to be sounded in its first inversion. in the same way the
figures / indicate that the note given is the fifth of the chord,
the root and fifth being found by going up a sixth and a fourth from the
note given; i.e., the chord is to be sounded in its second inversion.[pg ]
the use of these and other similar figures and signs is called figured
bass (or thorough bass) notation. an example of a figured bass is
given in fig. .
[listen]
thorough bass notation was formerly used extensively in
writing accompaniments to vocal works, the accompanist having
to interpret the notes and signs given, and then to make up an
interesting accompaniment as he went along. much of handel's
music was written in this way, but in modern editions of these
works the chords have been printed in full and the signs
omitted.
. a seventh chord consists of a fundamental tone with its third,
fifth, and seventh. the fifth is sometimes omitted. a ninth chord
consists of a fundamental with its third, fifth, seventh, and ninth.
. a cadence is the close of a musical phrase: in melody it refers
to the last two tones; in harmony to the last two chords.
the word cadence is derived from cadere, a latin word
meaning to fall, the reference being to the falling of the
voice (i.e., the dropping to the normal pitch) at the close
of a sentence.
. the most frequent cadence in harmony is that involving the chord on
i preceded by the chord on v. because of its directness the cadence v—i
is called the authentic cadence.
. the most satisfactory form (to the ear) of the authentic cadence is
that in which the highest voice (the soprano) of the final chord is the
root of that chord. when the final chord appears in this position the
cadence is called perfect[] authentic,[pg ] and when the third or
fifth of the chord appear in the soprano, the cadence is called
imperfect authentic. fig.  shows the chord g—b—d cadencing to
c—e—g in three different ways. the first one (a) is called a perfect
authentic cadence, but the last two (c) and (d) are imperfect
authentic.
[listen]
. a plagal cadence is one in which the tonic chord is preceded by
the sub-dominant chord (iv—i). the plagal cadence (sometimes called
the church cadence, or amen cadence), like the authentic, is
described as being perfect when the soprano of the tonic chord is the
root of that chord, and imperfect when the soprano of the final chord
is the third or fifth of that chord. fig.  shows the chord f—a—c
cadencing to c—e—g in three ways. the first one (a) is called a
perfect plagal cadence, the last two are imperfect plagal.
[listen]
. a half-cadence occurs when the dominant chord is used as the
final chord of a phrase, and is immediately preceded by the tonic chord.
this form is used to give variety in the course of a composition, but is
not available at the end because it does not give a definite close in
the tonic key. fig.  shows the use of the half-cadence at the close
of such a phrase.[pg ]
[listen]
. a deceptive cadence is the progression of the dominant chord to
some other chord than the tonic, the word deceptive implying that the
ear expects to hear v resolve to i and is deceived when it does not do
so. the most common form of deceptive cadence is that in which v (or
v) resolves to vi. it is used to give variety, but as in the case of
the half-cadence, is not available at the end of a composition. fig. 
gives an example.
[listen]
. a sequence is a succession of similar harmonic progressions,
these resulting from a typical or symmetrical movement of the bass part.
see fig. .
[listen]
the word sequence is also applied to a succession of similar melodic
progressions, as in fig. .[pg ]
[listen]
. modulation is a change of key without any break in the continuity
of chords or melody tones. harmonic modulations are usually effected
through the medium of a chord, some or all of whose tones are common to
both keys. examples of both harmonic and melodic modulations are
shown in figs.  and .
[listen]
the chord most frequently used in modulating is the dominant seventh,
i.e., a seventh chord (see sec. ) on the dominant tone of the key.
in the key of c this chord is g—b—d—f; in the key of d it is
a—c♯—e—g; in the key of a♭ it is
e♭—g—b♭—d♭, etc.
[listen]
. a suspension is the temporary substitution of a tone a degree
higher than the regular chord-tone, this temporary tone being later
replaced by the regular chord-tone. see fig.  (a).
[listen]
[pg ]
. a retardation is the temporary substitution of a tone a degree
lower than the regular tone, this tone (as in the case of the
suspension) being later replaced by the regular chord tone. see fig. 
(a).
[listen]
the "regular chord tone" to which both suspension and retardation
resolve is called the tone of resolution.
. the anticipation is a chord-tone introduced just before the rest
of the chord to which it belongs is sounded. see fig.  (a).
[listen]
. a pedal point (or organ point) is a tone sustained through a
succession of harmonic progressions, to the chords of some of which it
usually belongs. the term pedal point originated in organ playing,
(where the foot on a pedal can sustain a tone while the hands are
playing a succession of harmonies), but as now used it may be applied to
any kind of music. the dominant and tonic are the tones most often used
in this way. see fig. .[pg ]
[listen]
. when the upper three voices of a four-voice composition are written
close together (the soprano and tenor never appearing more than an
octave apart), the term close position is applied. but when the upper
voices are not written close together, the term open position is
applied.
. by transposition is meant playing, singing, or writing a piece of
music in some other key than the original. thus e.g., if a song
written in the key of g is too high in range for a soloist, the
accompanist sometimes transposes it to a lower key (as f or e), thus
causing all tones to sound a second or a third lower than they did when
the same song was played in the original key.
[pg ]
miscellaneous terms
a battuta—with the beat; in strict rhythm.
à quatre mains—for four hands.
accompagnamento—the accompaniment.
all'unisono—in unison.
alla breve—/ measure.
the term alla breve is also sometimes used as a tempo indication, to
show a rate of speed so great that a half-note has a beat, i.e., only
two beats in a measure—hence twice as fast as before.
alla capella—usually the same as a capella (see p. ,
sec. ) but
sometimes used in the same sense as alla breve.
alla marcia—in march style.
alla zingara—in gypsy style.
alt—see in alt.
alto—the lowest female voice. range approximately g-e''.
the word alto is derived from the latin word altus, meaning high,
the term being formerly applied to the highest male voice, which
originally sang (and still does so in many male choirs) the alto part.
animato come sopra—in animated style as above.
antiphony (antiphonal)—the responsive singing of two choirs,
usually one at either end of the church, or at either side of the
chancel.
arabesque—an instrumental composition in light, somewhat fantastic
style.
the term arabesque is derived from the word arabian, and was
originally applied to a style of decoration.
arioso—in the style of an air or song, i.e., a flowing, vocal
style.
attacca—attack the next division without any pause.
attacca subito—same as attacca.
attacca subito il seguente—attack
at once that which follows.
attack—the promptness or firmness with which a phrase is begun.
bagpipe—a scotch instrument on which the tone is produced by a
combination of bellows and reeds. its characteristic effect is the
continuous sounding of a low tone (sometimes several tones) while the
melody is being played on the higher reeds.
barcarole (or barcarolle)—a boat song. also applied to a vocal or
instrumental composition in the style of the gondolier's boat song.
baritone (or barytone)—the male voice having a range between that
of the tenor and that of the bass. approximate range g-g'.
bass—the lowest male voice. approximate range e-e'.
basso—same as bass.
berceuse—a cradle song.
binary form—a form in two parts.
binary measure—a measure having two beats.[pg ]
bis—twice. used to indicate a repetition. (rare.)
brace—the sign used to join several staffs, showing that all tones
represented on these staffs are to be performed together. the term is
often used also in referring to the music written on staffs so joined;
as—"begin with the upper brace."
broken chord—a chord whose tones are not all sounded simultaneously,
as e.g., in an accompaniment group.
broken octave—an octave whose tones are sounded one at a time instead
of simultaneously.
cacophony—harsh, discordant, unpleasant, especially incorrect
combinations of tones. the opposite of euphony.
cadenza—a brilliant passage, usually in an instrumental composition,
introduced just before the close of a movement. the cadenza was
formerly improvised by the performer, (thus giving an opportunity of
displaying his technical skill), but since beethoven, composers have
usually written their own cadenzas.
cantabile—in a singing style.
cantando—same as cantabile.
canto—the highest voice part; i.e., the soprano part.
note the derivation of canto, cantabile, etc., from the latin word
cantus, meaning a song.
carol—a hymn of joyful praise, usually sung in connection with easter
or christmas festivities. the word carol meant originally a dance,
hence the happy character of songs of this type.
catch—a round set to humorous words.
chromatic (noun)—a term somewhat loosely applied to any tone not
belonging to the key as indicated by the signature. many teachers are
replacing the word chromatic in this sense with the term intermediate
tone, this term being applicable whether the foreign tone is actually
used for ornamental purposes as a chromatic, or to effect a
modulation. thus e.g., "f♯ is the intermediate tone between f
and g in the key of c."
clavichord—an instrument with keys, resembling the square piano in
appearance. the tone was produced by forcing wedge-shaped pieces of
metal against the strings, thus setting them in vibration. the
clavichord was one of the immediate predecessors of the piano, much of
the music written by bach being composed for it, although this music is
now played on the modern piano.
colla voce—with the voice: i.e., play the accompaniment according
to the soloist's performance rather than strictly according to the
rhythm indicated in the score.
colla parte—same as colla voce.
coloratura—florid passages in singing. also applied to the style of
singing employed in rendering such passages. (see p. ,
sec. .)
consonance—a combination of tones agreeable to the ear and requiring
no resolution to other tone-combinations in order to give the effect of
finality. the major triad c—e—g is an example of a consonant chord.
contralto—same as alto.
con variazioni—with variations.
direct—a sign () placed at the end of the last staff
on a page, to indicate what the first note on the next page is going to
be. this sign is now practically obsolete.[pg ]
dirge—a funeral chant. the dirge is named from the first word of a
chant used in the "office for the dead," which begins—dirige domine,
deus meus, in conspectu tuo viam meam (direct, o lord, my god, my way
in thy sight).
discord—an ugly, unharmonious combination of tones.
dissonance—a harmonic combination of tones giving rise to the feeling
of incompleteness or unrest, and therefore requiring resolution to some
other combination which has an agreeable or final feeling. (cf.
consonance.) the diminished triad c—e♭—g♭ is an example of a
dissonant chord.
divisi—divided. an indication showing that the first violins, or the
sopranos, or any other body of performers ordinarily sounding in unison
are now to divide into two or more parts.
duet—a composition for two performers. (from the it. word
due—two.)
école—a school or style of composition or performance.
etude—a study. also an instrumental composition in the style of a
study, but intended for artistic performance.
euphony—agreeable tone combinations; the opposite of cacophony. (from
the greek word meaning well-sounding.)
facile—easy.
fanfare—a trumpet call.
fantasia—an instrumental composition not based on any regular form.
fiasco—a complete failure or breakdown.
this use of the word fiasco (which means in italian a flask, or
bottle) is said to have reference to the bursting of a bottle, the
complete ruin of the bottle being compared with the complete failure of
a performance.
gamut—all the tones of a scale.
glissando—playing a scale on the keyboard by drawing the finger along
over the keys, thus depressing them in very rapid succession. the word
is derived from the french word glisser—to glide.
harpsichord—one of the immediate predecessors of the piano.
humoresque—a capricious, fantastic composition. (cf. fantasia.)
idyl—a short, romantic piece of music in simple and unaffected style.
in alt—pitches in the first octave above the treble staff. thus
e.g., "c in alt" is the c represented by the second added line above
the treble staff.
in altissimo—pitches in the octave above the alt octave.
instrumentation—see orchestration.
interlude—a short movement between two larger movements.
loco—place; i.e., play as written. (see p. ,
sec. .)
lunga trillo—a long trill.
[pg ]
miscellaneous terms (continued)
lyric—a short, song-like poem of simple character. also applied to
instrumental pieces of like character.
maggiore—major.
marcato il canto—the melody well marked; i.e., subdue the
accompaniment so that the melody may stand out strongly.
melos—melody. this word melos is also applied to the peculiar style
of vocal solo found in wagner's music dramas. see recitative (p. ,
sec. ).
mellifluous—pleasing; pleasant sounding.
menuetto, menuet—same as minuet. (see p. ,
sec. .)
mezzo soprano—a woman's voice of soprano quality, but of somewhat
lower compass than the soprano voice. range approximately b to g''.
minore—minor.
nocturne (sometimes spelled nocturn, notturna, nokturne,
etc.)—a night piece; a quiet, melodious, somewhat sentimental
composition, usually for piano solo.
nuance—delicate shading; subtle variations in tempo and dynamics
which make the rendition of music more expressive.
obbligato (sometimes incorrectly spelled obligato)—an accessory
melody accompanying harmonized music, (usually vocal music).
the word obbligato (it. bound, or obliged) refers to the fact that
this is usually a melody of independent value, so important that it
cannot be omitted in a complete performance.
offertory (sometimes spelled offertoire, or offertorium)—a piece
of music played or sung during the taking up of the offering in the
church service. the word is often applied by composers to any short,
simple piece of music (usually for organ) that is suitable for the above
purpose.
opus—work; used by composers to designate the order in which their
compositions were written, as e.g., beethoven, op. , no. .
orchestration—the art of writing for the orchestra, this implying an
intimate knowledge of the range, quality, and possibilities of all the
orchestral instruments.
ossia—or else; used most often to call the attention of the performer
to a simpler passage that may be substituted for the original one by a
player whose skill is not equal to the task he is attempting to perform.
overture—(from overt—open)—an instrumental prelude to an opera or
oratorio. the older overtures were independent compositions and bore
no particular relation to the work which was to follow, but in modern
music (cf. wagner, strauss, etc.), the overture introduces the
principal themes that are to occur in the work itself, and the
introduction thus becomes an integral part of the work as a whole. the
word overture is sometimes applied to independent orchestral
compositions that have no connection with vocal works, as the hebrides
overture by mendelssohn.[pg ]
pizzicato—plucked. a term found in music for stringed instruments,
and indicating that for the moment the bow is not to be used, the tone
being secured by plucking the string.
polacca—a polish dance in three-quarter measure.
polonaise—same as polacca.
postlude—(lit. after-play)—an organ composition to be played at the
close of a church service.
prelude—(lit. before-play)—an instrumental composition to be played
at the beginning of a church service, or before some larger work (opera,
etc.). the term is also applied to independent piano compositions of
somewhat indefinite form. (cf. preludes by chopin, rachmaninoff, etc.)
prière—a prayer; a term often applied (especially by french
composers) to a quiet, devotional composition for organ.
quintole, quintuplet—a group of five notes to be performed in the
time ordinarily given to four notes of the same value. there is only one
accent in the group, this occurring of course on the first of the five
tones.
religioso, religiosamente—in a devotional style.
requiem—the mass for the dead in the roman catholic service. it is so
called from its first word requiem which means rest. (see p. ,
sec. .)
rhapsody—an irregular instrumental composition of the nature of an
improvisation. a term first applied by liszt to a series of piano pieces
based on gypsy themes.
ribattuta—a
device in instrumental music whereby a two-note phrase is
gradually accelerated, even to the extent of becoming a trill. (see
appendix e, p. , for an example.)
ritornello, ritornelle—a short instrumental prelude, interlude, or
postlude, in a vocal composition, as e.g., in an operatic aria or
chorus.
schottische—a dance in two-quarter measure, something like the
polka.
sec, secco—dry, unornamented: applied to a style of opera recitative
(see p. , sec. ), and also to some particular chord in an
instrumental composition which is to be sounded and almost instantly
dropped.
score—a term used in two senses:
. to designate some particular point to which teacher or
conductor wishes to call attention; as e.g., "begin with the
lower score, third measure." the word brace is also
frequently used in this sense.
. to refer to all the parts of a composition that are to be
performed simultaneously, when they have been assembled on a
single page for use by a chorus or orchestral conductor. the
term vocal score usually means all chorus parts together
with an accompaniment arranged for piano or organ, while the
terms full score and orchestral score refer to a complete
assemblage of all parts, each being printed on a separate
staff, but all staffs being braced and barred together.
senza replica, senza repetizione—without repetition; a term used in
connection with such indications as d.c., d.s., etc., which often
call for the repetition of some large division of a composition, the
term senza replica indicating that the smaller repeats included within
the larger division are not to be observed the second time.
serenade, serenata—an evening song.
sextet—a composition for six voices or instruments.[pg ]
sextuplet—a group of six notes to be performed in the time ordinarily
given to four of the same value. the sextuplet differs from a pair of
triplets in having but one accent.
simile, similiter—the same; indicating that the same general effect
is to be continued.
solfeggio, solfège—a vocal exercise sung either on simple vowels or
on arbitrary syllables containing these simple vowel sounds. its purpose
is to develop tone quality and flexibility. these terms are also often
applied to classes in sight-singing which use the sol-fa syllables.
sopra—above.
soprano—the highest female voice. range approximately b—c'''.
sostenuto—sustained or connected; the opposite of staccato.
sotto—under. e.g., sotto voce—under the voice, i.e., with
subdued tone.
solmization—sight-singing by syllable.
staccato—detached; the opposite of legato.
subito—suddenly.
tenor—the highest male voice. range approximately d—c''.
tenuto—(from teneo, to hold)—a direction signifying that the tones
are to be prolonged to the full value indicated by the notes.
toccata—a brilliant composition for piano or organ, usually
characterized by much rapid staccato playing.
triplet—a group of three tones, to be performed in the time
ordinarily given to two of the same value. the first tone of the triplet
is always slightly accented.
tutti—(derived from totus, toti, latin—all)—a direction
signifying that all performers are to take part. also used occasionally
to refer to a passage where all performers do take part.
[pg ]
the history of music notation
many conflicting statements have been made regarding the history and
development of music writing, and the student who is seeking light on
this subject is often at a loss to determine what actually did happen in
the rise of our modern system of writing music. we have one writer for
example asserting that staff notation was begun by drawing a single red
line across the page, this line representing the pitch f (fourth line,
bass staff), the neumae (the predecessors of our modern notes)
standing either for this pitch f, or for a higher or lower pitch,
according to their position on the line, or above or below it.
"another line," continues this writer, "this time of yellow color, was
soon added above the red one, and this line was to represent c' (middle
c). soon the colors of these lines were omitted and the letters f and
c were placed at the beginning of each of them. from this arose our f
and c clefs, which preceded the g clef by some centuries."[]
another writer[] gives a somewhat different explanation, stating that
the staff system with the use of clefs came about through writing a
letter (c or f) in the margin of the manuscript and drawing a line from
this letter to the neume which was to represent the tone for which this
particular letter stood.
a third writer[] asserts that because the alphabetical notation was
not suitable for recording melodies because of its[pg ] inconvenience in
sight-singing "points were placed at definite distances above the words
and above and below one another." "in this system ... everything
depended on the accuracy with which the points were interspersed, and
the scribes, as a guide to the eye, began to scratch a straight line
across the page to indicate the position of one particular scale degree
from which all the others could be shown by the relative distances of
their points. but this was not found sufficiently definite and the
scratched line was therefore colored red and a second line was added,
colored yellow, indicating the interval of a fifth above the first."
it will be noted that all three writers agree that a certain thing
happened, but as in the case of the four gospels in the new testament,
not all the writers agree on details and it is difficult to determine
which account is most nearly accurate in detail as well as in general
statement. communication was much slower a thousand years ago than now
and ideas about new methods of doing things did not spread rapidly,
consequently it is entirely possible that various men or groups of men
in various places worked out a system of notation differing somewhat in
details of origin and development but alike in final result. the point
is that the development of musical knowledge (rise of part-writing,
increased interest in instrumental music, etc.), demanded a more exact
system of notation than had previously existed, just as the development
of science in the nineteenth century necessitated a more accurate
scientific nomenclature, and in both cases the need gave rise to the
result as we have it to-day.
out of the chaos of conflicting statements regarding the development of
music notation, the student may glean an outline-knowledge of three
fairly distinct periods or stages, each of these stages being intimately
bound up with the development of music itself in that period. these
three stages are:[pg ]
() the greek system, which used the letters of the alphabet
for representing fixed pitches.
() the period of the neumae.
() the period of staff notation.
of the greek system little is known beyond the fact that the letters of
the alphabet were used to represent pitches. this method was probably
accurate enough, but it was cumbersome, and did not afford any means of
writing "measured music" nor did it give the eye any opportunity of
grasping the general outline of the melody in its progression upward and
downward, as staff notation does. the greek system seems to have been
abandoned at some time preceding the fifth century. at any rate it was
about this time that certain accent marks began to be written above
the text of the latin hymns of the church, these marks serving to
indicate in a general way the progress of the melody. e.g., an upward
stroke of the pen indicated a rise of the melody, a downward stroke a
fall, etc. in the course of two or three centuries these marks were
added to and modified quite considerably, and the system of notation
which thus grew up was called "neume notation," the word neume
(sometimes spelled neuma, or pneuma) being of greek origin and
meaning a nod or sign.
this system of neumes was in some ways a retrogression from the greek
letter system, for the neumes indicated neither definite pitches nor
definite tone-lengths. but it had this advantage over the greek system,
that the position of the signs on the page indicated graphically to the
eye the general direction of the melody, as well as giving at least a
hint concerning the relative highness or lowness of each individual tone
(the so-called diastematic system), and this was a great aid to the
eye in singing, just as the relative highness and lowness of notes on
the modern staff is of great value in reading music at the present time.
thus although the neumae did not enable one to sing a new melody at
sight as our[pg ] modern staff notation does, yet they served very well to
recall to the eye the general outline of a melody previously learned by
ear and therefore enabled the singer (the system was used for vocal
music only) to differentiate between that particular melody and the
dozens of others which he probably knew. neume notation was used mostly
in connection with the "plain-song melodies" of the church, and since
the words of these chants were sung as they would be pronounced in
reading, the deficiency of the neume system in not expressing definite
duration values was not felt. but later on with the rise of so-called
"measured music" (cf. invention of opera, development of independent
instrumental music, etc.), this lack was seen to be one of the chief
disadvantages of the system.
the elements of neume-writing as given by riemann in his dictionary of
music are:
"() the signs for a single note: virga (virgula) and punctus (punctum).
() the sign for a rising interval: pes (podatus). () the sign for a
falling interval: clinis (flexa). () some signs for special manners of
performance: tremula (bebung), quilisma (shake), plica (turn), etc. the
others were either synonyms of the above-named or combinations of
them...."
since music in the middle ages was always copied by hand, it will
readily be understood that these neumae were not uniform either in shape
or size, and that each writer made use of certain peculiarities of
writing, which, although perfectly intelligible to himself, could not
readily be interpreted by others (cf. writing shorthand). here then we
observe the greatest weakness of the neume system—its lack of
uniformity and its consequent inability accurately to express musical
ideas for universal interpretation.
examples of several neumes are given merely in order to give
the beginner a general idea of their appearance.
virga or
. punctus
 or
. pes
 or
clinis or
.[pg ]
as music grew more and more complex, and especially as writing in
several parts came into use (cf. rise of organum, descant, and
counterpoint), it became increasingly difficult to express musical ideas
on the basis of the old notation, and numerous attempts were made to
invent a more accurate and usable system. among these one of the most
interesting was that in which the words of the text were written in the
spaces between long, parallel lines, placing the initial letters of the
words tone and semi-tone at the beginning of the line to indicate
the scale interval. an example will make this clear.
this indicated the precise melodic interval but did not give any idea of
the rhythm, and the natural accents of the text were the only guide the
singer had in this direction, as was the case in neume-notation and in
early staff-notation also. various other attempts to invent a more
definite notation were made, but all were sporadic, and it was not until
the idea of using the lines (later lines and spaces) to represent
definite pitches, and writing notes of various shapes (derived from the
neumae) to indicate relative duration-values—it was only when this
combination of two elements was devised that any one system began to be
universally used.
just how the transition from neume to staff notation was made no one
knows: it was not done in a day nor in a year but was the result of a
gradual process of evolution and improvement. nor is it probable that
any one man deserves the entire credit for the invention of staff
notation, although this feat is commonly attributed to an italian monk
named guido d'arezzo (approximate dates -). to this same monk we
are indebted, however, for the invention of the[pg ] syllables (ut, re, mi,
etc.) which (in a somewhat modified form) are so widely used for
sight-singing purposes. (for a more detailed account of the transition
to staff notation, see grove, op. cit. article notation.) it will now
be readily seen that our modern notation is the result of a combination
of two preceding methods (the greek letters, and the neumes) together
with a new element—the staff, emphasizing the idea that higher tones
are written higher on the staff than lower ones. the development of
the neumes into notes of various shapes indicating relative time values
and the division of the staff into measures with a definite measure
signature at the beginning are natural developments of the earlier
primitive idea. in the system of "musica mensurabilis" or measured
music which was inaugurated a little later, the virga (which had
meanwhile developed into a square-headed neume) was adopted as the
longa or long note, and the punctus in two of its forms as breve and
semi-breve (short and half-short). the longa is now extinct, but the
modern form of the breve is still used as the double-whole-note, and the
semi-breve is our modern whole-note.
red-colored notes were sometimes used to indicate changes in value and
before long outline notes (called empty notes) came into use, these
being easier to make than the solid ones. the transition from square-
and diamond-shaped notes to round and oval ones also came about because
of the greater facility with which the latter could be written, and for
the same reason notes of small denomination were later "tied together"
or stroked. this latter usage began about  a.d.
it is interesting to find that when "measured music" was finally
inaugurated there were at first but two measure-signatures, viz.—the
circle, standing for three-beat measure (the so-called perfect
measure) and the semi-circle (or broken circle) which indicated
two-beat measure. occasionally three-beat measure was indicated by three
vertical strokes at the[pg ] beginning of the melody, while two-beat measure
was shown by two such strokes. upon the basis of these two varieties of
measure, primitive in conception though they may have been, has been
built nevertheless the whole system now employed, and in the last
analysis all forms of measure now in use will be found to be of either
the two-beat or the three-beat variety. the circle has disappeared
entirely as a measure-sign, but the broken circle still survives, and
from it are derived the familiar signs
 and
, which are sometimes erroneously referred to as being
the initial letter of our word common (as used in the expression
"common time"). the transition from the older style of measure-signature
to the present one seems to have occurred during the century following
the invention of opera, i.e., from about  to about  a.d.
the rest came into use very soon after "measured music" began to be
composed and we soon find rests corresponding with the various
denominations of notes in use, viz.:
the terms applied to these rests vary in different authorities, but it
will be noted that the pausa, semi-pausa, and suspirum correspond
respectively to the double-whole-rest, whole-rest, and half-rest in use
at present.
the bar and double bar may be developments of the maxima rest (as some
writers suggest) but are probably also derived from the practice of
drawing a line vertically through the various parts of a score to show
which notes belonged together, thus facilitating score reading. the bar
may occasionally be found as early as , but was not employed
universally until  or later.
the number of lines used in the staff has varied greatly since the time
of guido, there having been all the way from[pg ] four to fifteen at various
times and in various places, (four being the standard number for a
long time). these lines (when there were quite a number in the staff)
were often divided into groups of four by red lines, which were not
themselves used for notes. these red lines were gradually omitted and
the staff divided into sections by a space, as in modern usage. the
number of lines in each section was changed to five (in some cases six)
for the sake of having a larger available range in each section.
the clefs at the beginning of the staffs are of course simply altered
forms of the letters f, c, and g, which were written at first by guido
and others to make the old neume notation more definite.
the staccato sign seems not to have appeared until about the time of
bach, the legato sign being also invented at about the same time. the
fermata was first used in imitative part-writing to show where each part
was to stop, but with the development of harmonic writing the present
practice was inaugurated. leger lines came into use in the seventeenth
century.
sharps and flats were invented because composers found it necessary to
use other tones than those that could be represented by the staff
degrees in their natural condition. the history of their origin and
development is somewhat complicated and cannot be given here, but it
should be noted once more that it was the need of expressing more than
could be expressed by the older symbols that called forth the newer and
more comprehensive method. the use of sharps and flats in key signatures
grew up early in the seventeenth century. in the earlier signatures it
was customary to duplicate sharps or flats on staff degrees having the
same pitch-name, thus:
. (the use of the g
clef as here shown did not of course exist at that time.)[pg ]
the double-sharp and double-flat became necessary when "equal
temperament" (making possible the use of the complete cycle of keys) was
adopted. this was in the time of bach (-).
signs of expression (relating to tempo and dynamics) date back at least
as far as the year  a.d., but the modern terms used for this purpose
did not appear until some years after the invention of opera, the date
given by c.f.a. williams in grove's dictionary being . these words
and signs of expression were at first used only in connection with
instrumental music, but were gradually applied to vocal music also.
other systems of notation have been invented from time to time in the
course of the last two or three centuries, but in most cases they have
died with their inventors, and in no case has any such system been
accepted with anything even approaching unanimity. the tonic-sol-fa
system[] is used quite[pg ] extensively in england for vocal music, but
has gained little ground anywhere else and the chances are that the
present system of notation, with possibly slight additions and
modifications, will remain the standard notation for some time to come
in spite of the attacks that are periodically made upon it on the ground
of cumbersomeness, difficulty in teaching children, etc. the main
characteristics of staff notation may be summed up as follows:
. pitches represented by lines and spaces of a staff, the
higher the line, the higher the pitch represented, signs
called clefs at the beginning of each staff making clear the
pitch names of the lines and spaces.
. duration values shown by shapes of notes.
. accents shown by position of notes on the staff with regard
to bars, i.e., the strongest accent always falls just after
the bar, and the beat relatively least accented is found just
before the bar.[pg ]
. extent and description of beat-groups shown by
measure-signs.
. key shown by key signature placed at the beginning of each
staff.
. rate of speed, dynamic changes, etc., shown by certain
italian words (allegro, andante, etc.), whose meaning is
as universally understood as staff notation itself.
[pg ]
musical instruments
. broadly speaking, musical instruments may be divided into two
classes, viz.: () those that have a keyboard and are therefore capable
of sounding several tones simultaneously; () those that (as a rule)
sound only one tone at a time, as the violin and trumpet. the piano is
of course the most familiar example of the first class, and a brief
description is therefore given.
the piano was invented about two hundred years ago by
cristofori (-), an italian. it was an enormous
improvement over the types of keyboard instrument that were in
use at that time (clavichord, harpsichord, spinet, virginal)
and has resulted in an entirely different style of
composition. see note on embellishments, p. .
. the most characteristic things about the piano as contrasted with
its immediate predecessors are: () that on it the loudness and softness
of the tone can be regulated by the force with which the keys are struck
(hence the name pianoforte meaning literally the soft-loud); () the
fact that the piano is capable of sustaining tone to a much greater
extent than its predecessors. in other words the tone continues sounding
for some little time after the key is struck, while on the earlier
instruments it stopped almost instantly after being sounded.
the essentials of the piano mechanism are:
. felt hammers controlled by keys, each hammer striking two
or three strings (which are tuned in unison) and immediately
rebounding from these strings, allowing them to vibrate as
long as the key[pg ] is held down. the mechanism that allows the
hammers to rebound from the strings and fall into position for
another blow is called the escapement.
. a damper (made of softer felt) pressing against each string
and preventing it from vibrating until it is wanted.
. a keyboard action that controls both hammers and dampers,
causing the damper to leave the string at the same instant
that the hammer strikes it.
. a pedal (damper pedal) controlling all of the dampers, so
that at any moment all the strings may be released so as to be
free to vibrate.
other interesting details are:
. the strings are stretched over a thin sheet of wood called
the sound-board. this aids greatly in intensifying the tone.
. the soft pedal (the one at the left) in an upright piano
causes the hammers to move up nearer the strings, and the
shorter swing thus afforded causes a less violent blow and
consequently a softer tone. in the grand piano this same
pedal shifts the mechanism to one side so that the hammers
strike only one or two of the strings, this resulting in a
softer tone of somewhat modified quality.
these details regarding the mechanism of the piano can easily be
verified by removing the front of any ordinary upright piano and
observing what takes place when the keys are struck or the pedals
depressed.
. there are two familiar types of organ in use at the present time,
() the reed organ, () the pipe-organ.
the reed organ is very simple in construction, the tone being produced
by the vibration of metal reeds (fixed in little cells), through which
air is forced (or sucked) from the bellows, the latter being usually
worked by the feet of the player.[pg ] more power may be secured either by
drawing additional stops, thus throwing on more sets of reeds, or by
opening the knee swells which either throw on more reeds (sometimes
octave couplers) or else open a swell box in which some of the reeds
are enclosed, the tone being louder when the box is open than when
closed. more tone may also be secured by pumping harder.
. the essential characteristic of the pipe-organ is a number of sets
or registers of pipes called stops, each set being capable (usually)
of sounding the entire chromatic scale through a range of five or six
octaves. thus for example when the stop melodia is drawn (by pulling
out a stop-knob or tilting a tablet), one set of pipes only, sounds when
the keyboard is played on: but if the stop flute is drawn with
melodia, two pipes speak every time a key is depressed. thus if an
organ has forty speaking stops, all running through the entire
keyboard, then each time one key is depressed forty pipes will speak,
and if a chord of five tones is played, two hundred pipes will speak.
the object of having so many pipes is not merely to make possible a very
powerful tone, but, rather, to give greater variety of tone-color.
the pipe-organ usually has a pedal keyboard on which the feet of the
performer play a bass part, this part often sounding an octave (or more)
lower than the notes indicate.
an eight-foot stop on the organ produces tones of the same pitches as
the piano when corresponding keys are struck: a four-foot stop sounds
tones an octave higher and a two-foot stop tones two octaves higher. a
sixteen-foot stop sounds tones an octave lower than the piano, and a
thirty-two foot stop, tones two octaves lower, while some organs have
also a sixty-four foot stop which sounds three octaves lower. this
gives the organ an exceedingly wide range, its compass being greater
than that of any other single instrument, and comparable in both range
of pitches and variety of color only with the modern orchestra.[pg ]
modern pipe-organs always have a number of combination pedals or
pistons (usually both), by means of which the organist is enabled to
throw on a number of stops with one movement. the selection and use of
suitable stops, couplers, combinations, etc., is called registration.
. the instruments mentioned at the beginning of this appendix as
belonging to the second class are more familiar in connection with
ensemble playing, being commonly associated with either band or
orchestra.
. a band is a company of musicians all of whom play upon either wind
or percussion instruments, the main body of tone being produced by the
brass and wood-wind divisions.
sousa's band is usually made up in somewhat the following
manner:  flutes and piccolos,  b♭ clarinets,  e♭
clarinet,  alto clarinet,  bass clarinet,  oboes, 
bassoons,  sarrusophones,  saxophones,  cornets, 
trumpets,  soprano saxhorn (fluegelhorn),  french horns, 
trombones,  contra-bass tubas,  tubas,  snare drum,  bass
drum,  kettle drums, cymbals, triangle, bells, castanets,
xylophone, etc.
. an orchestra is a company of musicians performing upon stringed
instruments as well as upon wind and percussion. it is differentiated
from the band by the fact that the main body of tone is produced by the
strings.
there are four classes of instruments in the orchestra, viz.,
strings, wood-wind, brass (wind) and percussion. in addition
to these four classes, there is the harp, which although a stringed
instrument, does not belong in the same group as the other strings
because the manner of producing the tone is altogether different.
. in the first group (the strings) are found the first and second
violins, viola, violoncello (usually spelled cello), and double-bass.
the first and second violins are identical in every way (but play
different parts), while the other members of the family merely represent
larger examples of the same type of instrument.
. in the second group (the wood-wind) are found the flute, piccolo,
oboe, bassoon, english horn, double-bassoon,[pg ] clarinet, and bass
clarinet. the english horn, double-bassoon, bass clarinet, and piccolo
are not called for in the older compositions, hence are not always
present in the orchestra.
. in the third group (the brass choir) are found the french horn,
(usually referred to as the horn), trumpet (sometimes replaced by the
cornet) trombone, and tuba.
. the fourth group (percussion) consists of kettle drums, bass drum,
cymbals, snare drum, triangle, bells, etc.
. in an orchestra of about  players the proportion of instruments
is as about as follows, although it varies somewhat according to the
taste of the conductor, the style of composition to be performed, etc.:
 first violins,  second violins,  violas,  cellos,  basses, 
harp,  flutes,  piccolo,  oboes,  english horn,  clarinets,  bass
clarinet,  bassoons,  contra (or double) bassoon,  horns,  trumpets,
 trombones,  tuba,  kettle drums,  bass drum,  snare drum,  each
of triangle, cymbals, bells, and other instruments of percussion,
several of which are often manipulated by one performer.
. the cuts and brief descriptions here added will give at least a
rudimentary idea of the appearance and possibilities of the instruments
most commonly used in bands and orchestras. for fuller descriptions and
particulars regarding range, quality, etc., the student is referred to
mason's "the orchestral instruments and what they do," lavignac's "music
and musicians," and to the various articles which describe each
instrument under its own name in grove's dictionary or in any good
encyclopaedia. for still fuller details some work on orchestration will
have to be consulted.
. the violin has four strings, tuned thus
, these making available a range of about three and one-half octaves
(g—c''''). this range[] may be extended upward somewhat[pg ] further by
means of harmonics, these being produced by lightly touching the
string at certain points (while the bow is moving across it) instead of
holding it down against the finger-board. the highest string of the
violin (viola and cello also) is often called the chanterelle
because it is most often used for playing the melody. the violin
ordinarily produces but one tone at a time, but by stopping two
strings simultaneously and so drawing the bow as to set both in
vibration, two tones may be produced at the same time, while three and
four tones can be sounded almost simultaneously.
the mute (or sordino) is a small clamp made of metal, wood, or
ivory, which when clipped to the top of the bridge causes the vibrations
to be transmitted less freely to the body of the violin, giving rise to
a tone modified in quality, and decreased in power.
for certain special effects the player is directed to pluck the string
(pizzicato), this method of playing giving rise to a dry, detached
tone instead of the smooth, flowing one that is so characteristic of the
violin as commonly played.
violins in the orchestra are divided into firsts and seconds, the
first violins being always seated at the left of the audience and the
seconds at the right.
. the viola has four strings, also tuned in fifths, thus
. the viola looks exactly like the violin at
a little distance, and is really only a larger sized violin, having a
range a fifth lower. its tone is not so incisive as that of the violin,
being[pg ] rather heavier—"more gloomy," as it is often described. the
viola is not so useful as the violin as a solo instrument because it
is not capable of producing so many varieties of color, nevertheless it
is invaluable for certain effects. in orchestral music it is of course
one of the most valuable instruments for filling in the harmony. the
viola players are usually seated behind the second violin players in
the orchestra.
. the violoncello or cello (sometimes called bass viol) has four
strings, tuned thus:
its range is about three
and one-half octaves (from c to e'' or f''), but in solo work this range
is sometimes extended much higher. the cello is much more universally
used as a solo instrument than the viola and its tone is capable of a
much greater degree of variation. in the orchestra it plays the bass of
the string quartet (reinforced by the double-bass), but is also often
used for solo passages. con sordino and pizzicato passages occur as
often for the cello as for the violin.
. the double bass differs from the other members of the string
family in that it is tuned in fourths instead of in fifths. its four
strings are tuned as follows
 the entire range
of the instrument being from ee to a. in music written for double-bass
the notes are always printed an octave higher than the tones are to
sound: that is, when the bass-player sees the note
 he
plays this being done to avoid leger lines. the tone
of the bass is much heavier and[pg ] the instrument itself is much more
clumsy to handle than the other members of the group, hence it is almost
never used as a solo instrument but it is invaluable for reinforcing the
bass part in orchestral music. the mute is rarely used on the
double-bass, but the pizzicato effect is very common and the bass
pizzicato tone is much fuller and richer than that of any other stringed
instrument.
. the flute has a range of three octaves.
it is used in both solo and orchestral playing as well as in bands. the
flute was formerly always made of wood, but is at present often made of
metal.
. the piccolo is a flute playing an octave higher than the one
described above. the notes are printed as for the flute, but the player
understands that the tone is to sound an octave higher. the piccolo is
used widely in band music and quite often in orchestral music also, but
since the tone is so brilliant and penetrating and is incapable of any
great variation, it is not suitable for solo performance.
[pg ]
. the next four instruments to be described (oboe, bassoon,
english horn, and contra bassoon) are often referred to as the oboe
family since the principle of tone production and general manipulation
is the same in all four. the tone in these instruments is produced by
the vibration of two very thin pieces of cane, which are called together
a double-reed.
the oboe is especially valuable in the orchestra as a solo instrument,
and its thin, nasal tones are suggestive of rustic, pastoral simplicity,
both oboe and english horn being often used by orchestral composers
in passages intended to express the idea of rural out-of-door life. the
english horn is also often used in passages where the idea of
melancholy and suffering is to be conveyed to the audience. in a
military band the oboe corresponds to the first violin of the orchestra.
the bassoon and contra-bassoon are used mostly to provide a bass
part for the harmony of the wood-wind group, but they are also sometimes
employed (especially the bassoon) to depict comic or grotesque
effects.
. the next two types of instruments to be described (clarinet and
saxophone) are alike in that the tone is produced by the vibration of
a single strip of cane (called single reed) which is held against
the lower lip of the player. the clarinet and bass clarinet are made
of wood and are used in both bands and orchestras, but the saxophone
is usually made of metal, and, the tone being more[pg ] strident and
penetrating, the instrument is ordinarily used only in combination with
other wind instruments, i.e., in bands.
since the fingering of the clarinet is excessively difficult the
performer can play in only certain keys on the same instrument, hence to
play in different keys clarinets in several keys must be provided,
there being usually three in all. the music is written as though it were
to be played in the key of c, but the tones produced are actually in
other keys. for this reason the clarinet is called a transposing
instrument. the range of the clarinet is the greatest possessed by
any of the wind instruments, that of the clarinet in c being from
 to
[pg ]
the sarrusophone is an instrument with a double-reed. it is made of
brass and exists in several sizes, the only one ever used in the
orchestra being the double-bass sarrusophone, which has approximately
the same range as the double-bassoon and is sometimes (but rarely) made
use of in the orchestra instead of the latter instrument. the tone of
the sarrusophone is something like that of the bassoon.
. the french horn (often called valve horn or simply horn)
really consists of a long tube (about  feet) which is bent into
circular form for convenience in handling. its range is from
 to
. in the orchestra french
horns are used in pairs, two of the players taking the higher tones,
and two the lower. the tone is intensely mellow but incapable of any
extensive[pg ] variation, but in spite of this lack of variety the tone
itself is so wonderfully beautiful that the instrument is one of the
most useful in the orchestra both in solo passages and to fill in the
harmony. the horn (as well as the trumpet and trombone) differs from
most of the wood-wind instruments in that its mouthpiece contains no
reed, the lips of the player constituting the vibrating body as they are
stretched across the mouthpiece and air is forced against them. the
horn is used in bands as well as in orchestras.
. the range of the trumpet is
, the typical
tone being brilliant and ringing. it is used in both band and orchestra,
playing the highest parts assigned to the brass choir. the trumpet is
often replaced in both band and orchestra by its less refined cousin the
cornet because of the ease with which the latter can be played as
compared with the trumpet, and the larger number of players that are
available in consequence of this ease of execution.
. the cornet looks something like the trumpet, but is not so slim
and graceful in appearance. its tube is only four and one-half feet
long, as compared with a length of about eight feet in the trumpet, and
sixteen feet in the french horn.
the range of the cornet in b♭ is from
 to
. the tone is somewhat commonplace as compared
with the[pg ] trumpet, but because of its great agility in the rendition of
trills, repeated tones, etc., it is universally used in all sorts of
combinations, even (as noted above) taking the place of the trumpet in
many small orchestras.
. the pitch sounded by the trombone is altered by lengthening or
shortening the tube of which the instrument is constructed, this being
possible because the lower part slides into the upper and can be pulled
out to increase the total length of the tube through which the air
passes. there are usually three trombones in the orchestra, each
playing a separate part, and the combination of this trio (with the
tuba reinforcing the bass part) is majestic and thrilling, being
powerful enough to dominate the entire orchestra in fortissimo
passages. but the trombones are useful in soft passages also, and
their tone when playing pianissimo is rich, serene, and sonorous.
. the bass tuba is a member of the saxhorn family[] and[pg ] supplies
the lowest part of the brass choir, as the double-bass does in the
string choir. it is used in both orchestra and band, being often
supported in the larger bands by a still lower-toned member of the same
family—the contra-bass tuba. the range of the tuba is from
 to
. the kettle-drum is the most important member of the percussion
family and is always used either in pairs or in threes. the size of
these instruments varies somewhat with the make, but when two drums are
used the diameter is approximately that given under the illustration.
the range of a pair of drums is one octave
 and
when but two drums are used the larger one takes the tones from f to
about c of this range, and the smaller takes those[pg ] from about b♭
to f. the most common usage is to tune one drum to the tonic, and the
other to the dominant of the key in which the composition is written.
the pitch of the kettle-drum can be varied by increasing or lessening
the tension of the head by means of thumb-screws which act on a metal
ring.
[pg ]
the other important members of the percussion family are shown on this
and the following page, their use being so obvious as to require no
detailed explanation.
[pg ]
. the harp is one of the oldest of instruments (dating back over
 years), but it is only in comparatively recent years that it has
been used in the symphony orchestra. its range is from
 to
the modern double-action harp has forty-six strings, which are tuned
in half-steps and whole-steps so as to sound the scale of c♭ major.
it has a series of seven pedals around its base, each pedal having two
notches below it, into either of which the pedal may be lowered and
held fast. the first pedal shortens the f♭ string so that it now
sounds f, (giving the key of g♭); the second one[pg ] shortens the
c♭ string so that it sounds c (giving the key of d♭); the
third pedal shortens the g♭ string so that it sounds g (giving the
key of a♭); the fourth changes d♭ to d (giving the key of
e♭), and so on until, when all the pedals are fixed in their first
notches, the scale of c is sounded instead of c♭ as was the case
before any of the pedals were depressed. but if the first pedal is now
pushed down into the second notch the original f♭ string is still
further shortened and now sounds the pitch f♯ (giving us the key
of g), and if all the other pedals are likewise successively lowered to
the second notch we get in turn all the sharp keys—d, a, e, b,
f♯ and c♯, the last-named key being obtained as the result
of having all the pedals fixed in their second notches, thus making all
the tones of the original c♭ scale a whole-step higher so that they
now sound the c♯ scale.
chords of not more than four tones for each hand may be played
simultaneously on the harp, but arpeggio and scale passages are the
rule, and are more successful than simultaneous chords. the notation of
harp music is essentially like that of piano music.
[pg ]
acoustics
note:—it is usually taken for granted that the student of
music is familiar with the significance of such terms as
over-tone, equal temperament, etc., and with principles
such as that relating to the relation between vibration rates
and pitches: the writer has in his own experience found,
however, that most students are not at all familiar with such
data, and this appendix is therefore added in the hope that a
few facts at least regarding the laws of sound may be brought
to the attention of some who would otherwise remain in entire
ignorance of the subject.
. acoustics is the science which deals with sound and the laws of its
production and transmission. since all sound is caused by vibration,
acoustics may be defined as the science which treats of the phenomena
of sound-producing vibration.
. all sound (as stated above) is produced by vibration of some sort:
strike a tuning-fork against the top of a table and see the vibrations
which cause the tone, or, if the fork is a small one and the vibrations
cannot be seen, hold it against the edge of a sheet of paper and hear
the blows it strikes; or, watch one of the lowest strings of the piano
after striking the key a sharp blow; or, look closely at the heavier
strings of the violin (or better still, the cello) and watch them
oscillate rapidly to and fro as the bow moves across them.
the vibrating body may be a string, a thin piece of wood, a piece of
metal, a membrane (cf. drum), the lips (cf. playing the cornet), the
vocal cords, etc. often it is a column of air whose vibrations give rise
to the tone, the reed or other medium merely serving to set the air in
vibration.
. sound is transmitted through the air in somewhat this fashion: the
vibrating body (a string for example) strikes the air-particles in its
immediate vicinity, and they, being in con[pg ]tact with other such
air-particles, strike these others, the latter in turn striking yet
others, and so on, both a forward and backward movement being set up
(oscillation). these particles lie so close together that no movement at
all can be detected, and it is only when the disturbance finally reaches
the air-particles that are in contact with the ear-drum that any effect
is evident.
this phenomenon of sound-transmission may perhaps be made more clear by
the old illustration of a series of eight billiard balls in a row on a
table: if the first ball is tapped lightly, striking gently against ball
number , the latter (as well as numbers , , , , and ) will not
apparently move at all, but ball number  at the other end will roll
away. the air-particles act upon each other in much this same fashion,
the difference being that when they are set in motion by a vibrating
body a complete vibration backward and forward causes a similar
backward and forward movement of the particles (oscillation) instead
of simply a forward jerk as in the case of the billiard balls.
another way of describing the same process is this: the vibration of
some body produces waves in the air (cf. waves in the ocean, which carry
water forward but do not themselves move on continuously), these waves
spread out spherically (i.e. in all directions) and finally reach the
ear, where they set the ear-drum in vibration, thus sending certain
sound-stimuli to the nerves of hearing in the inner ear, and thus to the
brain.
an important thing to be noted in connection with sound-transmission is
that sound will not travel in a vacuum: some kind of a medium is
essential for its transmission. this medium may be air, water, a bar of
iron or steel, the earth, etc.
. the rate at which sound travels through the air is about  feet
per second, the rapidity varying somewhat with fluctuations in
temperature and humidity. in water the rate is much higher than in air
(about four times as great)[pg ] while the velocity of sound through other
mediums (as e.g., steel) is sometimes as much as sixteen times as
great as through air.
. sound, like light, may be intensified by a suitable reflecting
surface directly back of the vibrating body (cf. sounding board); it may
also be reflected by some surface at a distance from its source in such
a way that at a certain point (the focus) the sound may be very clearly
heard, but at other places, even those nearer the source of sound, it
can scarcely be heard at all. if there is such a surface in an
auditorium (as often occurs) there will be a certain point where
everything can be heard very easily, but in the rest of the room it may
be very difficult to understand what is being said or sung.
echoes are caused by sound-reflection, the distance of the reflecting
surface from the vibrating body determining the number of syllables that
will be echoed.
the acoustics of an auditorium (i.e., its hearing properties) depend
upon the position and nature of the reflecting surfaces and also upon
the length of time a sound persists after the vibrating body has
stopped. if it persists longer than -/ or -/ seconds the room will
not be suitable for musical performances because of the mixture of
persisting tones with following ones, this causing a blurred effect
somewhat like that obtained by playing a series of unrelated chords on
the piano while the damper-pedal is held down. the duration of the
reverberation depends upon the size and height of the room, material of
floor and walls, furniture, size of audience, etc.
. sound may be classified roughly into tones and noises although
the line of cleavage is not always sharply drawn. if i throw stones at
the side of a barn, sounds are produced, but they are caused by
irregular vibrations of an irregularly constructed surface and are
referred to as noise. but if i tap the head of a kettle-drum, a
regular series of vibrations is set up and the resulting sound is
referred to as tone. in general the[pg ] material of music consists of
tones, but for special effects certain noises are also utilized (cf.
castanets, etc.).
. musical tones have three properties, viz.:
. pitch.
. intensity.
. quality (timbre).
by pitch is meant the highness or lowness of tone. it depends upon
rate of vibration. if a body vibrates only  or  times per second no
tone is heard at all: but if it vibrates regularly at the rate of  or
 per second a tone of very low pitch is heard. if it vibrates at the
rate of  the pitch is higher, at  higher still, at  yet higher,
and when a rate of about , per second has been reached the pitch is
so high that most ears cannot perceive it at all. the highest tone that
can ordinarily be heard is the e♭ four octaves higher than the
highest e♭ of the piano. the entire range of sound humanly audible
is therefore about eleven octaves (rates -,), but only about
eight of these octaves are utilized for musical purposes. the tones of
the piano (with a range of -/ octaves) are produced by vibration
rates approximately between  and . in the orchestra the range is
slightly more extended, the rates being from  to .
certain interesting facts regarding the relation between vibration-rates
and pitches have been worked out: it has been discovered for instance
that if the number of vibrations is doubled, the pitch of the resulting
tone is an octave higher; i.e., if a string vibrating at the rate of
 per second gives rise to the pitch c', then a string one-half as
long and vibrating twice as rapidly () will give rise to the pitch
c'', i.e., an octave higher than c'. in the same way it has been found
that if the rate is multiplied by / the pitch of the tone will be a
major third higher; if multiplied by /, a perfect fifth higher,
etc. these laws are often stated thus: the ratio of the octave to the
fundamental is as two is to one; that of the major third as five is to[pg ]
four; that of the perfect fifth as three is to two, and so on through
the entire series of pitches embraced within the octave, the ratio
being of course the same for all octaves.
. the intensity (loudness or softness) of tones depends upon the
amplitude (width) of the vibrations, a louder tone being the result of
vibrations of greater amplitude, and vice versa. this may be verified by
plucking a long string (on cello or double-bass) and noting that when
plucked gently vibrations of small amplitude are set up, while a
vigorous pluck results in much wider vibrations, and, consequently, in a
louder tone. it should be noted that the pitch of the tone is not
affected by the change in amplitude of vibration.
the intensity of tones varies with the medium conveying them, being
usually louder at night because the air is then more elastic. tone
intensity is also affected by sympathetic vibrations set up in other
bodies. if two strings of the same length are stretched side by side and
one set in vibration so as to produce tone the other will soon begin to
vibrate also and the combined tone will be louder than if only one
string produced it. this phenomenon is the basis of what is known as
resonance (cf. body of violin, resonance cavities of nose and mouth,
sounding board of piano, etc.).
. quality depends upon the shape (or form) of the vibrations which
give rise to the tone. a series of simple vibrations will cause a simple
(or colorless) tone, while complex vibrations (giving rise to overtones
of various kinds and in a variety of proportions) cause more
individualistic peculiarities of quality. quality is affected also by
the shape and size of the resonance body. (cf. last part of sec. 
above.)
. practically every musical tone really consists of a combination of
several tones sounding simultaneously, the combined effect upon the ear
giving the impression of a single tone. the most important tone of the
series is the fundamental, which dominates the combination and gives
the pitch,[pg ] but this fundamental is practically always combined with a
greater or less number of faint and elusive attending tones called
overtones or harmonics. the first of these overtones is the octave
above the fundamental; the second is the fifth above this octave; the
third, two octaves above the fundamental, and so on through the series
as shown in the figure below. the presence of these overtones is
accounted for by the fact that the string (or other vibrating body) does
not merely vibrate in its entirety but has in addition to the principal
oscillation a number of sectional movements also. thus it is easily
proved that a string vibrates in halves, thirds, etc., in addition to
the principal vibration of the entire string, and it is the vibration of
these halves, thirds, etc., which gives rise to the harmonics, or
upper partials as they are often called. the figure shows great c
and its first eight overtones. a similar series might be worked out from
any other fundamental.
[listen]
it will be recalled that in the section () dealing with quality the
statement was made that quality depends upon the shape of the
vibrations; it should now be noted that it is the form of these
vibrations that determines the nature and proportion of the overtones
and hence the quality. thus e.g., a tone that has too large a
proportion of the fourth upper partial (i.e., the third of the
chord) will be reedy and somewhat unpleasant. this is the case with
many voices that are referred to as nasal. too great a proportion of
overtones is what causes certain pianos to sound "tin-panny." the tone
pro[pg ]duced by a good tuning-fork is almost entirely free from overtones:
it has therefore no distinctive quality and is said to be a simple
tone. the characteristic tone of the oboe on the other hand has many
overtones and is therefore highly individualistic: this enables us to
recognize the tone of the instrument even though we cannot see the
player. such a tone is said to be complex.
. the mathematical ratio referred to on page , if strictly carried
out in tuning a keyboard instrument would cause the half-steps to vary
slightly in size, and playing in certain keys (especially those having a
number of sharps or flats in the signature) would therefore sound out of
tune. there would be many other disadvantages in such a system, notably
the inability to modulate freely to other keys, and since modulation is
one of the predominant and most striking characteristics of modern
music, this would constitute a serious barrier to advances in
composition. to obviate these disadvantages a system of equal
temperament was invented and has been in universal use since the time
of bach (-) who was the first prominent composer to use it
extensively. equal temperament means simply dividing the octave into
twelve equal parts, thus causing all scales (as played on keyboard
instruments at least) to sound exactly alike.
to show the practicability of equal temperament bach wrote a
series of  preludes and fugues, two in each major and two
in each minor key. he called the collection "the well-tempered
clavichord."
. various standards of pitch have existed at different times in the
last two centuries, and even now there is no absolute uniformity
although conditions are much better than they were even twenty-five
years ago. scientists use what is known as the "scientific standard"
(sometimes called the "philosophic standard"), viz.,  double
vibrations for "middle c." this pitch is not in actual use for musical
purposes, but is retained for theoretical purposes because of its[pg ]
convenience of computation (being a power of ). in  a conference of
musicians at vienna ratified the pitch giving middle c  vibrations,
this having been adopted by the french as their official pitch some 
years before. in  a convention of piano manufacturers at
philadelphia adopted this same pitch for the united states, and it has
been in practically universal use ever since. this pitch (giving middle
c  vibrations) is known as "international pitch."
concert pitch is slightly higher than international, the difference
between the two varying somewhat, but being almost always less than
one-half step. this higher pitch is still often used by bands and
sometimes by orchestras to give greater brilliancy to the wind
instruments.
references
lavignac—music and musicians, pp. -.
broadhouse—the student's helmholz.
helmholtz—sensations of tone.
hamilton—sound and its relation to music.
note:—for a simple and illuminating treatment of the subject
from the standpoint of the music student, the books by
lavignac and hamilton are especially recommended.
[pg ]
terminology reform
a recent writer[] on vocal terminology makes the following statement
as an introduction to certain remarks advocating a more definite use of
terms relating to tone production by the human voice:—"the correct use
of words is the most potent factor in the development of the thinker."
if this statement has any basis of fact whatsoever to support it then it
must be evident to the merest novice in musical work that the popular
use of many common terms by musicians is keeping a good many people from
clear and logical thought in a field that needs accurate thinkers very
badly! however this may be, it must be patent to all that our present
terminology is in many respects neither correct nor logical, and the
movement inaugurated by the music section of the national education
association some years ago to secure greater uniformity in the use and
definition of certain expressions should therefore not only command the
respect and commendation, but the active support of all progressive
teachers of music.
let it be noted at the outset that such reforms as are advocated by the
committee will never come into general use while the rank and file of
teachers throughout the country merely approve the reports so
carefully compiled and submitted each year: these reforms will become
effective only as individual teachers make up their minds that the end
to be attained is worth the trouble of being careful to use only
correct[pg ] terminology every day for a month, or three months, or a
year—whatever length of time may be necessary in order to get the new
habits fixed in mind and muscle.
the terminology committee was appointed by the department of music of
the n.e.a. in  and made its first report at los angeles in .
since then the indefatigable chairman of the committee (mr. chas. i.
rice, of worcester, mass.) has contributed generously of both time and
strength, and has by his annual reports to the department set many of us
to thinking along certain new lines, and has caused some of us at any
rate to adopt in our own teaching certain changes of terminology which
have enabled us to make our work more effective.
in his first report mr. rice says:
"any one who has observed the teaching of school music in any
considerable number of places in this country cannot fail to have
remarked the great diversity of statement employed by different teachers
regarding the facts which we are engaged in teaching, and the equal
diversity of terminology used in teaching the symbols by which musicians
seek to record these facts. to the teacher of exact sciences our
picturesque use of the same term to describe two or more entirely
different things never ceases to be a marvel.... thoughtful men and
women will become impressed with the untruthfulness of certain
statements and little by little change their practice. others will
follow, influenced by example. the revolutionists will deride us for not
moving faster while the conservatives will be suspicious of any change."
at this meeting in los angeles a list of thirteen points was recommended
by the committee and adopted by the music department. these points are
given in the n.e.a. volume of proceedings for , p. .
since  the committee (consisting of chas. i. rice, p.c. hayden, w.b.
kinnear, leo r. lewis, and constance[pg ] barlow-smith) have each year
selected a number of topics for discussion, and have submitted valuable
reports recommending the adoption of certain reforms. some of the points
recommended have usually been rejected by the department, but many of
them have been adopted and the reports of the committee have set many
teachers thinking and have made us all more careful in the use and
definition of common terms. a complete list of all points adopted by the
department since  has been made by mr. rice for school music, and
this list is here reprinted from the january, , number of that
magazine.
terminology adoptions, -
. tone: specific name for a musical sound of definite
pitch. use neither sound, a general term, nor note, a term
of notation.
. interval: the pitch relation between two tones. not
properly applicable to a single tone or scale degree. example:
"sing the fifth tone of the scale." not "sing the fifth
interval of the scale."
. key: tones in relation to a tonic. example: in the key of
g. not in the scale of g. scales, major and minor are
composed of a definite selection from the many tones of the
key, and all scales extend through at least one octave of
pitch. the chromatic scale utilizes all the tones of a key
within the octave.
. natural: not a suitable compound to use in naming
pitches. pitch names are either simple: b, or compound: b
sharp, b double-sharp, b flat or b double-flat, and there is
no pitch named "b natural." example: pitch b, not "b
natural."
note:—l.r.l. thinks that b natural should be the name when
the notation suggests it.
. step, half-step: terms of interval measurement. avoid
tone, semi-tone or half-tone. major second and minor
second are interval names. example: how large are the
following intervals? () major second, () minor second, ()
augmented prime. answer: () a step, () a half-step, () a
half-step.
. chromatic: a tone of the key which is not a member of its
diatonic scale. (n.b.) an accidental (a notation sign) is not
a chromatic sign unless it makes a staff-degree represent a
chromatic tone.[pg ]
. major; minor: major and minor keys having the same
signature should be called relative major and minor. major and
minor keys having the same tonic, but different signatures,
should be called tonic major and minor. not "parallel" major
or minor in either case.
. staff: five horizontal lines and their spaces. staff
lines are named (numbered) upward in order, first to fifth.
spaces: space below, first-second-third-fourth-space, and
space above[]. (six in all.) additional short lines and
their short spaces numbered outward both ways from the main
staff, viz: line below, second space below. the boundary of
the staff is always a space.
. g clef, f clef, c clef: these clefs when placed upon the
staff, give its degrees their first, or primary pitch meaning.
each makes the degree it occupies represent a pitch of its
respective name. example: the g clef makes the second line
represent the pitch g. avoid "fixes g on." the staff with
clef in position represents only pitches having simple or
one-word names, a, b, c, etc.
. sharps, flats: given a staff with clef in position as in
example above, sharps and flats make staff degrees upon which
they are placed represent pitches a half-step higher or lower.
these pitches have compound or two-word names. example: the
second line stands for the pitch g (simple name). sharp the
second line and it will stand for the pitch g sharp. (compound
name.) the third line stands for the pitch b. (simple name.)
flat it, and the line will stand for the pitch b flat.
(compound name.) n.b. these signs do not "raise" or
"lower" notes, tones, pitches, letters or staff degrees.
. double-sharp, double-flat: given a staff with three or
more degrees sharped in the signature, double-sharps are used
(subject to the rules governing composition) to make certain
of these degrees, already sharped, represent pitches one
half-step higher yet. similarly, when three or more degrees
are flatted in the signature, double-flats are used to make
certain degrees already flatted, represent pitches one
half-step lower yet. examples: to represent sharp  in the key
of b major, double-sharp the c degree, or (equally good)
double-sharp the third space (g clef). to represent flat  in
the key of d flat major, double-flat the b degree, or (equally
good) double flat the third line (g clef). do not say: "put
a double-sharp on " or "put a double-sharp on c," or
"indicate" a higher or lower pitch "on" a sharped or
flatted degree.
. signature: sharps or flats used as signatures affect the
staff de[pg ]grees they occupy and all octaves of the same.
example: with signature of four sharps, the first one affects
the fifth line and the first space; the second, the third
space; the third, the space above and the second line; the
fourth, the fourth line and the space below. do not say: "f
and c are sharped," "ti is sharped," "b is flatted," "fa is
flatted." "sharpened" or "flattened" are undesirable.
. brace: the two or more staffs containing parts to be
sounded together; also the vertical line or bracket connecting
such staffs. not "line" or "score." "staff" is better than
"line" for a single staff, and "score" is used meaning the
book containing an entire work, as "vocal score," "orchestral
score," "full score."
. notes: notes are characters designed to represent
relative duration. when placed on staff-degrees they
indicate pitch. (note the difference between "represent" and
"indicate.") "sing what the note calls for" means, sing a tone
of the pitch represented by the staff degree occupied by the
note-head. the answer to the question: "what is that note?"
would be "half-note," "eighth-note" according to the
denomination of the note in question, whether it was on or off
the staff.
. measure-sign: -, -, -, are measure-signs. avoid
"time signatures," "meter-signatures," "the fraction,"
"time-marks." example: what is the measure-sign? (c) ans. a
broken circle. what is its meaning? ans. four-quarter measure.
(not four-four time, four-four rhythm, four-four meter.)
. note placing: place a quarter note on the fourth line.
not "put a quarter note on d."
. beat-pulse: a tone or rest occurs on a certain beat or
pulse of a measure. not on a certain count.
. signature terminology: the right hand sharp in the
signature is on the staff degree that represents seven of the
major scale. not "always on  or ti."
. signature terminology: the right hand flat in the
signature is on the staff degree that represents four of the
major scale. not "always on fa."
. rote, note, syllable: singing by rote means that the
singer sings something learned by ear without regard to notes.
singing by note means that the singer is guided to the correct
pitch by visible notes. singing by syllable means that the
singer sings the tones of a song or part to the sol-fa
syllables instead of to words, neutral vowels or the hum.
"sing by note" is not correct if the direction means simply to
sing the[pg ] sol-fa syllables, whether in sight reading, rote
singing, or memory work. "sing by syllable" would be correct
in each case.
adoptions of the  meeting at san francisco
arabic numerals, either , , , , , , or , placed on the
staff directly after the signature and above the third line,
show the number of beats in a measure.
a note, either a quarter or a dotted quarter, placed in
parenthesis under the numeral, represents the length of one
beat and is called the beat-note.
the numeral and the beat-note thus grouped constitute the
measure-sign.
illustrative statements covering proper terminology: the tune
"america" is written in three-quarter measure. the chorus:
"how lovely are the messengers" is written in two-dotted
quarter measure.
the above forms of statement were adopted at denver in ,
and are recommended for general use when speaking of music
written with the conventional measure-signs, etc.
in place of: "two-two time, three-eight time, four-four time,"
say as above: "this piece is written in two-half measure,
three-eighth measure, four-quarter measure."
minor scales
primitive minor (ascending)
the minor scale form having minor sixth and minor seventh
above tonic to be called primitive minor.
illustrative examples. a minor: a, b, c, d, e, f, g, a; c
minor: c, d, e flat, f, g, a flat, b flat, c.
transcriber's note: above, supplied b flat missing from
original.
primitive minor (descending)
same pitches in reverse order.
harmonic minor (ascending)
the minor scale form having minor sixth and major seventh
above tonic to be called harmonic minor.
illustrative examples. a minor: a, b, c, d, e, f, g sharp, a;
c minor: c, d, e flat, f, g, a flat, b, c.
harmonic minor (descending)
same pitches in reverse order.[pg ]
melodic minor (ascending)
the minor scale form having major sixth and major seventh
above tonic to be called melodic minor.
illustrative examples. a minor: a, b, c, d, e, f sharp, g
sharp, a; c minor: c, d, e flat, f, g, a, b, c.
melodic minor (descending)
same as the primitive.
adoptions of the  meeting at chicago
pulse and beat
the committee finds that the words: pulse and beat are in
general use as synonymous terms, meaning one of the succession
of throbs or impulses of which we are conscious when listening
to music. each of these pulses or beats has an exact point of
beginning, a duration, and an exact point of ending, the
latter coincident with the beginning of the next pulse or
beat. when thus used, both words are terms of ear.
beat
one of these words, beat, is also in universal use, meaning
one of a series of physical motions by means of which a
conductor holds his group of performers to a uniform movement.
when thus used it becomes a term of eye.
the conductor's baton, if it is to be authoritative, cannot
wander about through the whole duration of the pulse but must
move quickly to a point of comparative repose, remaining until
just before the arrival of the next pulse when it again makes
a rapid swing, finishing coincidently with the initial tone
(or silence) of the new pulse.
thus it is practically the end of the conductor's beat that
marks the beginning of the pulse.
the committee is of opinion that beat might preferably be used
as indicating the outward sign.
beat-note
this term "beat-note" is already in use in another important
connection (see terminology report, ) and the committee
recommends that those using the above terms shall say: "this
note is an on-the-beat note; this one is an after-the-beat
note; this one a before-the-beat note."[pg ]
definitions
matters of ear
pulse: the unit of movement in music, one of a series of
regularly recurring throbs or impulses.
measure: a group of pulses.
pulse-group: two or more tones grouped within the pulse.
matters of eye
beat: one of a series of conventional movements made by the
conductor. this might include any unconventional motion which
served to mark the movement of the music, whether made by
conductor, performer or auditor.
beat-note: a note of the denomination indicated by the
measure-sign as the unit of note-value in a given measure.
example
given the following measure-signs: -, -, -, quarter,
half, or eighth notes, respectively, are beat-notes.
beat-group: a group of notes or notes and rests, of smaller
denomination than the beat-note which represents a full beat
from beginning to end and is equal in value to the beat-note.
(a beat-group may begin with a rest.)
on-the-beat note (or rest): any note (or rest) ranging in
value from a full beat down, which calls for musical action
(or inaction) synchronously with the conductor's beat.
after-the-beat note: any note in a beat-group which indicates
that a tone is to be sounded after the beginning, and before
or at the middle of the pulse.
before-the-beat note: any note in a beat-group which indicates
that a tone is to be sounded after the middle of the pulse.
to illustrate terminology and to differentiate between pulse
and beat as terms, respectively of ear and eye, the following
is submitted:
whenever a brief tone involves the musical idea of
syncopation, it may be regarded as an after-the-pulse tone and
the note that calls for it as an after-the-beat note; when it
involves the idea of anticipation or preparation it may be
regarded as a before-the-pulse tone, and the note that calls
for it, as a before-the-beat note.[pg ]
measure and meter
"what is the measure-sign?"
"what is the meter-signature?"
these two words are used synonymously, and one of them is
unnecessary. the committee recommends that measure be retained
and used. meter has its use in connection with hymns.
the author does not find it possible at present to agree with all the
recommendations made in the above report, but the summary is printed in
full for the sake of completeness.
the music teacher's national association has also interested itself
mildly in the subject of terminology reform, and at its meeting in
washington, d.c., in , professor waldo s. pratt gave his address as
president of the association on the subject "system and precision in
musical speech." this address interested the members of the association
to such an extent that professor pratt was asked to act as a committee
whose purpose it should be to look into the matter of reforms necessary
in music terminology and report at a later session. in  professor
pratt read a report in which he advocated the idea of making some
changes in music nomenclature, but took the ground that the subject is
too comprehensive to be mastered in the short time that can be given to
it by a committee, and that it is therefore impossible to recommend
specific changes. he also took occasion to remark that one difficulty in
the whole matter of terminology is that many terms and expressions are
used colloquially and that such use although usually not scientific,
is often not distinctly harmful and is not of sufficient importance to
cause undue excitement on the part of reformers. quoting from the report
at this point:—"a great deal of confusion is more apparent than real
between note and tone, between step and degree, between key
and tonality. no practical harm is done by speaking of the first
note of a piece when really first tone would be more[pg ] accurate. to
say that a piece is written in the key of b♭ is more convenient
than to say that it is written in the tonality of which b♭ is the
tonic. the truth is that some of the niceties of expression upon which
insistence is occasionally laid are merely fussy, not because they have
not some sort of reason, but because they fail to take into account the
practical difference between colloquial or off-hand speech and the
diction of a scientific treatise. this is said without forgetting that
colloquialism always needs watching and that some people form the habit
of being careless or positively uncouth as if it were a mark of high
artistic genius."
professor pratt's report is thus seen to be philosophic rather than
constructive, and terminology reform will undoubtedly make more
immediate progress through the efforts of the n.e.a. committee with its
specific recommendations (even though these are sometimes admittedly
fussy) than through the policy of the m.t.n.a. of waiting for some one
to get time to take up the subject in a scholarly way. nevertheless the
philosophic view is sometimes badly needed, especially when the spirit
of reform becomes too rabid and attaches too great importance to
trifles. a judicious intermingling of the two committees in a series of
joint meetings would undoubtedly result in mutual helpfulness, and
possibly also in a more tangible and convincing statement of principles
than has yet been formulated by either.
[pg ]
sonata op. , no.  by beethoven
analysis by arthur e. heacox,
oberlin conservatory of music
transcriber's note: the original book contains only the first
movement of the sonata. click on the "enlarge"
link below each page image to view a larger version of that
page. to listen to the music, click here.
first subject  measures, e♭ major, as follows:  meas.
presentation, one meas. link,  meas. repetition oct. higher.
rhythmic elements are a, b, c, all presented in first  meas.
[enlarge page ]
[enlarge page ]
[enlarge page ]
[enlarge page ]
[enlarge page ]
[enlarge page ]
[enlarge page ]
[enlarge page ]
[enlarge page ]
[enlarge page ]
[pg ]
eh = a as in face; ah = a as in far; ch = ch as in chair;
final eh = e as in met.
a (ah), 
a battuta (ah-baht-too'-tah), 
a capella (cah-pel'-lah), 
a capriccio (cah-pritch'-eo), 
accelerando (aht-cheh-leh-rahn'-do), 
accented tones, 
accent marks, 
accent in measures, 
acciaccatura (aht-cheea-cah-too'-ra), , 
accidentals, 
accompagnamento (ahc-com-pahn-yah-men'-to), 
acoustics (ah-kow'-stics), def., 
of auditoriums, 
adagietto (ah-dah-jee-et'-to), 
adagio (ah-dah'-jee-o), 
à deux mains (doo-mahng), 
ad libitum, 
affrettando (ahf-fret-tahn'-do), 
agitato (ah-jee-tah'-to), 
agréments (ah-greh-mahng), 
à la or alla (ahl'-lah), 
alla breve (breh'-veh), 
alla marcia (mar'-chee-ah), 
allargando (ahl-lahr-gahn'-do), 
alla zingara (tseen-gah'-rah), 
allegretto (ahl-leh-gret'-to), 
allegrissimo, 
allegro (ahl-leh'-gro), 
allegro agitato (ah-jee-tah'-to), 
allegro appassionata (-ah'-tah), 
allegro assai (ahs-sah'-ee), 
allegro commodo (kom-mo'-do), 
allegro con brio (bree'-o), 
allegro con fuoco (foo-o'-ko), 
allegro con moto (mo'-to), 
allegro con spirito (spee'-ree-to), 
allegro di bravura (dee brah-voo'-rah), 
allegro di molto (mohl'-to), 
allegro furioso (foo-ree-o'-so), 
allegro giusto (jew-sto), 
allegro ma grazioso (mah grah-tsi-o'-so), 
allegro (ma) non tanto (tahn'-to), 
allegro (ma) non troppo (trop'-po), 
allegro moderato (mod-e-rah'-to), 
allegro quasi andante (quah-see ahn-dahn'-teh), 
allegro vivace (vee-vah'-cheh), 
allemande (al-mahnd), 
all'unisono (oo-nee-so'-no), 
all'ottava (ot-tah'-vah), 
alt (ahlt), 
alto (ahl-to), 
a mezza voce (met'-zah-vo'-cheh), 
amore (ah-mo'-reh), , 
andante (ahn-dahn'-teh), 
andante affettuoso (ahf-fet-too-o'-so), 
andante amabile (ah-mah'-bee-leh), 
andante cantabile (cahn-tah'-bee-leh), 
andante con moto (mo'-to), 
andante grazioso (grah-tsi-o'-so), 
andante maestoso (mah-es-to'-so), 
andante (ma) non troppo (mah non trop'-po), 
andante pastorale (pahs-to-rah'-leh), 
[pg ]andante quasi allegro (quah-see ahl-leh'-gro), 
andante sostenuto (sos-teh-noo'-to), 
animando (ah-nee-mahn'-do), 
animato (ah-nee-mah'-to), 
animato come sopra (co-meh so'-prah), 
andantino (ahn-dahn-tee'-no), 
antecedent, 
anthem, 
anticipation, 
antiphony (an-tif'-o-ny), 
antithesis (an-tith'-), 
a piacere (pee-ah-cheh'-reh), 
appoggiatura (ap-pod-jea-too'-rah), def., 
à quatre mains (kahtr-mahng), 
arabesque, 
aria (ah'-ree-ah), 
arioso (ah-ree-o'-so), 
arpeggiando (ar-ped-jee-ahn'-do), 
arpeggiato (-ah'-to), 
arpeggiento (-en'-to), 
arpeggio (ar-ped'-jee-o), 
art-ballad, 
assai (ahs-sah'-ee), 
a tempo, 
a tempo primo (pree'-mo), 
a tempo rubato (roo-bah'-to), 
attacca (aht-tah'-kah), 
attacca subito (soo'-bee-to), 
attacca subito il seguente (eel seg-wen'-teh), 
attack, 
bagpipe, 
ballad, 
band, 
bar, def. and use, 
double, 
barcarole (bar'-cah-rohl), 
baritone, 
bass, 
bass clarinet, 
basso (bahs'-so), 
bassoon, 
bass staff, 
bass tuba, 
bass viol, 
ben (behn), 
ben marcato (mahr-kah'-to), 
berceuse (behr-soos'), 
binary form, 
binary measure, 
bis (bees), 
bolero (bo-leh'-ro), 
bourrée (boo-reh'), 
brace, 
brass instruments, 
brillante (breel-ahn'-teh), 
broken chord, 
broken octave, 
cacophony (kak-of'-o-ny), 
cadence, 
cadenza, 
calando (kah-lahn'-do), 
cancel, , 
cantabile (kahn-tah'-bee-leh), 
cantando (kakn-tahn'-do), 
canto (kahn'-to), 
cantus firmus, 
canon, 
cantata (kahn-tah'-tah), 
carol, 
catch, 
c clef , 
cello (chel'-lo), 
chaconne (shah-con'), 
chamber music, 
chanterelle (shong-tah-rel'), 
chinese scale, 
choral, 
chords def. and lands, 
inversions of, 
common, 
seventh, 
dominant seventh, 
chromatic, 
chromatic scale, 
clarinet, 
classes of instruments in orchestra, 
clavichord, 
clefs, , 
close position, 
coda, 
coi (co'-ee), 
col, 
[pg ]colla, 
colla parte (par'-teh), 
colla voce (vo'-cheh), 
colle, 
collo, 
coloratura singing, , 
coll'ottava (ot-tah'-vah), 
combination pedals, 
come (koh'-meh), 
come primo (pree'-mo), 
common chords, 
compound measure, 
compound duple measure, 
con, 
con alcuna licenza (ahl-koo'-nah lee-chen'-tsah), 
con amore (ah-mo'-reh), , 
con anima (ah'-nee-mah), 
con bravura (brah-voo'-rah), 
con celerita (che-leh'-ree-tah), 
concerto (con-cher'-to), 
concert pitch, 
con delicato (deh-lee-cah'-to), 
con energico (en-er-jee'-ko), 
con espressione (es-pres-see-o'-neh), 
con forza (fort'-za), 
con fuoco (foo-o'-ko), 
con grand' espressione (grahnd' es-pres-see-o'-neh), 
con grazia (grahts-yah), 
con melinconia (or malinconia) (-leen-ko'-ne-eh), 
con moto, 
con passione (pas-se-o'-neh), 
consequent, 
consonance, 
con spirito (spe'-ree-to), 
con tenerezza (teh-neh-ret'-za), 
continuous form, 
contra, 
contra bass tuba, 
contra octave, 
contralto, 
con variazione (vah-ri-ah-tsi-o'-neh), 
cornet, 
counterpoint, def., , , 
courante (koo-rahnt'), 
crescendo (kre-shen'-do), 
crescendo al fortissimo, 
crescendo ed affrettando (ahf-fret-tahn'-do), 
crescendo ed animando poco a poco (ah-ni-mahn'-do), 
crescendo e diminuendo (eh de-me-noo-en'-do), 
crescendo molto (mohl'-to), 
crescendo poco a poco, 
crescendo poco a poco sin al fine (seen ahl fee'-neh), 
crescendo poi diminuendo (po'-ee dee-mee-noo-en'-do), 
crescendo subito (soo'-bee-to), 
cross-stroke, , 
csardas (tsar'-dahs), 
da (dah), 
da capo (kah'-po), 
dal segno (sehn'-yo), 
dances, 
dash over note, , 
decrescendo (deh-kreh-shen'-do), 
decrescendo al pianissimo (ahl pee-ahn-is'-si-mo), 
degrees of staff, 
delicato (deh-lee-kah'-to), 
descriptive music, 
di (dee), 
diatonic condition, 
diatonic scale, 
di bravura (brah-voo'-rah), 
diminuendo (dee-mee-noo-en'-do), 
di molto (mohl'-to), 
direct, 
dirge, 
discord, 
dissonance (dis'), 
divisi (di-ve'-ze), 
dolce (dohl'-cheh), 
dolce e cantabile (eh kahn-tah'-bee-leh), 
dolcissimo (dohl-chis'-see-mo), 
dolente (do-len'-teh), 
dominant, 
dominant seventh, 
doloroso (do-lo-ro'-so), 
[pg ]doppio (dop'-pee-o), 
doppio movimento (mo-vi-men'-to), 
dot—where placed, 
uses of, 
with slur or tie, 
with dash, 
double bar, 
double bass, 
double bassoon, 
double flat, , 
double mordent, 
double sharp, , 
doublet, 
duet, 
duple measure, 
dynamics, 
e (eh), 
école (eh'-kole), 
ed, 
eight-foot stop, 
elements of music, 
embellishments, 
english names for notes, 
english horn, 
enharmonic, def., 
enharmonic scale, 
enharmonic tie, 
ensemble (ong-sombl), 
equal temperament, 
e poi la coda (eh-po'-ee), 
espressivo (ehs-pres-see'-vo), 
et, 
etto, 
etude, 
euphony (yu'-fo-ny), 
even measure, 
facile (fah-chee'-leh), 
fanfare (fahn'-fehr), 
fantasia (fahn-tah-ze'-ah), 
f clef, , , 
fermata (fehr-mah'-ta), , 
fiasco (fe-ahs'-ko), 
figured bass, 
fine (fee'-neh), 
five-lined octave, 
flat, , 
flute, 
folk-song, 
form, def., 
binary, 
forte (for'-teh), 
forte piano (pee-ah'-no), 
forte possibile (pos-see'-bee-leh), 
fortissimo, 
fortissimo possibile (pos-see-bee-leh), 
fortisissimo, 
forzando (for-tsahn'-do), 
forzato (for-tsah'-to), 
four-foot stop, 
four-lined octave, 
free imitation, 
french horn, 
french pitch designations, 
fugue, 
fundamental, 
gamut (gam'-ut), 
gavotte (gah-vot'), 
g clef, , , 
general pause, 
german pitch designation, 
gigue (zheeg), 
giocoso (jee-o-ko'-so), 
giojoso (jee-o-yo'-so), 
glee, 
glissando (glis-sahn'-do), 
graces, 
grandioso (grahn-dee-o'-so), 
grand sonata, 
grave (grah'-veh), 
grazioso (grah-tsi-o'-so), 
great octave, 
great staff, 
grosse pause (gros-seh pah-oo'-za) or (gros-seh pow-zeh), 
gruppetto (groo-pet'-to), 
habanera (hah-bah-neh'-rah), 
half-step, 
harmonic minor scale, 
harmonics, 
harmonics on violin, 
[pg ]harmony, 
harp, 
harpsichord, 
head of note, 
hold, 
homophonic style, 
hook, 
humoresque (hoo-mo-resk'), 
hymn to st. john, 
idyl, 
il (eel), 
il basso (bahs'-so), 
il più (pee'-oo), 
il più forte possibile (pos-see'-bee-leh), 
imitation, 
imperfect trill, 
in alt (in ahlt), 
in altissimo (ahl-tis'-si-mo), 
ino (ee'-no), 
instrumentation, 
instruments, classification of, 
intensity of tones, 
interlude, 
intermediate tones, 
see "chromatic," p. 
international pitch, 
interval, def., 
enharmonic, 
harmonic, 
melodic, 
names of, 
inversion, in thematic development, 
inversions of chords, 
inverted mordent, 
inverted turn, 
issimo, 
kettle-drum, 
key, def., 
signature, 
enharmonic keys, 
key-tone, , 
how different from scale, 
la (lah), 
lacrimando (lah-kri-mahn'-do), 
lacrimoso (lah-kri-mo'-so), 
largamente (lar-gah-men'-teh), 
largando (lar-gahn'-do), 
larghetto (lar-get'-to), 
largo, 
largo assai (ahs-sah'-ee), 
largo di molto (de mohl'-to), 
largo ma non troppo (mah non trop'-po), 
largo un poco (oon po'-co), 
le (leh), 
leading tone, , 
legato (leh-gah'-to), , 
leger lines, 
leggierissimo (led-jah-ris'-si-mo), 
leggiero (led-jee'-ro), 
lentando (len-tahn'-do), 
lentemente (len-tah-men'-teh), 
lentissimamente (-men'-teh), 
lentissamente (-men'-teh), 
lento, 
lento a capriccio (ah-cah-preet'-chee-o), 
lento assai (ahs-sah'-ee), 
lento di molto (de mohl'-to), 
libretto (lee-bret'-to), 
lied (leed), 
l'istesso tempo (lis-tes'-so), , 
loco, , 
long appoggiatura (ap-pod-jea-too'-rah), 
lower tetrachord, 
lunga pausa (loong-ah pow'-zeh) or (loon-gah pah-oo'-za), 
lunga trillo, 
lusingando (loos-in-gahn'-do), 
lyric, 
madrigal (mad'-ri-gal), 
maesta (mah'-es-tah), 
maestoso (mah-es-to'-so), 
maggiore (mahd-jo'-reh), 
main droite (mahng droa), 
main gauche (mahng gowsh), 
major key, 
major scale, def., 
positions, 
origin of name, 
mancando (mahn-kahn'-do), 
mano destra (mah'-no dehs'-trah), 
[pg ]mano sinistra (si-nees'-trah), 
marcato il canto (mar-kah'-to eel kahn'-to), 
martellando (mar-tel-lahn'-do), 
martellato (mar-tel-lah'-to), 
marziale (mart-se-ah'-leh), 
mass, 
mazurka (mah-zoor'-ka), 
measure, def., 
how differs from "bar," 
how differs from "rhythm," 
syncopation in, 
simple and compound, 
duple or even, 
triple or perfect, 
quadruple, 
sextuple, 
compound duple, 
signature, 
binary, 
mediant, 
mellifluous (mel-lif'-loo-us), 
melodic minor scales, 
melody, 
melos (meh'-los), 
meno (meh'-no), 
meno mosso (mos'-so), 
mente (men'-teh), 
menuet (meh-noo-eh'), 
menuetto (meh-noo-et'-to), 
messa di voce (mes'-sa dee vo'-cheh), 
mesto (mehs'-to), 
metronome, 
mezza (med'-zah), 
mezzo (med'-zo), 
mezzo forte (for'-teh), , 
mezzo piano (pe-ah'-no), 
mezzo soprano (so-prah'-no), 
mezzo voce (vo'-cheh), 
minor key, 
minore (me-no'-reh), 
minor scale, def., 
positions, 
minuet, 
misterioso (mis-teh-ri-o'-so), 
moderato (mod-e-rah'-to), 
modulation, def., 
enharmonic, 
molto (mohl'-to), 
molto crescendo (kre-shen'-do), 
monophonic style, , 
mordent, , 
morendo (mo-ren'-do), 
moriente (mo-ri-en'-teh), 
motet (mo-tet'), 
movable c clef, 
mute, 
natural, , 
natural condition of staff-degrees, 
nel, 
nel battere (baht-teh'-reh), 
nella, 
neumae (neoo'-mee), 
nocturne, 
non (non), 
non tanto (tahn'-to), 
non tanto allegro (ahl-leh'-gro), 
non troppo allegro (trop'-po), 
notation, history of music, 
notes, def., 
kinds of, 
english names for, 
dotted, 
staccato, 
irregular note-groups, 
parts of, 
how made, 
nuance (noo-angs), 
obbligato (ob-blee-gah'-to), 
oboe (o'-bo), 
octave, def., 
octaves, names of, 
offertory, 
one-lined octave, 
open position, 
opera, 
opus, 
oratorio, 
orchestra, 
orchestration, 
organ, reed, 
pipe, 
[pg ]point, 
original minor scale, 
origin of scale, 
ossia (os'-see-ah), , 
ossia più facile (pe-oo' fah-chee'-leh), 
overtones, 
overture, 
parlando (par-lahn'-do), 
part song, 
pastorale (pas-to-rah'-leh), 
pedal point, 
pentatonic scale, 
per (pehr), 
percussion instruments, 
perdendo (pehr-den'-do), 
perdendosi (pehr-den-do'-see), 
perfect measure, 
perfect trill, 
per il violino (eel ve-o-le'-no), 
period, 
pesante (peh-sahn'-teh), 
peu (peuh), 
phrase, 
phrase mark, 
pianissimo (pee-ahn-is'-si-mo), 
pianissimo possibile (pos-see'-bee'-leh), 
pianisissimo (pee-ahn-is-is'-si-mo), 
piano (pee-ah'-no), 
piano assai (ahs-sah'-ee), 
piano, description of, 
piccolo (pik'-ko-lo), 
pipe organ, 
pitch, def., 
pitch names, 
standards of, 
concert pitch, 
international pitch, 
più (pe-oo'), 
più allegro (ahl-leh'-gro), 
più forte (for'-teh), 
più lento, 
più mosso (mos'-so), 
più tosto (tos'-to), 
pizzicato (pits-e-kah'-to), , 
pochetto (po-ket'-to), see ino, 
poco, 
poco a poco animando (ah-nee-mahn'-do), 
poi (po' ee), 
polacca (po-lahk'-kah), 
polka, 
polonaise (pol-o-nez'), , 
polyphonic style, 
pomposo (pom-po'-so), 
portamento (por'-tah-men'-to), 
position, open and close, 
possibile (pos-see'-bee-leh), 
postlude, 
prall trill, 
precipitoso (preh-che-pi-to'-so), 
prelude, 
prestissimo (pres-tis'-see-mo), 
prestissimo possibile (pos-see'-bee-leh), 
presto, 
presto assai (ahs-sah'-ee), 
presto (ma) non troppo (mah non trop'-po), 
prière (pre-ehr'), 
primary forms, 
primitive minor scale, 
program music, 
pure music, 
pure scale, 
quadruple measure, 
quality, 
quartet, 
quasi (quah'-see), 
quintole (kwin'-to-leh), 
quintolet, 
quintuplet, , 
raised sixth, 
rallentando (rahl-len-tahn'-do), 
rapidamente (rah-pid-a-men'-teh), 
rate of speed, of sound, 
recitative (res-i-tah-teev'), 
recitativo (reh-chee-ta-tee'-vo), 
reed organ, 
relative minor, , 
religioso (reh-lee-jo'-so), 
repetition and contrast, , 
[pg ]requiem (re'-kwi-em), 
rests, def., 
rules for making, 
kinds of, 
peculiar use of, 
several measures of, 
retardation, 
rhapsody, 
rhythm, def., 
element of music, 
how differs from "measure," 
correct use of word, 
rhythmic augmentation, 
rhythmic diminution, 
rhythmic figures, 
ribattuta (re-baht-too'-tah), 
rigaudon (rig'-o-don), 
rinforzando (rin-for-tsahn'-do), 
rinforzato (rin-for-tsah'-to), 
risoluto (ree-so-loo'-to), 
ritardando (ree-tar-dahn'-do), 
ritenente (ree-ten-en'-teh), 
ritenuto (ree-ten-oo'-to), 
ritornelle (ree-tor-nell'), 
ritornello (ree-tor-nel'-lo), 
rondo, , 
rules:
for writing music, , 
for turning stems, , 
for altered staff degrees, 
for embellishments, -
for repeats, , 
for writing chromatic scale, 
sans (sahng), 
sans pedales (peh-da-leh), 
sarabande (sar-ah-bahn'-deh), 
sarrusophone (sar-reoos-o-fohn'), 
saxhorn, p.  (footnote)
saxophone, 
scales, def., 
origin, 
how different from keys, 
positions of:
major, 
minor, 
chromatic, 
tones of, called, , , 
chinese, 
scotch, 
scherzando (skehr-tsahn'-do), 
scherzo (skehr'-tso), , 
scherzoso (skehr-tzo'-so), 
school-round, 
schottische (shot'-tish), 
score, 
scotch scale, 
sec (sek), 
secco (sek'-ko), 
section, 
segue (sehg'-weh), 
semplice (sem-plee'-cheh), 
sempre (sem'-preh), 
sempre forte (for'-teh), 
sempre lento malinconico assai (mah-leen-ko'-ni-ko ahs-sah'-ee), 
sempre marcatissimo (mar-kah-tis'-si-mo), 
sentimento (sen-tee-men'-to), 
senza (sen-tza), 
senza accompagnamento (ahc-com-pahn-yah-men'-toh), 
senza repetizione (reh-peh-titz-e-o'-neh), , 
senza replica (reh'-ple-kah), 
septimole, 
septolet, 
sequence, 
serenade, 
serenata (seh-re-nah'-tah), 
seventh chord, 
sextet, 
sextolet, 
sextuple measure, 
sextuplet, , 
sforzando (sfortz-ahn'-do), 
sforzato (sfortz-ah'-to), 
shake, 
sharp, , 
short appoggiatura (ap-pod-jea-too-rah), 
simile (see'-mee-leh), , 
similiter (see-mil'-i-ter), 
simple measure, 
[pg ]simple tone, 
sin (seen), 
sin al fine (ahl-fee'-neh), 
sino (see'-no), 
sixteen-foot stop, 
sixty-four-foot stop, 
slentando (slen-tahn'-do), 
slur, 
small octave, 
smorzando (smor-tzahn'-do), 
solenne (so-len'-neh), 
solfège (sul-fezh'), 
solfeggio (sol-fed'-jo), 
solmization, 
solo, 
sonata (so-nah'-tah), 
sonata allegro (ahl-leh'-gro), 
sonata form, 
sonatina (so-na-tee'-nah), 
song form, 
sopra (so'-prah), 
soprano (so-prah'-no), 
sordino (sor-dee'-no), 
sostenuto (sos-teh-noo'-to), 
sotto (sot'-to), 
sotto voce (vo'-cheh), 
sound, app. c, 
production of, 
transmission of, 
rate of travel of, 
intensification of, 
reflection of, 
classification of, 
spiritoso (spee-ree-to'-so), 
staccatissimo (stahk-kah-tis'-si-mo), 
staccato (stahk-kah'-to), , , 
staff, 
staff degrees, 
standards of pitch, 
stems, 
step, half and whole, 
strepitoso (streh-pee-to'-so), 
stretto (stret'-to), 
strict imitation, 
stringed instruments, 
stringendo (strin-jen'-do), 
stroking notes, 
strophe form (stro'-feh), 
styles, kinds of, 
how differ from forms, 
sub, 
sub-dominant, 
subject, 
subito (soo-bee'-to), 
sub-mediant, 
sub-octave, 
suite (sweet), 
super-dominant, 
super-tonic, 
suspension, 
swell-box, 
syllables for sight-singing, 
symphonic poem, 
symphony, def., 
syncopation, 
tail of note, 
takt pausa (tahkt pow'-zeh or pah-oo'-za), 
tanto (tahn'-to), 
tarantella (tah-rahn-tel'-lah), 
tempered scales, 
tempo, -
tempo commodo (ko-mo'-do), 
tempo di marcia (de mar'-chee-ah), 
tempo di menuetto (meh-noo-et'-to), 
tempo di valso (vahl'-so), 
tempo giusto (jew-sto), 
tempo ordinario (or-dee-nah'-ree-o), 
tempo primo (pree'-mo), 
tempo rubato (roo-bah'-to), 
tenor, 
tenuto (teh-noo'-to), , 
terminology reforms, app. d, p. 
tetrachords in scales, 
thematic development, 
theme, 
theme and variations, 
thesis, 
thirty-two-foot stop, 
thorough-bass, 
three-lined octave, 
through-composed form, 
tie, 
[pg ]timbre (tambr), 
time, wrong uses of word, 
toccata (tok-kah'-tah), 
tonality scale, , , 
tone, how represented, 
ornamental tone, 
key-tone, 
