 progress as he had seen it was worth hearing. natives hated strickland;
 but they were afraid of him. he knew too much.
 when the youghals came into the station, strickland—very gravely, as
 he did everything—fell in love with miss youghal; and she, after a
 while, fell in love with him because she could not understand him. then
 strickland told the parents; but mrs. youghal said she was not going to
 throw her daughter into the worst paid department in the empire, and old
 youghal said, in so many words, that he mistrusted strickland's ways and
 works, and would thank him not to speak or write to his daughter any more.
 “very well,” said strickland, for he did not wish to make his lady-love's
 life a burden. after one long talk with miss youghal he dropped the
 business entirely.
 the youghals went up to simla in april.
 in july, strickland secured three months' leave on “urgent private
 affairs.” he locked up his house—though not a native in the
 providence would wittingly have touched “estreekin sahib's” gear for the
 world—and went down to see a friend of his, an old dyer, at tarn
 taran.
 here all trace of him was lost, until a sais met me on the simla mall with
 this extraordinary note:
 “dear old man,
 “please give bearer a box of cheroots—supers, no. i, for preference.
 they are freshest at the club. i'll repay when i reappear; but at present
 i'm out of society.
 “yours,
 i ordered two boxes, and handed them over to the sais with my love. that
 sais was strickland, and he was in old youghal's employ, attached to miss
 youghal's arab. the poor fellow was suffering for an english smoke, and
 knew that whatever happened i should hold my tongue till the business was
 over.
 later on, mrs. youghal, who was wrapped up in her servants, began talking
 at houses where she called of her paragon among saises—the man who
 was never too busy to get up in the morning and pick flowers for the
 breakfast-table, and who blacked—actually blacked—the hoofs of
 his horse like a london coachman! the turnout of miss youghal's arab was a
 wonder and a delight. strickland—dulloo, i mean—found his
 reward in the pretty things that miss youghal said to him when she went
 out riding. her parents were pleased to find she had forgotten all her
 foolishness for young strickland and said she was a good girl.
 strickland vows that the two months of his service were the most rigid
 mental discipline he has ever gone through. quite apart from the little
 fact that the wife of one of his fellow-saises fell in love with him and
 then tried to poison him with arsenic because he would have nothing to do
 with her, he had to school himself into keeping quiet when miss youghal
 went out riding with some man who tried to flirt with her, and he was
 forced to trot behind carrying the blanket and hearing every word! also,
 he had to keep his temper when he was slanged in “benmore” porch by a
 policeman—especially once when he was abused by a naik he had
 himself recruited from isser jang village—or, worse still, when a
 young subaltern called him a pig for not making way quickly enough.
 but the life had its compensations. he obtained great insight into the
 ways and thefts of saises—enough, he says, to have summarily
 convicted half the chamar population of the punjab if he had been on
 business. he became one of the leading players at knuckle-bones, which all
 jhampanis and many saises play while they are waiting outside the
 government house or the gaiety theatre of nights; he learned to smoke
 tobacco that was three-fourths cowdung; and he heard the wisdom of the
 grizzled jemadar of the government house saises, whose words are valuable.
 he saw many things which amused him; and he states, on honor, that no man
 can appreciate simla properly, till he has seen it from the sais's point
 of view. he also says that, if he chose to write all he saw, his head
 would be broken in several places.
 strickland's account of the agony he endured on wet nights, hearing the
 music and seeing the lights in “benmore,” with his toes tingling for a
 waltz and his head in a horse-blanket, is rather amusing. one of these
 days, strickland is going to write a little book on his experiences. that
 book will be worth buying; and even more, worth suppressing.
 thus, he served faithfully as jacob served for rachel; and his leave was
 nearly at an end when the explosion came. he had really done his best to
 keep his temper in the hearing of the flirtations i have mentioned; but he
 broke down at last. an old and very distinguished general took miss
 youghal for a ride, and began that specially offensive
 “you're-only-a-little-girl” sort of flirtation—most difficult for a
 woman to turn aside deftly, and most maddening to listen to. miss youghal
 was shaking with fear at the things he said in the hearing of her sais.
 dulloo—strickland—stood it as long as he could. then he caught
 hold of the general's bridle, and, in most fluent english, invited him to
 step off and be heaved over the cliff. next minute miss youghal began
 crying; and strickland saw that he had hopelessly given himself away, and
 everything was over.
 the general nearly had a fit, while miss youghal was sobbing out the story
 of the disguise and the engagement that wasn't recognized by the parents.
 strickland was furiously angry with himself and more angry with the
 general for forcing his hand; so he said nothing, but held the horse's
 head and prepared to thrash the general as some sort of satisfaction, but
 when the general had thoroughly grasped the story, and knew who strickland
 was, he began to puff and blow in the saddle, and nearly rolled off with
 laughing. he said strickland deserved a v. c., if it were only for putting
 on a sais's blanket. then he called himself names, and vowed that he
 deserved a thrashing, but he was too old to take it from strickland. then
 he complimented miss youghal on her lover. the scandal of the business
 never struck him; for he was a nice old man, with a weakness for
 flirtations. then he laughed again, and said that old youghal was a fool.
 strickland let go of the cob's head, and suggested that the general had
 better help them, if that was his opinion. strickland knew youghal's
 weakness for men with titles and letters after their names and high
 official position. “it's rather like a forty-minute farce,” said the
 general, “but begad, i will help, if it's only to escape that tremendous
 thrashing i deserved. go along to your home, my sais-policeman, and change
 into decent kit, and i'll attack mr. youghal. miss youghal, may i ask you
 to canter home and wait?”
 about seven minutes later, there was a wild hurroosh at the club. a sais,
 with a blanket and head-rope, was asking all the men he knew: “for
 heaven's sake lend me decent clothes!” as the men did not recognize him,
 there were some peculiar scenes before strickland could get a hot bath,
 with soda in it, in one room, a shirt here, a collar there, a pair of
 trousers elsewhere, and so on. he galloped off, with half the club
 wardrobe on his back, and an utter stranger's pony under him, to the house
 of old youghal. the general, arrayed in purple and fine linen, was before
 him. what the general had said strickland never knew, but youghal received
 strickland with moderate civility; and mrs. youghal, touched by the
 devotion of the transformed dulloo, was almost kind. the general beamed,
 and chuckled, and miss youghal came in, and almost before old youghal knew
 where he was, the parental consent had been wrenched out and strickland
 had departed with miss youghal to the telegraph office to wire for his
 kit. the final embarrassment was when an utter stranger attacked him on
 the mall and asked for the stolen pony.
 so, in the end, strickland and miss youghal were married, on the strict
 understanding that strickland should drop his old ways, and stick to
 departmental routine, which pays best and leads to simla. strickland was
 far too fond of his wife, just then, to break his word, but it was a sore
 trial to him; for the streets and the bazars, and the sounds in them, were
 full of meaning to strickland, and these called to him to come back and
 take up his wanderings and his discoveries. some day, i will tell you how
 he broke his promise to help a friend. that was long since, and he has, by
 this time, been nearly spoilt for what he would call shikar. he is
 forgetting the slang, and the beggar's cant, and the marks, and the signs,
 and the drift of the undercurrents, which, if a man would master, he must
 always continue to learn.
 but he fills in his departmental returns beautifully.
 i am dying for you, and you are dying for another.
 punjabi proverb.
 when the gravesend tender left the p. & o. steamer for bombay and went
 back to catch the train to town, there were many people in it crying. but
 the one who wept most, and most openly was miss agnes laiter. she had
 reason to cry, because the only man she ever loved—or ever could
 love, so she said—was going out to india; and india, as every one
 knows, is divided equally between jungle, tigers, cobras, cholera, and
 sepoys.
 phil garron, leaning over the side of the steamer in the rain, felt very
 unhappy too; but he did not cry. he was sent out to “tea.” what “tea”
 meant he had not the vaguest idea, but fancied that he would have to ride
 on a prancing horse over hills covered with tea-vines, and draw a
 sumptuous salary for doing so; and he was very grateful to his uncle for
 getting him the berth. he was really going to reform all his slack,
 shiftless ways, save a large proportion of his magnificent salary yearly,
 and, in a very short time, return to marry agnes laiter. phil garron had
 been lying loose on his friends' hands for three years, and, as he had
 nothing to do, he naturally fell in love. he was very nice; but he was not
 strong in his views and opinions and principles, and though he never came
 to actual grief his friends were thankful when he said good-bye, and went
 out to this mysterious “tea” business near darjiling. they said:—“god
 bless you, dear boy! let us never see your face again,”—or at least
 that was what phil was given to understand.
 when he sailed, he was very full of a great plan to prove himself several
 hundred times better than any one had given him credit for—to work
 like a horse, and triumphantly marry agnes laiter. he had many good points
 besides his good looks; his only fault being that he was weak, the least
 little bit in the world weak. he had as much notion of economy as the
 morning sun; and yet you could not lay your hand on any one item, and say:
 “herein phil garron is extravagant or reckless.” nor could you point out
 any particular vice in his character; but he was “unsatisfactory” and as
 workable as putty.
 agnes laiter went about her duties at home—her family objected to
 the engagement—with red eyes, while phil was sailing to darjiling—“a
 port on the bengal ocean,” as his mother used to tell her friends. he was
 popular enough on board ship, made many acquaintances and a moderately
 large liquor bill, and sent off huge letters to agnes laiter at each port.
 then he fell to work on this plantation, somewhere between darjiling and
 kangra, and, though the salary and the horse and the work were not quite
 all he had fancied, he succeeded fairly well, and gave himself much
 unnecessary credit for his perseverance.
 in the course of time, as he settled more into collar, and his work grew
 fixed before him, the face of agnes laiter went out of his mind and only
 came when he was at leisure, which was not often. he would forget all
 about her for a fortnight, and remember her with a start, like a
 school-boy who has forgotten to learn his lesson. she did not forget phil,
 because she was of the kind that never forgets. only, another man—a
 really desirable young man—presented himself before mrs. laiter; and
 the chance of a marriage with phil was as far off as ever; and his letters
 were so unsatisfactory; and there was a certain amount of domestic
 pressure brought to bear on the girl; and the young man really was an
 eligible person as incomes go; and the end of all things was that agnes
 married him, and wrote a tempestuous whirlwind of a letter to phil in the
 wilds of darjiling, and said she should never know a happy moment all the
 rest of her life. which was a true prophecy.
 phil got that letter, and held himself ill-treated. this was two years
 after he had come out; but by dint of thinking fixedly of agnes laiter,
 and looking at her photograph, and patting himself on the back for being
 one of the most constant lovers in history, and warming to the work as he
 went on, he really fancied that he had been very hardly used. he sat down
 and wrote one final letter—a really pathetic “world without end,
 amen,” epistle; explaining how he would be true to eternity, and that all
 women were very much alike, and he would hide his broken heart, etc.,
 etc.; but if, at any future time, etc., etc., he could afford to wait,
 etc., etc., unchanged affections, etc., etc., return to her old love,
 etc., etc., for eight closely-written pages. from an artistic point of
 view, it was very neat work, but an ordinary philistine, who knew the
 state of phil's real feelings—not the ones he rose to as he went on
 writing—would have called it the thoroughly mean and selfish work of
 a thoroughly mean and selfish, weak man. but this verdict would have been
 incorrect. phil paid for the postage, and felt every word he had written
 for at least two days and a half. it was the last flicker before the light
 went out.
 that letter made agnes laiter very unhappy, and she cried and put it away
 in her desk, and became mrs. somebody else for the good of her family.
 which is the first duty of every christian maid.
 phil went his ways, and thought no more of his letter, except as an artist
 thinks of a neatly touched-in sketch. his ways were not bad, but they were
 not altogether good until they brought him across dunmaya, the daughter of
 a rajput ex-subadar-major of our native army. the girl had a strain of
 hill blood in her, and, like the hill women, was not a purdah nashin.
 where phil met her, or how he heard of her, does not matter. she was a
 good girl and handsome, and, in her way, very clever and shrewd; though,
 of course, a little hard. it is to be remembered that phil was living very
 comfortably, denying himself no small luxury, never putting by an anna,
 very satisfied with himself and his good intentions, was dropping all his
 english correspondents one by one, and beginning more and more to look
 upon this land as his home. some men fall this way; and they are of no use
 afterwards. the climate where he was stationed was good, and it really did
 not seem to him that there was anything to go home for.
 he did what many planters have done before him—that is to say, he
 made up his mind to marry a hill girl and settle down. he was seven and
 twenty then, with a long life before him, but no spirit to go through with
 it. so he married dunmaya by the forms of the english church, and some
 fellow-planters said he was a fool, and some said he was a wise man.
 dunmaya was a thoroughly honest girl, and, in spite of her reverence for
 an englishman, had a reasonable estimate of her husband's weaknesses. she
 managed him tenderly, and became, in less than a year, a very passable
 imitation of an english lady in dress and carriage. [it is curious to
 think that a hill man, after a lifetime's education, is a hill man still;
 but a hill woman can in six months master most of the ways of her english
 sisters. there was a coolie woman once. but that is another story.]
 dunmaya dressed by preference in black and yellow, and looked well.
 meantime the letter lay in agnes's desk, and now and again she would think
 of poor resolute hard-working phil among the cobras and tigers of
 darjiling, toiling in the vain hope that she might come back to him. her
 husband was worth ten phils, except that he had rheumatism of the heart.
 three years after he was married—and after he had tried nice and
 algeria for his complaint—he went to bombay, where he died, and set
 agnes free. being a devout woman, she looked on his death and the place of
 it, as a direct interposition of providence, and when she had recovered
 from the shock, she took out and reread phil's letter with the “etc.,
 etc.,” and the big dashes, and the little dashes, and kissed it several
 times. no one knew her in bombay; she had her husband's income, which was
 a large one, and phil was close at hand. it was wrong and improper, of
 course, but she decided, as heroines do in novels, to find her old lover,
 to offer him her hand and her gold, and with him spend the rest of her
 life in some spot far from unsympathetic souls. she sat for two months,
 alone in watson's hotel, elaborating this decision, and the picture was a
 pretty one. then she set out in search of phil garron, assistant on a tea
 plantation with a more than usually unpronounceable name.
 she found him. she spent a month over it, for his plantation was not in
 the darjiling district at all, but nearer kangra. phil was very little
 altered, and dunmaya was very nice to her.
 now the particular sin and shame of the whole business is that phil, who
 really is not worth thinking of twice, was and is loved by dunmaya, and
 more than loved by agnes, the whole of whose life he seems to have spoilt.
 worst of all, dunmaya is making a decent man of him; and he will be
 ultimately saved from perdition through her training.
 which is manifestly unfair.
 to-night god knows what thing shall tide,
 the earth is racked and faint—
 expectant, sleepless, open-eyed;
 and we, who from the earth were made,
 thrill with our mother's pain.
 in durance.
 no man will ever know the exact truth of this story; though women may
 sometimes whisper it to one another after a dance, when they are putting
 up their hair for the night and comparing lists of victims. a man, of
 course, cannot assist at these functions. so the tale must be told from
 the outside—in the dark—all wrong.
 never praise a sister to a sister, in the hope of your compliments
 reaching the proper ears, and so preparing the way for you later on.
 sisters are women first, and sisters afterwards; and you will find that
 you do yourself harm.
 saumarez knew this when he made up his mind to propose to the elder miss
 copleigh. saumarez was a strange man, with few merits, so far as men could
 see, though he was popular with women, and carried enough conceit to stock
 a viceroy's council and leave a little over for the commander-in-chief's
 staff. he was a civilian. very many women took an interest in saumarez,
 perhaps, because his manner to them was offensive. if you hit a pony over
 the nose at the outset of your acquaintance, he may not love you, but he
 will take a deep interest in your movements ever afterwards. the elder
 miss copleigh was nice, plump, winning and pretty. the younger was not so
 pretty, and, from men disregarding the hint set forth above, her style was
 repellant and unattractive. both girls had, practically, the same figure,
 and there was a strong likeness between them in look and voice; though no
 one could doubt for an instant which was the nicer of the two.
 saumarez made up his mind, as soon as they came into the station from
 behar, to marry the elder one. at least, we all made sure that he would,
 which comes to the same thing. she was two and twenty, and he was
 thirty-three, with pay and allowances of nearly fourteen hundred rupees a
 month. so the match, as we arranged it, was in every way a good one.
 saumarez was his name, and summary was his nature, as a man once said.
 having drafted his resolution, he formed a select committee of one to sit
 upon it, and resolved to take his time. in our unpleasant slang, the
 copleigh girls “hunted in couples.” that is to say, you could do nothing
 with one without the other. they were very loving sisters; but their
 mutual affection was sometimes inconvenient. saumarez held the
 balance-hair true between them, and none but himself could have said to
 which side his heart inclined; though every one guessed. he rode with them
 a good deal and danced with them, but he never succeeded in detaching them
 from each other for any length of time.
 women said that the two girls kept together through deep mistrust, each
 fearing that the other would steal a march on her. but that has nothing to
 do with a man. saumarez was silent for good or bad, and as business-likely
 attentive as he could be, having due regard to his work and his polo.
 beyond doubt both girls were fond of him.
 as the hot weather drew nearer, and saumarez made no sign, women said that
 you could see their trouble in the eyes of the girls—that they were
 looking strained, anxious, and irritable. men are quite blind in these
 matters unless they have more of the woman than the man in their
 composition, in which case it does not matter what they say or think. i
 maintain it was the hot april days that took the color out of the copleigh
 girls' cheeks. they should have been sent to the hills early. no one—man
 or woman—feels an angel when the hot weather is approaching. the
 younger sister grew more cynical—not to say acid—in her ways;
 and the winningness of the elder wore thin. there was more effort in it.
 now the station wherein all these things happened was, though not a little
 one, off the line of rail, and suffered through want of attention. there
 were no gardens or bands or amusements worth speaking of, and it was
 nearly a day's journey to come into lahore for a dance. people were
 grateful for small things to interest them.
 about the beginning of may, and just before the final exodus of
 hill-goers, when the weather was very hot and there were not more than
 twenty people in the station, saumarez gave a moonlight riding-picnic at
 an old tomb, six miles away, near the bed of the river. it was a “noah's
 ark” picnic; and there was to be the usual arrangement of quarter-mile
 intervals between each couple, on account of the dust. six couples came
 altogether, including chaperons. moonlight picnics are useful just at the
 very end of the season, before all the girls go away to the hills. they
 lead to understandings, and should be encouraged by chaperones; especially
 those whose girls look sweetish in riding habits. i knew a case once. but
 that is another story. that picnic was called the “great pop picnic,”
 because every one knew saumarez would propose then to the eldest miss
 copleigh; and, beside his affair, there was another which might possibly
 come to happiness. the social atmosphere was heavily charged and wanted
 clearing.
 we met at the parade-ground at ten: the night was fearfully hot. the
 horses sweated even at walking-pace, but anything was better than sitting
 still in our own dark houses. when we moved off under the full moon we
 were four couples, one triplet, and mr. saumarez rode with the copleigh
 girls, and i loitered at the tail of the procession, wondering with whom
 saumarez would ride home. every one was happy and contented; but we all
 felt that things were going to happen. we rode slowly: and it was nearly
 midnight before we reached the old tomb, facing the ruined tank, in the
 decayed gardens where we were going to eat and drink. i was late in coming
 up; and before i went into the garden, i saw that the horizon to the north
 carried a faint, dun-colored feather. but no one would have thanked me for
 spoiling so well-managed an entertainment as this picnic—and a
 dust-storm, more or less, does no great harm.
 we gathered by the tank. some one had brought out a banjo—which is a
 most sentimental instrument—and three or four of us sang. you must
 not laugh at this. our amusements in out-of-the-way stations are very few
 indeed. then we talked in groups or together, lying under the trees, with
 the sun-baked roses dropping their petals on our feet, until supper was
 ready. it was a beautiful supper, as cold and as iced as you could wish;
 and we stayed long over it.
 i had felt that the air was growing hotter and hotter; but nobody seemed
 to notice it until the moon went out and a burning hot wind began lashing
 the orange-trees with a sound like the noise of the sea. before we knew
 where we were, the dust-storm was on us, and everything was roaring,
 whirling darkness. the supper-table was blown bodily into the tank. we
 were afraid of staying anywhere near the old tomb for fear it might be
 blown down. so we felt our way to the orange-trees where the horses were
 picketed and waited for the storm to blow over. then the little light that
 was left vanished, and you could not see your hand before your face. the
 air was heavy with dust and sand from the bed of the river, that filled
 boots and pockets and drifted down necks and coated eyebrows and
 moustaches. it was one of the worst dust-storms of the year. we were all
 huddled together close to the trembling horses, with the thunder
 clattering overhead, and the lightning spurting like water from a sluice,
 all ways at once. there was no danger, of course, unless the horses broke
 loose. i was standing with my head downward and my hands over my mouth,
 hearing the trees thrashing each other. i could not see who was next me
 till the flashes came. then i found that i was packed near saumarez and
 the eldest miss copleigh, with my own horse just in front of me. i
 recognized the eldest miss copleigh, because she had a pagri round her
 helmet, and the younger had not. all the electricity in the air had gone
 into my body and i was quivering and tingling from head to foot—exactly
 as a corn shoots and tingles before rain. it was a grand storm. the wind
 seemed to be picking up the earth and pitching it to leeward in great
 heaps; and the heat beat up from the ground like the heat of the day of
 judgment.
 the storm lulled slightly after the first half-hour, and i heard a
 despairing little voice close to my ear, saying to itself, quietly and
 softly, as if some lost soul were flying about with the wind: “o my god!”
 then the younger miss copleigh stumbled into my arms, saying: “where is my
 horse? get my horse. i want to go home. i want to go home. take me home.”
 i thought that the lightning and the black darkness had frightened her; so
 i said there was no danger, but she must wait till the storm blew over.
 she answered: “it is not that! it is not that! i want to go home! o take
 me away from here!”
 i said that she could not go till the light came; but i felt her brush
 past me and go away. it was too dark to see where. then the whole sky was
 split open with one tremendous flash, as if the end of the world were
 coming, and all the women shrieked.
 almost directly after this, i felt a man's hand on my shoulder and heard
 saumarez bellowing in my ear. through the rattling of the trees and
 howling of the wind, i did not catch his words at once, but at last i
 heard him say: “i've proposed to the wrong one! what shall i do?” saumarez
 had no occasion to make this confidence to me. i was never a friend of
 his, nor am i now; but i fancy neither of us were ourselves just then. he
 was shaking as he stood with excitement, and i was feeling queer all over
 with the electricity. i could not think of anything to say except:—“more
 fool you for proposing in a dust-storm.” but i did not see how that would
 improve the mistake.
 then he shouted: “where's edith—edith copleigh?” edith was the
 youngest sister. i answered out of my astonishment:—“what do you
 want with her?” would you believe it, for the next two minutes, he and i
 were shouting at each other like maniacs—he vowing that it was the
 youngest sister he had meant to propose to all along, and i telling him
 till my throat was hoarse that he must have made a mistake! i can't
 account for this except, again, by the fact that we were neither of us
 ourselves. everything seemed to me like a bad dream—from the
 stamping of the horses in the darkness to saumarez telling me the story of
 his loving edith copleigh since the first. he was still clawing my
 shoulder and begging me to tell him where edith copleigh was, when another
 lull came and brought light with it, and we saw the dust-cloud forming on
 the plain in front of us. so we knew the worst was over. the moon was low
 down, and there was just the glimmer of the false dawn that comes about an
 hour before the real one. but the light was very faint, and the dun cloud
 roared like a bull. i wondered where edith copleigh had gone; and as i was
 wondering i saw three things together: first maud copleigh's face come
 smiling out of the darkness and move towards saumarez, who was standing by
 me. i heard the girl whisper, “george,” and slide her arm through the arm
 that was not clawing my shoulder, and i saw that look on her face which
 only comes once or twice in a lifetime-when a woman is perfectly happy and
 the air is full of trumpets and gorgeous-colored fire and the earth turns
 into cloud because she loves and is loved. at the same time, i saw
 saumarez's face as he heard maud copleigh's voice, and fifty yards away
 from the clump of orange-trees i saw a brown holland habit getting upon a
 horse.
 it must have been my state of over-excitement that made me so quick to
 meddle with what did not concern me. saumarez was moving off to the habit;
 but i pushed him back and said:—“stop here and explain. i'll fetch
 her back!” and i ran out to get at my own horse. i had a perfectly
 unnecessary notion that everything must be done decently and in order, and
 that saumarez's first care was to wipe the happy look out of maud
 copleigh's face. all the time i was linking up the curb-chain i wondered
 how he would do it.
 i cantered after edith copleigh, thinking to bring her back slowly on some
 pretence or another. but she galloped away as soon as she saw me, and i
 was forced to ride after her in earnest. she called back over her shoulder—“go
 away! i'm going home. oh, go away!” two or three times; but my business
 was to catch her first, and argue later. the ride just fitted in with the
 rest of the evil dream. the ground was very bad, and now and again we
 rushed through the whirling, choking “dust-devils” in the skirts of the
 flying storm. there was a burning hot wind blowing that brought up a
 stench of stale brick-kilns with it; and through the half light and
 through the dust-devils, across that desolate plain, flickered the brown
 holland habit on the gray horse. she headed for the station at first. then
 she wheeled round and set off for the river through beds of burnt down
 jungle-grass, bad even to ride a pig over. in cold blood i should never
 have dreamed of going over such a country at night, but it seemed quite
 right and natural with the lightning crackling overhead, and a reek like
 the smell of the pit in my nostrils. i rode and shouted, and she bent
 forward and lashed her horse, and the aftermath of the dust-storm came up
 and caught us both, and drove us downwind like pieces of paper.
 i don't know how far we rode; but the drumming of the horse-hoofs and the
 roar of the wind and the race of the faint blood-red moon through the
 yellow mist seemed to have gone on for years and years, and i was
 literally drenched with sweat from my helmet to my gaiters when the gray
 stumbled, recovered himself, and pulled up dead lame. my brute was used up
 altogether. edith copleigh was in a sad state, plastered with dust, her
 helmet off, and crying bitterly. “why can't you let me alone?” she said.
 “i only wanted to get away and go home. oh, please let me go!”
 “you have got to come back with me, miss copleigh. saumarez has something
 to say to you.”
 it was a foolish way of putting it; but i hardly knew miss copleigh; and,
 though i was playing providence at the cost of my horse, i could not tell
 her in as many words what saumarez had told me. i thought he could do that
 better himself. all her pretence about being tired and wanting to go home
 broke down, and she rocked herself to and fro in the saddle as she sobbed,
 and the hot wind blew her black hair to leeward. i am not going to repeat
 what she said, because she was utterly unstrung.
 this, if you please, was the cynical miss copleigh. here was i, almost an
 utter stranger to her, trying to tell her that saumarez loved her and she
 was to come back to hear him say so! i believe i made myself understood,
 for she gathered the gray together and made him hobble somehow, and we set
 off for the tomb, while the storm went thundering down to umballa and a
 few big drops of warm rain fell. i found out that she had been standing
 close to saumarez when he proposed to her sister and had wanted to go home
 and cry in peace, as an english girl should. she dabbled her eyes with her
 pocket-handkerchief as we went along, and babbled to me out of sheer
 lightness of heart and hysteria. that was perfectly unnatural; and yet, it
 seemed all right at the time and in the place. all the world was only the
 two copleigh girls, saumarez and i, ringed in with the lightning and the
 dark; and the guidance of this misguided world seemed to lie in my hands.
 when we returned to the tomb in the deep, dead stillness that followed the
 storm, the dawn was just breaking and nobody had gone away. they were
 waiting for our return. saumarez most of all. his face was white and
 drawn. as miss copleigh and i limped up, he came forward to meet us, and,
 when he helped her down from her saddle, he kissed her before all the
 picnic. it was like a scene in a theatre, and the likeness was heightened
 by all the dust-white, ghostly-looking men and women under the
 orange-trees, clapping their hands, as if they were watching a play—at
 saumarez's choice. i never knew anything so un-english in my life.
 lastly, saumarez said we must all go home or the station would come out to
 look for us, and would i be good enough to ride home with maud copleigh?
 nothing would give me greater pleasure, i said.
 so, we formed up, six couples in all, and went back two by two; saumarez
 walking at the side of edith copleigh, who was riding his horse.
 the air was cleared; and little by little, as the sun rose, i felt we were
 all dropping back again into ordinary men and women and that the “great
 pop picnic” was a thing altogether apart and out of the world—never
 to happen again. it had gone with the dust-storm and the tingle in the hot
 air.
 i felt tired and limp, and a good deal ashamed of myself as i went in for
 a bath and some sleep.
 there is a woman's version of this story, but it will never be written....
 unless maud copleigh cares to try.
 thus, for a season, they fought it fair—
 she and his cousin may—
 tactful, talented, debonnaire,
 decorous foes were they;
 but never can battle of man compare
 with merciless feminine fray.
 two and one.
 mrs. hauksbee was sometimes nice to her own sex. here is a story to prove
 this; and you can believe just as much as ever you please.
 pluffles was a subaltern in the “unmentionables.” he was callow, even for
 a subaltern. he was callow all over—like a canary that had not
 finished fledging itself. the worst of it was he had three times as much
 money as was good for him; pluffles' papa being a rich man and pluffles
 being the only son. pluffles' mamma adored him. she was only a little less
 callow than pluffles and she believed everything he said.
 pluffles' weakness was not believing what people said. he preferred what
 he called “trusting to his own judgment.” he had as much judgment as he
 had seat or hands; and this preference tumbled him into trouble once or
 twice. but the biggest trouble pluffles ever manufactured came about at
 simla—some years ago, when he was four-and-twenty.
 he began by trusting to his own judgment, as usual, and the result was
 that, after a time, he was bound hand and foot to mrs. reiver's 'rickshaw
 wheels.
 there was nothing good about mrs. reiver, unless it was her dress. she was
 bad from her hair—which started life on a brittany's girl's head—to
 her boot-heels, which were two and three-eighth inches high. she was not
 honestly mischievous like mrs. hauksbee; she was wicked in a business-like
 way.
 there was never any scandal—she had not generous impulses enough for
 that. she was the exception which proved the rule that anglo-indian ladies
 are in every way as nice as their sisters at home. she spent her life in
 proving that rule.
 mrs. hauksbee and she hated each other fervently. they heard far too much
 to clash; but the things they said of each other were startling—not
 to say original. mrs. hauksbee was honest—honest as her own front
 teeth—and, but for her love of mischief, would have been a woman's
 woman. there was no honesty about mrs. reiver; nothing but selfishness.
 and at the beginning of the season, poor little pluffles fell a prey to
 her. she laid herself out to that end, and who was pluffles, to resist? he
 went on trusting to his judgment, and he got judged.
 i have seen hayes argue with a tough horse—i have seen a
 tonga-driver coerce a stubborn pony—i have seen a riotous setter
 broken to gun by a hard keeper—but the breaking-in of pluffles of
 the “unmentionables” was beyond all these. he learned to fetch and carry
 like a dog, and to wait like one, too, for a word from mrs. reiver. he
 learned to keep appointments which mrs. reiver had no intention of
 keeping. he learned to take thankfully dances which mrs. reiver had no
 intention of giving him. he learned to shiver for an hour and a quarter on
 the windward side of elysium while mrs. reiver was making up her mind to
 come for a ride. he learned to hunt for a 'rickshaw, in a light dress-suit
 under a pelting rain, and to walk by the side of that 'rickshaw when he
 had found it. he learned what it was to be spoken to like a coolie and
 ordered about like a cook. he learned all this and many other things
 besides. and he paid for his schooling.
 perhaps, in some hazy way, he fancied that it was fine and impressive,
 that it gave him a status among men, and was altogether the thing to do.
 it was nobody's business to warn pluffles that he was unwise. the pace
 that season was too good to inquire; and meddling with another man's folly
 is always thankless work. pluffles' colonel should have ordered him back
 to his regiment when he heard how things were going. but pluffles had got
 himself engaged to a girl in england the last time he went home; and if
 there was one thing more than another which the colonel detested, it was a
 married subaltern. he chuckled when he heard of the education of pluffles,
 and said it was “good training for the boy.” but it was not good training
 in the least. it led him into spending money beyond his means, which were
 good: above that, the education spoilt an average boy and made it a
 tenth-rate man of an objectionable kind. he wandered into a bad set, and
 his little bill at hamilton's was a thing to wonder at.
 then mrs. hauksbee rose to the occasion. she played her game alone,
 knowing what people would say of her; and she played it for the sake of a
 girl she had never seen. pluffles' fiancee was to come out, under the
 chaperonage of an aunt, in october, to be married to pluffles.
 at the beginning of august, mrs. hauksbee discovered that it was time to
 interfere. a man who rides much knows exactly what a horse is going to do
 next before he does it. in the same way, a woman of mrs. hauksbee's
 experience knows accurately how a boy will behave under certain
 circumstances—notably when he is infatuated with one of mrs.
 reiver's stamp. she said that, sooner or later, little pluffles would
 break off that engagement for nothing at all—simply to gratify mrs.
 reiver, who, in return, would keep him at her feet and in her service just
 so long as she found it worth her while. she said she knew the signs of
 these things. if she did not, no one else could.
 then she went forth to capture pluffles under the guns of the enemy; just
 as mrs. cusack-bremmil carried away bremmil under mrs. hauksbee's eyes.
 this particular engagement lasted seven weeks—we called it the seven
 weeks' war—and was fought out inch by inch on both sides. a detailed
 account would fill a book, and would be incomplete then. any one who knows
 about these things can fit in the details for himself. it was a superb
 fight—there will never be another like it as long as jakko stands—and
 pluffles was the prize of victory. people said shameful things about mrs.
 hauksbee. they did not know what she was playing for. mrs. reiver fought,
 partly because pluffles was useful to her, but mainly because she hated
 mrs. hauksbee, and the matter was a trial of strength between them. no one
 knows what pluffles thought. he had not many ideas at the best of times,
 and the few he possessed made him conceited. mrs. hauksbee said:—“the
 boy must be caught; and the only way of catching him is by treating him
 well.”
 so she treated him as a man of the world and of experience so long as the
 issue was doubtful. little by little, pluffles fell away from his old
 allegiance and came over to the enemy, by whom he was made much of. he was
 never sent on out-post duty after 'rickshaws any more, nor was he given
 dances which never came off, nor were the drains on his purse continued.
 mrs. hauksbee held him on the snaffle; and after his treatment at mrs.
 reiver's hands, he appreciated the change.
 mrs. reiver had broken him of talking about himself, and made him talk
 about her own merits. mrs. hauksbee acted otherwise, and won his
 confidence, till he mentioned his engagement to the girl at home, speaking
 of it in a high and mighty way as a “piece of boyish folly.” this was when
 he was taking tea with her one afternoon, and discoursing in what he
 considered a gay and fascinating style. mrs. hauksbee had seen an earlier
 generation of his stamp bud and blossom, and decay into fat captains and
 tubby majors.
 at a moderate estimate there were about three and twenty sides to that
 lady's character. some men say more. she began to talk to pluffles after
 the manner of a mother, and as if there had been three hundred years,
 instead of fifteen, between them. she spoke with a sort of throaty quaver
 in her voice which had a soothing effect, though what she said was
 anything but soothing. she pointed out the exceeding folly, not to say
 meanness, of pluffles' conduct, and the smallness of his views. then he
 stammered something about “trusting to his own judgment as a man of the
 world;” and this paved the way for what she wanted to say next. it would
 have withered up pluffles had it come from any other woman; but in the
 soft cooing style in which mrs. hauksbee put it, it only made him feel
 limp and repentant—as if he had been in some superior kind of
 church. little by little, very softly and pleasantly, she began taking the
 conceit out of pluffles, as you take the ribs out of an umbrella before
 re-covering it. she told him what she thought of him and his judgment and
 his knowledge of the world; and how his performances had made him
 ridiculous to other people; and how it was his intention to make love to
 herself if she gave him the chance. then she said that marriage would be
 the making of him; and drew a pretty little picture—all rose and
 opal—of the mrs. pluffles of the future going through life relying
 on the “judgment” and “knowledge of the world” of a husband who had
 nothing to reproach himself with. how she reconciled these two statements
 she alone knew. but they did not strike pluffles as conflicting.
 hers was a perfect little homily—much better than any clergyman
 could have given—and it ended with touching allusions to pluffles'
 mamma and papa, and the wisdom of taking his bride home.
 then she sent pluffles out for a walk, to think over what she had said.
 pluffles left, blowing his nose very hard and holding himself very
 straight. mrs. hauksbee laughed.
 what pluffles had intended to do in the matter of the engagement only mrs.
 reiver knew, and she kept her own counsel to her death. she would have
 liked it spoiled as a compliment, i fancy.
 pluffles enjoyed many talks with mrs. hauksbee during the next few days.
 they were all to the same end, and they helped pluffles in the path of
 virtue.
 mrs. hauksbee wanted to keep him under her wing to the last. therefore she
 discountenanced his going down to bombay to get married. “goodness only
 knows what might happen by the way!” she said. “pluffles is cursed with
 the curse of reuben, and india is no fit place for him!”
 in the end, the fiancee arrived with her aunt; and pluffles, having
 reduced his affairs to some sort of order—here again mrs. hauksbee
 helped him—was married.
 mrs. hauksbee gave a sigh of relief when both the “i wills” had been said,
 and went her way.
 pluffies took her advice about going home. he left the service, and is now
 raising speckled cattle inside green painted fences somewhere at home. i
 believe he does this very judiciously. he would have come to extreme grief
 out here.
 for these reasons if any one says anything more than usually nasty about
 mrs. hauksbee, tell him the story of the rescue of pluffles.
 pit where the buffalo cooled his hide,
 by the hot sun emptied, and blistered and dried;
 log in the reh-grass, hidden and alone;
 bund where the earth-rat's mounds are strown:
 cave in the bank where the sly stream steals;
 aloe that stabs at the belly and heels,
 jump if you dare on a steed untried—
 safer it is to go wide—go wide!
 hark, from in front where the best men ride:—
 “pull to the off, boys! wide! go wide!”
 the peora hunt.
 once upon a time there lived at simla a very pretty girl, the daughter of
 a poor but honest district and sessions judge. she was a good girl, but
 could not help knowing her power and using it. her mamma was very anxious
 about her daughter's future, as all good mammas should be.
 when a man is a commissioner and a bachelor and has the right of wearing
 open-work jam-tart jewels in gold and enamel on his clothes, and of going
 through a door before every one except a member of council, a
 lieutenant-governor, or a viceroy, he is worth marrying. at least, that is
 what ladies say. there was a commissioner in simla, in those days, who
 was, and wore, and did, all i have said. he was a plain man—an ugly
 man—the ugliest man in asia, with two exceptions. his was a face to
 dream about and try to carve on a pipe-head afterwards. his name was
 saggott—barr-saggott—anthony barr-saggott and six letters to
 follow. departmentally, he was one of the best men the government of india
 owned. socially, he was like a blandishing gorilla.
 when he turned his attentions to miss beighton, i believe that mrs.
 beighton wept with delight at the reward providence had sent her in her
 old age.
 mr. beighton held his tongue. he was an easy-going man.
 now a commissioner is very rich. his pay is beyond the dreams of avarice—is
 so enormous that he can afford to save and scrape in a way that would
 almost discredit a member of council. most commissioners are mean; but
 barr-saggott was an exception. he entertained royally; he horsed himself
 well; he gave dances; he was a power in the land; and he behaved as such.
 consider that everything i am writing of took place in an almost
 pre-historic era in the history of british india. some folk may remember
 the years before lawn-tennis was born when we all played croquet. there
 were seasons before that, if you will believe me, when even croquet had
 not been invented, and archery—which was revived in england in —was
 as great a pest as lawn-tennis is now. people talked learnedly about
 “holding” and “loosing,” “steles,” “reflexed bows,” “-pound bows,”
 “backed” or “self-yew bows,” as we talk about “rallies,” “volleys,”
 “smashes,” “returns,” and “-ounce rackets.”
 miss beighton shot divinely over ladies' distance— yards, that is—and
 was acknowledged the best lady archer in simla. men called her “diana of
 tara-devi.”
 barr-saggott paid her great attention; and, as i have said, the heart of
 her mother was uplifted in consequence. kitty beighton took matters more
 calmly. it was pleasant to be singled out by a commissioner with letters
 after his name, and to fill the hearts of other girls with bad feelings.
 but there was no denying the fact that barr-saggott was phenomenally ugly;
 and all his attempts to adorn himself only made him more grotesque. he was
 not christened “the langur”—which means gray ape—for nothing.
 it was pleasant, kitty thought, to have him at her feet, but it was better
 to escape from him and ride with the graceless cubbon—the man in a
 dragoon regiment at umballa—the boy with a handsome face, and no
 prospects. kitty liked cubbon more than a little. he never pretended for a
 moment the he was anything less than head over heels in love with her; for
 he was an honest boy. so kitty fled, now and again, from the stately
 wooings of barr-saggott to the company of young cubbon, and was scolded by
 her mamma in consequence. “but, mother,” she said, “mr. saggot is such—such
 a—is so fearfully ugly, you know!”
 “my dear,” said mrs. beighton, piously, “we cannot be other than an
 all-ruling providence has made us. besides, you will take precedence of
 your own mother, you know! think of that and be reasonable.”
 then kitty put up her little chin and said irreverent things about
 precedence, and commissioners, and matrimony. mr. beighton rubbed the top
 of his head; for he was an easy-going man.
 late in the season, when he judged that the time was ripe, barr-saggott
 developed a plan which did great credit to his administrative powers. he
 arranged an archery tournament for ladies, with a most sumptuous
 diamond-studded bracelet as prize. he drew up his terms skilfully, and
 every one saw that the bracelet was a gift to miss beighton; the
 acceptance carrying with it the hand and the heart of commissioner
 barr-saggott. the terms were a st. leonard's round—thirty-six shots
 at sixty yards—under the rules of the simla toxophilite society.
 all simla was invited. there were beautifully arranged tea-tables under
 the deodars at annandale, where the grand stand is now; and, alone in its
 glory, winking in the sun, sat the diamond bracelet in a blue velvet case.
 miss beighton was anxious—almost too anxious to compete. on the
 appointed afternoon, all simla rode down to annandale to witness the
 judgment of paris turned upside down. kitty rode with young cubbon, and it
 was easy to see that the boy was troubled in his mind. he must be held
 innocent of everything that followed. kitty was pale and nervous, and
 looked long at the bracelet. barr-saggott was gorgeously dressed, even
 more nervous than kitty, and more hideous than ever.
 mrs. beighton smiled condescendingly, as befitted the mother of a
 potential commissioneress, and the shooting began; all the world standing
 in a semicircle as the ladies came out one after the other.
 nothing is so tedious as an archery competition. they shot, and they shot,
 and they kept on shooting, till the sun left the valley, and little
 breezes got up in the deodars, and people waited for miss beighton to
 shoot and win. cubbon was at one horn of the semicircle round the
 shooters, and barr-saggott at the other. miss beighton was last on the
 list. the scoring had been weak, and the bracelet, plus commissioner
 barr-saggott, was hers to a certainty.
 the commissioner strung her bow with his own sacred hands. she stepped
 forward, looked at the bracelet, and her first arrow went true to a hair—full
 into the heart of the “gold”—counting nine points.
 young cubbon on the left turned white, and his devil prompted barr-saggott
 to smile. now horses used to shy when barr-saggott smiled. kitty saw that
 smile. she looked to her left-front, gave an almost imperceptible nod to
 cubbon, and went on shooting.
 i wish i could describe the scene that followed. it was out of the
 ordinary and most improper. miss kitty fitted her arrows with immense deliberation,
 so that every one might see what she was doing. she was a perfect shot;
 and her -pound bow suited her to a nicety. she pinned the wooden legs of
 the target with great care four successive times. she pinned the wooden
 top of the target once, and all the ladies looked at each other. then she
 began some fancy shooting at the white, which, if you hit it, counts
 exactly one point. she put five arrows into the white. it was wonderful
 archery; but, seeing that her business was to make “golds” and win the
 bracelet, barr-saggott turned a delicate green like young water-grass.
 next, she shot over the target twice, then wide to the left twice—always
 with the same deliberation—while a chilly hush fell over the
 company, and mrs. beighton took out her handkerchief. then kitty shot at
 the ground in front of the target, and split several arrows. then she made
 a red—or seven points—just to show what she could do if she
 liked, and finished up her amazing performance with some more fancy
 shooting at the target-supports. here is her score as it was picked off:—
 gold. red. blue. black. white. total hits. total
 score
 miss beighton       
 barr-saggott looked as if the last few arrowheads had been driven into his
 legs instead of the target's, and the deep stillness was broken by a
 little snubby, mottled, half-grown girl saying in a shrill voice of
 triumph: “then i've won!”
 mrs. beighton did her best to bear up; but she wept in the presence of the
 people. no training could help her through such a disappointment. kitty
 unstrung her bow with a vicious jerk, and went back to her place, while
 barr-saggott was trying to pretend that he enjoyed snapping the bracelet
 on the snubby girl's raw, red wrist. it was an awkward scene—most
 awkward. every one tried to depart in a body and leave kitty to the mercy
 of her mamma.
 but cubbon took her away instead, and—the rest isn't worth printing.
 then a pile of heads be laid—
 thirty thousand heaped on high—
 all to please the kafir maid,
 where the oxus ripples by.
 grimly spake atulla khan:—
 “love hath made this thing a man.”
 oatta's story.
 if you go straight away from levees and government house lists, past
 trades' balls—far beyond everything and everybody you ever knew in
 your respectable life—you cross, in time, the border line where the
 last drop of white blood ends and the full tide of black sets in. it would
 be easier to talk to a new made duchess on the spur of the moment than to
 the borderline folk without violating some of their conventions or hurting
 their feelings. the black and the white mix very quaintly in their ways.
 sometimes the white shows in spurts of fierce, childish pride—which
 is pride of race run crooked—and sometimes the black in still
 fiercer abasement and humility, half heathenish customs and strange,
 unaccountable impulses to crime. one of these days, this people—understand
 they are far lower than the class whence derozio, the man who imitated
 byron, sprung—will turn out a writer or a poet; and then we shall
 know how they live and what they feel. in the meantime, any stories about
 them cannot be absolutely correct in fact or inference.
 miss vezzis came from across the borderline to look after some children
 who belonged to a lady until a regularly ordained nurse could come out.
 the lady said miss vezzis was a bad, dirty nurse and inattentive. it never
 struck her that miss vezzis had her own life to lead and her own affairs
 to worry over, and that these affairs were the most important things in
 the world to miss vezzis. very few mistresses admit this sort of
 reasoning. miss vezzis was as black as a boot, and to our standard of
 taste, hideously ugly. she wore cotton-print gowns and bulged shoes; and
 when she lost her temper with the children, she abused them in the
 language of the borderline—which is part english, part portuguese,
 and part native. she was not attractive; but she had her pride, and she
 preferred being called “miss vezzis.”
 every sunday she dressed herself wonderfully and went to see her mamma,
 who lived, for the most part, on an old cane chair in a greasy tussur-silk
 dressing-gown and a big rabbit-warren of a house full of vezzises,
 pereiras, ribieras, lisboas and gansalveses, and a floating population of
 loafers; besides fragments of the day's bazar, garlic, stale incense,
 clothes thrown on the floor, petticoats hung on strings for screens, old
 bottles, pewter crucifixes, dried immortelles, pariah puppies, plaster
 images of the virgin, and hats without crowns. miss vezzis drew twenty
 rupees a month for acting as nurse, and she squabbled weekly with her
 mamma as to the percentage to be given towards housekeeping. when the
 quarrel was over, michele d'cruze used to shamble across the low mud wall
 of the compound and make love to miss vezzis after the fashion of the
 borderline, which is hedged about with much ceremony. michele was a poor,
 sickly weed and very black; but he had his pride. he would not be seen
 smoking a huqa for anything; and he looked down on natives as only a man
 with seven-eighths native blood in his veins can. the vezzis family had
 their pride too. they traced their descent from a mythical plate-layer who
 had worked on the sone bridge when railways were new in india, and they
 valued their english origin. michele was a telegraph signaller on rs.  a
 month. the fact that he was in government employ made mrs. vezzis lenient
 to the shortcomings of his ancestors.
 there was a compromising legend—dom anna the tailor brought it from
 poonani—that a black jew of cochin had once married into the d'cruze
 family; while it was an open secret that an uncle of mrs. d'cruze was at
 that very time doing menial work, connected with cooking, for a club in
 southern india! he sent mrs d'cruze seven rupees eight annas a month; but
 she felt the disgrace to the family very keenly all the same.
 however, in the course of a few sundays, mrs. vezzis brought herself to
 overlook these blemishes and gave her consent to the marriage of her
 daughter with michele, on condition that michele should have at least
 fifty rupees a month to start married life upon. this wonderful prudence
 must have been a lingering touch of the mythical plate-layer's yorkshire
 blood; for across the borderline people take a pride in marrying when they
 please—not when they can.
 having regard to his departmental prospects, miss vezzis might as well
 have asked michele to go away and come back with the moon in his pocket.
 but michele was deeply in love with miss vezzis, and that helped him to
 endure. he accompanied miss vezzis to mass one sunday, and after mass,
 walking home through the hot stale dust with her hand in his, he swore by
 several saints, whose names would not interest you, never to forget miss
 vezzis; and she swore by her honor and the saints—the oath runs
 rather curiously; “in nomine sanctissimae—” (whatever the name of
 the she-saint is) and so forth, ending with a kiss on the forehead, a kiss
 on the left cheek, and a kiss on the mouth—never to forget michele.
 next week michele was transferred, and miss vezzis dropped tears upon the
 window-sash of the “intermediate” compartment as he left the station.
 if you look at the telegraph-map of india you will see a long line
 skirting the coast from backergunge to madras. michele was ordered to
 tibasu, a little sub-office one-third down this line, to send messages on
 from berhampur to chicacola, and to think of miss vezzis and his chances
 of getting fifty rupees a month out of office hours. he had the noise of
 the bay of bengal and a bengali babu for company; nothing more. he sent
 foolish letters, with crosses tucked inside the flaps of the envelopes, to
 miss vezzis.
 when he had been at tibasu for nearly three weeks his chance came.
 never forget that unless the outward and visible signs of our authority
 are always before a native he is as incapable as a child of understanding
 what authority means, or where is the danger of disobeying it. tibasu was
 a forgotten little place with a few orissa mohamedans in it. these,
 hearing nothing of the collector-sahib for some time, and heartily
 despising the hindu sub-judge, arranged to start a little mohurrum riot of
 their own. but the hindus turned out and broke their heads; when, finding
 lawlessness pleasant, hindus and mahomedans together raised an aimless
 sort of donnybrook just to see how far they could go. they looted each
 other's shops, and paid off private grudges in the regular way. it was a
 nasty little riot, but not worth putting in the newspapers.
 michele was working in his office when he heard the sound that a man never
 forgets all his life—the “ah-yah” of an angry crowd. [when that
 sound drops about three tones, and changes to a thick, droning ut, the man
 who hears it had better go away if he is alone.] the native police
 inspector ran in and told michele that the town was in an uproar and
 coming to wreck the telegraph office. the babu put on his cap and quietly
 dropped out of the window; while the police inspector, afraid, but obeying
 the old race-instinct which recognizes a drop of white blood as far as it
 can be diluted, said:—“what orders does the sahib give?”
 the “sahib” decided michele. though horribly frightened, he felt that, for
 the hour, he, the man with the cochin jew and the menial uncle in his
 pedigree, was the only representative of english authority in the place.
 then he thought of miss vezzis and the fifty rupees, and took the
 situation on himself. there were seven native policemen in tibasu, and
 four crazy smooth-bore muskets among them. all the men were gray with
 fear, but not beyond leading. michele dropped the key of the telegraph
 instrument, and went out, at the head of his army, to meet the mob. as the
 shouting crew came round a corner of the road, he dropped and fired; the
 men behind him loosing instinctively at the same time.
 the whole crowd—curs to the backbone—yelled and ran; leaving
 one man dead, and another dying in the road. michele was sweating with
 fear, but he kept his weakness under, and went down into the town, past
 the house where the sub-judge had barricaded himself. the streets were
 empty. tibasu was more frightened than michele, for the mob had been taken
 at the right time.
 michele returned to the telegraph-office, and sent a message to chicacola
 asking for help. before an answer came, he received a deputation of the
 elders of tibasu, telling him that the sub-judge said his actions
 generally were “unconstitutional,” and trying to bully him. but the heart of
 michele d'cruze was big and white in his breast, because of his love for
 miss vezzis, the nurse-girl, and because he had tasted for the first time
 responsibility and success. those two make an intoxicating drink, and have
 ruined more men than ever has whiskey. michele answered that the sub-judge
 might say what he pleased, but, until the assistant collector came, the
 telegraph signaller was the government of india in tibasu, and the elders
 of the town would be held accountable for further rioting. then they bowed
 their heads and said: “show mercy!” or words to that effect, and went back
 in great fear; each accusing the other of having begun the rioting.
 early in the dawn, after a night's patrol with his seven policemen,
 michele went down the road, musket in hand, to meet the assistant
 collector, who had ridden in to quell tibasu. but, in the presence of this
 young englishman, michele felt himself slipping back more and more into
 the native, and the tale of the tibasu riots ended, with the strain on the
 teller, in an hysterical outburst of tears, bred by sorrow that he had
 killed a man, shame that he could not feel as uplifted as he had felt
 through the night, and childish anger that his tongue could not do justice
 to his great deeds. it was the white drop in michele's veins dying out,
 though he did not know it.
 but the englishman understood; and, after he had schooled those men of
 tibasu, and had conferred with the sub-judge till that excellent official
 turned green, he found time to draught an official letter describing the
 conduct of michele. which letter filtered through the proper channels, and
 ended in the transfer of michele up-country once more, on the imperial
 salary of sixty-six rupees a month.
 so he and miss vezzis were married with great state and ancientry; and now
 there are several little d'cruzes sprawling about the verandahs of the
 central telegraph office.
 but, if the whole revenue of the department he serves were to be his
 reward michele could never, never repeat what he did at tibasu for the
 sake of miss vezzis the nurse-girl.
 which proves that, when a man does good work out of all proportion to his
 pay, in seven cases out of nine there is a woman at the back of the
 virtue.
 the two exceptions must have suffered from sunstroke.
 what is in the brahmin's books that is in the brahmin's heart.
 neither you nor i knew there was so much evil in the world.
 hindu proverb.
 this began in a practical joke; but it has gone far enough now, and is
 getting serious.
 platte, the subaltern, being poor, had a waterbury watch and a plain
 leather guard.
 the colonel had a waterbury watch also, and for guard, the lip-strap of a
 curb-chain. lip-straps make the best watch guards. they are strong and
 short. between a lip-strap and an ordinary leather guard there is no great
 difference; between one waterbury watch and another there is none at all.
 every one in the station knew the colonel's lip-strap. he was not a horsey
 man, but he liked people to believe he had been on once; and he wove
 fantastic stories of the hunting-bridle to which this particular lip-strap
 had belonged. otherwise he was painfully religious.
 platte and the colonel were dressing at the club—both late for their
 engagements, and both in a hurry. that was kismet. the two watches were on
 a shelf below the looking-glass—guards hanging down. that was
 carelessness. platte changed first, snatched a watch, looked in the glass,
 settled his tie, and ran. forty seconds later, the colonel did exactly the
 same thing; each man taking the other's watch.
 you may have noticed that many religious people are deeply suspicious.
 they seem—for purely religious purposes, of course—to know
 more about iniquity than the unregenerate. perhaps they were specially bad
 before they became converted! at any rate, in the imputation of things
 evil, and in putting the worst construction on things innocent, a certain
 type of good people may be trusted to surpass all others. the colonel and
 his wife were of that type. but the colonel's wife was the worst. she
 manufactured the station scandal, and—talked to her ayah! nothing
 more need be said. the colonel's wife broke up the laplace's home. the
 colonel's wife stopped the ferris-haughtrey engagement. the colonel's wife
 induced young buxton to keep his wife down in the plains through the first
 year of the marriage. whereby little mrs. buxton died, and the baby with
 her. these things will be remembered against the colonel's wife so long as
 there is a regiment in the country.
 but to come back to the colonel and platte. they went their several ways
 from the dressing-room. the colonel dined with two chaplains, while platte
 went to a bachelor-party, and whist to follow.
 mark how things happen! if platte's sais had put the new saddle-pad on the
 mare, the butts of the territs would not have worked through the worn
 leather, and the old pad into the mare's withers, when she was coming home
 at two o'clock in the morning. she would not have reared, bolted, fallen
 into a ditch, upset the cart, and sent platte flying over an aloe-hedge on
 to mrs. larkyn's well-kept lawn; and this tale would never have been
 written. but the mare did all these things, and while platte was rolling
 over and over on the turf, like a shot rabbit, the watch and guard flew
 from his waistcoat—as an infantry major's sword hops out of the
 scabbard when they are firing a feu de joie—and rolled and rolled in
 the moonlight, till it stopped under a window.
 platte stuffed his handkerchief under the pad, put the cart straight, and
 went home.
 mark again how kismet works! this would not happen once in a hundred
 years. towards the end of his dinner with the two chaplains, the colonel
 let out his waistcoat and leaned over the table to look at some mission
 reports. the bar of the watch-guard worked through the buttonhole, and the
 watch—platte's watch—slid quietly on to the carpet. where the
 bearer found it next morning and kept it.
 then the colonel went home to the wife of his bosom; but the driver of the
 carriage was drunk and lost his way. so the colonel returned at an
 unseemly hour and his excuses were not accepted. if the colonel's wife had
 been an ordinary “vessel of wrath appointed for destruction,” she would
 have known that when a man stays away on purpose, his excuse is always
 sound and original. the very baldness of the colonel's explanation proved
 its truth.
 see once more the workings of kismet! the colonel's watch which came with
 platte hurriedly on to mrs. larkyn's lawn, chose to stop just under mrs.
 larkyn's window, where she saw it early in the morning, recognized it, and
 picked it up. she had heard the crash of platte's cart at two o'clock that
 morning, and his voice calling the mare names. she knew platte and liked
 him. that day she showed him the watch and heard his story. he put his
 head on one side, winked and said:—“how disgusting! shocking old
 man! with his religious training, too! i should send the watch to the
 colonel's wife and ask for explanations.”
 mrs. larkyn thought for a minute of the laplaces—whom she had known
 when laplace and his wife believed in each other—and answered:—“i
 will send it. i think it will do her good. but remember, we must never
 tell her the truth.”
 platte guessed that his own watch was in the colonel's possession, and
 thought that the return of the lip-strapped waterbury with a soothing note
 from mrs. larkyn, would merely create a small trouble for a few minutes.
 mrs. larkyn knew better. she knew that any poison dropped would find good
 holding-ground in the heart of the colonel's wife.
 the packet, and a note containing a few remarks on the colonel's
 calling-hours, were sent over to the colonel's wife, who wept in her own
 room and took counsel with herself.
 if there was one woman under heaven whom the colonel's wife hated with
 holy fervor, it was mrs. larkyn. mrs. larkyn was a frivolous lady, and
 called the colonel's wife “old cat.” the colonel's wife said that somebody
 in revelations was remarkably like mrs. larkyn. she mentioned other
 scripture people as well. from the old testament. [but the colonel's wife
 was the only person who cared or dared to say anything against mrs.
 larkyn. every one else accepted her as an amusing, honest little body.]
 wherefore, to believe that her husband had been shedding watches under
 that “thing's” window at ungodly hours, coupled with the fact of his late
 arrival on the previous night, was.....
 at this point she rose up and sought her husband. he denied everything
 except the ownership of the watch. she besought him, for his soul's sake,
 to speak the truth. he denied afresh, with two bad words. then a stony
 silence held the colonel's wife, while a man could draw his breath five
 times.
 the speech that followed is no affair of mine or yours. it was made up of
 wifely and womanly jealousy; knowledge of old age and sunken cheeks; deep
 mistrust born of the text that says even little babies' hearts are as bad
 as they make them; rancorous hatred of mrs. larkyn, and the tenets of the
 creed of the colonel's wife's upbringing.
 over and above all, was the damning lip-strapped waterbury, ticking away
 in the palm of her shaking, withered hand. at that hour, i think, the
 colonel's wife realized a little of the restless suspicions she had
 injected into old laplace's mind, a little of poor miss haughtrey's
 misery, and some of the canker that ate into buxton's heart as he watched
 his wife dying before his eyes. the colonel stammered and tried to
 explain. then he remembered that his watch had disappeared; and the
 mystery grew greater. the colonel's wife talked and prayed by turns till
 she was tired, and went away to devise means for “chastening the stubborn
 heart of her husband.” which translated, means, in our slang,
 “tail-twisting.”
 you see, being deeply impressed with the doctrine of original sin, she
 could not believe in the face of appearances. she knew too much, and
 jumped to the wildest conclusions.
 but it was good for her. it spoilt her life, as she had spoilt the life of
 the laplaces. she had lost her faith in the colonel, and—here the
 creed-suspicion came in—he might, she argued, have erred many times,
 before a merciful providence, at the hands of so unworthy an instrument as
 mrs. larkyn, had established his guilt. he was a bad, wicked, gray-haired
 profligate. this may sound too sudden a revulsion for a long-wedded wife;
 but it is a venerable fact that, if a man or woman makes a practice of,
 and takes a delight in, believing and spreading evil of people indifferent
 to him or her, he or she will end in believing evil of folk very near and
 dear. you may think, also, that the mere incident of the watch was too
 small and trivial to raise this misunderstanding. it is another aged fact
 that, in life as well as racing, all the worst accidents happen at little
 ditches and cut-down fences. in the same way, you sometimes see a woman
 who would have made a joan of arc in another century and climate,
 threshing herself to pieces over all the mean worry of housekeeping. but
 that is another story.
 her belief only made the colonel's wife more wretched, because it insisted
 so strongly on the villainy of men. remembering what she had done, it was
 pleasant to watch her unhappiness, and the penny-farthing attempts she
 made to hide it from the station. but the station knew and laughed
 heartlessly; for they had heard the story of the watch, with much dramatic
 gesture, from mrs. larkyn's lips.
 once or twice platte said to mrs. larkyn, seeing that the colonel had not
 cleared himself:—“this thing has gone far enough. i move we tell the
 colonel's wife how it happened.” mrs. larkyn shut her lips and shook her
 head, and vowed that the colonel's wife must bear her punishment as best
 she could. now mrs. larkyn was a frivolous woman, in whom none would have
 suspected deep hate. so platte took no action, and came to believe
 gradually, from the colonel's silence, that the colonel must have “run off
 the line” somewhere that night, and, therefore, preferred to stand
 sentence on the lesser count of rambling into other people's compounds out
 of calling hours. platte forgot about the watch business after a while,
 and moved down-country with his regiment. mrs. larkyn went home when her
 husband's tour of indian service expired. she never forgot.
 but platte was quite right when he said that the joke had gone too far.
 the mistrust and the tragedy of it—which we outsiders cannot see and
 do not believe in—are killing the colonel's wife, and are making the
 colonel wretched. if either of them read this story, they can depend upon
 its being a fairly true account of the case, and can “kiss and make
 friends.”
 shakespeare alludes to the pleasure of watching an engineer being shelled
 by his own battery. now this shows that poets should not write about what
 they do not understand. any one could have told him that sappers and
 gunners are perfectly different branches of the service. but, if you
 correct the sentence, and substitute gunner for sapper, the moral comes
 just the same.
 when the earth was sick and the skies were gray,
 and the woods were rotted with rain,
 the dead man rode through the autumn day
 to visit his love again.
 old ballad.
 far back in the “seventies,” before they had built any public offices at
 simla, and the broad road round jakko lived in a pigeon-hole in the p. w.
 d. hovels, her parents made miss gaurey marry colonel schriederling. he
 could not have been much more than thirty-five years her senior; and, as
 he lived on two hundred rupees a month and had money of his own, he was
 well off. he belonged to good people, and suffered in the cold weather
 from lung complaints. in the hot weather he dangled on the brink of
 heat-apoplexy; but it never quite killed him.
 understand, i do not blame schriederling. he was a good husband according
 to his lights, and his temper only failed him when he was being nursed.
 which was some seventeen days in each month. he was almost generous to his
 wife about money matters, and that, for him, was a concession. still mrs.
 schreiderling was not happy. they married her when she was this side of
 twenty and had given all her poor little heart to another man. i have
 forgotten his name, but we will call him the other man. he had no money
 and no prospects. he was not even good-looking; and i think he was in the
 commissariat or transport. but, in spite of all these things, she loved
 him very madly; and there was some sort of an engagement between the two
 when schreiderling appeared and told mrs. gaurey that he wished to marry
 her daughter. then the other engagement was broken off—washed away
 by mrs. gaurey's tears, for that lady governed her house by weeping over
 disobedience to her authority and the lack of reverence she received in
 her old age. the daughter did not take after her mother. she never cried.
 not even at the wedding.
 the other man bore his loss quietly, and was transferred to as bad a
 station as he could find. perhaps the climate consoled him. he suffered
 from intermittent fever, and that may have distracted him from his other
 trouble. he was weak about the heart also. both ways. one of the valves
 was affected, and the fever made it worse. this showed itself later on.
 then many months passed, and mrs. schreiderling took to being ill. she did
 not pine away like people in story books, but she seemed to pick up every
 form of illness that went about a station, from simple fever upwards. she
 was never more than ordinarily pretty at the best of times; and the
 illness made her ugly. schreiderling said so. he prided himself on
 speaking his mind.
 when she ceased being pretty, he left her to her own devices, and went
 back to the lairs of his bachelordom. she used to trot up and down simla
 mall in a forlorn sort of way, with a gray terai hat well on the back of
 her head, and a shocking bad saddle under her. schreiderling's generosity
 stopped at the horse. he said that any saddle would do for a woman as
 nervous as mrs. schreiderling. she never was asked to dance, because she
 did not dance well; and she was so dull and uninteresting, that her box
 very seldom had any cards in it. schreiderling said that if he had known
 that she was going to be such a scare-crow after her marriage, he would
 never have married her. he always prided himself on speaking his mind, did
 schreiderling!
 he left her at simla one august, and went down to his regiment. then she
 revived a little, but she never recovered her looks. i found out at the
 club that the other man is coming up sick—very sick—on an off
 chance of recovery. the fever and the heart-valves had nearly killed him.
 she knew that, too, and she knew—what i had no interest in knowing—when
 he was coming up. i suppose he wrote to tell her. they had not seen each
 other since a month before the wedding. and here comes the unpleasant part
 of the story.
 a late call kept me down at the dovedell hotel till dusk one evening. mrs.
 schreidlerling had been flitting up and down the mall all the afternoon in
 the rain. coming up along the cart-road, a tonga passed me, and my pony,
 tired with standing so long, set off at a canter. just by the road down to
 the tonga office mrs. schreiderling, dripping from head to foot, was
 waiting for the tonga. i turned up-hill, as the tonga was no affair of
 mine; and just then she began to shriek. i went back at once and saw,
 under the tonga office lamps, mrs. schreiderling kneeling in the wet road
 by the back seat of the newly-arrived tonga, screaming hideously. then she
 fell face down in the dirt as i came up.
 sitting in the back seat, very square and firm, with one hand on the
 awning-stanchion and the wet pouring off his hat and moustache, was the
 other man—dead. the sixty-mile up-hill jolt had been too much for
 his valve, i suppose. the tonga-driver said:—“the sahib died two
 stages out of solon. therefore, i tied him with a rope, lest he should
 fall out by the way, and so came to simla. will the sahib give me
 bukshish? it,” pointing to the other man, “should have given one rupee.”
 the other man sat with a grin on his face, as if he enjoyed the joke of
 his arrival; and mrs. schreiderling, in the mud, began to groan. there was
 no one except us four in the office and it was raining heavily. the first
 thing was to take mrs. schreiderling home, and the second was to prevent
 her name from being mixed up with the affair. the tonga-driver received
 five rupees to find a bazar 'rickshaw for mrs. schreiderling. he was to
 tell the tonga babu afterwards of the other man, and the babu was to make
 such arrangements as seemed best.
 mrs. schreiderling was carried into the shed out of the rain, and for
 three-quarters of an hour we two waited for the 'rickshaw. the other man
 was left exactly as he had arrived. mrs. schreiderling would do everything
 but cry, which might have helped her. she tried to scream as soon as her
 senses came back, and then she began praying for the other man's soul. had
 she not been as honest as the day, she would have prayed for her own soul
 too. i waited to hear her do this, but she did not. then i tried to get
 some of the mud off her habit. lastly, the 'rickshaw came, and i got her
 away—partly by force. it was a terrible business from beginning to
 end; but most of all when the 'rickshaw had to squeeze between the wall
 and the tonga, and she saw by the lamp-light that thin, yellow hand
 grasping the awning-stanchion.
 she was taken home just as every one was going to a dance at viceregal
 lodge—“peterhoff” it was then—and the doctor found that she
 had fallen from her horse, that i had picked her up at the back of jakko,
 and really deserved great credit for the prompt manner in which i had
 secured medical aid. she did not die—men of schreiderling's stamp
 marry women who don't die easily. they live and grow ugly.
 she never told of her one meeting, since her marriage, with the other man;
 and, when the chill and cough following the exposure of that evening,
 allowed her abroad, she never by word or sign alluded to having met me by
 the tonga office. perhaps she never knew.
 she used to trot up and down the mall, on that shocking bad saddle,
 looking as if she expected to meet some one round the corner every minute.
 two years afterward, she went home, and died—at bournemouth, i
 think.
 schreiderling, when he grew maudlin at mess, used to talk about “my poor
 dear wife.” he always set great store on speaking his mind, did
 schreiderling!
 rosicrucian subtleties
 in the orient had rise;
 ye may find their teachers still
 under jacatala's hill.
 seek ye bombast paracelsus,
 read what flood the seeker tells us
 of the dominant that runs
 through the cycles of the suns—
 read my story last and see
 luna at her apogee.
 there are yearly appointments, and two-yearly appointments, and
 five-yearly appointments at simla, and there are, or used to be, permanent
 appointments, whereon you stayed up for the term of your natural life and
 secured red cheeks and a nice income. of course, you could descend in the
 cold weather; for simla is rather dull then.
 tarrion came from goodness knows where—all away and away in some
 forsaken part of central india, where they call pachmari a “sanitarium,”
 and drive behind trotting bullocks, i believe. he belonged to a regiment;
 but what he really wanted to do was to escape from his regiment and live
 in simla forever and ever. he had no preference for anything in
 particular, beyond a good horse and a nice partner. he thought he could do
 everything well; which is a beautiful belief when you hold it with all
 your heart. he was clever in many ways, and good to look at, and always
 made people round him comfortable—even in central india.
 so he went up to simla, and, because he was clever and amusing, he
 gravitated naturally to mrs. hauksbee, who could forgive everything but
 stupidity. once he did her great service by changing the date on an
 invitation-card for a big dance which mrs. hauksbee wished to attend, but
 couldn't because she had quarrelled with the a.-d.-c., who took care,
 being a mean man, to invite her to a small dance on the th instead of the
 big ball of the th. it was a very clever piece of forgery; and when mrs.
 hauksbee showed the a.-d.-c. her invitation-card, and chaffed him mildly
 for not better managing his vendettas, he really thought he had made a
 mistake; and—which was wise—realized that it was no use to
 fight with mrs. hauksbee. she was grateful to tarrion and asked what she
 could do for him. he said simply: “i'm a freelance up here on leave, and
 on the lookout for what i can loot. i haven't a square inch of interest in
 all simla. my name isn't known to any man with an appointment in his gift,
 and i want an appointment—a good, sound, pukka one. i believe you
 can do anything you turn yourself to do. will you help me?” mrs. hauksbee
 thought for a minute, and passed the last of her riding-whip through her
 lips, as was her custom when thinking. then her eyes sparkled, and she
 said:—“i will;” and she shook hands on it. tarrion, having perfect
 confidence in this great woman, took no further thought of the business at
 all. except to wonder what sort of an appointment he would win.
 mrs. hauksbee began calculating the prices of all the heads of departments
 and members of council she knew, and the more she thought the more she
 laughed, because her heart was in the game and it amused her. then she
 took a civil list and ran over a few of the appointments. there are some
 beautiful appointments in the civil list. eventually, she decided that,
 though tarrion was too good for the political department, she had better
 begin by trying to get him in there. what were her own plans to this end,
 does not matter in the least, for luck or fate played into her hands, and
 she had nothing to do but to watch the course of events and take the
 credit of them.
 all viceroys, when they first come out, pass through the “diplomatic
 secrecy” craze. it wears off in time; but they all catch it in the
 beginning, because they are new to the country. the particular viceroy who
 was suffering from the complaint just then—this was a long time ago,
 before lord dufferin ever came from canada, or lord ripon from the bosom
 of the english church—had it very badly; and the result was that men
 who were new to keeping official secrets went about looking unhappy; and
 the viceroy plumed himself on the way in which he had instilled notions of
 reticence into his staff.
 now, the supreme government have a careless custom of committing what they
 do to printed papers. these papers deal with all sorts of things—from
 the payment of rs.  to a “secret service” native, up to rebukes
 administered to vakils and motamids of native states, and rather brusque
 letters to native princes, telling them to put their houses in order, to
 refrain from kidnapping women, or filling offenders with pounded red
 pepper, and eccentricities of that kind. of course, these things could
 never be made public, because native princes never err officially, and
 their states are, officially, as well administered as our territories.
 also, the private allowances to various queer people are not exactly
 matters to put into newspapers, though they give quaint reading sometimes.
 when the supreme government is at simla, these papers are prepared there,
 and go round to the people who ought to see them in office-boxes or by
 post. the principle of secrecy was to that viceroy quite as important as
 the practice, and he held that a benevolent despotism like ours should
 never allow even little things, such as appointments of subordinate
 clerks, to leak out till the proper time. he was always remarkable for his
 principles.
 there was a very important batch of papers in preparation at that time. it
 had to travel from one end of simla to the other by hand. it was not put
 into an official envelope, but a large, square, pale-pink one; the matter
 being in ms. on soft crinkley paper. it was addressed to “the head clerk,
 etc., etc.” now, between “the head clerk, etc., etc.,” and “mrs. hauksbee”
 and a flourish, is no very great difference if the address be written in a
 very bad hand, as this was. the chaprassi who took the envelope was not
 more of an idiot than most chaprassis. he merely forgot where this most
 unofficial cover was to be delivered, and so asked the first englishman he
 met, who happened to be a man riding down to annandale in a great hurry.
 the englishman hardly looked, said: “hauksbee sahib ki mem,” and went on.
 so did the chaprasss, because that letter was the last in stock and he
 wanted to get his work over. there was no book to sign; he thrust the
 letter into mrs. hauksbee's bearer's hands and went off to smoke with a
 friend. mrs. hauksbee was expecting some cut-out pattern things in flimsy
 paper from a friend. as soon as she got the big square packet, therefore,
 she said, “oh, the dear creature!” and tore it open with a paper-knife,
 and all the ms. enclosures tumbled out on the floor.
 mrs. hauksbee began reading. i have said the batch was rather important.
 that is quite enough for you to know. it referred to some correspondence,
 two measures, a peremptory order to a native chief and two dozen other
 things. mrs. hauksbee gasped as she read, for the first glimpse of the
 naked machinery of the great indian government, stripped of its casings,
 and lacquer, and paint, and guard-rails, impresses even the most stupid
 man. and mrs. hauksbee was a clever woman. she was a little afraid at
 first, and felt as if she had laid hold of a lightning-flash by the tail,
 and did not quite know what to do with it. there were remarks and initials
 at the side of the papers; and some of the remarks were rather more severe
 than the papers. the initials belonged to men who are all dead or gone
 now; but they were great in their day. mrs. hauksbee read on and thought
 calmly as she read. then the value of her trove struck her, and she cast
 about for the best method of using it. then tarrion dropped in, and they
 read through all the papers together, and tarrion, not knowing how she had
 come by them, vowed that mrs. hauksbee was the greatest woman on earth.
 which i believe was true, or nearly so.
 “the honest course is always the best,” said tarrion after an hour and a
 half of study and conversation. “all things considered, the intelligence
 branch is about my form. either that or the foreign office. i go to lay
 siege to the high gods in their temples.”
 he did not seek a little man, or a little big man, or a weak head of a
 strong department, but he called on the biggest and strongest man that the
 government owned, and explained that he wanted an appointment at simla on
 a good salary. the compound insolence of this amused the strong man, and,
 as he had nothing to do for the moment, he listened to the proposals of
 the audacious tarrion. “you have, i presume, some special qualifications,
 besides the gift of self-assertion, for the claims you put forwards?” said
 the strong man. “that, sir,” said tarrion, “is for you to judge.” then he
 began, for he had a good memory, quoting a few of the more important notes
 in the papers—slowly and one by one as a man drops chlorodyne into a
 glass. when he had reached the peremptory order—and it was a
 peremptory order—the strong man was troubled.
 tarrion wound up:—“and i fancy that special knowledge of this kind
 is at least as valuable for, let us say, a berth in the foreign office, as
 the fact of being the nephew of a distinguished officer's wife.” that hit
 the strong man hard, for the last appointment to the foreign office had
 been by black favor, and he knew it. “i'll see what i can do for you,”
 said the strong man. “many thanks,” said tarrion. then he left, and the
 strong man departed to see how the appointment was to be blocked.
 followed a pause of eleven days; with thunders and lightnings and much
 telegraphing. the appointment was not a very important one, carrying only
 between rs.  and rs.  a month; but, as the viceroy said, it was the
 principle of diplomatic secrecy that had to be maintained, and it was more
 than likely that a boy so well supplied with special information would be
 worth translating. so they translated him. they must have suspected him,
 though he protested that his information was due to singular talents of
 his own. now, much of this story, including the after-history of the
 missing envelope, you must fill in for yourself, because there are reasons
 why it cannot be written. if you do not know about things up above, you
 won't understand how to fill it in, and you will say it is impossible.
 what the viceroy said when tarrion was introduced to him was:—“so,
 this is the boy who 'rushed' the government of india, is it? recollect,
 sir, that is not done twice.” so he must have known something.
 what tarrion said when he saw his appointment gazetted was:—“if mrs.
 hauksbee were twenty years younger, and i her husband, i should be viceroy
 of india in twenty years.”
 what mrs. hauksbee said, when tarrion thanked her, almost with tears in
 his eyes, was first:—“i told you so!” and next, to herself:—“what
 fools men are!”
 the conversion of aurelian mcgoggin.
 ride with an idle whip, ride with an unused heel.
 but, once in a way, there will come a day
 when the colt must be taught to feel
 the lash that falls, and the curb that galls,
 and the sting of the rowelled steel.
 life's handicap.
 this is not a tale exactly. it is a tract; and i am immensely proud of it.
 making a tract is a feat.
 every man is entitled to his own religious opinions; but no man—least
 of all a junior—has a right to thrust these down other men's
 throats. the government sends out weird civilians now and again; but
 mcgoggin was the queerest exported for a long time. he was clever—brilliantly
 clever—but his cleverness worked the wrong way. instead of keeping
 to the study of the vernaculars, he had read some books written by a man
 called comte, i think, and a man called spencer, and a professor clifford.
 [you will find these books in the library.] they deal with people's
 insides from the point of view of men who have no stomachs. there was no
 order against his reading them; but his mamma should have smacked him.
 they fermented in his head, and he came out to india with a rarefied
 religion over and above his work. it was not much of a creed. it only
 proved that men had no souls, and there was no god and no hereafter, and
 that you must worry along somehow for the good of humanity.
 one of its minor tenets seemed to be that the one thing more sinful than
 giving an order was obeying it. at least, that was what mcgoggin said; but
 i suspect he had misread his primers.
 i do not say a word against this creed. it was made up in town, where
 there is nothing but machinery and asphalt and building—all shut in
 by the fog. naturally, a man grows to think that there is no one higher
 than himself, and that the metropolitan board of works made everything.
 but in this country, where you really see humanity—raw, brown, naked
 humanity—with nothing between it and the blazing sky, and only the
 used-up, over-handled earth underfoot, the notion somehow dies away, and
 most folk come back to simpler theories. life, in india, is not long
 enough to waste in proving that there is no one in particular at the head
 of affairs. for this reason. the deputy is above the assistant, the
 commissioner above the deputy, the lieutenant-governor above the
 commissioner, and the viceroy above all four, under the orders of the
 secretary of state, who is responsible to the empress. if the empress be
 not responsible to her maker—if there is no maker for her to be
 responsible to—the entire system of our administration must be
 wrong. which is manifestly impossible. at home men are to be excused. they
 are stalled up a good deal and get intellectually “beany.” when you take a
 gross, “beany” horse to exercise, he slavers and slobbers over the bit
 till you can't see the horns. but the bit is there just the same. men do
 not get “beany” in india. the climate and the work are against playing
 bricks with words.
 if mcgoggin had kept his creed, with the capital letters and the endings
 in “isms,” to himself, no one would have cared; but his grandfathers on
 both sides had been wesleyan preachers, and the preaching strain came out
 in his mind. he wanted every one at the club to see that they had no souls
 too, and to help him to eliminate his creator. as a good many men told
 him, he undoubtedly had no soul, because he was so young, but it did not
 follow that his seniors were equally undeveloped; and, whether there was
 another world or not, a man still wanted to read his papers in this. “but
 that is not the point—that is not the point!” aurelian used to say.
 then men threw sofa-cushions at him and told him to go to any particular
 place he might believe in. they christened him the “blastoderm”—he
 said he came from a family of that name somewhere, in the pre-historic
 ages—and, by insult and laughter, strove to choke him dumb, for he
 was an unmitigated nuisance at the club; besides being an offence to the
 older men. his deputy commissioner, who was working on the frontier when
 aurelian was rolling on a bed-quilt, told him that, for a clever boy,
 aurelian was a very big idiot. and, you know, if he had gone on with his
 work, he would have been caught up to the secretariat in a few years. he
 was just the type that goes there—all head, no physique and a
 hundred theories. not a soul was interested in mcgoggin's soul. he might
 have had two, or none, or somebody's else's. his business was to obey
 orders and keep abreast of his files instead of devastating the club with
 “isms.”
 he worked brilliantly; but he could not accept any order without trying to
 better it. that was the fault of his creed. it made men too responsible
 and left too much to their honor. you can sometimes ride an old horse in a
 halter; but never a colt. mcgoggin took more trouble over his cases than
 any of the men of his year. he may have fancied that thirty-page judgments
 on fifty-rupee cases—both sides perjured to the gullet—advanced
 the cause of humanity. at any rate, he worked too much, and worried and
 fretted over the rebukes he received, and lectured away on his ridiculous
 creed out of office, till the doctor had to warn him that he was overdoing
 it. no man can toil eighteen annas in the rupee in june without suffering.
 but mcgoggin was still intellectually “beany” and proud of himself and his
 powers, and he would take no hint. he worked nine hours a day steadily.
 “very well,” said the doctor, “you'll break down because you are
 over-engined for your beam.” mcgoggin was a little chap.
 one day, the collapse came—as dramatically as if it had been meant
 to embellish a tract.
 it was just before the rains. we were sitting in the verandah in the dead,
 hot, close air, gasping and praying that the black-blue clouds would let
 down and bring the cool. very, very far away, there was a faint whisper,
 which was the roar of the rains breaking over the river. one of the men
 heard it, got out of his chair, listened, and said, naturally enough:—“thank
 god!”
 then the blastoderm turned in his place and said:—“why? i assure you
 it's only the result of perfectly natural causes—atmospheric
 phenomena of the simplest kind. why you should, therefore, return thanks
 to a being who never did exist—who is only a figment—”
 “blastoderm,” grunted the man in the next chair, “dry up, and throw me
 over the pioneer. we know all about your figments.” the blastoderm reached
 out to the table, took up one paper, and jumped as if something had stung
 him. then he handed the paper over.
 “as i was saying,” he went on slowly and with an effort—“due to
 perfectly natural causes—perfectly natural causes. i mean—”
 “hi! blastoderm, you've given me the calcutta mercantile advertiser.”
 the dust got up in little whorls, while the treetops rocked and the kites
 whistled. but no one was looking at the coming of the rains. we were all
 staring at the blastoderm, who had risen from his chair and was fighting
 with his speech. then he said, still more slowly:—
 “perfectly conceivable—dictionary—red oak—amenable—cause—retaining—shuttlecock—alone.”
 “blastoderm's drunk,” said one man. but the blastoderm was not drunk. he
 looked at us in a dazed sort of way, and began motioning with his hands in
 the half light as the clouds closed overhead. then—with a scream:—
 “what is it?—can't—reserve—attainable—market—obscure—”
 but his speech seemed to freeze in him, and—just as the lightning
 shot two tongues that cut the whole sky into three pieces and the rain
 fell in quivering sheets—the blastoderm was struck dumb. he stood
 pawing and champing like a hard-held horse, and his eyes were full of
 terror.
 the doctor came over in three minutes, and heard the story. “it's
 aphasia,” he said. “take him to his room. i knew the smash would come.” we
 carried the blastoderm across, in the pouring rain, to his quarters, and
 the doctor gave him bromide of potassium to make him sleep.
 then the doctor came back to us and told us that aphasia was like all the
 arrears of “punjab head” falling in a lump; and that only once before—in
 the case of a sepoy—had he met with so complete a case. i myself
 have seen mild aphasia in an overworked man, but this sudden dumbness was
 uncanny—though, as the blastoderm himself might have said, due to
 “perfectly natural causes.”
 “he'll have to take leave after this,” said the doctor. “he won't be fit
 for work for another three months. no; it isn't insanity or anything like
 it. it's only complete loss of control over the speech and memory. i fancy
 it will keep the blastoderm quiet, though.”
 two days later, the blastoderm found his tongue again. the first question
 he asked was: “what was it?” the doctor enlightened him. “but i can't
 understand it!” said the blastoderm; “i'm quite sane; but i can't be sure
 of my mind, it seems—my own memory—can i?”
 “go up into the hills for three months, and don't think about it,” said
 the doctor.
 “but i can't understand it,” repeated the blastoderm. “it was my own mind
 and memory.”
 “i can't help it,” said the doctor; “there are a good many things you
 can't understand; and, by the time you have put in my length of service,
 you'll know exactly how much a man dare call his own in this world.”
 the stroke cowed the blastoderm. he could not understand it. he went into
 the hills in fear and trembling, wondering whether he would be permitted
 to reach the end of any sentence he began.
 this gave him a wholesome feeling of mistrust. the legitimate explanation,
 that he had been overworking himself, failed to satisfy him. something had
 wiped his lips of speech, as a mother wipes the milky lips of her child,
 and he was afraid—horribly afraid.
 so the club had rest when he returned; and if ever you come across
 aurelian mcgoggin laying down the law on things human—he doesn't
 seem to know as much as he used to about things divine—put your
 forefinger on your lip for a moment, and see what happens.
 don't blame me if he throws a glass at your head!
 pleasant it is for the little tin gods,
 when great jove nods;
 but little tin gods make their little mistakes
 in missing the hour when great jove wakes.
 as a general rule, it is inexpedient to meddle with questions of state in
 a land where men are highly paid to work them out for you. this tale is a
 justifiable exception.
 once in every five years, as you know, we indent for a new viceroy; and
 each viceroy imports, with the rest of his baggage, a private secretary,
 who may or may not be the real viceroy, just as fate ordains. fate looks
 after the indian empire because it is so big and so helpless.
 there was a viceroy once, who brought out with him a turbulent private
 secretary—a hard man with a soft manner and a morbid passion for
 work. this secretary was called wonder—john fennil wonder. the
 viceroy possessed no name—nothing but a string of counties and
 two-thirds of the alphabet after them. he said, in confidence, that he was
 the electro-plated figurehead of a golden administration, and he watched
 in a dreamy, amused way wonder's attempts to draw matters which were
 entirely outside his province into his own hands. “when we are all
 cherubims together,” said his excellency once, “my dear, good friend
 wonder will head the conspiracy for plucking out gabriel's tail-feathers
 or stealing peter's keys. then i shall report him.”
 but, though the viceroy did nothing to check wonder's officiousness, other
 people said unpleasant things. maybe the members of council began it; but,
 finally, all simla agreed that there was “too much wonder, and too little
 viceroy,” in that regime. wonder was always quoting “his excellency.” it
 was “his excellency this,” “his excellency that,” “in the opinion of his
 excellency,” and so on. the viceroy smiled; but he did not heed. he said
 that, so long as his old men squabbled with his “dear, good wonder,” they
 might be induced to leave the “immemorial east” in peace.
 “no wise man has a policy,” said the viceroy. “a policy is the blackmail
 levied on the fool by the unforeseen. i am not the former, and i do not
 believe in the latter.”
 i do not quite see what this means, unless it refers to an insurance
 policy. perhaps it was the viceroy's way of saying:—“lie low.”
 that season, came up to simla one of these crazy people with only a single
 idea. these are the men who make things move; but they are not nice to
 talk to. this man's name was mellish, and he had lived for fifteen years
 on land of his own, in lower bengal, studying cholera. he held that
 cholera was a germ that propagated itself as it flew through a muggy
 atmosphere; and stuck in the branches of trees like a wool-flake. the germ
 could be rendered sterile, he said, by “mellish's own invincible
 fumigatory”—a heavy violet-black powder—“the result of fifteen
 years' scientific investigation, sir!”
 inventors seem very much alike as a caste. they talk loudly, especially
 about “conspiracies of monopolists;” they beat upon the table with their
 fists; and they secrete fragments of their inventions about their persons.
 mellish said that there was a medical “ring” at simla, headed by the
 surgeon-general, who was in league, apparently, with all the hospital
 assistants in the empire. i forget exactly how he proved it, but it had
 something to do with “skulking up to the hills;” and what mellish wanted
 was the independent evidence of the viceroy—“steward of our most
 gracious majesty the queen, sir.” so mellish went up to simla, with
 eighty-four pounds of fumigatory in his trunk, to speak to the viceroy and
 to show him the merits of the invention.
 but it is easier to see a viceroy than to talk to him, unless you chance
 to be as important as mellishe of madras. he was a six-thousand-rupee man,
 so great that his daughters never “married.” they “contracted alliances.”
 he himself was not paid. he “received emoluments,” and his journeys about
 the country were “tours of observation.” his business was to stir up the
 people in madras with a long pole—as you stir up stench in a pond—and
 the people had to come up out of their comfortable old ways and gasp:—“this
 is enlightenment and progress. isn't it fine!” then they gave mellishe
 statues and jasmine garlands, in the hope of getting rid of him.
 mellishe came up to simla “to confer with the viceroy.” that was one of
 his perquisites. the viceroy knew nothing of mellishe except that he was
 “one of those middle-class deities who seem necessary to the spiritual
 comfort of this paradise of the middle-classes,” and that, in all
 probability, he had “suggested, designed, founded, and endowed all the
 public institutions in madras.” which proves that his excellency, though
 dreamy, had experience of the ways of six-thousand-rupee men.
 mellishe's name was e. mellishe and mellish's was e. s. mellish, and they
 were both staying at the same hotel, and the fate that looks after the
 indian empire ordained that wonder should blunder and drop the final “e;”
 that the chaprassi should help him, and that the note which ran: “dear mr.
 mellish.—can you set aside your other engagements and lunch with us
 at two to-morrow? his excellency has an hour at your disposal then,”
 should be given to mellish with the fumigatory. he nearly wept with pride
 and delight, and at the appointed hour cantered off to peterhoff, a big
 paper-bag full of the fumigatory in his coat-tail pockets. he had his
 chance, and he meant to make the most of it. mellishe of madras had been
 so portentously solemn about his “conference,” that wonder had arranged
 for a private tiffin—no a.-d. c.'s, no wonder, no one but the
 viceroy, who said plaintively that he feared being left alone with
 unmuzzled autocrats like the great mellishe of madras.
 but his guest did not bore the viceroy. on the contrary, he amused him.
 mellish was nervously anxious to go straight to his fumigatory, and talked
 at random until tiffin was over and his excellency asked him to smoke. the
 viceroy was pleased with mellish because he did not talk “shop.”
 as soon as the cheroots were lit, mellish spoke like a man; beginning with
 his cholera-theory, reviewing his fifteen years' “scientific labors,” the
 machinations of the “simla ring,” and the excellence of his fumigatory,
 while the viceroy watched him between half-shut eyes and thought:
 “evidently, this is the wrong tiger; but it is an original animal.”
 mellish's hair was standing on end with excitement, and he stammered. he
 began groping in his coat-tails and, before the viceroy knew what was
 about to happen, he had tipped a bagful of his powder into the big silver
 ash-tray.
 “j-j-judge for yourself, sir,” said mellish. “y' excellency shall judge
 for yourself! absolutely infallible, on my honor.”
 he plunged the lighted end of his cigar into the powder, which began to
 smoke like a volcano, and send up fat, greasy wreaths of copper-colored
 smoke. in five seconds the room was filled with a most pungent and
 sickening stench—a reek that took fierce hold of the trap of your
 windpipe and shut it. the powder then hissed and fizzed, and sent out blue
 and green sparks, and the smoke rose till you could neither see, nor
 breathe, nor gasp. mellish, however, was used to it.
 “nitrate of strontia,” he shouted; “baryta, bone-meal, etcetera! thousand
 cubic feet smoke per cubic inch. not a germ could live—not a germ,
 y' excellency!”
 but his excellency had fled, and was coughing at the foot of the stairs,
 while all peterhoff hummed like a hive. red lancers came in, and the head
 chaprassi, who speaks english, came in, and mace-bearers came in, and
 ladies ran downstairs screaming “fire;” for the smoke was drifting through
 the house and oozing out of the windows, and bellying along the verandahs,
 and wreathing and writhing across the gardens. no one could enter the room
 where mellish was lecturing on his fumigatory, till that unspeakable
 powder had burned itself out.
 then an aide-de-camp, who desired the v. c., rushed through the rolling
 clouds and hauled mellish into the hall. the viceroy was prostrate with
 laughter, and could only waggle his hands feebly at mellish, who was
 shaking a fresh bagful of powder at him.
 “glorious! glorious!” sobbed his excellency. “not a germ, as you justly
 observe, could exist! i can swear it. a magnificent success!”
 then he laughed till the tears came, and wonder, who had caught the real
 mellishe snorting on the mall, entered and was deeply shocked at the
 scene. but the viceroy was delighted, because he saw that wonder would
 presently depart. mellish with the fumigatory was also pleased, for he
 felt that he had smashed the simla medical “ring.”
 few men could tell a story like his excellency when he took the trouble,
 and the account of “my dear, good wonder's friend with the powder” went
 the round of simla, and flippant folk made wonder unhappy by their
 remarks.
 but his excellency told the tale once too often—for wonder. as he
 meant to do. it was at a seepee picnic. wonder was sitting just behind the
 viceroy.
 “and i really thought for a moment,” wound up his excellency, “that my
 dear, good wonder had hired an assassin to clear his way to the throne!”
 every one laughed; but there was a delicate subtinkle in the viceroy's
 tone which wonder understood. he found that his health was giving way; and
 the viceroy allowed him to go, and presented him with a flaming
 “character” for use at home among big people.
 “my fault entirely,” said his excellency, in after seasons, with a
 twinkling in his eye. “my inconsistency must always have been distasteful
 to such a masterly man.”
 there is a tide in the affairs of men,
 which, taken any way you please, is bad,
 and strands them in forsaken guts and creeks
 no decent soul would think of visiting.
 you cannot stop the tide; but now and then,
 you may arrest some rash adventurer
 who—h'm—will hardly thank you for your pains.
 vibart's moralities.
 we are a high-caste and enlightened race, and infant-marriage is very
 shocking and the consequences are sometimes peculiar; but, nevertheless,
 the hindu notion—which is the continental notion—which is the
 aboriginal notion—of arranging marriages irrespective of the
 personal inclinations of the married, is sound. think for a minute, and
 you will see that it must be so; unless, of course, you believe in
 “affinities.” in which case you had better not read this tale. how can a
 man who has never married; who cannot be trusted to pick up at sight a
 moderately sound horse; whose head is hot and upset with visions of
 domestic felicity, go about the choosing of a wife? he cannot see straight
 or think straight if he tries; and the same disadvantages exist in the
 case of a girl's fancies. but when mature, married and discreet people
 arrange a match between a boy and a girl, they do it sensibly, with a view
 to the future, and the young couple live happily ever afterwards. as
 everybody knows.
 properly speaking, government should establish a matrimonial department,
 efficiently officered, with a jury of matrons, a judge of the chief court,
 a senior chaplain, and an awful warning, in the shape of a love-match that
 has gone wrong, chained to the trees in the courtyard. all marriages
 should be made through the department, which might be subordinate to the
 educational department, under the same penalty as that attaching to the
 transfer of land without a stamped document. but government won't take
 suggestions. it pretends that it is too busy. however, i will put my
 notion on record, and explain the example that illustrates the theory.
 once upon a time there was a good young man—a first-class officer in
 his own department—a man with a career before him and, possibly, a
 k. c. g. e. at the end of it. all his superiors spoke well of him, because
 he knew how to hold his tongue and his pen at the proper times. there are
 to-day only eleven men in india who possess this secret; and they have
 all, with one exception, attained great honor and enormous incomes.
 this good young man was quiet and self-contained—too old for his
 years by far. which always carries its own punishment. had a subaltern, or
 a tea-planter's assistant, or anybody who enjoys life and has no care for
 to-morrow, done what he tried to do not a soul would have cared. but when
 peythroppe—the estimable, virtuous, economical, quiet, hard-working,
 young peythroppe—fell, there was a flutter through five departments.
 the manner of his fall was in this way. he met a miss castries—d'castries
 it was originally, but the family dropped the d' for administrative
 reasons—and he fell in love with her even more energetically that he
 worked. understand clearly that there was not a breath of a word to be
 said against miss castries—not a shadow of a breath. she was good
 and very lovely—possessed what innocent people at home call a
 “spanish” complexion, with thick blue-black hair growing low down on her
 forehead, into a “widow's peak,” and big violet eyes under eyebrows as
 black and as straight as the borders of a gazette extraordinary when a big
 man dies. but—but—but—. well, she was a very sweet girl
 and very pious, but for many reasons she was “impossible.” quite so. all
 good mammas know what “impossible” means. it was obviously absurd that
 peythroppe should marry her. the little opal-tinted onyx at the base of
 her finger-nails said this as plainly as print. further, marriage with
 miss castries meant marriage with several other castries—honorary
 lieutenant castries, her papa, mrs. eulalie castries, her mamma, and all
 the ramifications of the castries family, on incomes ranging from rs. 
 to rs.  a month, and their wives and connections again.
 it would have been cheaper for peythroppe to have assaulted a commissioner
 with a dog-whip, or to have burned the records of a deputy commissioner's
 office, than to have contracted an alliance with the castries. it would
 have weighted his after-career less—even under a government which
 never forgets and never forgives. everybody saw this but peythroppe. he
 was going to marry miss castries, he was—being of age and drawing a
 good income—and woe betide the house that would not afterwards
 receive mrs. virginie saulez peythroppe with the deference due to her
 husband's rank. that was peythroppe's ultimatum, and any remonstrance
 drove him frantic.
 these sudden madnesses most afflict the sanest men. there was a case once—but
 i will tell you of that later on. you cannot account for the mania, except
 under a theory directly contradicting the one about the place wherein
 marriages are made. peythroppe was burningly anxious to put a millstone
 round his neck at the outset of his career and argument had not the least
 effect on him. he was going to marry miss castries, and the business was
 his own business. he would thank you to keep your advice to yourself. with
 a man in this condition, mere words only fix him in his purpose. of course
 he cannot see that marriage out here does not concern the individual but
 the government he serves.
 do you remember mrs. hauksbee—the most wonderful woman in india? she
 saved pluffles from mrs. reiver, won tarrion his appointment in the
 foreign office, and was defeated in open field by mrs. cusack-bremmil. she
 heard of the lamentable condition of peythroppe, and her brain struck out
 the plan that saved him. she had the wisdom of the serpent, the logical
 coherence of the man, the fearlessness of the child, and the triple
 intuition of the woman. never—no, never—as long as a tonga
 buckets down the solon dip, or the couples go a-riding at the back of
 summer hill, will there be such a genius as mrs. hauksbee. she attended
 the consultation of three men on peythroppe's case; and she stood up with
 the lash of her riding-whip between her lips and spake.
 three weeks later, peythroppe dined with the three men, and the gazette of
 india came in. peythroppe found to his surprise that he had been gazetted
 a month's leave. don't ask me how this was managed. i believe firmly that
 if mrs. hauksbee gave the order, the whole great indian administration
 would stand on its head.
 the three men had also a month's leave each. peythroppe put the gazette
 down and said bad words. then there came from the compound the soft
 “pad-pad” of camels—“thieves' camels,” the bikaneer breed that don't
 bubble and howl when they sit down and get up.
 after that i don't know what happened. this much is certain. peythroppe
 disappeared—vanished like smoke—and the long foot-rest chair
 in the house of the three men was broken to splinters. also a bedstead
 departed from one of the bedrooms.
 mrs. hauksbee said that mr. peythroppe was shooting in rajputana with the
 three men; so we were compelled to believe her.
 at the end of the month, peythroppe was gazetted twenty days' extension of
 leave; but there was wrath and lamentation in the house of castries. the
 marriage-day had been fixed, but the bridegroom never came; and the
 d'silvas, pereiras, and ducketts lifted their voices and mocked honorary
 lieutenant castries as one who had been basely imposed upon. mrs. hauksbee
 went to the wedding, and was much astonished when peythroppe did not
 appear. after seven weeks, peythroppe and the three men returned from
 rajputana. peythroppe was in hard, tough condition, rather white, and more
 self-contained than ever.
 one of the three men had a cut on his nose, cause by the kick of a gun.
 twelve-bores kick rather curiously.
 then came honorary lieutenant castries, seeking for the blood of his
 perfidious son-in-law to be. he said things—vulgar and “impossible”
 things which showed the raw rough “ranker” below the “honorary,” and i
 fancy peythroppe's eyes were opened. anyhow, he held his peace till the
 end; when he spoke briefly. honorary lieutenant castries asked for a “peg”
 before he went away to die or bring a suit for breach of promise.
 miss castries was a very good girl. she said that she would have no breach
 of promise suits. she said that, if she was not a lady, she was refined
 enough to know that ladies kept their broken hearts to themselves; and, as
 she ruled her parents, nothing happened. later on, she married a most
 respectable and gentlemanly person. he travelled for an enterprising firm
 in calcutta, and was all that a good husband should be.
 so peythroppe came to his right mind again, and did much good work, and
 was honored by all who knew him. one of these days he will marry; but he
 will marry a sweet pink-and-white maiden, on the government house list,
 with a little money and some influential connections, as every wise man
 should. and he will never, all his life, tell her what happened during the
 seven weeks of his shooting-tour in rajputana.
 but just think how much trouble and expense—for camel hire is not
 cheap, and those bikaneer brutes had to be fed like humans—might
 have been saved by a properly conducted matrimonial department, under the
 control of the director general of education, but corresponding direct
 with the viceroy.
 “'i've forgotten the countersign,' sez 'e.
 'oh! you 'aye, 'ave you?' sez i.
 'but i'm the colonel,' sez 'e.
 'oh! you are, are you?' sez i. 'colonel nor no colonel, you waits
 'ere till i'm relieved, an' the sarjint reports on your ugly old
 mug. coop!' sez i.
 an' s'help me soul, 'twas the colonel after all! but i was a
 recruity then.”
 the unedited autobiography of private ortheris.
 if there was one thing on which golightly prided himself more than
 another, it was looking like “an officer and a gentleman.” he said it was
 for the honor of the service that he attired himself so elaborately; but
 those who knew him best said that it was just personal vanity. there was
 no harm about golightly—not an ounce. he recognized a horse when he
 saw one, and could do more than fill a cantle. he played a very fair game
 at billiards, and was a sound man at the whist-table. everyone liked him;
 and nobody ever dreamed of seeing him handcuffed on a station platform as
 a deserter. but this sad thing happened.
 he was going down from dalhousie, at the end of his leave—riding
 down. he had cut his leave as fine as he dared, and wanted to come down in
 a hurry.
 it was fairly warm at dalhousie, and knowing what to expect below, he
 descended in a new khaki suit—tight fitting—of a delicate
 olive-green; a peacock-blue tie, white collar, and a snowy white solah
 helmet. he prided himself on looking neat even when he was riding post. he
 did look neat, and he was so deeply concerned about his appearance before
 he started that he quite forgot to take anything but some small change
 with him. he left all his notes at the hotel. his servants had gone down
 the road before him, to be ready in waiting at pathankote with a change of
 gear. that was what he called travelling in “light marching-order.” he was
 proud of his faculty of organization—what we call bundobust.
 twenty-two miles out of dalhousie it began to rain—not a mere
 hill-shower, but a good, tepid monsoonish downpour. golightly bustled on,
 wishing that he had brought an umbrella. the dust on the roads turned into
 mud, and the pony mired a good deal. so did golightly's khaki gaiters. but
 he kept on steadily and tried to think how pleasant the coolth was.
 his next pony was rather a brute at starting, and golightly's hands being
 slippery with the rain, contrived to get rid of golightly at a corner. he
 chased the animal, caught it, and went ahead briskly. the spill had not
 improved his clothes or his temper, and he had lost one spur. he kept the
 other one employed. by the time that stage was ended, the pony had had as
 much exercise as he wanted, and, in spite of the rain, golightly was
 sweating freely. at the end of another miserable half-hour, golightly
 found the world disappear before his eyes in clammy pulp. the rain had
 turned the pith of his huge and snowy solah-topee into an evil-smelling
 dough, and it had closed on his head like a half-opened mushroom. also the
 green lining was beginning to run.
 golightly did not say anything worth recording here. he tore off and
 squeezed up as much of the brim as was in his eyes and ploughed on. the
 back of the helmet was flapping on his neck and the sides stuck to his
 ears, but the leather band and green lining kept things roughly together,
 so that the hat did not actually melt away where it flapped.
 presently, the pulp and the green stuff made a sort of slimy mildew which
 ran over golightly in several directions—down his back and bosom for
 choice. the khaki color ran too—it was really shockingly bad dye—and
 sections of golightly were brown, and patches were violet, and contours
 were ochre, and streaks were ruddy red, and blotches were nearly white,
 according to the nature and peculiarities of the dye. when he took out his
 handkerchief to wipe his face and the green of the hat-lining and the
 purple stuff that had soaked through on to his neck from the tie became
 thoroughly mixed, the effect was amazing.
 near dhar the rain stopped and the evening sun came out and dried him up
 slightly. it fixed the colors, too. three miles from pathankote the last
 pony fell dead lame, and golightly was forced to walk. he pushed on into
 pathankote to find his servants. he did not know then that his khitmatgar
 had stopped by the roadside to get drunk, and would come on the next day
 saying that he had sprained his ankle. when he got into pathankote, he
 couldn't find his servants, his boots were stiff and ropy with mud, and
 there were large quantities of dirt about his body. the blue tie had run
 as much as the khaki. so he took it off with the collar and threw it away.
 then he said something about servants generally and tried to get a peg. he
 paid eight annas for the drink, and this revealed to him that he had only
 six annas more in his pocket—or in the world as he stood at that
 hour.
 he went to the station-master to negotiate for a first-class ticket to
 khasa, where he was stationed. the booking-clerk said something to the
 station-master, the station-master said something to the telegraph clerk,
 and the three looked at him with curiosity. they asked him to wait for
 half-an-hour, while they telegraphed to umritsar for authority. so he
 waited, and four constables came and grouped themselves picturesquely
 round him. just as he was preparing to ask them to go away, the
 station-master said that he would give the sahib a ticket to umritsar, if
 the sahib would kindly come inside the booking-office. golightly stepped
 inside, and the next thing he knew was that a constable was attached to
 each of his legs and arms, while the station-master was trying to cram a
 mailbag over his head.
 there was a very fair scuffle all round the booking-office, and golightly
 received a nasty cut over his eye through falling against a table. but the
 constables were too much for him, and they and the station-master
 handcuffed him securely. as soon as the mail-bag was slipped, he began
 expressing his opinions, and the head-constable said:—“without doubt
 this is the soldier-englishman we required. listen to the abuse!” then
 golightly asked the station-master what the this and the that the
 proceedings meant. the station-master told him he was “private john binkle
 of the —— regiment,  ft.  in., fair hair, gray eyes, and a
 dissipated appearance, no marks on the body,” who had deserted a fortnight
 ago. golightly began explaining at great length; and the more he explained
 the less the station-master believed him. he said that no lieutenant could
 look such a ruffian as did golightly, and that his instructions were to
 send his capture under proper escort to umritsar. golightly was feeling
 very damp and uncomfortable, and the language he used was not fit for
 publication, even in an expurgated form. the four constables saw him safe
 to umritsar in an “intermediate” compartment, and he spent the four-hour
 journey in abusing them as fluently as his knowledge of the vernaculars
 allowed.
 at umritsar he was bundled out on the platform into the arms of a corporal
 and two men of the —— regiment. golightly drew himself up and
 tried to carry off matters jauntily. he did not feel too jaunty in
 handcuffs, with four constables behind him, and the blood from the cut on
 his forehead stiffening on his left cheek. the corporal was not jocular
 either. golightly got as far as—“this is a very absurd mistake, my
 men,” when the corporal told him to “stow his lip” and come along.
 golightly did not want to come along. he desired to stop and explain. he
 explained very well indeed, until the corporal cut in with:—“you a
 orficer! it's the like o' you as brings disgrace on the likes of us.
 bloom-in' fine orficer you are! i know your regiment. the rogue's march is
 the quickstep where you come from. you're a black shame to the service.”
 golightly kept his temper, and began explaining all over again from the
 beginning. then he was marched out of the rain into the refreshment-room
 and told not to make a qualified fool of himself. the men were going to
 run him up to fort govindghar. and “running up” is a performance almost as
 undignified as the frog march.
 golightly was nearly hysterical with rage and the chill and the mistake
 and the handcuffs and the headache that the cut on his forehead had given
 him. he really laid himself out to express what was in his mind. when he
 had quite finished and his throat was feeling dry, one of the men said:—“i've
 'eard a few beggars in the click blind, stiff and crack on a bit; but i've
 never 'eard any one to touch this 'ere 'orficer.'” they were not angry
 with him. they rather admired him. they had some beer at the
 refreshment-room, and offered golightly some too, because he had “swore
 won'erful.” they asked him to tell them all about the adventures of
 private john binkle while he was loose on the countryside; and that made
 golightly wilder than ever. if he had kept his wits about him he would
 have kept quiet until an officer came; but he attempted to run.
 now the butt of a martini in the small of your back hurts a great deal,
 and rotten, rain-soaked khaki tears easily when two men are jerking at
 your collar.
 golightly rose from the floor feeling very sick and giddy, with his shirt
 ripped open all down his breast and nearly all down his back. he yielded
 to his luck, and at that point the down-train from lahore came in carrying
 one of golightly's majors.
 this is the major's evidence in full:—
 “there was the sound of a scuffle in the second-class refreshment-room, so
 i went in and saw the most villainous loafer that i ever set eyes on. his
 boots and breeches were plastered with mud and beer-stains. he wore a
 muddy-white dunghill sort of thing on his head, and it hung down in slips
 on his shoulders, which were a good deal scratched. he was half in and
 half out of a shirt as nearly in two pieces as it could be, and he was
 begging the guard to look at the name on the tail of it. as he had rucked
 the shirt all over his head, i couldn't at first see who he was, but i
 fancied that he was a man in the first stage of d. t. from the way he
 swore while he wrestled with his rags. when he turned round, and i had
 made allowance for a lump as big as a pork-pie over one eye, and some
 green war-paint on the face, and some violet stripes round the neck, i saw
 that it was golightly. he was very glad to see me,” said the major, “and
 he hoped i would not tell the mess about it. i didn't, but you can if you
 like, now that golightly has gone home.”
 golightly spent the greater part of that summer in trying to get the
 corporal and the two soldiers tried by court-martial for arresting an
 “officer and a gentleman.” they were, of course, very sorry for their
 error. but the tale leaked into the regimental canteen, and thence ran
 about the province.
 a stone's throw out on either hand
 from that well-ordered road we tread,
 and all the world is wild and strange;
 churel and ghoul and djinn and sprite
 shall bear us company to-night,
 for we have reached the oldest land
 wherein the powers of darkness range.
 from the dusk to the dawn.
 the house of suddhoo, near the taksali gate, is two-storied, with four
 carved windows of old brown wood, and a flat roof. you may recognize it by
 five red hand-prints arranged like the five of diamonds on the whitewash
 between the upper windows. bhagwan dass, the bunnia, and a man who says he
 gets his living by seal-cutting, live in the lower story with a troop of
 wives, servants, friends, and retainers. the two upper rooms used to be
 occupied by janoo and azizun and a little black-and-tan terrier that was
 stolen from an englishman's house and given to janoo by a soldier. to-day,
 only janoo lives in the upper rooms. suddhoo sleeps on the roof generally,
 except when he sleeps in the street. he used to go to peshawar in the cold
 weather to visit his son, who sells curiosities near the edwardes' gate,
 and then he slept under a real mud roof. suddhoo is a great friend of
 mine, because his cousin had a son who secured, thanks to my
 recommendation, the post of head-messenger to a big firm in the station.
 suddhoo says that god will make me a lieutenant-governor one of these
 days. i daresay his prophecy will come true. he is very, very old, with
 white hair and no teeth worth showing, and he has outlived his wits—outlived
 nearly everything except his fondness for his son at peshawar. janoo and
 azizun are kashmiris, ladies of the city, and theirs was an ancient and
 more or less honorable profession; but azizun has since married a medical
 student from the north-west and has settled down to a most respectable
 life somewhere near bareilly. bhagwan dass is an extortionate and an
 adulterator. he is very rich. the man who is supposed to get his living by
 seal-cutting pretends to be very poor. this lets you know as much as is
 necessary of the four principal tenants in the house of suddhoo. then
 there is me, of course; but i am only the chorus that comes in at the end
 to explain things. so i do not count.
 suddhoo was not clever. the man who pretended to cut seals was the
 cleverest of them all—bhagwan dass only knew how to lie—except
 janoo. she was also beautiful, but that was her own affair.
 suddhoo's son at peshawar was attacked by pleurisy, and old suddhoo was
 troubled. the seal-cutter man heard of suddhoo's anxiety and made capital
 out of it. he was abreast of the times. he got a friend in peshawar to
 telegraph daily accounts of the son's health. and here the story begins.
 suddhoo's cousin's son told me, one evening, that suddhoo wanted to see
 me; that he was too old and feeble to come personally, and that i should
 be conferring an everlasting honor on the house of suddhoo if i went to
 him. i went; but i think, seeing how well-off suddhoo was then, that he
 might have sent something better than an ekka, which jolted fearfully, to
 haul out a future lieutenant-governor to the city on a muggy april
 evening. the ekka did not run quickly. it was full dark when we pulled up
 opposite the door of ranjit singh's tomb near the main gate of the fort.
 here was suddhoo and he said that, by reason of my condescension, it was
 absolutely certain that i should become a lieutenant-governor while my
 hair was yet black. then we talked about the weather and the state of my
 health, and the wheat crops, for fifteen minutes, in the huzuri bagh,
 under the stars.
 suddhoo came to the point at last. he said that janoo had told him that
 there was an order of the sirkar against magic, because it was feared that
 magic might one day kill the empress of india. i didn't know anything
 about the state of the law; but i fancied that something interesting was
 going to happen. i said that so far from magic being discouraged by the
 government it was highly commended. the greatest officials of the state
 practiced it themselves. (if the financial statement isn't magic, i don't
 know what is.) then, to encourage him further, i said that, if there was
 any jadoo afoot, i had not the least objection to giving it my countenance
 and sanction, and to seeing that it was clean jadoo—white magic, as
 distinguished from the unclean jadoo which kills folk. it took a long time
 before suddhoo admitted that this was just what he had asked me to come
 for. then he told me, in jerks and quavers, that the man who said he cut
 seals was a sorcerer of the cleanest kind; that every day he gave suddhoo
 news of the sick son in peshawar more quickly than the lightning could
 fly, and that this news was always corroborated by the letters. further,
 that he had told suddhoo how a great danger was threatening his son, which
 could be removed by clean jadoo; and, of course, heavy payment. i began to
 see how the land lay, and told suddhoo that i also understood a little
 jadoo in the western line, and would go to his house to see that
 everything was done decently and in order. we set off together; and on the
 way suddhoo told me he had paid the seal-cutter between one hundred and
 two hundred rupees already; and the jadoo of that night would cost two
 hundred more. which was cheap, he said, considering the greatness of his
 son's danger; but i do not think he meant it.
 the lights were all cloaked in the front of the house when we arrived. i
 could hear awful noises from behind the seal-cutter's shop-front, as if
 some one were groaning his soul out. suddhoo shook all over, and while we
 groped our way upstairs told me that the jadoo had begun. janoo and azizun
 met us at the stair-head, and told us that the jadoo-work was coming off
 in their rooms, because there was more space there. janoo is a lady of a
 freethinking turn of mind. she whispered that the jadoo was an invention
 to get money out of suddhoo, and that the seal-cutter would go to a hot
 place when he died. suddhoo was nearly crying with fear and old age. he
 kept walking up and down the room in the half light, repeating his son's
 name over and over again, and asking azizun if the seal-cutter ought not
 to make a reduction in the case of his own landlord. janoo pulled me over
 to the shadow in the recess of the carved bow-windows. the boards were up,
 and the rooms were only lit by one tiny lamp. there was no chance of my
 being seen if i stayed still.
 presently, the groans below ceased, and we heard steps on the staircase.
 that was the seal-cutter. he stopped outside the door as the terrier
 barked and azizun fumbled at the chain, and he told suddhoo to blow out
 the lamp. this left the place in jet darkness, except for the red glow
 from the two huqas that belonged to janoo and azizun. the seal-cutter came
 in, and i heard suddhoo throw himself down on the floor and groan. azizun
 caught her breath, and janoo backed to one of the beds with a shudder.
 there was a clink of something metallic, and then shot up a pale
 blue-green flame near the ground. the light was just enough to show
 azizun, pressed against one corner of the room with the terrier between
 her knees; janoo, with her hands clasped, leaning forward as she sat on
 the bed; suddhoo, face down, quivering, and the seal-cutter.
 i hope i may never see another man like that seal-cutter. he was stripped
 to the waist, with a wreath of white jasmine as thick as my wrist round
 his forehead, a salmon-colored loin-cloth round his middle, and a steel
 bangle on each ankle. this was not awe-inspiring. it was the face of the
 man that turned me cold. it was blue-gray in the first place. in the
 second, the eyes were rolled back till you could only see the whites of
 them; and, in the third, the face was the face of a demon—a ghoul—anything
 you please except of the sleek, oily old ruffian who sat in the day-time
 over his turning-lathe downstairs. he was lying on his stomach, with his
 arms turned and crossed behind him, as if he had been thrown down
 pinioned. his head and neck were the only parts of him off the floor. they
 were nearly at right angles to the body, like the head of a cobra at
 spring. it was ghastly. in the centre of the room, on the bare earth
 floor, stood a big, deep, brass basin, with a pale blue-green light
 floating in the centre like a night-light. round that basin the man on the
 floor wriggled himself three times. how he did it i do not know. i could
 see the muscles ripple along his spine and fall smooth again; but i could
 not see any other motion. the head seemed the only thing alive about him,
 except that slow curl and uncurl of the laboring back-muscles. janoo from
 the bed was breathing seventy to the minute; azizun held her hands before
 her eyes; and old suddhoo, fingering at the dirt that had got into his
 white beard, was crying to himself. the horror of it was that the
 creeping, crawly thing made no sound—only crawled! and, remember,
 this lasted for ten minutes, while the terrier whined, and azizun
 shuddered, and janoo gasped, and suddhoo cried.
 i felt the hair lift at the back of my head, and my heart thump like a
 thermantidote paddle. luckily, the seal-cutter betrayed himself by his
 most impressive trick and made me calm again. after he had finished that
 unspeakable triple crawl, he stretched his head away from the floor as
 high as he could, and sent out a jet of fire from his nostrils. now, i
 knew how fire-spouting is done—i can do it myself—so i felt at
 ease. the business was a fraud. if he had only kept to that crawl without
 trying to raise the effect, goodness knows what i might not have thought.
 both the girls shrieked at the jet of fire and the head dropped, chin
 down, on the floor with a thud; the whole body lying then like a corpse
 with its arms trussed. there was a pause of five full minutes after this,
 and the blue-green flame died down. janoo stooped to settle one of her
 anklets, while azizun turned her face to the wall and took the terrier in
 her arms. suddhoo put out an arm mechanically to janoo's huqa, and she
 slid it across the floor with her foot. directly above the body and on the
 wall, were a couple of flaming portraits, in stamped paper frames, of the
 queen and the prince of wales. they looked down on the performance, and,
 to my thinking, seemed to heighten the grotesqueness of it all.
 just when the silence was getting unendurable, the body turned over and
 rolled away from the basin to the side of the room, where it lay stomach
 up. there was a faint “plop” from the basin—exactly like the noise a
 fish makes when it takes a fly—and the green light in the centre
 revived.
 i looked at the basin, and saw, bobbing in the water, the dried,
 shrivelled, black head of a native baby—open eyes, open mouth and
 shaved scalp. it was worse, being so very sudden, than the crawling
 exhibition. we had no time to say anything before it began to speak.
 read poe's account of the voice that came from the mesmerized dying man,
 and you will realize less than one-half of the horror of that head's
 voice.
 there was an interval of a second or two between each word, and a sort of
 “ring, ring, ring,” in the note of the voice, like the timbre of a bell.
 it pealed slowly, as if talking to itself, for several minutes before i
 got rid of my cold sweat. then the blessed solution struck me. i looked at
 the body lying near the doorway, and saw, just where the hollow of the
 throat joins on the shoulders, a muscle that had nothing to do with any
 man's regular breathing, twitching away steadily. the whole thing was a
 careful reproduction of the egyptian teraphin that one read about
 sometimes and the voice was as clever and as appalling a piece of
 ventriloquism as one could wish to hear. all this time the head was
 “lip-lip-lapping” against the side of the basin, and speaking. it told
 suddhoo, on his face again whining, of his son's illness and of the state
 of the illness up to the evening of that very night. i always shall
 respect the seal-cutter for keeping so faithfully to the time of the
 peshawar telegrams. it went on to say that skilled doctors were night and
 day watching over the man's life; and that he would eventually recover if
 the fee to the potent sorcerer, whose servant was the head in the basin,
 were doubled.
 here the mistake from the artistic point of view came in. to ask for twice
 your stipulated fee in a voice that lazarus might have used when he rose
 from the dead, is absurd. janoo, who is really a woman of masculine
 intellect, saw this as quickly as i did. i heard her say “asli nahin!
 fareib!” scornfully under her breath; and just as she said so, the light
 in the basin died out, the head stopped talking, and we heard the room
 door creak on its hinges. then janoo struck a match, lit the lamp, and we
 saw that head, basin, and seal-cutter were gone. suddhoo was wringing his
 hands and explaining to any one who cared to listen, that, if his chances
 of eternal salvation depended on it, he could not raise another two
 hundred rupees. azizun was nearly in hysterics in the corner; while janoo
 sat down composedly on one of the beds to discuss the probabilities of the
 whole thing being a bunao, or “make-up.”
 i explained as much as i knew of the seal-cutter's way of jadoo; but her
 argument was much more simple:—“the magic that is always demanding
 gifts is no true magic,” said she. “my mother told me that the only potent
 love-spells are those which are told you for love. this seal-cutter man is
 a liar and a devil. i dare not tell, do anything, or get anything done,
 because i am in debt to bhagwan dass the bunnia for two gold rings and a
 heavy anklet. i must get my food from his shop. the seal-cutter is the
 friend of bhagwan dass, and he would poison my food. a fool's jadoo has
 been going on for ten days, and has cost suddhoo many rupees each night.
 the seal-cutter used black hens and lemons and mantras before. he never
 showed us anything like this till to-night. azizun is a fool, and will be
 a pur dahnashin soon. suddhoo has lost his strength and his wits. see now!
 i had hoped to get from suddhoo many rupees while he lived, and many more
 after his death; and behold, he is spending everything on that offspring
 of a devil and a she-ass, the seal-cutter!”
 here i said:—“but what induced suddhoo to drag me into the business?
 of course i can speak to the seal-cutter, and he shall refund. the whole
 thing is child's talk—shame—and senseless.”
 “suddhoo is an old child,” said janoo. “he has lived on the roofs these
 seventy years and is as senseless as a milch-goat. he brought you here to
 assure himself that he was not breaking any law of the sirkar, whose salt
 he ate many years ago. he worships the dust off the feet of the
 seal-cutter, and that cow-devourer has forbidden him to go and see his
 son. what does suddhoo know of your laws or the lightning-post? i have to
 watch his money going day by day to that lying beast below.”
 janoo stamped her foot on the floor and nearly cried with vexation; while
 suddhoo was whimpering under a blanket in the corner, and azizun was
 trying to guide the pipe-stem to his foolish old mouth.
 now the case stands thus. unthinkingly, i have laid myself open to the
 charge of aiding and abetting the seal-cutter in obtaining money under
 false pretences, which is forbidden by section  of the indian penal
 code. i am helpless in the matter for these reasons, i cannot inform the
 police. what witnesses would support my statements? janoo refuses flatly,
 azizun is a veiled woman somewhere near bareilly—lost in this big
 india of ours. i cannot again take the law into my own hands, and speak to
 the seal-cutter; for certain am i that, not only would suddhoo disbelieve
 me, but this step would end in the poisoning of janoo, who is bound hand
 and foot by her debt to the bunnia. suddhoo is an old dotard; and whenever
 we meet mumbles my idiotic joke that the sirkar rather patronizes the
 black art than otherwise. his son is well now; but suddhoo is completely
 under the influence of the seal-cutter, by whose advice he regulates the
 affairs of his life. janoo watches daily the money that she hoped to
 wheedle out of suddhoo taken by the seal-cutter, and becomes daily more
 furious and sullen.
 she will never tell, because she dare not; but, unless something happens
 to prevent her, i am afraid that the seal-cutter will die of cholera—the
 white arsenic kind—about the middle of may. and thus i shall have to
 be privy to a murder in the house of suddhoo.
 cry “murder!” in the market-place, and each
 will turn upon his neighbor anxious eyes
 that ask:—“art thou the man?” we hunted cain,
 some centuries ago, across the world,
 that bred the fear our own misdeeds maintain
 to-day.
 vibart's moralities.
 shakespeare says something about worms, or it may be giants or beetles,
 turning if you tread on them too severely. the safest plan is never to
 tread on a worm—not even on the last new subaltern from home, with
 his buttons hardly out of their tissue paper, and the red of sappy english
 beef in his cheeks. this is the story of the worm that turned. for the
 sake of brevity, we will call henry augustus ramsay faizanne, “the worm,”
 although he really was an exceedingly pretty boy, without a hair on his
 face, and with a waist like a girl's when he came out to the second
 “shikarris” and was made unhappy in several ways. the “shikarris” are a
 high-caste regiment, and you must be able to do things well—play a
 banjo or ride more than a little, or sing, or act—to get on with
 them.
 the worm did nothing except fall off his pony, and knock chips out of
 gate-posts with his trap. even that became monotonous after a time. he
 objected to whist, cut the cloth at billiards, sang out of tune, kept very
 much to himself, and wrote to his mamma and sisters at home. four of these
 five things were vices which the “shikarris” objected to and set
 themselves to eradicate. every one knows how subalterns are, by brother
 subalterns, softened and not permitted to be ferocious. it is good and
 wholesome, and does no one any harm, unless tempers are lost; and then
 there is trouble. there was a man once—but that is another story.
 the “shikarris” shikarred the worm very much, and he bore everything
 without winking. he was so good and so anxious to learn, and flushed so
 pink, that his education was cut short, and he was left to his own devices
 by every one except the senior subaltern, who continued to make life a
 burden to the worm. the senior subaltern meant no harm; but his chaff was
 coarse, and he didn't quite understand where to stop. he had been waiting
 too long for his company; and that always sours a man. also he was in
 love, which made him worse.
 one day, after he had borrowed the worm's trap for a lady who never
 existed, had used it himself all the afternoon, had sent a note to the
 worm purporting to come from the lady, and was telling the mess all about
 it, the worm rose in his place and said, in his quiet, ladylike voice:
 “that was a very pretty sell; but i'll lay you a month's pay to a month's
 pay when you get your step, that i work a sell on you that you'll remember
 for the rest of your days, and the regiment after you when you're dead or
 broke.” the worm wasn't angry in the least, and the rest of the mess
 shouted. then the senior subaltern looked at the worm from the boots
 upwards, and down again, and said, “done, baby.” the worm took the rest of
 the mess to witness that the bet had been taken, and retired into a book
 with a sweet smile.
 two months passed, and the senior subaltern still educated the worm, who
 began to move about a little more as the hot weather came on. i have said
 that the senior subaltern was in love. the curious thing is that a girl
 was in love with the senior subaltern. though the colonel said awful
 things, and the majors snorted, and married captains looked unutterable
 wisdom, and the juniors scoffed, those two were engaged.
 the senior subaltern was so pleased with getting his company and his
 acceptance at the same time that he forgot to bother the worm. the girl
 was a pretty girl, and had money of her own. she does not come into this
 story at all.
 one night, at the beginning of the hot weather, all the mess, except the
 worm, who had gone to his own room to write home letters, were sitting on
 the platform outside the mess house. the band had finished playing, but no
 one wanted to go in. and the captains' wives were there also. the folly of
 a man in love is unlimited. the senior subaltern had been holding forth on
 the merits of the girl he was engaged to, and the ladies were purring
 approval, while the men yawned, when there was a rustle of skirts in the
 dark, and a tired, faint voice lifted itself:
 “where's my husband?”
 i do not wish in the least to reflect on the morality of the “shikarris;”
 but it is on record that four men jumped up as if they had been shot.
 three of them were married men. perhaps they were afraid that their wives
 had come from home unbeknownst. the fourth said that he had acted on the
 impulse of the moment. he explained this afterwards.
 then the voice cried:—“oh, lionel!” lionel was the senior
 subaltern's name. a woman came into the little circle of light by the
 candles on the peg-tables, stretching out her hands to the dark where the
 senior subaltern was, and sobbing. we rose to our feet, feeling that
 things were going to happen and ready to believe the worst. in this bad,
 small world of ours, one knows so little of the life of the next man—which,
 after all, is entirely his own concern—that one is not surprised
 when a crash comes. anything might turn up any day for any one. perhaps
 the senior subaltern had been trapped in his youth. men are crippled that
 way occasionally. we didn't know; we wanted to hear; and the captains'
 wives were as anxious as we. if he had been trapped, he was to be excused;
 for the woman from nowhere, in the dusty shoes, and gray travelling dress,
 was very lovely, with black hair and great eyes full of tears. she was
 tall, with a fine figure, and her voice had a running sob in it pitiful to
 hear. as soon as the senior subaltern stood up, she threw her arms round
 his neck, and called him “my darling,” and said she could not bear waiting
 alone in england, and his letters were so short and cold, and she was his
 to the end of the world, and would he forgive her. this did not sound
 quite like a lady's way of speaking. it was too demonstrative.
 things seemed black indeed, and the captains' wives peered under their
 eyebrows at the senior subaltern, and the colonel's face set like the day
 of judgment framed in gray bristles, and no one spoke for a while.
 next the colonel said, very shortly:—“well, sir?” and the woman
 sobbed afresh. the senior subaltern was half choked with the arms round
 his neck, but he gasped out:—“it's a d——d lie! i never
 had a wife in my life!” “don't swear,” said the colonel. “come into the
 mess. we must sift this clear somehow,” and he sighed to himself, for he
 believed in his “shikarris,” did the colonel.
 we trooped into the ante-room, under the full lights, and there we saw how
 beautiful the woman was. she stood up in the middle of us all, sometimes
 choking with crying, then hard and proud, and then holding out her arms to
 the senior subaltern. it was like the fourth act of a tragedy. she told us
 how the senior subaltern had married her when he was home on leave
 eighteen months before; and she seemed to know all that we knew, and more
 too, of his people and his past life. he was white and ashy gray, trying
 now and again to break into the torrent of her words; and we, noting how
 lovely she was and what a criminal he looked, esteemed him a beast of the
 worst kind. we felt sorry for him, though.
 i shall never forget the indictment of the senior subaltern by his wife.
 nor will he. it was so sudden, rushing out of the dark, unannounced, into
 our dull lives. the captains' wives stood back; but their eyes were
 alight, and you could see that they had already convicted and sentenced
 the senior subaltern. the colonel seemed five years older. one major was
 shading his eyes with his hand and watching the woman from underneath it.
 another was chewing his moustache and smiling quietly as if he were
 witnessing a play. full in the open space in the centre, by the
 whist-tables, the senior subaltern's terrier was hunting for fleas. i
 remember all this as clearly as though a photograph were in my hand. i
 remember the look of horror on the senior subaltern's face. it was rather
 like seeing a man hanged; but much more interesting. finally, the woman
 wound up by saying that the senior subaltern carried a double f. m. in
 tattoo on his left shoulder. we all knew that, and to our innocent minds
 it seemed to clinch the matter. but one of the bachelor majors said very
 politely:—“i presume that your marriage certificate would be more to
 the purpose?”
 that roused the woman. she stood up and sneered at the senior subaltern
 for a cur, and abused the major and the colonel and all the rest. then she
 wept, and then she pulled a paper from her breast, saying imperially:—“take
 that! and let my husband—my lawfully wedded husband—read it
 aloud—if he dare!”
 there was a hush, and the men looked into each other's eyes as the senior
 subaltern came forward in a dazed and dizzy way, and took the paper. we
 were wondering as we stared, whether there was anything against any one of
 us that might turn up later on. the senior subaltern's throat was dry;
 but, as he ran his eye over the paper, he broke out into a hoarse cackle
 of relief, and said to the woman:—“you young blackguard!”
 but the woman had fled through a door, and on the paper was written:—“this
 is to certify that i, the worm, have paid in full my debts to the senior
 subaltern, and, further, that the senior subaltern is my debtor, by
 agreement on the d of february, as by the mess attested, to the extent
 of one month's captain's pay, in the lawful currency of the india empire.”
 then a deputation set off for the worm's quarters and found him, betwixt
 and between, unlacing his stays, with the hat, wig, serge dress, etc., on
 the bed. he came over as he was, and the “shikarris” shouted till the
 gunners' mess sent over to know if they might have a share of the fun. i
 think we were all, except the colonel and the senior subaltern, a little
 disappointed that the scandal had come to nothing. but that is human
 nature. there could be no two words about the worm's acting. it leaned as
 near to a nasty tragedy as anything this side of a joke can. when most of
 the subalterns sat upon him with sofa-cushions to find out why he had not
 said that acting was his strong point, he answered very quietly:—“i
 don't think you ever asked me. i used to act at home with my sisters.” but
 no acting with girls could account for the worm's display that night.
 personally, i think it was in bad taste. besides being dangerous. there is
 no sort of use in playing with fire, even for fun.
 the “shikarris” made him president of the regimental dramatic club; and,
 when the senior subaltern paid up his debt, which he did at once, the worm
 sank the money in scenery and dresses. he was a good worm; and the
 “shikarris” are proud of him. the only drawback is that he has been
 christened “mrs. senior subaltern;” and as there are now two mrs. senior
 subalterns in the station, this is sometimes confusing to strangers.
 later on, i will tell you of a case something like, this, but with all the
 jest left out and nothing in it but real trouble.
 while the snaffle holds, or the “long-neck” stings,
 while the big beam tilts, or the last bell rings,
 while horses are horses to train and to race,
 then women and wine take a second place
 for me—for me—
 while a short “ten-three”
 has a field to squander or fence to face!
 song of the g. r.
 there are more ways of running a horse to suit your book than pulling his
 head off in the straight. some men forget this. understand clearly that
 all racing is rotten—as everything connected with losing money must
 be. out here, in addition to its inherent rottenness, it has the merit of
 being two-thirds sham; looking pretty on paper only. every one knows every
 one else far too well for business purposes. how on earth can you rack and
 harry and post a man for his losings, when you are fond of his wife, and
 live in the same station with him? he says, “on the monday following, i
 can't settle just yet.” you say, “all right, old man,” and think your self
 lucky if you pull off nine hundred out of a two-thousand rupee debt. any
 way you look at it, indian racing is immoral, and expensively immoral.
 which is much worse. if a man wants your money, he ought to ask for it, or
 send round a subscription-list, instead of juggling about the country,
 with an australian larrikin; a “brumby,” with as much breed as the boy; a
 brace of chumars in gold-laced caps; three or four ekka-ponies with hogged
 manes, and a switch-tailed demirep of a mare called arab because she has a
 kink in her flag. racing leads to the shroff quicker than anything else.
 but if you have no conscience and no sentiments, and good hands, and some
 knowledge of pace, and ten years' experience of horses, and several
 thousand rupees a month, i believe that you can occasionally contrive to
 pay your shoeing-bills.
 did you ever know shackles—b. w. g., ..—coarse, loose,
 mule-like ears—barrel as long as a gate-post—tough as a
 telegraph-wire—and the queerest brute that ever looked through a
 bridle? he was of no brand, being one of an ear-nicked mob taken into the
 bucephalus at l.-s. a head to make up freight, and sold raw and out of
 condition at calcutta for rs. . people who lost money on him called him
 a “brumby;” but if ever any horse had harpoon's shoulders and the gin's
 temper, shackles was that horse. two miles was his own particular
 distance. he trained himself, ran himself, and rode himself; and, if his
 jockey insulted him by giving him hints, he shut up at once and bucked the
 boy off. he objected to dictation. two or three of his owners did not
 understand this, and lost money in consequence. at last he was bought by a
 man who discovered that, if a race was to be won, shackles, and shackles
 only, would win it in his own way, so long as his jockey sat still. this
 man had a riding-boy called brunt—a lad from perth, west australia—and
 he taught brunt, with a trainer's whip, the hardest thing a jock can learn—to
 sit still, to sit still, and to keep on sitting still. when brunt fairly
 grasped this truth, shackles devastated the country. no weight could stop
 him at his own distance; and the fame of shackles spread from ajmir in the
 south, to chedputter in the north. there was no horse like shackles, so
 long as he was allowed to do his work in his own way. but he was beaten in
 the end; and the story of his fall is enough to make angels weep.
 at the lower end of the chedputter racecourse, just before the turn into
 the straight, the track passes close to a couple of old brick-mounds
 enclosing a funnel-shaped hollow. the big end of the funnel is not six
 feet from the railings on the off-side. the astounding peculiarity of the
 course is that, if you stand at one particular place, about half a mile
 away, inside the course, and speak at an ordinary pitch, your voice just
 hits the funnel of the brick-mounds and makes a curious whining echo
 there. a man discovered this one morning by accident while out training
 with a friend. he marked the place to stand and speak from with a couple
 of bricks, and he kept his knowledge to himself. every peculiarity of a
 course is worth remembering in a country where rats play the mischief with
 the elephant-litter, and stewards build jumps to suit their own stables.
 this man ran a very fairish country-bred, a long, racking high mare with
 the temper of a fiend, and the paces of an airy wandering seraph—a
 drifty, glidy stretch. the mare was, as a delicate tribute to mrs. reiver,
 called “the lady regula baddun”—or for short, regula baddun.
 shackles' jockey, brunt, was a quiet, well-behaved boy, but his nerves had
 been shaken. he began his career by riding jump-races in melbourne, where
 a few stewards want lynching, and was one of the jockeys who came through
 the awful butchery—perhaps you will recollect it—of the
 maribyrnong plate. the walls were colonial ramparts—logs of jarrak
 spiked into masonry—with wings as strong as church buttresses. once
 in his stride, a horse had to jump or fall. he couldn't run out. in the
 maribyrnong plate, twelve horses were jammed at the second wall. red hat,
 leading, fell this side, and threw out the glen, and the ruck came up
 behind and the space between wing and wing was one struggling, screaming,
 kicking shambles. four jockeys were taken out dead; three were very badly
 hurt, and brunt was among the three. he told the story of the maribyrnong
 plate sometimes; and when he described how whalley on red hat, said, as
 the mare fell under him:—“god ha' mercy, i'm done for!” and how,
 next instant, sithee there and white otter had crushed the life out of
 poor whalley, and the dust hid a small hell of men and horses, no one
 marvelled that brunt had dropped jump-races and australia together. regula
 baddun's owner knew that story by heart. brunt never varied it in the
 telling. he had no education.
 shackles came to the chedputter autumn races one year, and his owner
 walked about insulting the sportsmen of chedputter generally, till they
 went to the honorary secretary in a body and said:—“appoint
 handicappers, and arrange a race which shall break shackles and humble the
 pride of his owner.” the districts rose against shackles and sent up of
 their best; ousel, who was supposed to be able to do his mile in -;
 petard, the stud-bred, trained by a cavalry regiment who knew how to
 train; gringalet, the ewe-lamb of the th; bobolink, the pride of
 peshawar; and many others.
 they called that race the broken-link handicap, because it was to smash
 shackles; and the handicappers piled on the weights, and the fund gave
 eight hundred rupees, and the distance was “round the course for all
 horses.” shackles' owner said:—“you can arrange the race with regard
 to shackles only. so long as you don't bury him under weight-cloths, i
 don't mind.” regula baddun's owner said:—“i throw in my mare to fret
 ousel. six furlongs is regula's distance, and she will then lie down and
 die. so also will ousel, for his jockey doesn't understand a waiting
 race.” now, this was a lie, for regula had been in work for two months at
 dehra, and her chances were good, always supposing that shackles broke a
 blood-vessel—or brunt moved on him.
 the plunging in the lotteries was fine. they filled eight thousand-rupee
 lotteries on the broken link handicap, and the account in the pioneer said
 that “favoritism was divided.” in plain english, the various contingents
 were wild on their respective horses; for the handicappers had done their
 work well. the honorary secretary shouted himself hoarse through the din;
 and the smoke of the cheroots was like the smoke, and the rattling of the
 dice-boxes like the rattle of small-arm fire.
 ten horses started—very level—and regula baddun's owner
 cantered out on his back to a place inside the circle of the course, where
 two bricks had been thrown. he faced towards the brick-mounds at the lower
 end of the course and waited.
 the story of the running is in the pioneer. at the end of the first mile,
 shackles crept out of the ruck, well on the outside, ready to get round
 the turn, lay hold of the bit and spin up the straight before the others
 knew he had got away. brunt was sitting still, perfectly happy, listening
 to the “drum, drum, drum” of the hoofs behind, and knowing that, in about
 twenty strides, shackles would draw one deep breath and go up the last
 half-mile like the “flying dutchman.” as shackles went short to take the
 turn and came abreast of the brick-mound, brunt heard, above the noise of
 the wind in his ears, a whining, wailing voice on the offside, saying:—“god
 ha' mercy, i'm done for!” in one stride, brunt saw the whole seething
 smash of the maribyrnong plate before him, started in his saddle and gave
 a yell of terror. the start brought the heels into shackles' side, and the
 scream hurt shackles' feelings. he couldn't stop dead; but he put out his
 feet and slid along for fifty yards, and then, very gravely and
 judicially, bucked off brunt—a shaking, terror-stricken lump, while
 regula baddun made a neck-and-neck race with bobolink up the straight, and
 won by a short head—petard a bad third. shackles' owner, in the
 stand, tried to think that his field-glasses had gone wrong. regula
 baddun's owner, waiting by the two bricks, gave one deep sigh of relief,
 and cantered back to the stand. he had won, in lotteries and bets, about
 fifteen thousand.
 it was a broken-link handicap with a vengeance. it broke nearly all the
 men concerned, and nearly broke the heart of shackles' owner. he went down
 to interview brunt. the boy lay, livid and gasping with fright, where he
 had tumbled off. the sin of losing the race never seemed to strike him.
 all he knew was that whalley had “called” him, that the “call” was a
 warning; and, were he cut in two for it, he would never get up again. his
 nerve had gone altogether, and he only asked his master to give him a good
 thrashing, and let him go. he was fit for nothing, he said. he got his
 dismissal, and crept up to the paddock, white as chalk, with blue lips,
 his knees giving way under him. people said nasty things in the paddock;
 but brunt never heeded. he changed into tweeds, took his stick and went
 down the road, still shaking with fright, and muttering over and over
 again:—“god ha' mercy, i'm done for!” to the best of my knowledge
 and belief he spoke the truth.
 so now you know how the broken-link handicap was run and won. of course
 you don't believe it. you would credit anything about russia's designs on
 india, or the recommendations of the currency commission; but a little bit
 of sober fact is more than you can stand!
 “love heeds not caste nor sleep a broken bed. i went in search of
 love and lost myself.”
 hindu proverb.
 a man should, whatever happens, keep to his own caste, race and breed. let
 the white go to the white and the black to the black. then, whatever
 trouble falls is in the ordinary course of things—neither sudden,
 alien, nor unexpected.
 this is the story of a man who wilfully stepped beyond the safe limits of
 decent every-day society, and paid for it heavily.
 he knew too much in the first instance; and he saw too much in the second.
 he took too deep an interest in native life; but he will never do so
 again.
 deep away in the heart of the city, behind jitha megji's bustee, lies amir
 nath's gully, which ends in a dead-wall pierced by one grated window. at
 the head of the gully is a big cow-byre, and the walls on either side of
 the gully are without windows. neither suchet singh nor gaur chand
 approved of their women-folk looking into the world. if durga charan had
 been of their opinion, he would have been a happier man to-day, and little
 biessa would have been able to knead her own bread. her room looked out
 through the grated window into the narrow dark gully where the sun never
 came and where the buffaloes wallowed in the blue slime. she was a widow,
 about fifteen years old, and she prayed the gods, day and night, to send
 her a lover; for she did not approve of living alone.
 one day the man—trejago his name was—came into amir nath's
 gully on an aimless wandering; and, after he had passed the buffaloes,
 stumbled over a big heap of cattle food.
 then he saw that the gully ended in a trap, and heard a little laugh from
 behind the grated window. it was a pretty little laugh, and trejago,
 knowing that, for all practical purposes, the old arabian nights are good
 guides, went forward to the window, and whispered that verse of “the love
 song of har dyal” which begins:
 can a man stand upright in the face of the naked sun;
 or a lover in the presence of his beloved?
 if my feet fail me, o heart of my heart, am i to blame,
 being blinded by the glimpse of your beauty?
 there came the faint tchinks of a woman's bracelets from behind the
 grating, and a little voice went on with the song at the fifth verse:
 alas! alas! can the moon tell the lotus of her love when the
 gate of heaven is shut and the clouds gather for the rains?
 they have taken my beloved, and driven her with the pack-horses
 to the north.
 there are iron chains on the feet that were set on my heart.
 call to the bowman to make ready—
 the voice stopped suddenly, and trejago walked out of amir nath's gully,
 wondering who in the world could have capped “the love song of har dyal”
 so neatly.
 next morning, as he was driving to the office, an old woman threw a packet
 into his dog-cart. in the packet was the half of a broken glass bangle,
 one flower of the blood red dhak, a pinch of bhusa or cattle-food, and
 eleven cardamoms. that packet was a letter—not a clumsy compromising
 letter, but an innocent, unintelligible lover's epistle.
 trejago knew far too much about these things, as i have said. no
 englishman should be able to translate object-letters. but trejago spread
 all the trifles on the lid of his office-box and began to puzzle them out.
 a broken glass-bangle stands for a hindu widow all india over; because,
 when her husband dies a woman's bracelets are broken on her wrists.
 trejago saw the meaning of the little bit of the glass. the flower of the
 dhak means diversely “desire,” “come,” “write,” or “danger,” according to
 the other things with it. one cardamom means “jealousy;” but when any
 article is duplicated in an object-letter, it loses its symbolic meaning
 and stands merely for one of a number indicating time, or, if incense,
 curds, or saffron be sent also, place. the message ran then:—“a
 widow dhak flower and bhusa—at eleven o'clock.” the pinch of bhusa
 enlightened trejago. he saw—this kind of letter leaves much to
 instinctive knowledge—that the bhusa referred to the big heap of
 cattle-food over which he had fallen in amir nath's gully, and that the
 message must come from the person behind the grating; she being a widow.
 so the message ran then:—“a widow, in the gully in which is the heap
 of bhusa, desires you to come at eleven o'clock.”
 trejago threw all the rubbish into the fireplace and laughed. he knew that
 men in the east do not make love under windows at eleven in the forenoon,
 nor do women fix appointments a week in advance. so he went, that very
 night at eleven, into amir nath's gully, clad in a boorka, which cloaks a
 man as well as a woman. directly the gongs in the city made the hour, the
 little voice behind the grating took up “the love song of har dyal” at the
 verse where the panthan girl calls upon har dyal to return. the song is
 really pretty in the vernacular. in english you miss the wail of it. it
 runs something like this:—
 alone upon the housetops, to the north
 i turn and watch the lightning in the sky,—
 the glamour of thy footsteps in the north,
 come back to me, beloved, or i die!
 below my feet the still bazar is laid
 far, far below the weary camels lie,—
 the camels and the captives of thy raid,
 come back to me, beloved, or i die!
 my father's wife is old and harsh with years,
 and drudge of all my father's house am i.—
 my bread is sorrow and my drink is tears,
 come back to me, beloved, or i die!
 as the song stopped, trejago stepped up under the grating and whispered:—“i
 am here.”
 bisesa was good to look upon.
 that night was the beginning of many strange things, and of a double life
 so wild that trejago to-day sometimes wonders if it were not all a dream.
 bisesa or her old handmaiden who had thrown the object-letter had detached
 the heavy grating from the brick-work of the wall; so that the window slid
 inside, leaving only a square of raw masonry, into which an active man
 might climb.
 in the day-time, trejago drove through his routine of office-work, or put
 on his calling-clothes and called on the ladies of the station; wondering
 how long they would know him if they knew of poor little bisesa. at night,
 when all the city was still, came the walk under the evil-smelling boorka,
 the patrol through jitha megji's bustee, the quick turn into amir nath's
 gully between the sleeping cattle and the dead walls, and then, last of
 all, bisesa, and the deep, even breathing of the old woman who slept
 outside the door of the bare little room that durga charan allotted to his
 sister's daughter. who or what durga charan was, trejago never inquired;
 and why in the world he was not discovered and knifed never occurred to
 him till his madness was over, and bisesa... but this comes later.
 bisesa was an endless delight to trejago. she was as ignorant as a bird;
 and her distorted versions of the rumors from the outside world that had
 reached her in her room, amused trejago almost as much as her lisping
 attempts to pronounce his name—“christopher.” the first syllable was
 always more than she could manage, and she made funny little gestures with
 her rose-leaf hands, as one throwing the name away, and then, kneeling
 before trejago, asked him, exactly as an englishwoman would do, if he were
 sure he loved her. trejago swore that he loved her more than any one else
 in the world. which was true.
 after a month of this folly, the exigencies of his other life compelled
 trejago to be especially attentive to a lady of his acquaintance. you may
 take it for a fact that anything of this kind is not only noticed and
 discussed by a man's own race, but by some hundred and fifty natives as
 well. trejago had to walk with this lady and talk to her at the
 band-stand, and once or twice to drive with her; never for an instant
 dreaming that this would affect his dearer out-of-the-way life. but the
 news flew, in the usual mysterious fashion, from mouth to mouth, till
 bisesa's duenna heard of it and told bisesa. the child was so troubled
 that she did the household work evilly, and was beaten by durga charan's
 wife in consequence.
 a week later, bisesa taxed trejago with the flirtation. she understood no
 gradations and spoke openly. trejago laughed and bisesa stamped her little
 feet—little feet, light as marigold flowers, that could lie in the
 palm of a man's one hand.
 much that is written about “oriental passion and impulsiveness” is
 exaggerated and compiled at second-hand, but a little of it is true; and
 when an englishman finds that little, it is quite as startling as any
 passion in his own proper life. bisesa raged and stormed, and finally
 threatened to kill herself if trejago did not at once drop the alien
 memsahib who had come between them. trejago tried to explain, and to show
 her that she did not understand these things from a western standpoint.
 bisesa drew herself up, and said simply:
 “i do not. i know only this—it is not good that i should have made
 you dearer than my own heart to me, sahib. you are an englishman. i am
 only a black girl”—she was fairer than bar-gold in the mint—“and
 the widow of a black man.”
 then she sobbed and said: “but on my soul and my mother's soul, i love
 you. there shall no harm come to you, whatever happens to me.”
 trejago argued with the child, and tried to soothe her, but she seemed
 quite unreasonably disturbed. nothing would satisfy her save that all
 relations between them should end. he was to go away at once. and he went.
 as he dropped out at the window, she kissed his forehead twice, and he
 walked away wondering.
 a week, and then three weeks, passed without a sign from bisesa. trejago,
 thinking that the rupture had lasted quite long enough, went down to amir
 nath's gully for the fifth time in the three weeks, hoping that his rap at
 the sill of the shifting grating would be answered. he was not
 disappointed.
 there was a young moon, and one stream of light fell down into amir nath's
 gully, and struck the grating, which was drawn away as he knocked. from
 the black dark, bisesa held out her arms into the moonlight. both hands
 had been cut off at the wrists, and the stumps were nearly healed.
 then, as bisesa bowed her head between her arms and sobbed, some one in
 the room grunted like a wild beast, and something sharp—knife, sword
 or spear—thrust at trejago in his boorka. the stroke missed his
 body, but cut into one of the muscles of the groin, and he limped slightly
 from the wound for the rest of his days.
 the grating went into its place. there was no sign whatever from inside
 the house—nothing but the moonlight strip on the high wall, and the
 blackness of amir nath's gully behind.
 the next thing trejago remembers, after raging and shouting like a madman
 between those pitiless walls, is that he found himself near the river as
 the dawn was breaking, threw away his boorka and went home bareheaded.
 what the tragedy was—whether bisesa had, in a fit of causeless
 despair, told everything, or the intrigue had been discovered and she
 tortured to tell, whether durga charan knew his name, and what became of
 bisesa—trejago does not know to this day. something horrible had
 happened, and the thought of what it must have been comes upon trejago in
 the night now and again, and keeps him company till the morning. one
 special feature of the case is that he does not know where lies the front
 of durga charan's house. it may open on to a courtyard common to two or
 more houses, or it may lie behind any one of the gates of jitha megji's
 bustee. trejago cannot tell. he cannot get bisesa—poor little bisesa—back
 again. he has lost her in the city, where each man's house is as guarded
 and as unknowable as the grave; and the grating that opens into amir
 nath's gully has been walled up.
 but trejago pays his calls regularly, and is reckoned a very decent sort
 of man.
 there is nothing peculiar about him, except a slight stiffness, caused by
 a riding-strain, in the right leg.
 they burnt a corpse upon the sand—
 the light shone out afar;
 it guided home the plunging boats
 that beat from zanzibar.
 spirit of fire, where'er thy altars rise.
 thou art light of guidance to our eyes!
 salsette boat-song.
 there is hope for a man who gets publicly and riotously drunk more often
 that he ought to do; but there is no hope for the man who drinks secretly
 and alone in his own house—the man who is never seen to drink.
 this is a rule; so there must be an exception to prove it. moriarty's case
 was that exception.
 he was a civil engineer, and the government, very kindly, put him quite by
 himself in an out-district, with nobody but natives to talk to and a great
 deal of work to do. he did his work well in the four years he was utterly
 alone; but he picked up the vice of secret and solitary drinking, and came
 up out of the wilderness more old and worn and haggard than the dead-alive
 life had any right to make him. you know the saying that a man who has
 been alone in the jungle for more than a year is never quite sane all his
 life after. people credited moriarty's queerness of manner and moody ways
 to the solitude, and said it showed how government spoilt the futures of
 its best men. moriarty had built himself the plinth of a very good
 reputation in the bridge-dam-girder line. but he knew, every night of the
 week, that he was taking steps to undermine that reputation with l. l. l.
 and “christopher” and little nips of liqueurs, and filth of that kind. he
 had a sound constitution and a great brain, or else he would have broken
 down and died like a sick camel in the district, as better men have done
 before him.
 government ordered him to simla after he had come out of the desert; and
 he went up meaning to try for a post then vacant. that season, mrs. reiver—perhaps
 you will remember her—was in the height of her power, and many men
 lay under her yoke. everything bad that could be said has already been
 said about mrs. reiver, in another tale. moriarty was heavily-built and
 handsome, very quiet and nervously anxious to please his neighbors when he
 wasn't sunk in a brown study. he started a good deal at sudden noises or
 if spoken to without warning; and, when you watched him drinking his glass
 of water at dinner, you could see the hand shake a little. but all this
 was put down to nervousness, and the quiet, steady, “sip-sip-sip, fill and
 sip-sip-sip, again,” that went on in his own room when he was by himself,
 was never known. which was miraculous, seeing how everything in a man's
 private life is public property out here.
 moriarty was drawn, not into mrs. reiver's set, because they were not his
 sort, but into the power of mrs. reiver, and he fell down in front of her
 and made a goddess of her. this was due to his coming fresh out of the
 jungle to a big town. he could not scale things properly or see who was
 what.
 because mrs. reiver was cold and hard, he said she was stately and
 dignified. because she had no brains, and could not talk cleverly, he said
 she was reserved and shy. mrs. reiver shy! because she was unworthy of
 honor or reverence from any one, he reverenced her from a distance and
 dowered her with all the virtues in the bible and most of those in
 shakespeare.
 this big, dark, abstracted man who was so nervous when a pony cantered
 behind him, used to moon in the train of mrs. reiver, blushing with
 pleasure when she threw a word or two his way. his admiration was strictly
 platonic: even other women saw and admitted this. he did not move out in
 simla, so he heard nothing against his idol: which was satisfactory. mrs.
 reiver took no special notice of him, beyond seeing that he was added to
 her list of admirers, and going for a walk with him now and then, just to
 show that he was her property, claimable as such. moriarty must have done
 most of the talking, for mrs. reiver couldn't talk much to a man of his
 stamp; and the little she said could not have been profitable. what
 moriarty believed in, as he had good reason to, was mrs. reiver's
 influence over him, and, in that belief, set himself seriously to try to
 do away with the vice that only he himself knew of.
 his experiences while he was fighting with it must have been peculiar, but
 he never described them. sometimes he would hold off from everything
 except water for a week. then, on a rainy night, when no one had asked him
 out to dinner, and there was a big fire in his room, and everything
 comfortable, he would sit down and make a big night of it by adding little
 nip to little nip, planning big schemes of reformation meanwhile, until he
 threw himself on his bed hopelessly drunk. he suffered next morning.
 one night, the big crash came. he was troubled in his own mind over his
 attempts to make himself “worthy of the friendship” of mrs. reiver. the
 past ten days had been very bad ones, and the end of it all was that he
 received the arrears of two and three-quarter years of sipping in one
 attack of delirium tremens of the subdued kind; beginning with suicidal
 depression, going on to fits and starts and hysteria, and ending with
 downright raving. as he sat in a chair in front of the fire, or walked up
 and down the room picking a handkerchief to pieces, you heard what poor
 moriarty really thought of mrs. reiver, for he raved about her and his own
 fall for the most part; though he ravelled some p. w. d. accounts into the
 same skein of thought. he talked, and talked, and talked in a low dry
 whisper to himself, and there was no stopping him. he seemed to know that
 there was something wrong, and twice tried to pull himself together and
 confer rationally with the doctor; but his mind ran out of control at
 once, and he fell back to a whisper and the story of his troubles. it is
 terrible to hear a big man babbling like a child of all that a man usually
 locks up, and puts away in the deep of his heart. moriarty read out his
 very soul for the benefit of any one who was in the room between
 ten-thirty that night and two-forty-five next morning.
 from what he said, one gathered how immense an influence mrs. reiver held
 over him, and how thoroughly he felt for his own lapse. his whisperings
 cannot, of course, be put down here; but they were very instructive as
 showing the errors of his estimates.
 when the trouble was over, and his few acquaintances were pitying him for
 the bad attack of jungle-fever that had so pulled him down, moriarty swore
 a big oath to himself and went abroad again with mrs. reiver till the end
 of the season, adoring her in a quiet and deferential way as an angel from
 heaven. later on he took to riding—not hacking, but honest riding—which
 was good proof that he was improving, and you could slam doors behind him
 without his jumping to his feet with a gasp. that, again, was hopeful.
 how he kept his oath, and what it cost him in the beginning, nobody knows.
 he certainly managed to compass the hardest thing that a man who has drank
 heavily can do. he took his peg and wine at dinner, but he never drank
 alone, and never let what he drank have the least hold on him.
 once he told a bosom-friend the story of his great trouble, and how the
 “influence of a pure honest woman, and an angel as well” had saved him.
 when the man—startled at anything good being laid to mrs. reiver's
 door—laughed, it cost him moriarty's friendship. moriarty, who is
 married now to a woman ten thousand times better than mrs. reiver—a
 woman who believes that there is no man on earth as good and clever as her
 husband—will go down to his grave vowing and protesting that mrs.
 reiver saved him from ruin in both worlds.
 that she knew anything of moriarty's weakness nobody believed for a
 moment. that she would have cut him dead, thrown him over, and acquainted
 all her friends with her discovery, if she had known of it, nobody who
 knew her doubted for an instant.
 moriarty thought her something she never was, and in that belief saved
 himself. which was just as good as though she had been everything that he
 had imagined.
 but the question is, what claim will mrs. reiver have to the credit of
 moriarty's salvation, when her day of reckoning comes?
 he drank strong waters and his speech was coarse;
 he purchased raiment and forebore to pay;
 he struck a trusting junior with a horse,
 and won gymkhanas in a doubtful way.
 then, 'twixt a vice and folly, turned aside
 to do good deeds and straight to cloak them, lied.
 the mess room.
 if reggie burke were in india now, he would resent this tale being told;
 but as he is in hong-kong and won't see it, the telling is safe. he was
 the man who worked the big fraud on the sind and sialkote bank. he was
 manager of an up-country branch, and a sound practical man with a large
 experience of native loan and insurance work. he could combine the
 frivolities of ordinary life with his work, and yet do well. reggie burke
 rode anything that would let him get up, danced as neatly as he rode, and
 was wanted for every sort of amusement in the station.
 as he said himself, and as many men found out rather to their surprise,
 there were two burkes, both very much at your service. “reggie burke,”
 between four and ten, ready for anything from a hot-weather gymkhana to a
 riding-picnic; and, between ten and four, “mr. reginald burke, manager of
 the sind and sialkote branch bank.” you might play polo with him one
 afternoon and hear him express his opinions when a man crossed; and you
 might call on him next morning to raise a two-thousand rupee loan on a
 five hundred pound insurance-policy, eighty pounds paid in premiums. he
 would recognize you, but you would have some trouble in recognizing him.
 the directors of the bank—it had its headquarters in calcutta and
 its general manager's word carried weight with the government—picked
 their men well. they had tested reggie up to a fairly severe
 breaking-strain. they trusted him just as much as directors ever trust
 managers. you must see for yourself whether their trust was misplaced.
 reggie's branch was in a big station, and worked with the usual staff—one
 manager, one accountant, both english, a cashier, and a horde of native
 clerks; besides the police patrol at nights outside. the bulk of its work,
 for it was in a thriving district, was hoondi and accommodation of all
 kinds. a fool has no grip of this sort of business; and a clever man who
 does not go about among his clients, and know more than a little of their
 affairs, is worse than a fool. reggie was young-looking, clean-shaved,
 with a twinkle in his eye, and a head that nothing short of a gallon of
 the gunners' madeira could make any impression on.
 one day, at a big dinner, he announced casually that the directors had
 shifted on to him a natural curiosity, from england, in the accountant
 line. he was perfectly correct. mr. silas riley, accountant, was a most
 curious animal—a long, gawky, rawboned yorkshireman, full of the
 savage self-conceit that blossom's only in the best county in england.
 arrogance was a mild word for the mental attitude of mr. s. riley. he had
 worked himself up, after seven years, to a cashier's position in a
 huddersfield bank; and all his experience lay among the factories of the
 north. perhaps he would have done better on the bombay side, where they
 are happy with one-half per cent. profits, and money is cheap. he was
 useless for upper india and a wheat province, where a man wants a large
 head and a touch of imagination if he is to turn out a satisfactory
 balance-sheet.
 he was wonderfully narrow-minded in business, and, being new to the
 country, had no notion that indian banking is totally distinct from home
 work. like most clever self-made men, he had much simplicity in his
 nature; and, somehow or other, had construed the ordinarily polite terms
 of his letter of engagement into a belief that the directors had chosen
 him on account of his special and brilliant talents, and that they set
 great store by him. this notion grew and crystallized; thus adding to his
 natural north-country conceit. further, he was delicate, suffered from
 some trouble in his chest, and was short in his temper.
 you will admit that reggie had reason to call his new accountant a natural
 curiosity. the two men failed to hit it off at all. riley considered
 reggie a wild, feather-headed idiot, given to heaven only knew what
 dissipation in low places called “messes,” and totally unfit for the
 serious and solemn vocation of banking. he could never get over reggie's
 look of youth and “you-be-damned” air; and he couldn't understand reggie's
 friends—clean-built, careless men in the army—who rode over to
 big sunday breakfasts at the bank, and told sultry stories till riley got
 up and left the room. riley was always showing reggie how the business
 ought to be conducted, and reggie had more than once to remind him that
 seven years' limited experience between huddersfield and beverly did not
 qualify a man to steer a big up-country business. then riley sulked and
 referred to himself as a pillar of the bank and a cherished friend of the
 directors, and reggie tore his hair. if a man's english subordinates fail
 him in this country, he comes to a hard time indeed, for native help has
 strict limitations. in the winter riley went sick for weeks at a time with
 his lung complaint, and this threw more work on reggie. but he preferred
 it to the everlasting friction when riley was well.
 one of the travelling inspectors of the bank discovered these collapses
 and reported them to the directors. now riley had been foisted on the bank
 by an m. p., who wanted the support of riley's father, who, again, was
 anxious to get his son out to a warmer climate because of those lungs. the
 m. p. had an interest in the bank; but one of the directors wanted to
 advance a nominee of his own; and, after riley's father had died, he made
 the rest of the board see that an accountant who was sick for half the
 year, had better give place to a healthy man. if riley had known the real
 story of his appointment, he might have behaved better; but knowing
 nothing, his stretches of sickness alternated with restless, persistent,
 meddling irritation of reggie, and all the hundred ways in which conceit
 in a subordinate situation can find play. reggie used to call him striking
 and hair-curling names behind his back as a relief to his own feelings;
 but he never abused him to his face, because he said: “riley is such a
 frail beast that half of his loathsome conceit is due to pains in the
 chest.”
 late one april, riley went very sick indeed. the doctor punched him and
 thumped him, and told him he would be better before long. then the doctor
 went to reggie and said:—“do you know how sick your accountant is?”
 “no!” said reggie—“the worse the better, confound him! he's a
 clacking nuisance when he's well. i'll let you take away the bank safe if
 you can drug him silent for this hot-weather.”
 but the doctor did not laugh—“man, i'm not joking,” he said. “i'll
 give him another three months in his bed and a week or so more to die in.
 on my honor and reputation that's all the grace he has in this world.
 consumption has hold of him to the marrow.”
 reggie's face changed at once into the face of “mr. reginald burke,” and
 he answered:—“what can i do?”
 “nothing,” said the doctor. “for all practical purposes the man is dead
 already. keep him quiet and cheerful and tell him he's going to recover.
 that's all. i'll look after him to the end, of course.”
 the doctor went away, and reggie sat down to open the evening mail. his
 first letter was one from the directors, intimating for his information
 that mr. riley was to resign, under a month's notice, by the terms of his
 agreement, telling reggie that their letter to riley would follow and
 advising reggie of the coming of a new accountant, a man whom reggie knew
 and liked.
 reggie lit a cheroot, and, before he had finished smoking, he had sketched
 the outline of a fraud. he put away—“burked”—the directors
 letter, and went in to talk to riley, who was as ungracious as usual, and
 fretting himself over the way the bank would run during his illness. he
 never thought of the extra work on reggie's shoulders, but solely of the
 damage to his own prospects of advancement. then reggie assured him that
 everything would be well, and that he, reggie, would confer with riley
 daily on the management of the bank. riley was a little soothed, but he
 hinted in as many words that he did not think much of reggie's business
 capacity. reggie was humble. and he had letters in his desk from the
 directors that a gilbarte or a hardie might have been proud of!
 the days passed in the big darkened house, and the directors' letter of
 dismissal to riley came and was put away by reggie, who, every evening,
 brought the books to riley's room, and showed him what had been going
 forward, while riley snarled. reggie did his best to make statements
 pleasing to riley, but the accountant was sure that the bank was going to
 rack and ruin without him. in june, as the lying in bed told on his
 spirit, he asked whether his absence had been noted by the directors, and
 reggie said that they had written most sympathetic letters, hoping that he
 would be able to resume his valuable services before long. he showed riley
 the letters: and riley said that the directors ought to have written to
 him direct. a few days later, reggie opened riley's mail in the half-light
 of the room, and gave him the sheet—not the envelope—of a
 letter to riley from the directors. riley said he would thank reggie not
 to interfere with his private papers, specially as reggie knew he was too
 weak to open his own letters. reggie apologized.
 then riley's mood changed, and he lectured reggie on his evil ways: his
 horses and his bad friends. “of course, lying here on my back, mr. burke,
 i can't keep you straight; but when i'm well, i do hope you'll pay some
 heed to my words.” reggie, who had dropped polo, and dinners, and tennis,
 and all to attend to riley, said that he was penitent and settled riley's
 head on the pillow and heard him fret and contradict in hard, dry, hacking
 whispers, without a sign of impatience. this at the end of a heavy day's
 office work, doing double duty, in the latter half of june.
 when the new accountant came, reggie told him the facts of the case, and
 announced to riley that he had a guest staying with him. riley said that
 he might have had more consideration than to entertain his “doubtful
 friends” at such a time. reggie made carron, the new accountant, sleep at
 the club in consequence. carron's arrival took some of the heavy work off
 his shoulders, and he had time to attend to riley's exactions—to
 explain, soothe, invent, and settle and resettle the poor wretch in bed,
 and to forge complimentary letters from calcutta. at the end of the first
 month, riley wished to send some money home to his mother. reggie sent the
 draft. at the end of the second month, riley's salary came in just the
 same. reggie paid it out of his own pocket; and, with it, wrote riley a
 beautiful letter from the directors.
 riley was very ill indeed, but the flame of his life burnt unsteadily. now
 and then he would be cheerful and confident about the future, sketching
 plans for going home and seeing his mother. reggie listened patiently when
 the office work was over, and encouraged him.
 at other times riley insisted on reggie's reading the bible and grim
 “methody” tracts to him. out of these tracts he pointed morals directed at
 his manager. but he always found time to worry reggie about the working of
 the bank, and to show him where the weak points lay.
 this in-door, sick-room life and constant strains wore reggie down a good
 deal, and shook his nerves, and lowered his billiard-play by forty points.
 but the business of the bank, and the business of the sick-room, had to go
 on, though the glass was  degrees in the shade.
 at the end of the third month, riley was sinking fast, and had begun to
 realize that he was very sick. but the conceit that made him worry reggie,
 kept him from believing the worst. “he wants some sort of mental stimulant
 if he is to drag on,” said the doctor. “keep him interested in life if you
 care about his living.” so riley, contrary to all the laws of business and
 the finance, received a -per-cent, rise of salary from the directors.
 the “mental stimulant” succeeded beautifully. riley was happy and
 cheerful, and, as is often the case in consumption, healthiest in mind
 when the body was weakest. he lingered for a full month, snarling and
 fretting about the bank, talking of the future, hearing the bible read,
 lecturing reggie on sin, and wondering when he would be able to move
 abroad.
 but at the end of september, one mercilessly hot evening, he rose up in
 his bed with a little gasp, and said quickly to reggie:—“mr. burke,
 i am going to die. i know it in myself. my chest is all hollow inside, and
 there's nothing to breathe with. to the best of my knowledge i have done
 nowt”—he was returning to the talk of his boyhood—“to lie
 heavy on my conscience. god be thanked, i have been preserved from the
 grosser forms of sin; and i counsel you, mr. burke....”
 here his voice died down, and reggie stooped over him.
 “send my salary for september to my mother.... done great things with the
 bank if i had been spared.... mistaken policy.... no fault of mine.”
 then he turned his face to the wall and died.
 reggie drew the sheet over its face, and went out into the verandah, with
 his last “mental stimulant”—a letter of condolence and sympathy from
 the directors—unused in his pocket.
 “if i'd been only ten minutes earlier,” thought reggie, “i might have
 heartened him up to pull through another day.”
 the world hath set its heavy yoke
 upon the old white-bearded folk
 who strive to please the king.
 god's mercy is upon the young,
 god's wisdom in the baby tongue
 that fears not anything.
 the parable of chajju bhagat.
 now tods' mamma was a singularly charming woman, and every one in simla
 knew tods. most men had saved him from death on occasions. he was beyond
 his ayah's control altogether, and perilled his life daily to find out
 what would happen if you pulled a mountain battery mule's tail. he was an
 utterly fearless young pagan, about six years old, and the only baby who
 ever broke the holy calm of the supreme legislative council.
 it happened this way: tods' pet kid got loose, and fled up the hill, off
 the boileaugunge road, tods after it, until it burst into the viceregal
 lodge lawn, then attached to “peterhoff.” the council were sitting at the
 time, and the windows were open because it was warm. the red lancer in the
 porch told tods to go away; but tods knew the red lancer and most of the
 members of council personally. moreover, he had firm hold of the kid's
 collar, and was being dragged all across the flower-beds. “give my salaam
 to the long councillor sahib, and ask him to help me take moti back!”
 gasped tods. the council heard the noise through the open windows; and,
 after an interval, was seen the shocking spectacle of a legal member and a
 lieutenant-governor helping, under the direct patronage of a
 commander-in-chief and a viceroy, one small and very dirty boy in a
 sailor's suit and a tangle of brown hair, to coerce a lively and
 rebellious kid. they headed it off down the path to the mall, and tods
 went home in triumph and told his mamma that all the councillor sahibs had
 been helping him to catch moti. whereat his mamma smacked tods for
 interfering with the administration of the empire; but tods met the legal
 member the next day, and told him in confidence that if the legal member
 ever wanted to catch a goat, he, tods, would give him all the help in his
 power. “thank you, tods,” said the legal member.
 tods was the idol of some eighty jhampanis, and half as many saises. he
 saluted them all as “o brother.” it never entered his head that any living
 human being could disobey his orders; and he was the buffer between the
 servants and his mamma's wrath. the working of that household turned on
 tods, who was adored by every one from the dhoby to the dog-boy. even
 futteh khan, the villainous loafer khit from mussoorie, shirked risking
 tods' displeasure for fear his co-mates should look down on him.
 so tods had honor in the land from boileaugunge to chota simla, and ruled
 justly according to his lights. of course, he spoke urdu, but he had also
 mastered many queer side-speeches like the chotee bolee of the women, and
 held grave converse with shopkeepers and hill-coolies alike. he was
 precocious for his age, and his mixing with natives had taught him some of
 the more bitter truths of life; the meanness and the sordidness of it. he
 used, over his bread and milk, to deliver solemn and serious aphorisms,
 translated from the vernacular into the english, that made his mamma jump
 and vow that tods must go home next hot weather.
 just when tods was in the bloom of his power, the supreme legislature were
 hacking out a bill, for the sub-montane tracts, a revision of the then
 act, smaller than the punjab land bill, but affecting a few hundred
 thousand people none the less. the legal member had built, and bolstered,
 and embroidered, and amended that bill, till it looked beautiful on paper.
 then the council began to settle what they called the “minor details.” as
 if any englishman legislating for natives knows enough to know which are
 the minor and which are the major points, from the native point of view,
 of any measure! that bill was a triumph of “safe guarding the interests of
 the tenant.” one clause provided that land should not be leased on longer
 terms than five years at a stretch; because, if the landlord had a tenant
 bound down for, say, twenty years, he would squeeze the very life out of
 him. the notion was to keep up a stream of independent cultivators in the
 sub-montane tracts; and ethnologically and politically the notion was
 correct. the only drawback was that it was altogether wrong. a native's
 life in india implies the life of his son. wherefore, you cannot legislate
 for one generation at a time. you must consider the next from the native
 point of view. curiously enough, the native now and then, and in northern
 india more particularly, hates being over-protected against himself. there
 was a naga village once, where they lived on dead and buried commissariat
 mules.... but that is another story.
 for many reasons, to be explained later, the people concerned objected to
 the bill. the native member in council knew as much about punjabis as he
 knew about charing cross. he had said in calcutta that “the bill was
 entirely in accord with the desires of that large and important class, the
 cultivators;” and so on, and so on. the legal member's knowledge of
 natives was limited to english-speaking durbaris, and his own red
 chaprassis, the sub-montane tracts concerned no one in particular, the
 deputy commissioners were a good deal too driven to make representations,
 and the measure was one which dealt with small landholders only.
 nevertheless, the legal member prayed that it might be correct, for he was
 a nervously conscientious man. he did not know that no man can tell what
 natives think unless he mixes with them with the varnish off. and not
 always then. but he did the best he knew. and the measure came up to the
 supreme council for the final touches, while tods patrolled the burra
 simla bazar in his morning rides, and played with the monkey belonging to
 ditta mull, the bunnia, and listened, as a child listens to all the stray
 talk about this new freak of the lat sahib's.
 one day there was a dinner-party, at the house of tods' mamma, and the
 legal member came. tods was in bed, but he kept awake till he heard the
 bursts of laughter from the men over the coffee. then he paddled out in
 his little red flannel dressing-gown and his night-suit, and took refuge
 by the side of his father, knowing that he would not be sent back. “see
 the miseries of having a family!” said tods' father, giving tods three
 prunes, some water in a glass that had been used for claret, and telling
 him to sit still. tods sucked the prunes slowly, knowing that he would
 have to go when they were finished, and sipped the pink water like a man
 of the world, as he listened to the conversation. presently, the legal
 member, talking “shop,” to the head of a department, mentioned his bill by
 its full name—“the sub-montane tracts ryotwari revised enactment.”
 tods caught the one native word, and lifting up his small voice said:—“oh,
 i know all about that! has it been murramutted yet, councillor sahib?”
 “how much?” said the legal member.
 “murramutted—mended.—put theek, you know—made nice to
 please ditta mull!”
 the legal member left his place and moved up next to tods.
 “what do you know about ryotwari, little man?” he said.
 “i'm not a little man, i'm tods, and i know all about it. ditta mull, and
 choga lall, and amir nath, and—oh, lakhs of my friends tell me about
 it in the bazars when i talk to them.”
 “oh, they do—do they? what do they say, tods?”
 tods tucked his feet under his red flannel dressing-gown and said:—“i
 must fink.”
 the legal member waited patiently. then tods, with infinite compassion:
 “you don't speak my talk, do you, councillor sahib?”
 “no; i am sorry to say i do not,” said the legal member.
 “very well,” said tods. “i must fink in english.”
 he spent a minute putting his ideas in order, and began very slowly,
 translating in his mind from the vernacular to english, as many
 anglo-indian children do. you must remember that the legal member helped
 him on by questions when he halted, for tods was not equal to the
 sustained flight of oratory that follows.
 “ditta mull says:—'this thing is the talk of a child, and was made
 up by fools.' but i don't think you are a fool, councillor sahib,” said
 todds, hastily. “you caught my goat. this is what ditta mull says:—'i
 am not a fool, and why should the sirkar say i am a child? i can see if
 the land is good and if the landlord is good. if i am a fool, the sin is
 upon my own head. for five years i take my ground for which i have saved
 money, and a wife i take too, and a little son is born.' ditta mull has
 one daughter now, but he says he will have a son, soon. and he says: 'at
 the end of five years, by this new bundobust, i must go. if i do not go, i
 must get fresh seals and takkus-stamps on the papers, perhaps in the
 middle of the harvest, and to go to the law-courts once is wisdom, but to
 go twice is jehannum.' that is quite true,” explained tods, gravely. “all
 my friends say so. and ditta mull says:—'always fresh takkus and
 paying money to vakils and chaprassis and law-courts every five years or
 else the landlord makes me go. why do i want to go? am i fool? if i am a
 fool and do not know, after forty years, good land when i see it, let me
 die! but if the new bundobust says for fifteen years, then it is good and
 wise. my little son is a man, and i am burnt, and he takes the ground or
 another ground, paying only once for the takkus-stamps on the papers, and
 his little son is born, and at the end of fifteen years is a man too. but
 what profit is there in five years and fresh papers? nothing but dikh,
 trouble, dikh. we are not young men who take these lands, but old ones—not
 jais, but tradesmen with a little money—and for fifteen years we
 shall have peace. nor are we children that the sirkar should treat us so.”
 here tods stopped short, for the whole table were listening. the legal
 member said to tods: “is that all?”
 “all i can remember,” said tods. “but you should see ditta mull's big
 monkey. it's just like a councillor sahib.”
 “tods! go to bed,” said his father.
 tods gathered up his dressing-gown tail and departed.
 the legal member brought his hand down on the table with a crash—“by
 jove!” said the legal member, “i believe the boy is right. the short
 tenure is the weak point.”
 he left early, thinking over what tods had said. now, it was obviously
 impossible for the legal member to play with a bunnia's monkey, by way of
 getting understanding; but he did better. he made inquiries, always
 bearing in mind the fact that the real native—not the hybrid,
 university-trained mule—is as timid as a colt, and, little by
 little, he coaxed some of the men whom the measure concerned most
 intimately to give in their views, which squared very closely with tods'
 evidence.
 so the bill was amended in that clause; and the legal member was filled
 with an uneasy suspicion that native members represent very little except
 the orders they carry on their bosoms. but he put the thought from him as
 illiberal. he was a most liberal man.
 after a time the news spread through the bazars that tods had got the bill
 recast in the tenure clause, and if tods' mamma had not interfered, tods
 would have made himself sick on the baskets of fruit and pistachio nuts
 and cabuli grapes and almonds that crowded the verandah. till he went
 home, tods ranked some few degrees before the viceroy in popular
 estimation. but for the little life of him tods could not understand why.
 in the legal member's private-paper-box still lies the rough draft of the
 sub-montane tracts ryotwari revised enactment; and, opposite the
 twenty-second clause, pencilled in blue chalk, and signed by the legal
 member, are the words “tods' amendment.”
 “stopped in the straight when the race was his own!
 look at him cutting it—cur to the bone!”
 “ask ere the youngster be rated and chidden,
 what did he carry and how was he ridden?
 maybe they used him too much at the start;
 maybe fate's weight-cloths are breaking his heart.”
 life's handicap.
 when i was telling you of the joke that the worm played off on the senior
 subaltern, i promised a somewhat similar tale, but with all the jest left
 out. this is that tale:
 dicky hatt was kidnapped in his early, early youth—neither by
 landlady's daughter, housemaid, barmaid, nor cook, but by a girl so nearly
 of his own caste that only a woman could have said she was just the least
 little bit in the world below it. this happened a month before he came out
 to india, and five days after his one-and-twentieth birthday. the girl was
 nineteen—six years older than dicky in the things of this world,
 that is to say—and, for the time, twice as foolish as he.
 excepting, always, falling off a horse there is nothing more fatally easy
 than marriage before the registrar. the ceremony costs less than fifty
 shillings, and is remarkably like walking into a pawn-shop. after the
 declarations of residence have been put in, four minutes will cover the
 rest of the proceedings—fees, attestation, and all. then the
 registrar slides the blotting-pad over the names, and says grimly, with
 his pen between his teeth:—“now you're man and wife;” and the couple
 walk out into the street, feeling as if something were horribly illegal
 somewhere.
 but that ceremony holds and can drag a man to his undoing just as
 thoroughly as the “long as ye both shall live” curse from the altar-rails,
 with the bridesmaids giggling behind, and “the voice that breathed o'er
 eden” lifting the roof off. in this manner was dicky hatt kidnapped, and
 he considered it vastly fine, for he had received an appointment in india
 which carried a magnificent salary from the home point of view. the
 marriage was to be kept secret for a year. then mrs. dicky hatt was to
 come out and the rest of life was to be a glorious golden mist. that was
 how they sketched it under the addison road station lamps; and, after one
 short month, came gravesend and dicky steaming out to his new life, and
 the girl crying in a thirty-shillings a week bed-and-living room, in a
 back street off montpelier square near the knightsbridge barracks.
 but the country that dicky came to was a hard land, where “men” of
 twenty-one were reckoned very small boys indeed, and life was expensive.
 the salary that loomed so large six thousand miles away did not go far.
 particularly when dicky divided it by two, and remitted more than the fair
 half, at -, to montpelier square. one hundred and thirty-five rupees out
 of three hundred and thirty is not much to live on; but it was absurd to
 suppose that mrs. hatt could exist forever on the  pounds held back by
 dicky, from his outfit allowance. dicky saw this, and remitted at once;
 always remembering that rs.  were to be paid, twelve months later, for
 a first-class passage out for a lady. when you add to these trifling
 details the natural instincts of a boy beginning a new life in a new
 country and longing to go about and enjoy himself, and the necessity for
 grappling with strange work—which, properly speaking, should take up
 a boy's undivided attention—you will see that dicky started
 handicapped. he saw it himself for a breath or two; but he did not guess
 the full beauty of his future.
 as the hot weather began, the shackles settled on him and ate into his
 flesh. first would come letters—big, crossed, seven sheet letters—from
 his wife, telling him how she longed to see him, and what a heaven upon
 earth would be their property when they met. then some boy of the chummery
 wherein dicky lodged would pound on the door of his bare little room, and
 tell him to come out and look at a pony—the very thing to suit him.
 dicky could not afford ponies. he had to explain this. dicky could not
 afford living in the chummery, modest as it was. he had to explain this
 before he moved to a single room next the office where he worked all day.
 he kept house on a green oil-cloth table-cover, one chair, one charpoy,
 one photograph, one tooth-glass, very strong and thick, a seven-rupee
 eight-anna filter, and messing by contract at thirty-seven rupees a month.
 which last item was extortion. he had no punkah, for a punkah costs
 fifteen rupees a month; but he slept on the roof of the office with all
 his wife's letters under his pillow. now and again he was asked out to
 dinner where he got both a punkah and an iced drink. but this was seldom,
 for people objected to recognizing a boy who had evidently the instincts
 of a scotch tallow-chandler, and who lived in such a nasty fashion. dicky
 could not subscribe to any amusement, so he found no amusement except the
 pleasure of turning over his bank-book and reading what it said about
 “loans on approved security.” that cost nothing. he remitted through a
 bombay bank, by the way, and the station knew nothing of his private
 affairs.
 every month he sent home all he could possibly spare for his wife—and
 for another reason which was expected to explain itself shortly and would
 require more money.
 about this time, dicky was overtaken with the nervous, haunting fear that
 besets married men when they are out of sorts. he had no pension to look
 to. what if he should die suddenly, and leave his wife unprovided for? the
 thought used to lay hold of him in the still, hot nights on the roof, till
 the shaking of his heart made him think that he was going to die then and
 there of heart-disease. now this is a frame of mind which no boy has a
 right to know. it is a strong man's trouble; but, coming when it did, it
 nearly drove poor punkah-less, perspiring dicky hatt mad. he could tell no
 one about it.
 a certain amount of “screw” is as necessary for a man as for a
 billiard-ball. it makes them both do wonderful things. dicky needed money
 badly, and he worked for it like a horse. but, naturally, the men who
 owned him knew that a boy can live very comfortably on a certain income—pay
 in india is a matter of age, not merit, you see, and if their particular
 boy wished to work like two boys, business forbid that they should stop
 him! but business forbid that they should give him an increase of pay at
 his present ridiculously immature age! so dicky won certain rises of
 salary—ample for a boy—not enough for a wife and child—certainly
 too little for the seven-hundred-rupee passage that he and mrs. hatt had
 discussed so lightly once upon a time. and with this he was forced to be
 content.
 somehow, all his money seemed to fade away in home drafts and the crushing
 exchange, and the tone of the home letters changed and grew querulous.
 “why wouldn't dicky have his wife and the baby out? surely he had a salary—a
 fine salary—and it was too bad of him to enjoy himself in india. but
 would he—could he—make the next draft a little more elastic?”
 here followed a list of baby's kit, as long as a parsee's bill. then
 dicky, whose heart yearned to his wife and the little son he had never
 seen—which, again, is a feeling no boy is entitled to—enlarged
 the draft and wrote queer half-boy, half-man letters, saying that life was
 not so enjoyable after all and would the little wife wait yet a little
 longer? but the little wife, however much she approved of money, objected
 to waiting, and there was a strange, hard sort of ring in her letters that
 dicky didn't understand. how could he, poor boy?
 later on still—just as dicky had been told—apropos of another
 youngster who had “made a fool of himself,” as the saying is—that
 matrimony would not only ruin his further chances of advancement, but
 would lose him his present appointment—came the news that the baby,
 his own little, little son, had died, and, behind this, forty lines of an
 angry woman's scrawl, saying that death might have been averted if certain
 things, all costing money, had been done, or if the mother and the baby
 had been with dicky. the letter struck at dicky's naked heart; but, not
 being officially entitled to a baby, he could show no sign of trouble.
 how dicky won through the next four months, and what hope he kept alight
 to force him into his work, no one dare say. he pounded on, the
 seven-hundred-rupee passage as far away as ever, and his style of living
 unchanged, except when he launched into a new filter. there was the strain
 of his office-work, and the strain of his remittances, and the knowledge
 of his boy's death, which touched the boy more, perhaps, than it would
 have touched a man; and, beyond all, the enduring strain of his daily
 life. gray-headed seniors, who approved of his thrift and his fashion of
 denying himself everything pleasant, reminded him of the old saw that
 says:
 “if a youth would be distinguished in his art, art, art,
 he must keep the girls away from his heart, heart, heart.”
 and dicky, who fancied he had been through every trouble that a man is
 permitted to know, had to laugh and agree; with the last line of his
 balanced bank-book jingling in his head day and night.
 but he had one more sorrow to digest before the end. there arrived a
 letter from the little wife—the natural sequence of the others if
 dicky had only known it—and the burden of that letter was “gone with
 a handsomer man than you.” it was a rather curious production, without
 stops, something like this:—“she was not going to wait forever and
 the baby was dead and dicky was only a boy and he would never set eyes on
 her again and why hadn't he waved his handkerchief to her when he left
 gravesend and god was her judge she was a wicked woman but dicky was worse
 enjoying himself in india and this other man loved the ground she trod on
 and would dicky ever forgive her for she would never forgive dicky; and
 there was no address to write to.”
 instead of thanking his lucky stars that he was free, dicky discovered
 exactly how an injured husband feels—again, not at all the knowledge
 to which a boy is entitled—for his mind went back to his wife as he
 remembered her in the thirty-shilling “suite” in montpelier square, when
 the dawn of his last morning in england was breaking, and she was crying
 in the bed. whereat he rolled about on his bed and bit his fingers. he
 never stopped to think whether, if he had met mrs. hatt after those two
 years, he would have discovered that he and she had grown quite different
 and new persons. this, theoretically, he ought to have done. he spent the
 night after the english mail came in rather severe pain.
 next morning, dicky hatt felt disinclined to work. he argued that he had
 missed the pleasure of youth. he was tired, and he had tasted all the
 sorrow in life before three-and-twenty. his honor was gone—that was
 the man; and now he, too, would go to the devil—that was the boy in
 him. so he put his head down on the green oil-cloth table-cover, and wept
 before resigning his post, and all it offered.
 but the reward of his services came. he was given three days to reconsider
 himself, and the head of the establishment, after some telegraphings, said
 that it was a most unusual step, but, in view of the ability that mr. hatt
 had displayed at such and such a time, at such and such junctures, he was
 in a position to offer him an infinitely superior post—first on
 probation, and later, in the natural course of things, on confirmation.
 “and how much does the post carry?” said dicky. “six hundred and fifty
 rupees,” said the head slowly, expecting to see the young man sink with
 gratitude and joy.
 and it came then! the seven hundred rupee passage, and enough to have
 saved the wife, and the little son, and to have allowed of assured and
 open marriage, came then. dicky burst into a roar of laughter—laughter
 he could not check—nasty, jangling merriment that seemed as if it
 would go on forever. when he had recovered himself he said, quite
 seriously:—“i'm tired of work. i'm an old man now. it's about time i
 retired. and i will.”
 “the boy's mad!” said the head.
 i think he was right; but dicky hatt never reappeared to settle the
 question.
 go, stalk the red deer o'er the heather
 ride, follow the fox if you can!
 but, for pleasure and profit together,
 allow me the hunting of man,—
 the chase of the human, the search for the soul
 to its ruin,—the hunting of man.
 the old shikarri.
 i believe the difference began in the matter of a horse, with a twist in
 his temper, whom pinecoffin sold to nafferton and by whom nafferton was
 nearly slain. there may have been other causes of offence; the horse was
 the official stalking-horse. nafferton was very angry; but pinecoffin
 laughed and said that he had never guaranteed the beast's manners.
 nafferton laughed, too, though he vowed that he would write off his fall
 against pinecoffin if he waited five years. now, a dalesman from beyond
 skipton will forgive an injury when the strid lets a man live; but a south
 devon man is as soft as a dartmoor bog. you can see from their names that
 nafferton had the race-advantage of pinecoffin. he was a peculiar man, and
 his notions of humor were cruel. he taught me a new and fascinating form
 of shikar. he hounded pinecoffin from mithankot to jagadri, and from
 gurgaon to abbottabad up and across the punjab, a large province and in
 places remarkably dry. he said that he had no intention of allowing
 assistant commissioners to “sell him pups,” in the shape of ramping,
 screaming countrybreds, without making their lives a burden to them.
 most assistant commissioners develop a bent for some special work after
 their first hot weather in the country. the boys with digestions hope to
 write their names large on the frontier and struggle for dreary places
 like bannu and kohat. the bilious ones climb into the secretariat. which
 is very bad for the liver. others are bitten with a mania for district
 work, ghuznivide coins or persian poetry; while some, who come of farmers'
 stock, find that the smell of the earth after the rains gets into their
 blood, and calls them to “develop the resources of the province.” these
 men are enthusiasts. pinecoffin belonged to their class. he knew a great
 many facts bearing on the cost of bullocks and temporary wells, and
 opium-scrapers, and what happens if you burn too much rubbish on a field,
 in the hope of enriching used-up soil. all the pinecoffins come of a
 landholding breed, and so the land only took back her own again.
 unfortunately—most unfortunately for pinecoffin—he was a
 civilian, as well as a farmer. nafferton watched him, and thought about
 the horse. nafferton said:—“see me chase that boy till he drops!” i
 said:—“you can't get your knife into an assistant commissioner.”
 nafferton told me that i did not understand the administration of the
 province.
 our government is rather peculiar. it gushes on the agricultural and
 general information side, and will supply a moderately respectable man
 with all sorts of “economic statistics,” if he speaks to it prettily. for
 instance, you are interested in gold-washing in the sands of the sutlej.
 you pull the string, and find that it wakes up half a dozen departments,
 and finally communicates, say, with a friend of yours in the telegraph,
 who once wrote some notes on the customs of the gold-washers when he was
 on construction-work in their part of the empire. he may or may not be
 pleased at being ordered to write out everything he knows for your
 benefit. this depends on his temperament. the bigger man you are, the more
 information and the greater trouble can you raise.
 nafferton was not a big man; but he had the reputation of being very
 earnest. an “earnest” man can do much with a government. there was an
 earnest man who once nearly wrecked... but all india knows that story. i
 am not sure what real “earnestness” is. a very fair imitation can be
 manufactured by neglecting to dress decently, by mooning about in a
 dreamy, misty sort of way, by taking office-work home after staying in
 office till seven, and by receiving crowds of native gentlemen on sundays.
 that is one sort of “earnestness.”
 nafferton cast about for a peg whereon to hang his earnestness, and for a
 string that would communicate with pinecoffin. he found both. they were
 pig. nafferton became an earnest inquirer after pig. he informed the
 government that he had a scheme whereby a very large percentage of the
 british army in india could be fed, at a very large saving, on pig. then
 he hinted that pinecoffin might supply him with the “varied information
 necessary to the proper inception of the scheme.” so the government wrote
 on the back of the letter:—“instruct mr. pinecoffin to furnish mr.
 nafferton with any information in his power.” government is very prone to
 writing things on the backs of letters which, later, lead to trouble and
 confusion.
 nafferton had not the faintest interest in pig, but he knew that
 pinecoffin would flounce into the trap. pinecoffin was delighted at being
 consulted about pig. the indian pig is not exactly an important factor in
 agricultural life; but nafferton explained to pinecoffin that there was
 room for improvement, and corresponded direct with that young man.
 you may think that there is not much to be evolved from pig. it all
 depends how you set to work. pinecoffin being a civilian and wishing to do
 things thoroughly, began with an essay on the primitive pig, the mythology
 of the pig, and the dravidian pig. nafferton filed that information—twenty-seven
 foolscap sheets—and wanted to know about the distribution of the pig
 in the punjab, and how it stood the plains in the hot weather. from this
 point onwards, remember that i am giving you only the barest outlines of
 the affair—the guy-ropes, as it were, of the web that nafferton spun
 round pinecoffin.
 pinecoffin made a colored pig-population map, and collected observations
 on the comparative longevity of the pig (a) in the sub-montane tracts of
 the himalayas, and (b) in the rechna doab. nafferton filed that, and asked
 what sort of people looked after pig. this started an ethnological
 excursus on swineherds, and drew from pinecoffin long tables showing the
 proportion per thousand of the caste in the derajat. nafferton filed that
 bundle, and explained that the figures which he wanted referred to the
 cis-sutlej states, where he understood that pigs were very fine and large,
 and where he proposed to start a piggery. by this time, government had
 quite forgotten their instructions to mr. pinecoffin. they were like the
 gentlemen, in keats' poem, who turned well-oiled wheels to skin other
 people. but pinecoffin was just entering into the spirit of the pig-hunt,
 as nafferton well knew he would do. he had a fair amount of work of his
 own to clear away; but he sat up of nights reducing pig to five places of
 decimals for the honor of his service. he was not going to appear ignorant
 of so easy a subject as pig.
 then government sent him on special duty to kohat, to “inquire into” the
 big-seven-foot, iron-shod spades of that district. people had been killing
 each other with those peaceful tools; and government wished to know
 “whether a modified form of agricultural implement could not, tentatively
 and as a temporary measure, be introduced among the agricultural
 population without needlessly or unduly exasperating the existing
 religious sentiments of the peasantry.”
 between those spades and nafferton's pig, pinecoffin was rather heavily
 burdened.
 nafferton now began to take up “(a) the food-supply of the indigenous pig,
 with a view to the improvement of its capacities as a flesh-former. (b)
 the acclimatization of the exotic pig, maintaining its distinctive
 peculiarities.” pinecoffin replied exhaustively that the exotic pig would
 become merged in the indigenous type; and quoted horse-breeding statistics
 to prove this. the side-issue was debated, at great length on pinecoffin's
 side, till nafferton owned that he had been in the wrong, and moved the
 previous question. when pinecoffin had quite written himself out about
 flesh-formers, and fibrins, and glucose and the nitrogenous constituents
 of maize and lucerne, nafferton raised the question of expense. by this
 time pinecoffin, who had been transferred from kohat, had developed a pig
 theory of his own, which he stated in thirty-three folio pages—all
 carefully filed by nafferton. who asked for more.
 these things took ten months, and pinecoffin's interest in the potential
 piggery seemed to die down after he had stated his own views. but
 nafferton bombarded him with letters on “the imperial aspect of the
 scheme, as tending to officialize the sale of pork, and thereby calculated
 to give offence to the mahomedan population of upper india.” he guessed
 that pinecoffin would want some broad, free-hand work after his niggling,
 stippling, decimal details. pinecoffin handled the latest development of
 the case in masterly style, and proved that no “popular ebullition of
 excitement was to be apprehended.” nafferton said that there was nothing
 like civilian insight in matters of this kind, and lured him up a bye-path—“the
 possible profits to accrue to the government from the sale of
 hog-bristles.” there is an extensive literature of hog-bristles, and the
 shoe, brush, and colorman's trades recognize more varieties of bristles
 than you would think possible. after pinecoffin had wondered a little at
 nafferton's rage for information, he sent back a monograph, fifty-one
 pages, on “products of the pig.” this led him, under nafferton's tender
 handling, straight to the cawnpore factories, the trade in hog-skin for
 saddles—and thence to the tanners. pinecoffin wrote that
 pomegranate-seed was the best cure for hog-skin, and suggested—for
 the past fourteen months had wearied him—that nafferton should
 “raise his pigs before he tanned them.”
 nafferton went back to the second section of his fifth question. how could
 the exotic pig be brought to give as much pork as it did in the west and
 yet “assume the essentially hirsute characteristics of its oriental
 congener?” pinecoffin felt dazed, for he had forgotten what he had written
 sixteen month's before, and fancied that he was about to reopen the entire
 question. he was too far involved in the hideous tangle to retreat, and,
 in a weak moment, he wrote:—“consult my first letter.” which related
 to the dravidian pig. as a matter of fact, pinecoffin had still to reach
 the acclimatization stage; having gone off on a side-issue on the merging
 of types.
 then nafferton really unmasked his batteries! he complained to the
 government, in stately language, of “the paucity of help accorded to me in
 my earnest attempts to start a potentially remunerative industry, and the
 flippancy with which my requests for information are treated by a
 gentleman whose pseudo-scholarly attainments should at lest have taught
 him the primary differences between the dravidian and the berkshire
 variety of the genus sus. if i am to understand that the letter to which
 he refers me contains his serious views on the acclimatization of a
 valuable, though possibly uncleanly, animal, i am reluctantly compelled to
 believe,” etc., etc.
 there was a new man at the head of the department of castigation. the
 wretched pinecoffin was told that the service was made for the country,
 and not the country for the service, and that he had better begin to
 supply information about pigs.
 pinecoffin answered insanely that he had written everything that could be
 written about pig, and that some furlough was due to him.
 nafferton got a copy of that letter, and sent it, with the essay on the
 dravidian pig, to a down-country paper, which printed both in full. the
 essay was rather highflown; but if the editor had seen the stacks of
 paper, in pinecoffin's handwriting, on nafferton's table, he would not
 have been so sarcastic about the “nebulous discursiveness and blatant
 self-sufficiency of the modern competition-wallah, and his utter inability
 to grasp the practical issues of a practical question.” many friends cut
 out these remarks and sent them to pinecoffin.
 i have already stated that pinecoffin came of a soft stock. this last
 stroke frightened and shook him. he could not understand it; but he felt
 he had been, somehow, shamelessly betrayed by nafferton. he realized that
 he had wrapped himself up in the pigskin without need, and that he could
 not well set himself right with his government. all his acquaintances
 asked after his “nebulous discursiveness” or his “blatant
 self-sufficiency,” and this made him miserable.
 he took a train and went to nafferton, whom he had not seen since the pig
 business began. he also took the cutting from the paper, and blustered
 feebly and called nafferton names, and then died down to a watery, weak
 protest of the “i-say-it's-too-bad-you-know” order.
 nafferton was very sympathetic.
 “i'm afraid i've given you a good deal of trouble, haven't i?” said he.
 “trouble!” whimpered pinecoffin; “i don't mind the trouble so much, though
 that was bad enough; but what i resent is this showing up in print. it
 will stick to me like a burr all through my service. and i did do my best
 for your interminable swine. it's too bad of you, on my soul it is!”
 “i don't know,” said nafferton; “have you ever been stuck with a horse? it
 isn't the money i mind, though that is bad enough; but what i resent is
 the chaff that follows, especially from the boy who stuck me. but i think
 we'll cry quits now.”
 pinecoffin found nothing to say save bad words; and nafferton smiled ever
 so sweetly, and asked him to dinner.
 it was not in the open fight
 we threw away the sword,
 but in the lonely watching
 in the darkness by the ford.
 the waters lapped, the night-wind blew,
 full-armed the fear was born and grew,
 and we were flying ere we knew
 from panic in the night.
 beoni bar.
 some people hold that an english cavalry regiment cannot run. this is a
 mistake. i have seen four hundred and thirty-seven sabres flying over the
 face of the country in abject terror—have seen the best regiment
 that ever drew bridle, wiped off the army list for the space of two hours.
 if you repeat this tale to the white hussars they will, in all
 probability, treat you severely. they are not proud of the incident.
 you may know the white hussars by their “side,” which is greater than that
 of all the cavalry regiments on the roster. if this is not a sufficient
 mark, you may know them by their old brandy. it has been sixty years in
 the mess and is worth going far to taste. ask for the “mcgaire” old
 brandy, and see that you get it. if the mess sergeant thinks that you are
 uneducated, and that the genuine article will be lost on you, he will
 treat you accordingly. he is a good man. but, when you are at mess, you
 must never talk to your hosts about forced marches or long-distance rides.
 the mess are very sensitive; and, if they think that you are laughing at
 them, will tell you so.
 as the white hussars say, it was all the colonel's fault. he was a new
 man, and he ought never to have taken the command. he said that the
 regiment was not smart enough. this to the white hussars, who knew they
 could walk round any horse and through any guns, and over any foot on the
 face of the earth! that insult was the first cause of offence.
 then the colonel cast the drum-horse—the drum-horse of the white
 hussars! perhaps you do not see what an unspeakable crime he had
 committed. i will try to make it clear. the soul of the regiment lives in
 the drum-horse, who carries the silver kettle-drums. he is nearly always a
 big piebald waler. that is a point of honor; and a regiment will spend
 anything you please on a piebald. he is beyond the ordinary laws of
 casting. his work is very light, and he only manoeuvres at a foot-pace.
 wherefore, so long as he can step out and look handsome, his well-being is
 assured. he knows more about the regiment than the adjutant, and could not
 make a mistake if he tried.
 the drum-horse of the white hussars was only eighteen years old, and
 perfectly equal to his duties. he had at least six years' more work in
 him, and carried himself with all the pomp and dignity of a drum-major of
 the guards. the regiment had paid rs. , for him.
 but the colonel said that he must go, and he was cast in due form and
 replaced by a washy, bay beast as ugly as a mule, with a ewe-neck,
 rat-tail, and cow-hocks. the drummer detested that animal, and the best of
 the band-horses put back their ears and showed the whites of their eyes at
 the very sight of him. they knew him for an upstart and no gentleman. i
 fancy that the colonel's ideas of smartness extended to the band, and that
 he wanted to make it take part in the regular parade movements. a cavalry
 band is a sacred thing. it only turns out for commanding officers'
 parades, and the band master is one degree more important than the
 colonel. he is a high priest and the “keel row” is his holy song. the
 “keel row” is the cavalry trot; and the man who has never heard that tune
 rising, high and shrill, above the rattle of the regiment going past the
 saluting-base, has something yet to hear and understand.
 when the colonel cast the drum-horse of the white hussars, there was
 nearly a mutiny.
 the officers were angry, the regiment were furious, and the bandsman swore—like
 troopers. the drum-horse was going to be put up to auction—public
 auction—to be bought, perhaps, by a parsee and put into a cart! it
 was worse than exposing the inner life of the regiment to the whole world,
 or selling the mess plate to a jew—a black jew.
 the colonel was a mean man and a bully. he knew what the regiment thought
 about his action; and, when the troopers offered to buy the drum-horse, he
 said that their offer was mutinous and forbidden by the regulations.
 but one of the subalterns—hogan-yale, an irishman—bought the
 drum-horse for rs.  at the sale; and the colonel was wroth. yale
 professed repentance—he was unnaturally submissive—and said
 that, as he had only made the purchase to save the horse from possible
 ill-treatment and starvation, he would now shoot him and end the business.
 this appeared to soothe the colonel, for he wanted the drum-horse disposed
 of. he felt that he had made a mistake, and could not of course
 acknowledge it. meantime, the presence of the drum-horse was an annoyance
 to him.
 yale took to himself a glass of the old brandy, three cheroots, and his
 friend, martyn; and they all left the mess together. yale and martyn
 conferred for two hours in yale's quarters; but only the bull-terrier who
 keeps watch over yale's boot-trees knows what they said. a horse, hooded
 and sheeted to his ears, left yale's stables and was taken, very
 unwillingly, into the civil lines. yale's groom went with him. two men
 broke into the regimental theatre and took several paint-pots and some
 large scenery brushes. then night fell over the cantonments, and there was
 a noise as of a horse kicking his loose-box to pieces in yale's stables.
 yale had a big, old, white waler trap-horse.
 the next day was a thursday, and the men, hearing that yale was going to
 shoot the drum-horse in the evening, determined to give the beast a
 regular regimental funeral—a finer one than they would have given
 the colonel had he died just then. they got a bullock-cart and some
 sacking, and mounds and mounds of roses, and the body, under sacking, was
 carried out to the place where the anthrax cases were cremated; two-thirds
 of the regiment followed. there was no band, but they all sang “the place
 where the old horse died” as something respectful and appropriate to the
 occasion. when the corpse was dumped into the grave and the men began
 throwing down armfuls of roses to cover it, the farrier-sergeant ripped
 out an oath and said aloud:—“why, it ain't the drum-horse any more
 than it's me!” the troop-sergeant-majors asked him whether he had left his
 head in the canteen. the farrier-sergeant said that he knew the
 drum-horse's feet as well as he knew his own; but he was silenced when he
 saw the regimental number burnt in on the poor stiff, upturned near-fore.
 thus was the drum-horse of the white hussars buried; the farrier-sergeant
 grumbling. the sacking that covered the corpse was smeared in places with
 black paint; and the farrier-sergeant drew attention to this fact. but the
 troop-sergeant-major of e troop kicked him severely on the shin, and told
 him that he was undoubtedly drunk.
 on the monday following the burial, the colonel sought revenge on the
 white hussars. unfortunately, being at that time temporarily in command of
 the station, he ordered a brigade field-day. he said that he wished to
 make the regiment “sweat for their damned insolence,” and he carried out
 his notion thoroughly. that monday was one of the hardest days in the
 memory of the white hussars. they were thrown against a skeleton-enemy,
 and pushed forward, and withdrawn, and dismounted, and “scientifically
 handled” in every possible fashion over dusty country, till they sweated
 profusely. their only amusement came late in the day, when they fell upon
 the battery of horse artillery and chased it for two mile's. this was a
 personal question, and most of the troopers had money on the event; the
 gunners saying openly that they had the legs of the white hussars. they
 were wrong. a march-past concluded the campaign, and when the regiment got
 back to their lines, the men were coated with dirt from spur to
 chin-strap.
 the white hussars have one great and peculiar privilege. they won it at
 fontenoy, i think.
 many regiments possess special rights, such as wearing collars with
 undress uniform, or a bow of ribbon between the shoulders, or red and
 white roses in their helmets on certain days of the year. some rights are
 connected with regimental saints, and some with regimental successes. all
 are valued highly; but none so highly as the right of the white hussars to
 have the band playing when their horses are being watered in the lines.
 only one tune is played, and that tune never varies. i don't know its real
 name, but the white hussars call it:—“take me to london again.” it
 sound's very pretty. the regiment would sooner be struck off the roster
 than forego their distinction.
 after the “dismiss” was sounded, the officers rode off home to prepare for
 stables; and the men filed into the lines, riding easy. that is to say,
 they opened their tight buttons, shifted their helmets, and began to joke
 or to swear as the humor took them; the more careful slipping off and
 easing girths and curbs. a good trooper values his mount exactly as much
 as he values himself, and believes, or should believe, that the two
 together are irresistible where women or men, girl's or gun's, are
 concerned.
 then the orderly-officer gave the order:—“water horses,” and the
 regiment loafed off to the squadron-troughs, which were in rear of the
 stables and between these and the barracks. there were four huge troughs,
 one for each squadron, arranged en echelon, so that the whole regiment
 could water in ten minutes if it liked. but it lingered for seventeen, as
 a rule, while the band played.
 the band struck up as the squadrons filed off the troughs and the men
 slipped their feet out of the stirrups and chaffed each other. the sun was
 just setting in a big, hot bed of red cloud, and the road to the civil
 lines seemed to run straight into the sun's eye. there was a little dot on
 the road. it grew and grew till it showed as a horse, with a sort of
 gridiron thing on his back. the red cloud glared through the bars of the
 gridiron. some of the troopers shaded their eyes with their hands and
 said:—“what the mischief as that there 'orse got on 'im!”
 in another minute they heard a neigh that every soul—horse and man—in
 the regiment knew, and saw, heading straight towards the band, the dead
 drum-horse of the white hussars!
 on his withers banged and bumped the kettle-drums draped in crape, and on
 his back, very stiff and soldierly, sat a bare-headed skeleton.
 the band stopped playing, and, for a moment, there was a hush.
 then some one in e troop—men said it was the troop-sergeant-major—swung
 his horse round and yelled. no one can account exactly for what happened
 afterwards; but it seems that, at least, one man in each troop set an
 example of panic, and the rest followed like sheep. the horses that had
 barely put their muzzles into the trough's reared and capered; but, as
 soon as the band broke, which it did when the ghost of the drum-horse was
 about a furlong distant, all hooves followed suit, and the clatter of the
 stampede—quite different from the orderly throb and roar of a
 movement on parade, or the rough horse-play of watering in camp—made
 them only more terrified. they felt that the men on their backs were
 afraid of something. when horses once know that, all is over except the
 butchery.
 troop after troop turned from the troughs and ran—anywhere, and
 everywhere—like spit quicksilver. it was a most extraordinary
 spectacle, for men and horses were in all stages of easiness, and the
 carbine-buckets flopping against their sides urged the horses on. men were
 shouting and cursing, and trying to pull clear of the band which was being
 chased by the drum-horse whose rider had fallen forward and seemed to be
 spurring for a wager.
 the colonel had gone over to the mess for a drink. most of the officers
 were with him, and the subaltern of the day was preparing to go down to
 the lines, and receive the watering reports from the troop-sergeant
 majors. when “take me to london again” stopped, after twenty bars, every
 one in the mess said:—“what on earth has happened?” a minute later,
 they heard unmilitary noises, and saw, far across the plain, the white
 hussars scattered, and broken, and flying.
 the colonel was speechless with rage, for he thought that the regiment had
 risen against him or was unanimously drunk. the band, a disorganized mob,
 tore past, and at it's heels labored the drum-horse—the dead and
 buried drum-horse—with the jolting, clattering skeleton. hogan-yale
 whispered softly to martyn:—“no wire will stand that treatment,” and
 the band, which had doubled like a hare, came back again. but the rest of
 the regiment was gone, was rioting all over the province, for the dusk had
 shut in and each man was howling to his neighbor that the drum-horse was
 on his flank. troop-horses are far too tenderly treated as a rule. they
 can, on emergencies, do a great deal, even with seventeen stone on their
 backs. as the troopers found out.
 how long this panic lasted i cannot say. i believe that when the moon rose
 the men saw they had nothing to fear, and, by twos and threes and
 half-troops, crept back into cantonments very much ashamed of themselves.
 meantime, the drum-horse, disgusted at his treatment by old friends,
 pulled up, wheeled round, and trotted up to the mess verandah-steps for
 bread. no one liked to run; but no one cared to go forward till the
 colonel made a movement and laid hold of the skeleton's foot. the band had
 halted some distance away, and now came back slowly. the colonel called
 it, individually and collectively, every evil name that occurred to him at
 the time; for he had set his hand on the bosom of the drum-horse and found
 flesh and blood. then he beat the kettle-drums with his clenched fist, and
 discovered that they were but made of silvered paper and bamboo. next,
 still swearing, he tried to drag the skeleton out of the saddle, but found
 that it had been wired into the cantle. the sight of the colonel, with his
 arms round the skeleton's pelvis and his knee in the old drum-horse's
 stomach, was striking. not to say amusing. he worried the thing off in a
 minute or two, and threw it down on the ground, saying to the band:—“here,
 you curs, that's what you're afraid of.” the skeleton did not look pretty
 in the twilight. the band-sergeant seemed to recognize it, for he began to
 chuckle and choke. “shall i take it away, sir?” said the band-sergeant.
 “yes,” said the colonel, “take it to hell, and ride there yourselves!”
 the band-sergeant saluted, hoisted the skeleton across his saddle-bow, and
 led off to the stables. then the colonel began to make inquiries for the
 rest of the regiment, and the language he used was wonderful. he would
 disband the regiment—he would court-martial every soul in it—he
 would not command such a set of rabble, and so on, and so on. as the men
 dropped in, his language grew wilder, until at last it exceeded the utmost
 limits of free speech allowed even to a colonel of horse.
 martyn took hogan-yale aside and suggested compulsory retirement from the
 service as a necessity when all was discovered. martyn was the weaker man
 of the two, hogan-yale put up his eyebrows and remarked, firstly, that he
 was the son of a lord, and secondly, that he was as innocent as the babe
 unborn of the theatrical resurrection of the drum-horse.
 “my instructions,” said yale, with a singularly sweet smile, “were that
 the drum-horse should be sent back as impressively as possible. i ask you,
 am i responsible if a mule-headed friend sends him back in such a manner
 as to disturb the peace of mind of a regiment of her majesty's cavalry?”
 martyn said:—“you are a great man and will in time become a general;
 but i'd give my chance of a troop to be safe out of this affair.”
 providence saved martyn and hogan-yale. the second-in-command led the
 colonel away to the little curtained alcove wherein the subalterns of the
 white hussars were accustomed to play poker of nights; and there, after
 many oaths on the colonel's part, they talked together in low tones. i
 fancy that the second-in-command must have represented the scare as the
 work of some trooper whom it would be hopeless to detect; and i know that
 he dwelt upon the sin and the shame of making a public laughingstock of
 the scare.
 “they will call us,” said the second-in-command, who had really a fine
 imagination, “they will call us the 'fly-by-nights'; they will call us the
 'ghost hunters'; they will nickname us from one end of the army list to
 the other. all the explanations in the world won't make outsiders
 understand that the officers were away when the panic began. for the honor
 of the regiment and for your own sake keep this thing quiet.”
 the colonel was so exhausted with anger that soothing him down was not so
 difficult as might be imagined. he was made to see, gently and by degrees,
 that it was obviously impossible to court-martial the whole regiment, and
 equally impossible to proceed against any subaltern who, in his belief,
 had any concern in the hoax.
 “but the beast's alive! he's never been shot at all!” shouted the colonel.
 “it's flat, flagrant disobedience! i've known a man broke for less, d——d
 sight less. they're mocking me, i tell you, mutman! they're mocking me!”
 once more, the second-in-command set himself to sooth the colonel, and
 wrestled with him for half-an-hour. at the end of that time, the
 regimental sergeant-major reported himself. the situation was rather novel
 tell to him; but he was not a man to be put out by circumstances. he
 saluted and said: “regiment all come back, sir.” then, to propitiate the
 colonel:—“an' none of the horses any the worse, sir.”
 the colonel only snorted and answered:—“you'd better tuck the men
 into their cots, then, and see that they don't wake up and cry in the
 night.” the sergeant withdrew.
 his little stroke of humor pleased the colonel, and, further, he felt
 slightly ashamed of the language he had been using. the second-in-command
 worried him again, and the two sat talking far into the night.
 next day but one, there was a commanding officer's parade, and the colonel
 harangued the white hussars vigorously. the pith of his speech was that,
 since the drum-horse in his old age had proved himself capable of cutting
 up the whole regiment, he should return to his post of pride at the head
 of the band, but the regiment were a set of ruffians with bad consciences.
 the white hussars shouted, and threw everything movable about them into
 the air, and when the parade was over, they cheered the colonel till they
 couldn't speak. no cheers were put up for lieutenant hogan-yale, who
 smiled very sweetly in the background.
 said the second-in-command to the colonel, unofficially:—“these
 little things ensure popularity, and do not the least affect discipline.”
 “but i went back on my word,” said the colonel.
 “never mind,” said the second-in-command. “the white hussars will follow
 you anywhere from to-day. regiment's are just like women. they will do
 anything for trinketry.”
 a week later, hogan-yale received an extraordinary letter from some one
 who signed himself “secretary charity and zeal, , e. c.,” and asked
 for “the return of our skeleton which we have reason to believe is in your
 possession.”
 “who the deuce is this lunatic who trades in bones?” said hogan-yale.
 “beg your pardon, sir,” said the band-sergeant, “but the skeleton is with
 me, an' i'll return it if you'll pay the carriage into the civil lines.
 there's a coffin with it, sir.”
 hogan-yale smiled and handed two rupees to the band-sergeant, saying:—“write
 the date on the skull, will you?”
 if you doubt this story, and know where to go, you can see the date on the
 skeleton. but don't mention the matter to the white hussars.
 i happen to know something about it, because i prepared the drum-horse for
 his resurrection. he did not take kindly to the skeleton at all.
 in the daytime, when she moved about me,
 in the night, when she was sleeping at my side,—
 i was wearied, i was wearied of her presence.
 day by day and night by night i grew to hate her—
 would to god that she or i had died!
 confessions.
 there was a man called bronckhorst—a three-cornered, middle-aged man
 in the army—gray as a badger, and, some people said, with a touch of
 country-blood in him. that, however, cannot be proved. mrs. bronckhorst
 was not exactly young, though fifteen years younger than her husband. she
 was a large, pale, quiet woman, with heavy eyelids, over weak eyes, and
 hair that turned red or yellow as the lights fell on it.
 bronckhorst was not nice in any way. he had no respect for the pretty
 public and private lies that make life a little less nasty than it is. his
 manner towards his wife was coarse. there are many things—including
 actual assault with the clenched fist—that a wife will endure; but
 seldom a wife can bear—as mrs. bronckhorst bore—with a long
 course of brutal, hard chaff, making light of her weaknesses, her
 headaches, her small fits of gayety, her dresses, her queer little
 attempts to make herself attractive to her husband when she knows that she
 is not what she has been, and—worst of all—the love that she
 spends on her children. that particular sort of heavy-handed jest was
 specially dear to bronckhorst. i suppose that he had first slipped into
 it, meaning no harm, in the honeymoon, when folk find their ordinary stock
 of endearments run short, and so go to the other extreme to express their
 feelings. a similar impulse make's a man say:—“hutt, you old beast!”
 when a favorite horse nuzzles his coat-front. unluckily, when the reaction
 of marriage sets in, the form of speech remains, and, the tenderness
 having died out, hurts the wife more than she cares to say. but mrs.
 bronckhorst was devoted to her “teddy,” as she called him. perhaps that
 was why he objected to her. perhaps—this is only a theory to account
 for his infamous behavior later on—he gave way to the queer savage
 feeling that sometimes takes by the throat a husband twenty years'
 married, when he sees, across the table, the same face of his wedded wife,
 and knows that, as he has sat facing it, so must he continue to sit until
 day of its death or his own. most men and all women know the spasm. it
 only lasts for three breaths as a rule, must be a “throw-back” to times
 when men and women were rather worse than they are now, and is too
 unpleasant to be discussed.
 dinner at the bronckhorst's was an infliction few men cared to undergo.
 bronckhorst took a pleasure in saying things that made his wife wince.
 when their little boy came in at dessert, bronckhorst used to give him
 half a glass of wine, and naturally enough, the poor little mite got first
 riotous, next miserable, and was removed screaming. bronckhorst asked if
 that was the way teddy usually behaved, and whether mrs. bronckhorst could
 not spare some of her time to teach the “little beggar decency.” mrs.
 bronckhorst, who loved the boy more than her own life, tried not to cry—her
 spirit seemed to have been broken by her marriage. lastly, bronckhorst
 used to say:—“there! that'll do, that'll do. for god's sake try to
 behave like a rational woman. go into the drawing-room.” mrs. bronckhorst
 would go, trying to carry it all off with a smile; and the guest of the
 evening would feel angry and uncomfortable.
 after three years of this cheerful life—for mrs. bronckhorst had no
 woman-friends to talk to—the station was startled by the news that
 bronckhorst had instituted proceedings on the criminal count, against a
 man called biel, who certainly had been rather attentive to mrs.
 bronckhorst whenever she had appeared in public. the utter want of reserve
 with which bronckhorst treated his own dishonor helped us to know that the
 evidence against biel would be entirely circumstantial and native. there
 were no letters; but bronckhorst said openly that he would rack heaven and
 earth until he saw biel superintending the manufacture of carpets in the
 central jail. mrs. bronckhorst kept entirely to her house, and let
 charitable folks say what they pleased. opinions were divided. some
 two-thirds of the station jumped at once to the conclusion that biel was
 guilty; but a dozen men who knew and liked him held by him. biel was
 furious and surprised. he denied the whole thing, and vowed that he would
 thrash bronckhorst within an inch of his life. no jury, we knew, could
 convict a man on the criminal count on native evidence in a land where you
 can buy a murder-charge, including the corpse, all complete for fifty-four
 rupees; but biel did not care to scrape through by the benefit of a doubt.
 he wanted the whole thing cleared: but as he said one night:—“he can
 prove anything with servants' evidence, and i've only my bare word.” this
 was about a month before the case came on; and beyond agreeing with biel,
 we could do little. all that we could be sure of was that the native
 evidence would be bad enough to blast biel's character for the rest of his
 service; for when a native begins perjury he perjures himself thoroughly.
 he does not boggle over details.
 some genius at the end of the table whereat the affair was being talked
 over, said:—“look here! i don't believe lawyers are any good. get a
 man to wire to strickland, and beg him to come down and pull us through.”
 strickland was about a hundred and eighty miles up the line. he had not
 long been married to miss youghal, but he scented in the telegram a chance
 of return to the old detective work that his soul lusted after, and next
 night he came in and heard our story. he finished his pipe and said
 oracularly:—“we must get at the evidence. oorya bearer, mussalman
 khit and methraniayah, i suppose, are the pillars of the charge. i am on
 in this piece; but i'm afraid i'm getting rusty in my talk.”
 he rose and went into biel's bedroom where his trunk had been put, and
 shut the door. an hour later, we heard him say:—“i hadn't the heart
 to part with my old makeups when i married. will this do?” there was a
 lothely faquir salaaming in the doorway.
 “now lend me fifty rupees,” said strickland, “and give me your words of
 honor that you won't tell my wife.”
 he got all that he asked for, and left the house while the table drank his
 health. what he did only he himself knows. a faquir hung about
 bronckhorst's compound for twelve days. then a mehter appeared, and when
 biel heard of him, he said that strickland was an angel full-fledged.
 whether the mehter made love to janki, mrs. bronckhorst's ayah, is a
 question which concerns strickland exclusively.
 he came back at the end of three weeks, and said quietly:—“you spoke
 the truth, biel. the whole business is put up from beginning to end. jove!
 it almost astonishes me! that bronckhorst-beast isn't fit to live.”
 there was uproar and shouting, and biel said:—“how are you going to
 prove it? you can't say that you've been trespassing on bronckhorst's
 compound in disguise!”
 “no,” said strickland. “tell your lawyer-fool, whoever he is, to get up
 something strong about 'inherent improbabilities' and 'discrepancies of
 evidence.' he won't have to speak, but it will make him happy. i'm going
 to run this business.”
 biel held his tongue, and the other men waited to see what would happen.
 they trusted strickland as men trust quiet men. when the case came off the
 court was crowded. strickland hung about in the verandah of the court,
 till he met the mohammedan khitmatgar. then he murmured a faquir's
 blessing in his ear, and asked him how his second wife did. the man spun
 round, and, as he looked into the eyes of “estreeken sahib,” his jaw
 dropped. you must remember that before strickland was married, he was, as
 i have told you already, a power among natives. strickland whispered a
 rather coarse vernacular proverb to the effect that he was abreast of all
 that was going on, and went into the court armed with a gut
 trainer's-whip.
 the mohammedan was the first witness and strickland beamed upon him from
 the back of the court. the man moistened his lips with his tongue and, in
 his abject fear of “estreeken sahib” the faquir, went back on every detail
 of his evidence—said he was a poor man and god was his witness that
 he had forgotten every thing that bronckhorst sahib had told him to say.
 between his terror of strickland, the judge, and bronckhorst he collapsed,
 weeping.
 then began the panic among the witnesses. janki, the ayah, leering
 chastely behind her veil, turned gray, and the bearer left the court. he
 said that his mamma was dying and that it was not wholesome for any man to
 lie unthriftily in the presence of “estreeken sahib.”
 biel said politely to bronckhorst:—“your witnesses don't seem to
 work. haven't you any forged letters to produce?” but bronckhorst was
 swaying to and fro in his chair, and there was a dead pause after biel had
 been called to order.
 bronckhorst's counsel saw the look on his client's face, and without more
 ado, pitched his papers on the little green baize table, and mumbled
 something about having been misinformed. the whole court applauded wildly,
 like soldiers at a theatre, and the judge began to say what he thought.
 biel came out of the place, and strickland dropped a gut trainer's-whip in
 the verandah. ten minutes later, biel was cutting bronckhorst into ribbons
 behind the old court cells, quietly and without scandal. what was left of
 bronckhorst was sent home in a carriage; and his wife wept over it and
 nursed it into a man again.
 later on, after biel had managed to hush up the counter-charge against
 bronckhorst of fabricating false evidence, mrs. bronckhorst, with her
 faint watery smile, said that there had been a mistake, but it wasn't her
 teddy's fault altogether. she would wait till her teddy came back to her.
 perhaps he had grown tired of her, or she had tried his patience, and
 perhaps we wouldn't cut her any more, and perhaps the mothers would let
 their children play with “little teddy” again. he was so lonely. then the
 station invited mrs. bronckhorst everywhere, until bronckhorst was fit to
 appear in public, when he went home and took his wife with him. according
 to the latest advices, her teddy did “come back to her,” and they are
 moderately happy. though, of course, he can never forgive her the
 thrashing that she was the indirect means of getting for him.
 what biel wants to know is:—“why didn't i press home the charge
 against the bronckhorst-brute, and have him run in?”
 what mrs. strickland wants to know is:—“how did my husband bring
 such a lovely, lovely waler from your station? i know all his
 money-affairs; and i'm certain he didn't buy it.”
 what i want to know is:—“how do women like mrs. bronckhorst come to
 marry men like bronckhorst?”
 and my conundrum is the most unanswerable of the three.
 and the years went on as the years must do;
 but our great diana was always new—
 fresh, and blooming, and blonde, and fair,
 with azure eyes and with aureate hair;
 and all the folk, as they came or went,
 offered her praise to her heart's content.
 diana of ephesus.
 she had nothing to do with number eighteen in the braccio nuovo of the
 vatican, between visconti's ceres and the god of the nile. she was purely
 an indian deity—an anglo-indian deity, that is to say—and we
 called her the venus annodomini, to distinguish her from other annodominis
 of the same everlasting order. there was a legend among the hills that she
 had once been young; but no living man was prepared to come forward and
 say boldly that the legend was true. men rode up to simla, and stayed, and
 went away and made their name and did their life's work, and returned
 again to find the venus annodomini exactly as they had left her. she was
 as immutable as the hills. but not quite so green. all that a girl of
 eighteen could do in the way of riding, walking, dancing, picnicking and
 over-exertion generally, the venus annodomini did, and showed no sign of
 fatigue or trace of weariness. besides perpetual youth, she had
 discovered, men said, the secret of perpetual health; and her fame spread
 about the land. from a mere woman, she grew to be an institution, insomuch
 that no young man could be said to be properly formed, who had not, at
 some time or another, worshipped at the shrine of the venus annodomini.
 there was no one like her, though there were many imitations. six years in
 her eyes were no more than six months to ordinary women; and ten made less
 visible impression on her than does a week's fever on an ordinary woman.
 every one adored her, and in return she was pleasant and courteous to
 nearly every one. youth had been a habit of hers for so long, that she
 could not part with it—never realized, in fact, the necessity of
 parting with it—and took for her more chosen associates young
 people.
 among the worshippers of the venus annodomini was young gayerson. “very
 young” gayerson, he was called to distinguish him from his father “young”
 gayerson, a bengal civilian, who affected the customs—as he had the
 heart—of youth. “very young” gayerson was not content to worship
 placidly and for form's sake, as the other young men did, or to accept a
 ride or a dance, or a talk from the venus annodomini in a properly humble
 and thankful spirit. he was exacting, and, therefore, the venus annodomini
 repressed him. he worried himself nearly sick in a futile sort of way over
 her; and his devotion and earnestness made him appear either shy or
 boisterous or rude, as his mood might vary, by the side of the older men
 who, with him, bowed before the venus annodomini. she was sorry for him.
 he reminded her of a lad who, three-and-twenty years ago, had professed a
 boundless devotion for her, and for whom in return she had felt something
 more than a week's weakness. but that lad had fallen away and married
 another woman less than a year after he had worshipped her; and the venus
 annodomini had almost—not quite—forgotten his name. “very
 young” gayerson had the same big blue eyes and the same way of pouting his
 underlip when he was excited or troubled. but the venus annodomini checked
 him sternly none the less. too much zeal was a thing that she did not
 approve of; preferring instead, a tempered and sober tenderness.
 “very young” gayerson was miserable, and took no trouble to conceal his
 wretchedness. he was in the army—a line regiment i think, but am not
 certain—and, since his face was a looking-glass and his forehead an
 open book, by reason of his innocence, his brothers in arms made his life
 a burden to him and embittered his naturally sweet disposition. no one
 except “very young” gayerson, and he never told his views, knew how old
 “very young” gayerson believed the venus annodomini to be. perhaps he
 thought her five and twenty, or perhaps she told him that she was this
 age. “very young” gayerson would have forded the gugger in flood to carry
 her lightest word, and had implicit faith in her. every one liked him, and
 every one was sorry when they saw him so bound a slave of the venus
 annodomini. every one, too, admitted that it was not her fault; for the
 venus annodomini differed from mrs. hauksbee and mrs. reiver in this
 particular—she never moved a finger to attract any one; but, like
 ninon de l'enclos, all men were attracted to her. one could admire and
 respect mrs. hauksbee, despise and avoid mrs. reiver, but one was forced
 to adore the venus annodomini.
 “very young” gayerson's papa held a division or a collectorate or
 something administrative in a particularly unpleasant part of bengal—full
 of babus who edited newspapers proving that “young” gayerson was a “nero”
 and a “scylla” and a “charybdis”; and, in addition to the babus, there was
 a good deal of dysentery and cholera abroad for nine months of the year.
 “young” gayerson—he was about five and forty—rather liked
 babus, they amused him, but he objects to dysentery, and when he could get
 away, went to darjilling for the most part. this particular season he
 fancied that he would come up to simla, and see his boy. the boy was not
 altogether pleased. he told the venus annodomini that his father was
 coming up, and she flushed a little and said that she should be delighted
 to make his acquaintance. then she looked long and thoughtfully at “very
 young” gayerson; because she was very, very sorry for him, and he was a
 very, very big idiot.
 “my daughter is coming out in a fortnight, mr. gayerson,” she said.
 “your what?” said he.
 “daughter,” said the venus annodomini. “she's been out for a year at home
 already, and i want her to see a little of india. she is nineteen and a
 very sensible, nice girl i believe.”
 “very young” gayerson, who was a short twenty-two years old, nearly fell
 out of his chair with astonishment; for he had persisted in believing,
 against all belief, in the youth of the venus annodomini. she, with her
 back to the curtained window, watched the effect of her sentences and
 smiled.
 “very young” gayerson's papa came up twelve days later, and had not been
 in simla four and twenty hours, before two men, old acquaintances of his,
 had told him how “very young” gayerson had been conducting himself.
 “young” gayerson laughed a good deal, and inquired who the venus
 annodomini might be. which proves that he had been living in bengal where
 nobody knows anything except the rate of exchange. then he said “boys will
 be boys,” and spoke to his son about the matter. “very young” gayerson
 said that he felt wretched and unhappy; and “young” gayerson said that he
 repented of having helped to bring a fool into the world. he suggested
 that his son had better cut his leave short and go down to his duties.
 this led to an unfilial answer, and relations were strained, until “young”
 gayerson demmanded that they should call on the venus annodomini. “very
 young” gayerson went with his papa, feeling, somehow, uncomfortable and
 small.
 the venus annodomini received them graciously and “young” gayerson said:—“by
 jove! it's kitty!” “very young” gayerson would have listened for an
 explanation, if his time had not been taken up with trying to talk to a
 large, handsome, quiet, well-dressed girl—introduced to him by the
 venus annodomini as her daughter. she was far older in manners, style and
 repose than “very young” gayerson; and, as he realized this thing, he felt
 sick.
 presently, he heard the venus annodomini saying:—“do you know that
 your son is one of my most devoted admirers?”
 “i don't wonder,” said “young” gayerson. here he raised his voice:—“he
 follows his father's footsteps. didn't i worship the ground you trod on,
 ever so long ago, kitty—and you haven't changed since then. how
 strange it all seems!”
 “very young” gayerson said nothing. his conversation with the daughter of
 the venus annodomini was, through the rest of the call, fragmentary and
 disjointed.
 “at five, to-morrow then,” said the venus annodomini. “and mind you are
 punctual.”
 “at five punctual,” said “young” gayerson. “you can lend your old father a
 horse i dare say, youngster, can't you? i'm going for a ride tomorrow
 afternoon.”
 “certainly,” said “very young” gayerson. “i am going down to-morrow
 morning. my ponies are at your service, sir.”
 the venus annodomini looked at him across the half-light of the room, and
 her big gray eyes filled with moisture. she rose and shook hands with him.
 “good-bye, tom,” whispered the venus annodomini.
 little blind fish, thou art marvellous wise,
 little blind fish, who put out thy eyes?
 open thine ears while i whisper my wish—
 bring me a lover, thou little blind fish.
 the charm of the bisara.
 some natives say that it came from the other side of kulu, where the
 eleven-inch temple sapphire is. others that it was made at the
 devil-shrine of ao-chung in thibet, was stolen by a kafir, from him by a
 gurkha, from him again by a lahouli, from him by a khitmatgar, and by this
 latter sold to an englishman, so all its virtue was lost: because, to work
 properly, the bisara of pooree must be stolen—with bloodshed if
 possible, but, at any rate, stolen.
 these stories of the coming into india are all false. it was made at
 pooree ages since—the manner of its making would fill a small book—was
 stolen by one of the temple dancing-girls there, for her own purposes, and
 then passed on from hand to hand, steadily northward, till it reached
 hanla: always bearing the same name—the bisara of pooree. in shape
 it is a tiny, square box of silver, studded outside with eight small
 balas-rubies. inside the box, which opens with a spring, is a little
 eyeless fish, carved from some sort of dark, shiny nut and wrapped in a
 shred of faded gold-cloth. that is the bisara of pooree, and it were
 better for a man to take a king cobra in his hand than to touch the bisara
 of pooree.
 all kinds of magic are out of date and done away with except in india
 where nothing changes in spite of the shiny, toy-scum stuff that people
 call “civilization.” any man who knows about the bisara of pooree will
 tell you what its powers are—always supposing that it has been
 honestly stolen. it is the only regularly working, trustworthy love-charm
 in the country, with one exception.
 [the other charm is in the hands of a trooper of the nizam's horse, at a
 place called tuprani, due north of hyderabad.] this can be depended upon
 for a fact. some one else may explain it.
 if the bisara be not stolen, but given or bought or found, it turns
 against its owner in three years, and leads to ruin or death. this is
 another fact which you may explain when you have time. meanwhile, you can
 laugh at it. at present, the bisara is safe on an ekka-pony's neck, inside
 the blue bead-necklace that keeps off the evil-eye. if the ekka-driver
 ever finds it, and wears it, or gives it to his wife, i am sorry for him.
 a very dirty hill-cooly woman, with goitre, owned it at theog in . it
 came into simla from the north before churton's khitmatgar bought it, and
 sold it, for three times its silver-value, to churton, who collected
 curiosities. the servant knew no more what he had bought than the master;
 but a man looking over churton's collection of curiosities—churton
 was an assistant commissioner by the way—saw and held his tongue. he
 was an englishman; but knew how to believe. which shows that he was
 different from most englishmen. he knew that it was dangerous to have any
 share in the little box when working or dormant; for unsought love is a
 terrible gift.
 pack—“grubby” pack, as we used to call him—was, in every way,
 a nasty little man who must have crawled into the army by mistake. he was
 three inches taller than his sword, but not half so strong. and the sword
 was a fifty-shilling, tailor-made one. nobody liked him, and, i suppose,
 it was his wizenedness and worthlessness that made him fall so hopelessly
 in love with miss hollis, who was good and sweet, and five foot seven in
 her tennis shoes. he was not content with falling in love quietly, but
 brought all the strength of his miserable little nature into the business.
 if he had not been so objectionable, one might have pitied him. he
 vapored, and fretted, and fumed, and trotted up and down, and tried to
 make himself pleasing in miss hollis's big, quiet, gray eyes, and failed.
 it was one of the cases that you sometimes meet, even in this country
 where we marry by code, of a really blind attachment all on one side,
 without the faintest possibility of return. miss hollis looked on pack as
 some sort of vermin running about the road. he had no prospects beyond
 captain's pay, and no wits to help that out by one anna. in a large-sized
 man, love like his would have been touching. in a good man it would have
 been grand. he being what he was, it was only a nuisance.
 you will believe this much. what you will not believe, is what follows:
 churton, and the man who knew that the bisara was, were lunching at the
 simla club together. churton was complaining of life in general. his best
 mare had rolled out of stable down the hill and had broken her back; his
 decisions were being reversed by the upper courts, more than an assistant
 commissioner of eight years' standing has a right to expect; he knew liver
 and fever, and, for weeks past, had felt out of sorts. altogether, he was
 disgusted and disheartened.
 simla club dining-room is built, as all the world knows, in two sections,
 with an arch-arrangement dividing them. come in, turn to your own left,
 take the table under the window, and you cannot see any one who has come
 in, turning to the right, and taken a table on the right side of the arch.
 curiously enough, every word that you say can be heard, not only by the
 other diner, but by the servants beyond the screen through which they
 bring dinner. this is worth knowing: an echoing-room is a trap to be
 forewarned against.
 half in fun, and half hoping to be believed, the man who knew told churton
 the story of the bisara of pooree at rather greater length than i have
 told it to you in this place; winding up with the suggestion that churton
 might as well throw the little box down the hill and see whether all his
 troubles would go with it. in ordinary ears, english ears, the tale was
 only an interesting bit of folk-lore. churton laughed, said that he felt
 better for his tiffin, and went out. pack had been tiffining by himself to
 the right of the arch, and had heard everything. he was nearly mad with
 his absurd infatuation for miss hollis that all simla had been laughing
 about.
 it is a curious thing that, when a man hates or loves beyond reason, he is
 ready to go beyond reason to gratify his feelings. which he would not do
 for money or power merely. depend upon it, solomon would never have built
 altars to ashtaroth and all those ladies with queer names, if there had
 not been trouble of some kind in his zenana, and nowhere else. but this is
 beside the story. the facts of the case are these: pack called on churton
 next day when churton was out, left his card, and stole the bisara of
 pooree from its place under the clock on the mantelpiece! stole it like
 the thief he was by nature. three days later, all simla was electrified by
 the news that miss hollis had accepted pack—the shrivelled rat,
 pack! do you desire clearer evidence than this? the bisara of pooree had
 been stolen, and it worked as it had always done when won by foul means.
 there are three or four times in a man's life-when he is justified in
 meddling with other people's affairs to play providence.
 the man who knew felt that he was justified; but believing and acting on a
 belief are quite different things. the insolent satisfaction of pack as he
 ambled by the side of miss hollis, and churton's striking release from
 liver, as soon as the bisara of pooree had gone, decided the man. he
 explained to churton and churton laughed, because he was not brought up to
 believe that men on the government house list steal—at least little
 things. but the miraculous acceptance by miss hollis of that tailor, pack,
 decided him to take steps on suspicion. he vowed that he only wanted to
 find out where his ruby-studded silver box had vanished to. you cannot
 accuse a man on the government house list of stealing. and if you rifle
 his room you are a thief yourself. churton, prompted by the man who knew,
 decided on burglary. if he found nothing in pack's room.... but it is not
 nice to think of what would have happened in that case.
 pack went to a dance at benmore—benmore was benmore in those days,
 and not an office—and danced fifteen waltzes out of twenty-two with
 miss hollis. churton and the man took all the keys that they could lay
 hands on, and went to pack's room in the hotel, certain that his servants
 would be away. pack was a cheap soul. he had not purchased a decent
 cash-box to keep his papers in, but one of those native imitations that
 you buy for ten rupees. it opened to any sort of key, and there at the
 bottom, under pack's insurance policy, lay the bisara of pooree!
 churton called pack names, put the bisara of pooree in his pocket, and
 went to the dance with the man. at least, he came in time for supper, and
 saw the beginning of the end in miss hollis's eyes. she was hysterical
 after supper, and was taken away by her mamma.
 at the dance, with the abominable bisara in his pocket, churton twisted
 his foot on one of the steps leading down to the old rink, and had to be
 sent home in a rickshaw, grumbling. he did not believe in the bisara of
 pooree any the more for this manifestation, but he sought out pack and
 called him some ugly names; and “thief” was the mildest of them. pack took
 the names with the nervous smile of a little man who wants both soul and
 body to resent an insult, and went his way. there was no public scandal.
 a week later, pack got his definite dismissal from miss hollis. there had
 been a mistake in the placing of her affections, she said. so he went away
 to madras, where he can do no great harm even if he lives to be a colonel.
 churton insisted upon the man who knew taking the bisara of pooree as a
 gift. the man took it, went down to the cart road at once, found an ekka
 pony with a blue head-necklace, fastened the bisara of pooree inside the
 necklace with a piece of shoe-string and thanked heaven that he was rid of
 a danger. remember, in case you ever find it, that you must not destroy
 the bisara of pooree. i have not time to explain why just now, but the
 power lies in the little wooden fish. mister gubernatis or max muller
 could tell you more about it than i.
 you will say that all this story is made up. very well. if ever you come
 across a little silver, ruby-studded box, seven-eighths of an inch long by
 three-quarters wide, with a dark-brown wooden fish, wrapped in gold cloth,
 inside it, keep it. keep it for three years, and then you will discover
 for yourself whether my story is true or false.
 better still, steal it as pack did, and you will be sorry that you had not
 killed yourself in the beginning.
 “if i can attain heaven for a pice, why should you be envious?”
 opium smoker's proverb.
 this is no work of mine. my friend, gabral misquitta, the half-caste,
 spoke it all, between moonset and morning, six weeks before he died; and i
 took it down from his mouth as he answered my questions so:—
 it lies between the copper-smith's gully and the pipe-stem sellers'
 quarter, within a hundred yards, too, as the crow flies, of the mosque of
 wazir khan. i don't mind telling any one this much, but i defy him to find
 the gate, however well he may think he knows the city. you might even go
 through the very gully it stands in a hundred times, and be none the
 wiser. we used to call the gully, “the gully of the black smoke,” but its
 native name is altogether different of course. a loaded donkey couldn't
 pass between the walls; and, at one point, just before you reach the gate,
 a bulged house-front makes people go along all sideways.
 it isn't really a gate though. it's a house. old fung-tching had it first
 five years ago. he was a boot-maker in calcutta. they say that he murdered
 his wife there when he was drunk. that was why he dropped bazar-rum and
 took to the black smoke instead. later on, he came up north and opened the
 gate as a house where you could get your smoke in peace and quiet. mind
 you, it was a pukka, respectable opium-house, and not one of those
 stifling, sweltering chandoo-khanas, that you can find all over the city.
 no; the old man knew his business thoroughly, and he was most clean for a
 chinaman. he was a one-eyed little chap, not much more than five feet
 high, and both his middle fingers were gone. all the same, he was the
 handiest man at rolling black pills i have ever seen. never seemed to be
 touched by the smoke, either; and what he took day and night, night and
 day, was a caution. i've been at it five years, and i can do my fair share
 of the smoke with any one; but i was a child to fung-tching that way. all
 the same, the old man was keen on his money, very keen; and that's what i
 can't understand. i heard he saved a good deal before he died, but his
 nephew has got all that now; and the old man's gone back to china to be
 buried.
 he kept the big upper room, where his best customers gathered, as neat as
 a new pin. in one corner used to stand fung-tching's joss—almost as
 ugly as fung-tching—and there were always sticks burning under his
 nose; but you never smelt 'em when the pipes were going thick. opposite
 the joss was fung-tching's coffin. he had spent a good deal of his savings
 on that, and whenever a new man came to the gate he was always introduced
 to it. it was lacquered black, with red and gold writings on it, and i've
 heard that fung-tching brought it out all the way from china. i don't know
 whether that's true or not, but i know that, if i came first in the
 evening, i used to spread my mat just at the foot of it. it was a quiet
 corner you see, and a sort of breeze from the gully came in at the window
 now and then. besides the mats, there was no other furniture in the room—only
 the coffin, and the old joss all green and blue and purple with age and
 polish.
 fung-tching never told us why he called the place “the gate of a hundred
 sorrows.” (he was the only chinaman i know who used bad-sounding fancy
 names. most of them are flowery. as you'll see in calcutta.) we used to
 find that out for ourselves. nothing grows on you so much, if you're
 white, as the black smoke. a yellow man is made different. opium doesn't
 tell on him scarcely at all; but white and black suffer a good deal. of
 course, there are some people that the smoke doesn't touch any more than
 tobacco would at first. they just doze a bit, as one would fall asleep
 naturally, and next morning they are almost fit for work. now, i was one
 of that sort when i began, but i've been at it for five years pretty
 steadily, and its different now. there was an old aunt of mine, down agra
 way, and she left me a little at her death. about sixty rupees a month
 secured. sixty isn't much. i can recollect a time, seems hundreds and
 hundreds of years ago, that i was getting my three hundred a month, and
 pickings, when i was working on a big timber contract in calcutta.
 i didn't stick to that work for long. the black smoke does not allow of
 much other business; and even though i am very little affected by it, as
 men go, i couldn't do a day's work now to save my life. after all, sixty
 rupees is what i want. when old fung-tching was alive he used to draw the
 money for me, give me about half of it to live on (i eat very little), and
 the rest he kept himself. i was free of the gate at any time of the day
 and night, and could smoke and sleep there when i liked, so i didn't care.
 i know the old man made a good thing out of it; but that's no matter.
 nothing matters much to me; and, besides, the money always came fresh and
 fresh each month.
 there was ten of us met at the gate when the place was first opened. me,
 and two baboos from a government office somewhere in anarkulli, but they
 got the sack and couldn't pay (no man who has to work in the daylight can
 do the black smoke for any length of time straight on); a chinaman that
 was fung-tching's nephew; a bazar-woman that had got a lot of money
 somehow; an english loafer—mac-somebody i think, but i have
 forgotten—that smoked heaps, but never seemed to pay anything (they
 said he had saved fung-tching's life at some trial in calcutta when he was
 a barrister): another eurasian, like myself, from madras; a half-caste
 woman, and a couple of men who said they had come from the north. i think
 they must have been persians or afghans or something. there are not more
 than five of us living now, but we come regular. i don't know what
 happened to the baboos; but the bazar-woman she died after six months of
 the gate, and i think fung-tching took her bangles and nose-ring for
 himself. but i'm not certain. the englishman, he drank as well as smoked,
 and he dropped off. one of the persians got killed in a row at night by
 the big well near the mosque a long time ago, and the police shut up the
 well, because they said it was full of foul air. they found him dead at
 the bottom of it. so, you see, there is only me, the chinaman, the
 half-caste woman that we call the memsahib (she used to live with
 fung-tching), the other eurasian, and one of the persians. the memsahib
 looks very old now. i think she was a young woman when the gate was
 opened; but we are all old for the matter of that. hundreds and hundreds
 of years old. it is very hard to keep count of time in the gate, and
 besides, time doesn't matter to me. i draw my sixty rupees fresh and fresh
 every month. a very, very long while ago, when i used to be getting three
 hundred and fifty rupees a month, and pickings, on a big timber-contract
 at calcutta, i had a wife of sorts. but she's dead now. people said that i
 killed her by taking to the black smoke. perhaps i did, but it's so long
 since it doesn't matter. sometimes when i first came to the gate, i used
 to feel sorry for it; but that's all over and done with long ago, and i
 draw my sixty rupees fresh and fresh every month, and am quite happy. not
 drunk happy, you know, but always quiet and soothed and contented.
 how did i take to it? it began at calcutta. i used to try it in my own
 house, just to see what it was like. i never went very far, but i think my
 wife must have died then. anyhow, i found myself here, and got to know
 fung-tching. i don't remember rightly how that came about; but he told me
 of the gate and i used to go there, and, somehow, i have never got away
 from it since. mind you, though, the gate was a respectable place in
 fung-tching's time where you could be comfortable, and not at all like the
 chandoo-khanas where the niggers go. no; it was clean and quiet, and not
 crowded. of course, there were others beside us ten and the man; but we
 always had a mat apiece with a wadded woollen head-piece, all covered with
 black and red dragons and things; just like a coffin in the corner.
 at the end of one's third pipe the dragons used to move about and fight.
 i've watched 'em, many and many a night through. i used to regulate my
 smoke that way, and now it takes a dozen pipes to make 'em stir. besides,
 they are all torn and dirty, like the mats, and old fung-tching is dead.
 he died a couple of years ago, and gave me the pipe i always use now—a
 silver one, with queer beasts crawling up and down the receiver-bottle
 below the cup. before that, i think, i used a big bamboo stem with a
 copper cup, a very small one, and a green jade mouthpiece. it was a little
 thicker than a walking-stick stem, and smoked sweet, very sweet. the
 bamboo seemed to suck up the smoke. silver doesn't, and i've got to clean
 it out now and then, that's a great deal of trouble, but i smoke it for
 the old man's sake. he must have made a good thing out of me, but he
 always gave me clean mats and pillows, and the best stuff you could get
 anywhere.
 when he died, his nephew tsin-ling took up the gate, and he called it the
 “temple of the three possessions;” but we old ones speak of it as the
 “hundred sorrows,” all the same. the nephew does things very shabbily, and
 i think the memsahib must help him. she lives with him; same as she used
 to do with the old man. the two let in all sorts of low people, niggers
 and all, and the black smoke isn't as good as it used to be. i've found
 burnt bran in my pipe over and over again. the old man would have died if
 that had happened in his time. besides, the room is never cleaned, and all
 the mats are torn and cut at the edges. the coffin has gone—gone to
 china again—with the old man and two ounces of smoke inside it, in
 case he should want 'em on the way.
 the joss doesn't get so many sticks burnt under his nose as he used to;
 that's a sign of ill-luck, as sure as death. he's all brown, too, and no
 one ever attends to him. that's the memsahib's work, i know; because, when
 tsin-ling tried to burn gilt paper before him, she said it was a waste of
 money, and, if he kept a stick burning very slowly, the joss wouldn't know
 the difference. so now we've got the sticks mixed with a lot of glue, and
 they take half-an-hour longer to burn, and smell stinky. let alone the
 smell of the room by itself. no business can get on if they try that sort
 of thing. the joss doesn't like it. i can see that. late at night,
 sometimes, he turns all sorts of queer colors—blue and green and red—just
 as he used to do when old fung-tching was alive; and he rolls his eyes and
 stamps his feet like a devil.
 i don't know why i don't leave the place and smoke quietly in a little
 room of my own in the bazar. most like, tsin-ling would kill me if i went
 away—he draws my sixty rupees now—and besides, it's so much
 trouble, and i've grown to be very fond of the gate. it's not much to look
 at. not what it was in the old man's time, but i couldn't leave it. i've
 seen so many come in and out. and i've seen so many die here on the mats
 that i should be afraid of dying in the open now. i've seen some things
 that people would call strange enough; but nothing is strange when you're
 on the black smoke, except the black smoke. and if it was, it wouldn't
 matter. fung-tching used to be very particular about his people, and never
 got in any one who'd give trouble by dying messy and such. but the nephew
 isn't half so careful. he tells everywhere that he keeps a “first-chop”
 house. never tries to get men in quietly, and make them comfortable like
 fung-tching did. that's why the gate is getting a little bit more known
 than it used to be. among the niggers of course. the nephew daren't get a
 white, or, for matter of that, a mixed skin into the place. he has to keep
 us three of course—me and the memsahib and the other eurasian. we're
 fixtures. but he wouldn't give us credit for a pipeful—not for
 anything.
 one of these days, i hope, i shall die in the gate. the persian and the
 madras man are terrible shaky now. they've got a boy to light their pipes
 for them. i always do that myself. most like, i shall see them carried out
 before me. i don't think i shall ever outlive the memsahib or tsin-ling.
 women last longer than men at the black-smoke, and tsin-ling has a deal of
 the old man's blood in him, though he does smoke cheap stuff. the
 bazar-woman knew when she was going two days before her time; and she died
 on a clean mat with a nicely wadded pillow, and the old man hung up her
 pipe just above the joss. he was always fond of her, i fancy. but he took
 her bangles just the same.
 i should like to die like the bazar-woman—on a clean, cool mat with
 a pipe of good stuff between my lips. when i feel i'm going, i shall ask
 tsin-ling for them, and he can draw my sixty rupees a month, fresh and
 fresh, as long as he pleases, and watch the black and red dragons have
 their last big fight together; and then....
 well, it doesn't matter. nothing matters much to me—only i wished
 tsin-ling wouldn't put bran into the black smoke.
 “who is the happy man? he that sees in his own house at home little
 children crowned with dust, leaping and falling and crying.”
 munichandra, translated by professor peterson.
 the polo-ball was an old one, scarred, chipped, and dinted. it stood on
 the mantelpiece among the pipe-stems which imam din, khitmatgar, was
 cleaning for me.
 “does the heaven-born want this ball?” said imam din, deferentially.
 the heaven-born set no particular store by it; but of what use was a
 polo-ball to a khitmatgar?
 “by your honor's favor, i have a little son. he has seen this ball, and
 desires it to play with. i do not want it for myself.”
 no one would for an instant accuse portly old imam din of wanting to play
 with polo-balls. he carried out the battered thing into the verandah; and
 there followed a hurricane of joyful squeaks, a patter of small feet, and
 the thud-thud-thud of the ball rolling along the ground. evidently the
 little son had been waiting outside the door to secure his treasure. but
 how had he managed to see that polo-ball?
 next day, coming back from office half an hour earlier than usual, i was
 aware of a small figure in the dining-room—a tiny, plump figure in a
 ridiculously inadequate shirt which came, perhaps, half-way down the tubby
 stomach. it wandered round the room, thumb in mouth, crooning to itself as
 it took stock of the pictures. undoubtedly this was the “little son.”
 he had no business in my room, of course; but was so deeply absorbed in
 his discoveries that he never noticed me in the doorway. i stepped into
 the room and startled him nearly into a fit. he sat down on the ground
 with a gasp. his eyes opened, and his mouth followed suit. i knew what was
 coming, and fled, followed by a long, dry howl which reached the servants'
 quarters far more quickly than any command of mine had ever done. in ten
 seconds imam din was in the dining-room. then despairing sobs arose, and i
 returned to find imam din admonishing the small sinner who was using most
 of his shirt as a handkerchief.
 “this boy,” said imam din, judicially, “is a budmash, a big budmash. he
 will, without doubt, go to the jail-khana for his behavior.” renewed yells
 from the penitent, and an elaborate apology to myself from imam din.
 “tell the baby,” said i, “that the sahib is not angry, and take him away.”
 imam din conveyed my forgiveness to the offender, who had now gathered all
 his shirt round his neck, string-wise, and the yell subsided into a sob.
 the two set off for the door. “his name,” said imam din, as though the
 name were part of the crime, “is muhammad din, and he is a budmash.” freed
 from present danger, muhammad din turned round, in his father's arms, and
 said gravely:—“it is true that my name is muhammad din, tahib, but i
 am not a budmash. i am a man!”
 from that day dated my acquaintance with muhammad din. never again did he
 come into my dining-room, but on the neutral ground of the compound, we
 greeted each other with much state, though our conversation was confined
 to “talaam, tahib” from his side and “salaam muhammad din” from mine.
 daily on my return from office, the little white shirt, and the fat little
 body used to rise from the shade of the creeper-covered trellis where they
 had been hid; and daily i checked my horse here, that my salutation might
 not be slurred over or given unseemly.
 muhammad din never had any companions. he used to trot about the compound,
 in and out of the castor-oil bushes, on mysterious errands of his own. one
 day i stumbled upon some of his handiwork far down the ground. he had half
 buried the polo-ball in dust, and stuck six shrivelled old marigold
 flowers in a circle round it. outside that circle again, was a rude
 square, traced out in bits of red brick alternating with fragments of
 broken china; the whole bounded by a little bank of dust. the bhistie from
 the well-curb put in a plea for the small architect, saying that it was
 only the play of a baby and did not much disfigure my garden.
 heaven knows that i had no intention of touching the child's work then or
 later; but, that evening, a stroll through the garden brought me unawares
 full on it; so that i trampled, before i knew, marigold-heads, dust-bank,
 and fragments of broken soap-dish into confusion past all hope of mending.
 next morning i came upon muhammad din crying softly to himself over the
 ruin i had wrought. some one had cruelly told him that the sahib was very
 angry with him for spoiling the garden, and had scattered his rubbish
 using bad language the while. muhammad din labored for an hour at effacing
 every trace of the dust-bank and pottery fragments, and it was with a
 tearful apologetic face that he said, “talaam tahib,” when i came home
 from the office. a hasty inquiry resulted in imam din informing muhammad
 din that by my singular favor he was permitted to disport himself as he
 pleased. whereat the child took heart and fell to tracing the ground-plan
 of an edifice which was to eclipse the marigold-polo-ball creation.
 for some months, the chubby little eccentricity revolved in his humble
 orbit among the castor-oil bushes and in the dust; always fashioning
 magnificent palaces from stale flowers thrown away by the bearer, smooth
 water-worn pebbles, bits of broken glass, and feathers pulled, i fancy,
 from my fowls—always alone and always crooning to himself.
 a gayly-spotted sea-shell was dropped one day close to the last of his
 little buildings; and i looked that muhammad din should build something
 more than ordinarily splendid on the strength of it. nor was i
 disappointed. he meditated for the better part of an hour, and his
 crooning rose to a jubilant song. then he began tracing in dust. it would
 certainly be a wondrous palace, this one, for it was two yards long and a
 yard broad in ground-plan. but the palace was never completed.
 next day there was no muhammad din at the head of the carriage-drive, and
 no “talaam tahib” to welcome my return. i had grown accustomed to the
 greeting, and its omission troubled me. next day, imam din told me that
 the child was suffering slightly from fever and needed quinine. he got the
 medicine, and an english doctor.
 “they have no stamina, these brats,” said the doctor, as he left imam
 din's quarters.
 a week later, though i would have given much to have avoided it, i met on
 the road to the mussulman burying-ground imam din, accompanied by one
 other friend, carrying in his arms, wrapped in a white cloth, all that was
 left of little muhammad din.
 if your mirror be broken, look into still water; but have a care
 that you do not fall in.
 hindu proverb.
 next to a requited attachment, one of the most convenient things that a
 young man can carry about with him at the beginning of his career, is an
 unrequited attachment. it makes him feel important and business-like, and
 blase, and cynical; and whenever he has a touch of liver, or suffers from
 want of exercise, he can mourn over his lost love, and be very happy in a
 tender, twilight fashion.
 hannasyde's affair of the heart had been a godsend to him. it was four
 years old, and the girl had long since given up thinking of it. she had
 married and had many cares of her own. in the beginning, she had told
 hannasyde that, “while she could never be anything more than a sister to
 him, she would always take the deepest interest in his welfare.” this
 startlingly new and original remark gave hannasyde something to think over
 for two years; and his own vanity filled in the other twenty-four months.
 hannasyde was quite different from phil garron, but, none the less, had
 several points in common with that far too lucky man.
 he kept his unrequited attachment by him as men keep a well-smoked pipe—for
 comfort's sake, and because it had grown dear in the using. it brought him
 happily through the simla season. hannasyde was not lovely. there was a
 crudity in his manners, and a roughness in the way in which he helped a
 lady on to her horse, that did not attract the other sex to him. even if
 he had cast about for their favor, which he did not. he kept his wounded
 heart all to himself for a while.
 then trouble came to him. all who go to simla, know the slope from the
 telegraph to the public works office. hannasyde was loafing up the hill,
 one september morning between calling hours, when a 'rickshaw came down in
 a hurry, and in the 'rickshaw sat the living, breathing image of the girl
 who had made him so happily unhappy. hannasyde leaned against the railing
 and gasped. he wanted to run downhill after the 'rickshaw, but that was
 impossible; so he went forward with most of his blood in his temples. it
 was impossible, for many reasons, that the woman in the 'rickshaw could be
 the girl he had known. she was, he discovered later, the wife of a man
 from dindigul, or coimbatore, or some out-of-the-way place, and she had
 come up to simla early in the season for the good of her health. she was
 going back to dindigul, or wherever it was, at the end of the season; and
 in all likelihood would never return to simla again, her proper
 hill-station being ootacamund. that night, hannasyde, raw and savage from
 the raking up of all old feelings, took counsel with himself for one
 measured hour. what he decided upon was this; and you must decide for
 yourself how much genuine affection for the old love, and how much a very
 natural inclination to go abroad and enjoy himself, affected the decision.
 mrs. landys-haggert would never in all human likelihood cross his path
 again. so whatever he did didn't much matter. she was marvellously like
 the girl who “took a deep interest” and the rest of the formula. all
 things considered, it would be pleasant to make the acquaintance of mrs.
 landys-haggert, and for a little time—only a very little time—to
 make believe that he was with alice chisane again. every one is more or
 less mad on one point. hannasyde's particular monomania was his old love,
 alice chisane.
 he made it his business to get introduced to mrs. haggert, and the
 introduction prospered. he also made it his business to see as much as he
 could of that lady. when a man is in earnest as to interviews, the
 facilities which simla offers are startling. there are garden-parties, and
 tennis-parties, and picnics, and luncheons at annandale, and
 rifle-matches, and dinners and balls; besides rides and walks, which are
 matters of private arrangement. hannasyde had started with the intention
 of seeing a likeness, and he ended by doing much more. he wanted to be
 deceived, he meant to be deceived, and he deceived himself very
 thoroughly. not only were the face and figure, the face and figure of
 alice chisane, but the voice and lower tones were exactly the same, and so
 were the turns of speech; and the little mannerisms, that every woman has,
 of gait and gesticulation, were absolutely and identically the same. the
 turn of the head was the same; the tired look in the eyes at the end of a
 long walk was the same; the sloop and wrench over the saddle to hold in a
 pulling horse was the same; and once, most marvellous of all, mrs.
 landys-haggert singing to herself in the next room, while hannasyde was
 waiting to take her for a ride, hummed, note for note, with a throaty
 quiver of the voice in the second line:—“poor wandering one!”
 exactly as alice chisane had hummed it for hannasyde in the dusk of an
 english drawing-room. in the actual woman herself—in the soul of her—there
 was not the least likeness; she and alice chisane being cast in different
 moulds. but all that hannasyde wanted to know and see and think about, was
 this maddening and perplexing likeness of face and voice and manner. he
 was bent on making a fool of himself that way; and he was in no sort
 disappointed.
 open and obvious devotion from any sort of man is always pleasant to any
 sort of woman; but mrs. landys-haggert, being a woman of the world, could
 make nothing of hannasyde's admiration.
 he would take any amount of trouble—he was a selfish man habitually—to
 meet and forestall, if possible, her wishes. anything she told him to do
 was law; and he was, there could be no doubting it, fond of her company so
 long as she talked to him, and kept on talking about trivialities. but
 when she launched into expression of her personal views and her wrongs,
 those small social differences that make the spice of simla life,
 hannasyde was neither pleased nor interested. he didn't want to know
 anything about mrs. landys-haggert, or her experiences in the past—she
 had travelled nearly all over the world, and could talk cleverly—he
 wanted the likeness of alice chisane before his eyes and her voice in his
 ears. anything outside that, reminding him of another personality jarred,
 and he showed that it did.
 under the new post office, one evening, mrs. landys-haggert turned on him,
 and spoke her mind shortly and without warning. “mr. hannasyde,” said she,
 “will you be good enough to explain why you have appointed yourself my
 special cavalier servente? i don't understand it. but i am perfectly
 certain, somehow or other, that you don't care the least little bit in the
 world for me.” this seems to support, by the way, the theory that no man
 can act or tell lies to a woman without being found out. hannasyde was
 taken off his guard. his defence never was a strong one, because he was
 always thinking of himself, and he blurted out, before he knew what he was
 saying, this inexpedient answer:—“no more i do.”
 the queerness of the situation and the reply, made mrs. landys-haggert
 laugh. then it all came out; and at the end of hannasyde's lucid
 explanation, mrs. haggert said, with the least little touch of scorn in
 her voice:—“so i'm to act as the lay-figure for you to hang the rags
 of your tattered affections on, am i?”
 hannasyde didn't see what answer was required, and he devoted himself
 generally and vaguely to the praise of alice chisane, which was
 unsatisfactory. now it is to be thoroughly made clear that mrs. haggert
 had not the shadow of a ghost of an interest in hannasyde. only.... only
 no woman likes being made love through instead of to—specially on
 behalf of a musty divinity of four years' standing.
 hannasyde did not see that he had made any very particular exhibition of
 himself. he was glad to find a sympathetic soul in the arid wastes of
 simla.
 when the season ended, hannasyde went down to his own place and mrs.
 haggert to hers. “it was like making love to a ghost,” said hannasyde to
 himself, “and it doesn't matter; and now i'll get to my work.” but he
 found himself thinking steadily of the haggert-chisane ghost; and he could
 not be certain whether it was haggert or chisane that made up the greater
 part of the pretty phantom.
 he got understanding a month later.
 a peculiar point of this peculiar country is the way in which a heartless
 government transfers men from one end of the empire to the other. you can
 never be sure of getting rid of a friend or an enemy till he or she dies.
 there was a case once—but that's another story.
 haggert's department ordered him up from dindigul to the frontier at two
 days' notice, and he went through, losing money at every step, from
 dindigul to his station. he dropped mrs. haggert at lucknow, to stay with
 some friends there, to take part in a big ball at the chutter munzil, and
 to come on when he had made the new home a little comfortable. lucknow was
 hannasyde's station, and mrs. haggert stayed a week there. hannasyde went
 to meet her. and the train came in, he discovered which he had been
 thinking of for the past month. the unwisdom of his conduct also struck
 him. the lucknow week, with two dances, and an unlimited quantity of rides
 together, clinched matters; and hannasyde found himself pacing this circle
 of thought:—he adored alice chisane—at least he had adored
 her. and he admired mrs. landys-haggert because she was like alice
 chisane. but mrs. landys-haggert was not in the least like alice chisane,
 being a thousand times more adorable. now alice chisane was “the bride of
 another,” and so was mrs. landys-haggert, and a good and honest wife too.
 therefore, he, hannasyde, was.... here he called himself several hard
 names, and wished that he had been wise in the beginning.
 whether mrs. landys-haggert saw what was going on in his mind, she alone
 knows. he seemed to take an unqualified interest in everything connected
 with herself, as distinguished from the alice-chisane likeness, and he
 said one or two things which, if alice chisane had been still betrothed to
 him, could scarcely have been excused, even on the grounds of the
 likeness. but mrs. haggert turned the remarks aside, and spent a long time
 in making hannasyde see what a comfort and a pleasure she had been to him
 because of her strange resemblance to his old love. hannasyde groaned in
 his saddle and said, “yes, indeed,” and busied himself with preparations
 for her departure to the frontier, feeling very small and miserable.
 the last day of her stay at lucknow came, and hannasyde saw her off at the
 railway station. she was very grateful for his kindness and the trouble he
 had taken, and smiled pleasantly and sympathetically as one who knew the
 alice-chisane reason of that kindness. and hannasyde abused the coolies
 with the luggage, and hustled the people on the platform, and prayed that
 the roof might fall in and slay him.
 as the train went out slowly, mrs. landys-haggert leaned out of the window
 to say goodbye:—“on second thoughts au revoir, mr. hannasyde. i go
 home in the spring, and perhaps i may meet you in town.”
 hannasyde shook hands, and said very earnestly and adoringly:—“i
 hope to heaven i shall never see your face again!”
 and mrs. haggert understood.
 i closed and drew for my love's sake,
 that now is false to me,
 and i slew the riever of tarrant moss,
 and set dumeny free.
 and ever they give me praise and gold,
 and ever i moan my loss,
 for i struck the blow for my false love's sake,
 and not for the men at the moss.
 tarrant moss.
 one of the many curses of our life out here is the want of atmosphere in
 the painter's sense. there are no half-tints worth noticing. men stand out
 all crude and raw, with nothing to tone them down, and nothing to scale
 them against. they do their work, and grow to think that there is nothing
 but their work, and nothing like their work, and that they are the real
 pivots on which the administration turns. here is an instance of this
 feeling. a half-caste clerk was ruling forms in a pay office. he said to
 me:—“do you know what would happen if i added or took away one
 single line on this sheet?” then, with the air of a conspirator:—“it
 would disorganize the whole of the treasury payments throughout the whole
 of the presidency circle! think of that?”
 if men had not this delusion as to the ultra-importance of their own
 particular employments, i suppose that they would sit down and kill
 themselves. but their weakness is wearisome, particularly when the
 listener knows that he himself commits exactly the same sin.
 even the secretariat believes that it does good when it asks an
 over-driven executive officer to take census of wheat-weevils through a
 district of five thousand square miles.
 there was a man once in the foreign office—a man who had grown
 middle-aged in the department, and was commonly said, by irreverent
 juniors, to be able to repeat aitchison's “treaties and sunnuds”
 backwards, in his sleep. what he did with his stored knowledge only the
 secretary knew; and he, naturally, would not publish the news abroad. this
 man's name was wressley, and it was the shibboleth, in those days, to say:—“wressley
 knows more about the central indian states than any living man.” if you
 did not say this, you were considered one of mean understanding.
 now-a-days, the man who says that he knows the ravel of the inter-tribal
 complications across the border is of more use; but in wressley's time,
 much attention was paid to the central indian states. they were called
 “foci” and “factors,” and all manner of imposing names.
 and here the curse of anglo-indian life fell heavily. when wressley lifted
 up his voice, and spoke about such-and-such a succession to such-and-such
 a throne, the foreign office were silent, and heads of departments
 repeated the last two or three words of wressley's sentences, and tacked
 “yes, yes,” on them, and knew that they were “assisting the empire to
 grapple with serious political contingencies.” in most big undertakings,
 one or two men do the work while the rest sit near and talk till the ripe
 decorations begin to fall.
 wressley was the working-member of the foreign office firm, and, to keep
 him up to his duties when he showed signs of flagging, he was made much of
 by his superiors and told what a fine fellow he was. he did not require
 coaxing, because he was of tough build, but what he received confirmed him
 in the belief that there was no one quite so absolutely and imperatively
 necessary to the stability of india as wressley of the foreign office.
 there might be other good men, but the known, honored and trusted man
 among men was wressley of the foreign office. we had a viceroy in those
 days who knew exactly when to “gentle” a fractious big man and to hearten
 up a collar-galled little one, and so keep all his team level. he conveyed
 to wressley the impression which i have just set down; and even tough men
 are apt to be disorganized by a viceroy's praise. there was a case once—but
 that is another story.
 all india knew wressley's name and office—it was in thacker and
 spink's directory—but who he was personally, or what he did, or what
 his special merits were, not fifty men knew or cared. his work filled all
 his time, and he found no leisure to cultivate acquaintances beyond those
 of dead rajput chiefs with ahir blots in their 'scutcheons. wressley would
 have made a very good clerk in the herald's college had he not been a
 bengal civilian.
 upon a day, between office and office, great trouble came to wressley—overwhelmed
 him, knocked him down, and left him gasping as though he had been a little
 school-boy. without reason, against prudence, and at a moment's notice, he
 fell in love with a frivolous, golden-haired girl who used to tear about
 simla mall on a high, rough waler, with a blue velvet jockey-cap crammed
 over her eyes. her name was venner—tillie venner—and she was
 delightful. she took wressley's heart at a hand-gallop, and wressley found
 that it was not good for man to live alone; even with half the foreign
 office records in his presses.
 then simla laughed, for wressley in love was slightly ridiculous. he did
 his best to interest the girl in himself—that is to say, his work—and
 she, after the manner of women, did her best to appear interested in what,
 behind his back, she called “mr. wressley's wajahs”; for she lisped very
 prettily. she did not understand one little thing about them, but she
 acted as if she did. men have married on that sort of error before now.
 providence, however, had care of wressley. he was immensely struck with
 miss venner's intelligence. he would have been more impressed had he heard
 her private and confidential accounts of his calls. he held peculiar
 notions as to the wooing of girls. he said that the best work of a man's
 career should be laid reverently at their feet. ruskin writes something
 like this somewhere, i think; but in ordinary life a few kisses are better
 and save time.
 about a month after he had lost his heart to miss venner, and had been
 doing his work vilely in consequence, the first idea of his “native rule
 in central india” struck wressley and filled him with joy. it was, as he
 sketched it, a great thing—the work of his life—a really
 comprehensive survey of a most fascinating subject—to be written
 with all the special and laboriously acquired knowledge of wressley of the
 foreign office—a gift fit for an empress.
 he told miss venner that he was going to take leave, and hoped, on his
 return, to bring her a present worthy of her acceptance. would she wait?
 certainly she would. wressley drew seventeen hundred rupees a month. she
 would wait a year for that. her mamma would help her to wait.
 so wressley took one year's leave and all the available documents, about a
 truck-load, that he could lay hands on, and went down to central india
 with his notion hot in his head. he began his book in the land he was
 writing of. too much official correspondence had made him a frigid
 workman, and he must have guessed that he needed the white light of local
 color on his palette. this is a dangerous paint for amateurs to play with.
 heavens, how that man worked! he caught his rajahs, analyzed his rajahs,
 and traced them up into the mists of time and beyond, with their queens
 and their concubines. he dated and cross-dated, pedigreed and
 triple-pedigreed, compared, noted, connoted, wove, strung, sorted,
 selected, inferred, calendared and counter-calendared for ten hours a day.
 and, because this sudden and new light of love was upon him, he turned
 those dry bones of history and dirty records of misdeeds into things to
 weep or to laugh over as he pleased. his heart and soul were at the end of
 his pen, and they got into the link. he was dowered with sympathy,
 insight, humor and style for two hundred and thirty days and nights; and
 his book was a book. he had his vast special knowledge with him, so to
 speak; but the spirit, the woven-in human touch, the poetry and the power
 of the output, were beyond all special knowledge. but i doubt whether he
 knew the gift that was in him then, and thus he may have lost some
 happiness. he was toiling for tillie venner, not for himself. men often do
 their best work blind, for some one else's sake.
 also, though this has nothing to do with the story, in india where every
 one knows every one else, you can watch men being driven, by the women who
 govern them, out of the rank-and-file and sent to take up points alone. a
 good man once started, goes forward; but an average man, so soon as the
 woman loses interest in his success as a tribute to her power, comes back
 to the battalion and is no more heard of.
 wressley bore the first copy of his book to simla and, blushing and
 stammering, presented it to miss venner. she read a little of it. i give
 her review verbatim:—“oh, your book? it's all about those how-wid
 wajahs. i didn't understand it.”
 wressley of the foreign office was broken, smashed,—i am not
 exaggerating—by this one frivolous little girl. all that he could
 say feebly was:—“but, but it's my magnum opus! the work of my life.”
 miss venner did not know what magnum opus meant; but she knew that captain
 kerrington had won three races at the last gymkhana. wressley didn't press
 her to wait for him any longer. he had sense enough for that.
 then came the reaction after the year's strain, and wressley went back to
 the foreign office and his “wajahs,” a compiling, gazetteering,
 report-writing hack, who would have been dear at three hundred rupees a
 month. he abided by miss venner's review. which proves that the
 inspiration in the book was purely temporary and unconnected with himself.
 nevertheless, he had no right to sink, in a hill-tarn, five packing-cases,
 brought up at enormous expense from bombay, of the best book of indian
 history ever written.
 when he sold off before retiring, some years later, i was turning over his
 shelves, and came across the only existing copy of “native rule in central
 india”—the copy that miss venner could not understand. i read it,
 sitting on his mule-trucks, as long as the light lasted, and offered him
 his own price for it. he looked over my shoulder for a few pages and said
 to himself drearily:—“now, how in the world did i come to write such
 damned good stuff as that?” then to me:—“take it and keep it. write
 one of your penny-farthing yarns about its birth. perhaps—perhaps—the
 whole business may have been ordained to that end.”
 which, knowing what wressley of the foreign office was once, struck me as
 about the bitterest thing that i had ever heard a man say of his own work.
 not though you die to-night, o sweet, and wail,
 a spectre at my door,
 shall mortal fear make love immortal fail—
 i shall but love you more,
 who from death's house returning, give me still
 one moment's comfort in my matchless ill.
 shadow houses.
 this tale may be explained by those who know how souls are made, and where
 the bounds of the possible are put down. i have lived long enough in this
 country to know that it is best to know nothing, and can only write the
 story as it happened.
 dumoise was our civil surgeon at meridki, and we called him “dormouse,”
 because he was a round little, sleepy little man. he was a good doctor and
 never quarrelled with any one, not even with our deputy commissioner, who
 had the manners of a bargee and the tact of a horse. he married a girl as
 round and as sleepy-looking as himself. she was a miss hillardyce,
 daughter of “squash” hillardyce of the berars, who married his chief's
 daughter by mistake. but that is another story.
 a honeymoon in india is seldom more than a week long; but there is nothing
 to hinder a couple from extending it over two or three years. this is a
 delightful country for married folk who are wrapped up in one another.
 they can live absolutely alone and without interruption—just as the
 dormice did. these two little people retired from the world after their
 marriage, and were very happy. they were forced, of course, to give
 occasional dinners, but they made no friends hereby, and the station went
 its own way and forgot them; only saying, occasionally, that dormouse was
 the best of good fellows, though dull. a civil surgeon who never quarrels
 is a rarity, appreciated as such.
 few people can afford to play robinson crusoe anywhere—least of all
 in india, where we are few in the land, and very much dependent on each
 other's kind offices. dumoise was wrong in shutting himself from the world
 for a year, and he discovered his mistake when an epidemic of typhoid
 broke out in the station in the heart of the cold weather, and his wife
 went down. he was a shy little man, and five days were wasted before he
 realized that mrs. dumoise was burning with something worse than simple
 fever, and three days more passed before he ventured to call on mrs.
 shute, the engineer's wife, and timidly speak about his trouble. nearly
 every household in india knows that doctors are very helpless in typhoid.
 the battle must be fought out between death and the nurses, minute by
 minute and degree by degree. mrs. shute almost boxed dumoise's ears for
 what she called his “criminal delay,” and went off at once to look after
 the poor girl. we had seven cases of typhoid in the station that winter
 and, as the average of death is about one in every five cases, we felt
