circuit a dead resistance, in the other an inductive resistance, and,
the two circuits being in derivation, it is obvious that the difference
in phase of the current in such circuits will set up a rotation
of the motor. when the speed of the motor has thus been
brought to the desired rate the switch is shifted to throw the
main current directly through the motor-circuits, and although
the currents in both circuits will now be of the same phase the
motor will continue to revolve, becoming a true synchronous
motor. to secure greater efficiency, the armature or its polar
projections are wound with coils closed on themselves.[pg ]
in the accompanying diagrams, fig.  illustrates the details
of the plan above set forth, and figs.  and  modifications
of the same.
figs. ,  and .
referring to fig. , let a designate the field-magnets of a
motor, the polar projections of which are wound with coils b c
included in independent circuits, and d the armature with polar
projections wound with coils e closed upon themselves, the
motor in these respects being similar in construction to those[pg ]
described already, but having on account of the polar projections
on the armature core, or other similar and well-known features,
the properties of a synchronizing-motor. l l' represents the
conductors of a line from an alternating current generator g.
near the motor is placed a switch the action of which is that
of the one shown in the diagrams, which is constructed as follows:
f f' are two conducting plates or arms, pivoted at their
ends and connected by an insulating cross-bar, h, so as to be
shifted in parallelism. in the path of the bars f f' is the contact
, which forms one terminal of the circuit through coils c, and
the contact , which is one terminal of the circuit through coils
b. the opposite end of the wire of coils c is connected to the
wire l or bar f', and the corresponding end of coils b is connected
to wire l' and bar f; hence if the bars be shifted so as to bear on
contacts  and  both sets of coils b c will be included in the circuit
l l' in multiple arc or derivation. in the path of the levers
f f' are two other contact terminals,  and . the contact  is
connected to contact  through an artificial resistance, i, and contact
 with contact  through a self-induction coil, j, so that when
the switch levers are shifted upon the points  and  the circuits
of coils b and c will be connected in multiple arc or derivation to
the circuit l l', and will include the resistance and self-induction
coil respectively. a third position of the switch is that in which
the levers f and f' are shifted out of contact with both sets of
points. in this case the motor is entirely out of circuit.
the purpose and manner of operating the motor by these devices
are as follows: the normal position of the switch, the
motor being out of circuit, is off the contact points. assuming
the generator to be running, and that it is desired to start the
motor, the switch is shifted until its levers rest upon points  and
. the two motor-circuits are thus connected with the generator
circuit; but by reason of the presence of the resistance i in one
and the self-induction coil j in the other the coincidence of the
phases of the current is disturbed sufficiently to produce a progression
of the poles, which starts the motor in rotation. when
the speed of the motor has run up to synchronism with the
generator, or approximately so, the switch is shifted over upon
the points  and , thus cutting out the coils i and j, so that the
currents in both circuits have the same phase; but the motor
now runs as a synchronous motor.
it will be understood that when brought up to speed the mo[pg ]tor
will run with only one of the circuits b or c connected with
the main or generator circuit, or the two circuits may be connected
in series. this latter plan is preferable when a current
having a high number of alternations per unit of time is employed
to drive the motor. in such case the starting of the
motor is more difficult, and the dead and inductive resistances
must take up a considerable proportion of the electromotive
force of the circuits. generally the conditions are so adjusted
that the electromotive force used in each of the motor circuits is
that which is required to operate the motor when its circuits are
in series. the plan followed in this case is illustrated in fig.
. in this instance the motor has twelve poles and the armature
has polar projections d wound with closed coils e. the
switch used is of substantially the same construction as that
shown in the previous figure. there are, however, five contacts,
designated as , , , , and . the motor-circuits b c, which include
alternate field-coils, are connected to the terminals in the
following order: one end of circuit c is connected to contact 
and to contact  through a dead resistance, i. one terminal of
circuit b is connected to contact  and to contact  through a
self-induction coil, j. the opposite terminals of both circuits are
connected to contact .
one of the levers, as f, of the switch is made with an extension,
f, or otherwise, so as to cover both contacts  and  when
shifted into the position to start the motor. it will be observed
that when in this position and with lever f' on contact  the current
divides between the two circuits b c, which from their difference
in electrical character produce a progression of the poles
that starts the motor in rotation. when the motor has attained
the proper speed, the switch is shifted so that the levers cover
the contacts  and , thereby connecting circuits b and c in series.
it is found that by this disposition the motor is maintained
in rotation in synchronism with the generator. this principle
of operation, which consists in converting by a change of connections
or otherwise a double-circuit motor, or one operating by
a progressive shifting of the poles, into an ordinary synchronizing
motor may be carried out in many other ways. for instance,
instead of using the switch shown in the previous figures, we
may use a temporary ground circuit between the generator and
motor, in order to start the motor, in substantially the manner
indicated in fig. . let g in this figure represent an ordinary[pg ]
alternating-current generator with, say, two poles, m m', and an
armature wound with two coils, n n', at right angles and connected
in series. the motor has, for example, four poles wound
with coils b c, which are connected in series, and an armature
with polar projections d wound with closed coils e e. from the
common joint or union between the two circuits of both the generator
and the motor an earth connection is established, while
the terminals or ends of these circuits are connected to the
line. assuming that the motor is a synchronizing motor or one
that has the capability of running in synchronism with the generator,
but not of starting, it may be started by the above-described
apparatus by closing the ground connection from both
generator and motor. the system thus becomes one with a two-circuit
generator and motor, the ground forming a common return
for the currents in the two circuits l and l'. when by
this arrangement of circuits the motor is brought to speed, the
ground connection is broken between the motor or generator, or
both, ground-switches p p' being employed for this purpose.
the motor then runs as a synchronizing motor.
in describing the main features which constitute this invention
illustrations have necessarily been omitted of the appliances used
in conjunction with the electrical devices of similar systems—such,
for instance, as driving-belts, fixed and loose pulleys for the
motor, and the like; but these are matters well understood.
mr. tesla believes he is the first to operate electro-magnetic
motors by alternating currents in any of the ways herein described—that
is to say, by producing a progressive movement or rotation
of their poles or points of greatest magnetic attraction by
the alternating currents until they have reached a given speed,
and then by the same currents producing a simple alternation of
their poles, or, in other words, by a change in the order or character
of the circuit connections to convert a motor operating on
one principle to one operating on another.
[pg ]
change from double current to single current motor.
a description is given elsewhere of a method of operating alternating
current motors by first rotating their magnetic poles
until they have attained synchronous speed, and then alternating
the poles. the motor is thus transformed, by a simple change
of circuit connections from one operated by the action of two or
more independent energizing currents to one operated either by
a single current or by several currents acting as one. another
way of doing this will now be described.
at the start the magnetic poles of one element or field of the
motor are progressively shifted by alternating currents differing
in phase and passed through independent energizing circuits, and
short circuit the coils of the other element. when the motor
thus started reaches or passes the limit of speed synchronous with
the generator, mr. tesla connects up the coils previously short-circuited
with a source of direct current and by a change of the circuit
connections produces a simple alternation of the poles. the
motor then continues to run in synchronism with the generator.
the motor here shown in fig.  is one of the ordinary forms, with
field-cores either laminated or solid and with a cylindrical laminated
armature wound, for example, with the coils a b at right angles.
the shaft of the armature carries three collecting or contact rings
c d e. (shown, for better illustration, as of different diameters.)
one end of coil a connects to one ring, as c, and one end of
coil b connects with ring d. the remaining ends are connected
to ring e. collecting springs or brushes f g h bear upon the
rings and lead to the contacts of a switch, to be presently described.
the field-coils have their terminals in binding-posts k
k, and may be either closed upon themselves or connected with
a source of direct current l, by means of a switch m. the main
or controlling switch has five contacts a b c d e and two levers f
g, pivoted and connected by an insulating cross-bar h, so as to
move in parallelism. these levers are connected to the line[pg ]
wires from a source of alternating currents n. contact a is connected
to brush g and coil b through a dead resistance r and
wire p. contact b is connected with brush f and coil a through
a self-induction coil s and wire o. contacts c and e are connected
to brushes g f, respectively, through the wires p o, and contact
d is directly connected with brush h. the lever f has a widened
end, which may span the contacts a b. when in such position
and with lever g on contact d, the alternating currents divide between
the two motor-coils, and by reason of their different self-induction
a difference of current-phase is obtained that starts the
motor in rotation. in starting, the field-coils are short circuited.
fig. .
when the motor has attained the desired speed, the switch is
shifted to the position shown in dotted lines—that is to say, with
the levers f g resting on points c e. this connects up the two
armature coils in series, and the motor will then run as a synchronous
motor. the field-coils are thrown into circuit with the
direct current source when the main switch is shifted.
[pg ]
motor with "current lag" artificially secured.
one of the general ways followed by mr. tesla in developing
his rotary phase motors is to produce practically independent
currents differing primarily in phase and to pass these through the
motor-circuits. another way is to produce a single alternating
current, to divide it between the motor-circuits, and to effect
artificially a lag in one of these circuits or branches, as by
giving to the circuits different self-inductive capacity, and in
other ways. in the former case, in which the necessary difference
of phase is primarily effected in the generation of currents,
in some instances, the currents are passed through the energizing
coils of both elements of the motor—the field and armature; but
a further result or modification may be obtained by doing this
under the conditions hereinafter specified in the case of motors
in which the lag, as above stated, is artificially secured.
figs.  to , inclusive, are diagrams of different ways in which
the invention is carried out; and fig. , a side view of a form
of motor used by mr. tesla for this purpose.
figs. ,  and .
a b in fig.  indicate the two energizing circuits of a motor,
and c d two circuits on the armature. circuit or coil a is connected
in series with circuit or coil c, and the two circuits b d are
similarly connected. between coils a and c is a contact-ring e,
forming one terminal of the latter, and a brush a, forming one
terminal of the former. a ring d and brush c similarly connect
coils b and d. the opposite terminals of the field-coils connect
to one binding post h of the motor, and those of the armature
coils are similarly connected to the opposite binding post i through
a contact-ring f and brush g. thus each motor-circuit while in
derivation to the other includes one armature and one field coil.
these circuits are of different self-induction, and may be made
so in various ways. for the sake of clearness, an artificial resistance
r is shown in one of these circuits, and in the other a
self-induction coil s. when an alternating current is passed
[pg ]through this motor it divides between its two energizing-circuits.
the higher self-induction of one circuit produces a greater retardation
or lag in the current therein than in the other. the
difference of phase between the two currents effects the rotation
or shifting of the points of maximum magnetic effect that secures
the rotation of the armature. in certain respects this plan of including
both armature and field coils in circuit is a marked improvement.
such a motor has a good torque at starting; yet it
has also considerable tendency to synchronism, owing to the fact[pg ]
that when properly constructed the maximum magnetic effects in
both armature and field coincide—a condition which in the usual
construction of these motors with closed armature coils is not
readily attained. the motor thus constructed exhibits too, a
better regulation of current from no load to load, and there is
less difference between the apparent and real energy expended
in running it. the true synchronous speed of this form of motor
is that of the generator when both are alike—that is to say, if
the number of the coils on the armature and on the field is x, the
motor will run normally at the same speed as a generator driving
it if the number of field magnets or poles of the same be also x.
figs. ,  and .
fig.  shows a somewhat modified arrangement of circuits.
there is in this case but one armature coil e, the winding of
which maintains effects corresponding to the resultant poles produced
by the two field-circuits.
fig.  represents a disposition in which both armature and
field are wound with two sets of coils, all in multiple arc to the
line or main circuit. the armature coils are wound to correspond
with the field-coils with respect to their self-induction. a
modification of this plan is shown in fig. —that is to say, the[pg ]
two field coils and two armature coils are in derivation to themselves
and in series with one another. the armature coils in
this case, as in the previous figure, are wound for different self-induction
to correspond with the field coils.
another modification is shown in fig. . in this case only
one armature-coil, as d, is included in the line-circuit, while the
other, as c, is short-circuited.
in such a disposition as that shown in fig. , or where only
one armature-coil is employed, the torque on the start is somewhat
reduced, while the tendency to synchronism is somewhat
increased. in such a disposition as shown in fig. , the opposite
conditions would exist. in both instances, however, there
is the advantage of dispensing with one contact-ring.
fig. .
in fig.  the two field-coils and the armature-coil d are in
multiple arc. in fig.  this disposition is modified, coil d being
shown in series with the two field-coils.
fig.  is an outline of the general form of motor in which
this invention is embodied. the circuit connections between
the armature and field coils are made, as indicated in the previous
figures, through brushes and rings, which are not shown.
[pg ]
another method of transformation from a torque to a
synchronizing motor.
in a preceding chapter we have described a method by which
mr. tesla accomplishes the change in his type of rotating field
motor from a torque to a synchronizing motor. as will be observed,
the desired end is there reached by a change in the circuit
connections at the proper moment. we will now proceed
to describe another way of bringing about the same result. the
principle involved in this method is as follows:—
if an alternating current be passed through the field coils only
of a motor having two energizing circuits of different self-induction
and the armature coils be short-circuited, the motor will have
a strong torque, but little or no tendency to synchronism with
the generator; but if the same current which energizes the field
be passed also through the armature coils the tendency to remain
in synchronism is very considerably increased. this is due to
the fact that the maximum magnetic effects produced in the field
and armature more nearly coincide. on this principle mr.
tesla constructs a motor having independent field circuits of
different self-induction, which are joined in derivation to a
source of alternating currents. the armature is wound with one
or more coils, which are connected with the field coils through
contact rings and brushes, and around the armature coils a shunt
is arranged with means for opening or closing the same. in starting
this motor the shunt is closed around the armature coils,
which will therefore be in closed circuit. when the current is
directed through the motor, it divides between the two circuits,
(it is not necessary to consider any case where there are more
than two circuits used), which, by reason of their different self-induction,
secure a difference of phase between the two currents
in the two branches, that produces a shifting or rotation of the
poles. by the alternations of current, other currents are
induced in the closed—or short-circuited—armature coils and the[pg ]
motor has a strong torque. when the desired speed is reached,
the shunt around the armature-coils is opened and the current
directed through both armature and field coils. under these
conditions the motor has a strong tendency to synchronism.
figs. ,  and .
in fig. , a and b designate the field coils of the motor. as
the circuits including these coils are of different self-induction,
this is represented by a resistance coil r in circuit with a, and a
self-induction coil s in circuit with b. the same result may of
course be secured by the winding of the coils. c is the armature
circuit, the terminals of which are rings a b. brushes c d bear
on these rings and connect with the line and field circuits. d is
the shunt or short circuit around the armature. e is the switch
in the shunt.
it will be observed that in such a disposition as is illustrated in[pg ]
fig. , the field circuits a and b being of different self-induction,
there will always be a greater lag of the current in one than the
other, and that, generally, the armature phases will not correspond
with either, but with the resultant of both. it is therefore
important to observe the proper rule in winding the armature.
for instance, if the motor have eight poles—four in each circuit—there
will be four resultant poles, and hence the armature
winding should be such as to produce four poles, in order to constitute
a true synchronizing motor.
fig. .
the diagram, fig. , differs from the previous one only in
respect to the order of connections. in the present case the armature-coil,
instead of being in series with the field-coils, is in multiple
arc therewith. the armature-winding may be similar to
that of the field—that is to say, the armature may have two or
more coils wound or adapted for different self-induction and
adapted, preferably, to produce the same difference of
phase as the field-coils. on starting the motor the shunt
is closed around both coils. this is shown in fig. , in
which the armature coils are f g. to indicate their different
electrical character, there are shown in circuit with them, respectively,
the resistance r' and the self-induction coil s'. the two
armature coils are in series with the field-coils and the same disposition
of the shunt or short-circuit d is used. it is of advantage
in the operation of motors of this kind to construct or wind
the armature in such manner that when short-circuited on the
start it will have a tendency to reach a higher speed than that
which synchronizes with the generator. for example, a given
motor having, say, eight poles should run, with the armature coil
short-circuited, at two thousand revolutions per minute to bring
it up to synchronism. it will generally happen, however, that[pg ]
this speed is not reached, owing to the fact that the armature
and field currents do not properly correspond, so that when the
current is passed through the armature (the motor not being
quite up to synchronism) there is a liability that it will not "hold
on," as it is termed. it is preferable, therefore, to so wind or
construct the motor that on the start, when the armature coils
are short-circuited, the motor will tend to reach a speed higher
than the synchronous—as for instance, double the latter. in
such case the difficulty above alluded to is not felt, for the motor
will always hold up to synchronism if the synchronous speed—in
the case supposed of two thousand revolutions—is reached or
passed. this may be accomplished in various ways; but for all
practical purposes the following will suffice: on the armature
are wound two sets of coils. at the start only one of these is
short-circuited, thereby producing a number of poles on the armature,
which will tend to run the speed up above the synchronous
limit. when such limit is reached or passed, the current is
directed through the other coil, which, by increasing the number
of armature poles, tends to maintain synchronism.
fig. .
in fig. , such a disposition is shown. the motor having,
say, eight poles contains two field-circuits a and b, of different
self-induction. the armature has two coils f and g. the former
is closed upon itself, the latter connected with the field and line
through contact-rings a b, brushes c d, and a switch e. on the
start the coil f alone is active and the motor tends to run at a
speed above the synchronous; but when the coil g is connected
to the circuit the number of armature poles is increased, while
the motor is made a true synchronous motor. this disposition[pg ]
has the advantage that the closed armature-circuit imparts to the
motor torque when the speed falls off, but at the same time the
conditions are such that the motor comes out of synchronism
more readily. to increase the tendency to synchronism, two
circuits may be used on the armature, one of which is short-circuited
on the start and both connected with the external circuit
after the synchronous speed is reached or passed. this disposition
is shown in fig. . there are three contact-rings a b e
and three brushes c d f, which connect the armature circuits
with the external circuit. on starting, the switch h is turned to
complete the connection between one binding-post p and the field-coils.
this short-circuits one of the armature-coils, as g. the
other coil f is out of circuit and open. when the motor is up
to speed, the switch h is turned back, so that the connection
from binding-post p to the field coils is through the coil g, and
switch k is closed, thereby including coil f in multiple arc with
the field coils. both armature coils are thus active.
from the above-described instances it is evident that many
other dispositions for carrying out the invention are possible.
[pg ]
"magnetic lag" motor.
the following description deals with another form of motor,
namely, depending on "magnetic lag" or hysteresis, its peculiarity
being that in it the attractive effects or phases while lagging
behind the phases of current which produce them, are manifested
simultaneously and not successively. the phenomenon
utilized thus at an early stage by mr. tesla, was not generally
believed in by scientific men, and prof. ayrton was probably
first to advocate it or to elucidate the reason of its supposed existence.
fig.  is a side view of the motor, in elevation. fig.  is
a part-sectional view at right angles to fig. . fig.  is an
end view in elevation and part section of a modification, and
fig.  is a similar view of another modification.
in figs.  and , a designates a base or stand, and b b
the supporting-frame of the motor. bolted to the supporting-frame
are two magnetic cores or pole-pieces c c', of iron or
soft steel. these may be subdivided or laminated, in which
case hard iron or steel plates or bars should be used, or they
should be wound with closed coils. d is a circular disc armature,
built up of sections or plates of iron and mounted in the
frame between the pole-pieces c c', curved to conform to the
circular shape thereof. this disc may be wound with a number
of closed coils e. f f are the main energizing coils, supported
by the supporting-frame, so as to include within their magnetizing
influence both the pole-pieces c c' and the armature d.
the pole-pieces c c' project out beyond the coils f f on opposite
sides, as indicated in the drawings. if an alternating
current be passed through the coils f f, rotation of the armature
will be produced, and this rotation is explained by the
following apparent action, or mode of operation: an impulse
of current in the coils f f establishes two polarities in the motor.
the protruding end of pole-piece c, for instance, will be[pg ]
of one sign, and the corresponding end of pole-piece c' will be
of the opposite sign. the armature also exhibits two poles at
right angles to the coils f f, like poles to those in the pole-pieces
being on the same side of the coils. while the current
is flowing there is no appreciable tendency to rotation developed;
but after each current impulse ceases or begins to fall,
the magnetism in the armature and in the ends of the pole-pieces
c c' lags or continues to manifest itself, which produces a
rotation of the armature by the repellent force between the
more closely approximating points of maximum magnetic effect.
this effect is continued by the reversal of current, the polarities
of field and armature being simply reversed. one or both
of the elements—the armature or field—may be wound with
closed induced coils to intensify this effect. although in the
illustrations but one of the fields is shown, each element of the
motor really constitutes a field, wound with the closed coils,
the currents being induced mainly in those convolutions or coils
which are parallel to the coils f f.
fig. .fig. .
a modified form of this motor is shown in fig. . in this
form g is one of two standards that support the bearings for
the armature-shaft. h h are uprights or sides of a frame, preferably
magnetic, the ends c c' of which are bent in the manner
indicated, to conform to the shape of the armature d and form
field-magnet poles. the construction of the armature may be
the same as in the previous figure, or it may be simply a magnetic
disc or cylinder, as shown, and a coil or coils f f are se[pg ]cured
in position to surround both the armature and the poles
c c'. the armature is detachable from its shaft, the latter being
passed through the armature after it has been inserted in position.
the operation of this form of motor is the same in principle
as that previously described and needs no further explanation.
fig. .
fig. .
one of the most important features in alternating current
motors is, however, that they should be adapted to and capable
of running efficiently on the alternating circuits in present use,
in which almost without exception the generators yield a very
high number of alternations. such a motor, of the type under
consideration, mr. tesla has designed by a development of the
principle of the motor shown in fig. , making a multipolar
motor, which is illustrated in fig. . in the construction of
this motor he employs an annular magnetic frame j, with inwardly-extending
ribs or projections k, the ends of which all
bend or turn in one direction and are generally shaped to conform
to the curved surface of the armature. coils f f are wound
from one part k to the one next adjacent, the ends or loops of
each coil or group of wires being carried over toward the shaft,
so as to form u-shaped groups of convolutions at each end of the
armature. the pole-pieces c c', being substantially concentric
with the armature, form ledges, along which the coils are laid
and should project to some extent beyond the the coils, as shown.
the cylindrical or drum armature d is of the same construction
as in the other motors described, and is mounted to rotate within
the annular frame j and between the u-shaped ends or bends of[pg ]
the coils f. the coils f are connected in multiple or in series
with a source of alternating currents, and are so wound that
with a current or current impulse of given direction they will
make the alternate pole-pieces c of one polarity and the other
pole-pieces c' of the opposite polarity. the principle of the
operation of this motor is the same as the other above described,
for, considering any two pole-pieces c c', a current
impulse passing in the coil which bridges them or is wound
over both tends to establish polarities in their ends of opposite
sign and to set up in the armature core between them a polarity
of the same sign as that of the nearest pole-piece c. upon the
fall or cessation of the current impulse that established these
polarities the magnetism which lags behind the current phase,
and which continues to manifest itself in the polar projections
c c' and the armature, produces by repulsion a rotation of the
armature. the effect is continued by each reversal of the current.
what occurs in the case of one pair of pole-pieces occurs
simultaneously in all, so that the tendency to rotation of the
armature is measured by the sum of all the forces exerted by the
pole-pieces, as above described. in this motor also the magnetic
lag or effect is intensified by winding one or both cores
with closed induced coils. the armature core is shown as thus
wound. when closed coils are used, the cores should be laminated.
it is evident that a pulsatory as well as an alternating current
might be used to drive or operate the motors above described.
it will be understood that the degree of subdivision, the mass
of the iron in the cores, their size and the number of alternations
in the current employed to run the motor, must be taken into
consideration in order to properly construct this motor. in other
words, in all such motors the proper relations between the number
of alternations and the mass, size, or quality of the iron must
be preserved in order to secure the best results.
[pg ]
method of obtaining difference of phase by magnetic
shielding.
in that class of motors in which two or more sets of energizing
magnets are employed, and in which by artificial means a certain
interval of time is made to elapse between the respective maximum
or minimum periods or phases of their magnetic attraction
or effect, the interval or difference in phase between the two sets
of magnets is limited in extent. it is desirable, however, for the
economical working of such motors that the strength or attraction
of one set of magnets should be maximum, at the time when that
of the other set is minimum, and conversely; but these conditions
have not heretofore been realized except in cases where the two
currents have been obtained from independent sources in the
same or different machines. mr. tesla has therefore devised a
motor embodying conditions that approach more nearly the theoretical
requirements of perfect working, or in other words, he
produces artificially a difference of magnetic phase by means of
a current from a single primary source sufficient in extent to
meet the requirements of practical and economical working. he
employs a motor with two sets of energizing or field magnets,
each wound with coils connected with a source of alternating or
rapidly-varying currents, but forming two separate paths or
circuits. the magnets of one set are protected to a certain extent
from the energizing action of the current by means of a
magnetic shield or screen interposed between the magnet and its
energizing coil. this shield is properly adapted to the conditions
of particular cases, so as to shield or protect the main core from
magnetization until it has become itself saturated and no longer
capable of containing all the lines of force produced by the current.
it will be seen that by this means the energizing action
begins in the protected set of magnets a certain arbitrarily-determined
period of time later than in the other, and that by
this means alone or in conjunction with other means or devices[pg ]
heretofore employed a practical difference of magnetic phase
may readily be secured.
fig.  is a view of a motor, partly in section, with a diagram
illustrating the invention. fig.  is a similar view of a
modification of the same.
fig. .fig. .
in fig. , which exhibits the simplest form of the invention,
a a is the field-magnet of a motor, having, say, eight poles or
inwardly-projecting cores b and c. the cores b form one set of
magnets and are energized by coils d. the cores c, forming
the other set are energized by coils e, and the coils are
connected, preferably, in series with one another, in two derived
or branched circuits, f g, respectively, from a suitable
source of current. each coil e is surrounded by a magnetic
shield h, which is preferably composed of an annealed, insulated,
or oxidized iron wire wrapped or wound on the coils in the manner
indicated so as to form a closed magnetic circuit around the
coils and between the same and the magnetic cores c. between
the pole pieces or cores b c is mounted the armature k,
which, as is usual in this type of machines, is wound with coils
l closed upon themselves. the operation resulting from this
disposition is as follows: if a current impulse be directed
through the two circuits of the motor, it will quickly energize
the cores b, but not so the cores c, for the reason that in
passing through the coils e there is encountered the influence
of the closed magnetic circuits formed by the shields h. the
first effect is to retard effectively the current impulse in circuit
g, while at the same time the proportion of current which does
pass does not magnetize the cores c, which are shielded or[pg ]
screened by the shields h. as the increasing electromotive
force then urges more current through the coils e, the iron wire
h becomes magnetically saturated and incapable of carrying all
the lines of force, and hence ceases to protect the cores c, which
becomes magnetized, developing their maximum effect after an
interval of time subsequent to the similar manifestation of strength
in the other set of magnets, the extent of which is arbitrarily
determined by the thickness of the shield h, and other well-understood
conditions.
from the above it will be seen that the apparatus or device
acts in two ways. first, by retarding the current, and, second,
by retarding the magnetization of one set of the cores, from
which its effectiveness will readily appear.
many modifications of the principle of this invention are possible.
one useful and efficient application of the invention is
shown in fig. . in this figure a motor is shown similar in all
respects to that above described, except that the iron wire h, which
is wrapped around the coils e, is in this case connected in series
with the coils d. the iron-wire coils h, are connected and wound,
so as to have little or no self-induction, and being added to the
resistance of the circuit f, the action of the current in that circuit
will be accelerated, while in the other circuit g it will be
retarded. the shield h may be made in many forms, as will be
understood, and used in different ways, as appears from the
foregoing description.
as a modification of his type of motor with "shielded" fields,
mr. tesla has constructed a motor with a field-magnet having
two sets of poles or inwardly-projecting cores and placed side
by side, so as practically to form two fields of force and alternately
disposed—that is to say, with the poles of one set or field
opposite the spaces between the other. he then connects the free
ends of one set of poles by means of laminated iron bands or
bridge-pieces of considerably smaller cross-section than the cores
themselves, whereby the cores will all form parts of complete
magnetic circuits. when the coils on each set of magnets are
connected in multiple circuits or branches from a source of alternating
currents, electromotive forces are set up in or impressed
upon each circuit simultaneously; but the coils on the
magnetically bridged or shunted cores will have, by reason of
the closed magnetic circuits, a high self-induction, which retards
the current, permitting at the beginning of each impulse but lit[pg ]tle
current to pass. on the other hand, no such opposition being
encountered in the other set of coils, the current passes freely
through them, magnetizing the poles on which they are wound.
as soon, however, as the laminated bridges become saturated
and incapable of carrying all the lines of force which the rising
electromotive force, and consequently increased current, produce,
free poles are developed at the ends of the cores, which,
acting in conjunction with the others, produce rotation of the
armature.
the construction in detail by which this invention is illustrated
is shown in the accompanying drawings.
fig. .fig. .
fig.  is a view in side elevation of a motor embodying the
principle. fig.  is a vertical cross-section of the motor. a is
the frame of the motor, which should be built up of sheets of
iron punched out to the desired shape and bolted together with
insulation between the sheets. when complete, the frame makes
a field-magnet with inwardly projecting pole-pieces b and c. to
adapt them to the requirements of this particular case these pole-pieces
are out of line with one another, those marked b surrounding
one end of the armature and the others, as c, the opposite
end, and they are disposed alternately—that is to say, the pole-pieces
of one set occur in line with the spaces between those of the
other sets.
the armature d is of cylindrical form, and is also laminated in
the usual way and is wound longitudinally with coils closed upon
themselves. the pole-pieces c are connected or shunted by
bridge-pieces e. these may be made independently and attached
to the pole-pieces, or they may be parts of the forms or blanks
stamped or punched out of sheet-iron. their size or mass is
de[pg ]termined by various conditions, such as the strength of the current
to be employed, the mass or size of the cores to which they
are applied, and other familiar conditions.
coils f surround the pole-pieces b, and other coils g are wound
on the pole-pieces c. these coils are connected in series in two
circuits, which are branches of a circuit from a generator of alternating
currents, and they may be so wound, or the respective
circuits in which they are included may be so arranged, that the
circuit of coils g will have, independently of the particular construction
described, a higher self-induction than the other circuit
or branch.
the function of the shunts or bridges e is that they shall form
with the cores c a closed magnetic circuit for a current up to a
predetermined strength, so that when saturated by such current
and unable to carry more lines of force than such a current produces
they will to no further appreciable extent interfere with
the development, by a stronger current, of free magnetic poles at
the ends of the cores c.
in such a motor the current is so retarded in the coils g, and
the manifestation of the free magnetism in the poles c is so delayed
beyond the period of maximum magnetic effect in poles b, that a
strong torque is produced and the motor operates with approximately
the power developed in a motor of this kind energized
by independently generated currents differing by a full quarter
phase.
[pg ]
type of tesla single-phase motor.
up to this point, two principal types of tesla motors have
been described: first, those containing two or more energizing
circuits through which are caused to pass alternating currents
differing from one another in phase to an extent sufficient to
produce a continuous progression or shifting of the poles or
points of greatest magnetic effect, in obedience to which the
movable element of the motor is maintained in rotation; second,
those containing poles, or parts of different magnetic susceptibility,
which under the energizing influence of the same current
or two currents coinciding in phase will exhibit differences in
their magnetic periods or phases. in the first class of motors
the torque is due to the magnetism established in different portions
of the motor by currents from the same or from independent
sources, and exhibiting time differences in phase. in
the second class the torque results from the energizing effects of
a current upon different parts of the motor which differ in magnetic
susceptibility—in other words, parts which respond in the
same relative degree to the action of a current, not simultaneously,
but after different intervals of time.
in another tesla motor, however, the torque, instead of being
solely the result of a time difference in the magnetic periods or
phases of the poles or attractive parts to whatever cause due, is
produced by an angular displacement of the parts which, though
movable with respect to one another, are magnetized simultaneously,
or approximately so, by the same currents. this principle
of operation has been embodied practically in a motor in which
the necessary angular displacement between the points of greatest
magnetic attraction in the two elements of the motor—the armature
and field—is obtained by the direction of the lamination of
the magnetic cores of the elements.
fig.  is a side view of such a motor with a portion of its
armature core exposed. fig.  is an end or edge view of the[pg ]
same. fig.  is a central cross-section of the same, the armature
being shown mainly in elevation.
fig. .fig. .fig. .
let a a designate two plates built up of thin sections or
laminæ of soft iron insulated more or less from one another and
held together by bolts a and secured to a base b. the inner
faces of these plates contain recesses or grooves in which a coil
or coils d are secured obliquely to the direction of the laminations.
within the coils d is a disc e, preferably composed of
a spirally-wound iron wire or ribbon or a series of concentric
rings and mounted on a shaft f, having bearings in the plates
a a. such a device when acted upon by an alternating current
is capable of rotation and constitutes a motor, the operation of
which may be explained in the following manner: a current or
current-impulse traversing the coils d tends to magnetize the
cores a a and e, all of which are within the influence of the
field of the coils. the poles thus established would naturally
lie in the same line at right angles to the coils d, but in the
plates a they are deflected by reason of the direction of the
laminations, and appear at or near the extremities of these plates.
in the disc, however, where these conditions are not present, the
poles or points of greatest attraction are on a line at right
angles to the plane of the coils; hence there will be a torque established
by this angular displacement of the poles or magnetic
lines, which starts the disc in rotation, the magnetic lines of the
armature and field tending toward a position of parallelism.
this rotation is continued and maintained by the reversals of
the current in coils d d, which change alternately the polarity of
the field-cores a a. this rotary tendency or effect will be greatly[pg ]
increased by winding the disc with conductors g, closed upon
themselves and having a radial direction, whereby the magnetic
intensity of the poles of the disc will be greatly increased by
the energizing effect of the currents induced in the coils g by the
alternating currents in coils d.
the cores of the disc and field may or may not be of different
magnetic susceptibility—that is to say, they may both be of the
same kind of iron, so as to be magnetized at approximately the
same instant by the coils d; or one may be of soft iron and the
other of hard, in order that a certain time may elapse between
the periods of their magnetization. in either case rotation will
be produced; but unless the disc is provided with the closed energizing
coils it is desirable that the above-described difference of
magnetic susceptibility be utilized to assist in its rotation.
the cores of the field and armature may be made in various
ways, as will be well understood, it being only requisite that the
laminations in each be in such direction as to secure the necessary
angular displacement of the points of greatest attraction.
moreover, since the disc may be considered as made up of an
infinite number of radial arms, it is obvious that what is true of
a disc holds for many other forms of armature.
[pg ]
motors with circuits of different resistance.
as has been pointed out elsewhere, the lag or retardation of
the phases of an alternating current is directly proportional to
the self-induction and inversely proportional to the resistance of
the circuit through which the current flows. hence, in order
to secure the proper differences of phase between the two motor-circuits,
it is desirable to make the self-induction in one much
higher and the resistance much lower than the self-induction and
resistance, respectively, in the other. at the same time the
magnetic quantities of the two poles or sets of poles which the
two circuits produce should be approximately equal. these
requirements have led mr. tesla to the invention of a motor
having the following general characteristics: the coils which
are included in that energizing circuit which is to have the
higher self-induction are made of coarse wire, or a conductor of
relatively low resistance, and with the greatest possible length
or number of turns. in the other set of coils a comparatively
few turns of finer wire are used, or a wire of higher resistance.
furthermore, in order to approximate the magnetic quantities of
the poles excited by these coils, mr. tesla employs in the self-induction
circuit cores much longer than those in the other or
resistance circuit.
fig.  is a part sectional view of the motor at right angles to
the shaft. fig.  is a diagram of the field circuits.
in fig. , let a represent the coils in one motor circuit, and b
those in the other. the circuit a is to have the higher self-induction.
there are, therefore, used a long length or a large
number of turns of coarse wire in forming the coils of this circuit.
for the circuit b, a smaller conductor is employed, or a
conductor of a higher resistance than copper, such as german
silver or iron, and the coils are wound with fewer turns. in applying
these coils to a motor, mr. tesla builds up a field-magnet of
plates c, of iron and steel, secured together in the usual manner[pg ]
by bolts d. each plate is formed with four (more or less) long
cores e, around which is a space to receive the coil and an equal
number of short projections f to receive the coils of the resistance-circuit.
the plates are generally annular in shape, having an
open space in the centre for receiving the armature g, which mr.
tesla prefers to wind with closed coils. an alternating current
divided between the two circuits is retarded as to its phases in
the circuit a to a much greater extent than in the circuit b. by
reason of the relative sizes and disposition of the cores and coils
the magnetic effect of the poles e and f upon the armature closely
approximate.
fig. .fig. .
an important result secured by the construction shown here
is that these coils which are designed to have the higher self-induction
are almost completely surrounded by iron, and that the
retardation is thus very materially increased.
[pg ]
motor with equal magnetic energies in field and
armature.
let it be assumed that the energy as represented in the magnetism
in the field of a given rotating field motor is ninety and
that of the armature ten. the sum of these quantities, which
represents the total energy expended in driving the motor, is
one hundred; but, assuming that the motor be so constructed
that the energy in the field is represented by fifty, and that in
the armature by fifty, the sum is still one hundred; but while in
the first instance the product is nine hundred, in the second it is
two thousand five hundred, and as the energy developed is in
proportion to these products it is clear that those motors are the
most efficient—other things being equal—in which the magnetic
energies developed in the armature and field are equal. these
results mr. tesla obtains by using the same amount of copper or
ampere turns in both elements when the cores of both are equal,
or approximately so, and the same current energizes both; or in
cases where the currents in one element are induced to those of
the other he uses in the induced coils an excess of copper over
that in the primary element or conductor.
fig. .
[pg ]
the conventional figure of a motor here introduced, fig. ,
will give an idea of the solution furnished by mr. tesla for the
specific problem. referring to the drawing, a is the field-magnet,
b the armature, c the field coils, and d the armature-coils of
the motor.
generally speaking, if the mass of the cores of armature and
field be equal, the amount of copper or ampere turns of the
energizing coils on both should also be equal; but these conditions
will be modified in different forms of machine. it will be
understood that these results are most advantageous when existing
under the conditions presented where the motor is running
with its normal load, a point to be well borne in mind.
[pg ]
motors with coinciding maxima of magnetic effect in
armature and field.
in this form of motor, mr. tesla's object is to design and
build machines wherein the maxima of the magnetic effects of
the armature and field will more nearly coincide than in some of
the types previously under consideration. these types are: first,
motors having two or more energizing circuits of the same electrical
character, and in the operation of which the currents used
differ primarily in phase; second, motors with a plurality of
energizing circuits of different electrical character, in or by
means of which the difference of phase is produced artificially,
and, third, motors with a plurality of energizing circuits, the
currents in one being induced from currents in another. considering
the structural and operative conditions of any one of
them—as, for example, that first named—the armature which is
mounted to rotate in obedience to the co-operative influence or
action of the energizing circuits has coils wound upon it which
are closed upon themselves and in which currents are induced by
the energizing-currents with the object and result of energizing
the armature-core; but under any such conditions as must exist
in these motors, it is obvious that a certain time must elapse
between the manifestations of an energizing current impulse in
the field coils, and the corresponding magnetic state or phase in
the armature established by the current induced thereby; consequently
a given magnetic influence or effect in the field which is
the direct result of a primary current impulse will have become
more or less weakened or lost before the corresponding effect in
the armature indirectly produced has reached its maximum. this
is a condition unfavorable to efficient working in certain cases—as,
for instance, when the progress of the resultant poles or points
of maximum attraction is very great, or when a very high number
of alternations is employed—for it is apparent that a stronger[pg ]
tendency to rotation will be maintained if the maximum magnetic
attractions or conditions in both armature and field coincide,
the energy developed by a motor being measured by the product
of the magnetic quantities of the armature and field.
to secure this coincidence of maximum magnetic effects, mr.
tesla has devised various means, as explained below. fig.  is
a diagrammatic illustration of a tesla motor system in which the
alternating currents proceed from independent sources and differ
primarily in phase.
fig. .fig. .
a designates the field-magnet or magnetic frame of the motor;
b b, oppositely located pole-pieces adapted to receive the coils of
one energizing circuit; and c c, similar pole-pieces for the coils
of the other energizing circuit. these circuits are designated,
respectively, by d e, the conductor d'' forming a common return
to the generator g. between these poles is mounted an armature—for
example, a ring or annular armature, wound with a series
of coils f, forming a closed circuit or circuits. the action or
operation of a motor thus constructed is now well understood.
it will be observed, however, that the magnetism of poles b, for[pg ]
example, established by a current impulse in the coils thereon,
precedes the magnetic effect set up in the armature by the induced
current in coils f. consequently the mutual attraction
between the armature and field-poles is considerably reduced.
the same conditions will be found to exist if, instead of assuming
the poles b or c as acting independently, we regard the ideal resultant
of both acting together, which is the real condition. to
remedy this, the motor field is constructed with secondary poles
b' c', which are situated between the others. these pole-pieces
are wound with coils d' e', the former in derivation to the coils
d, the latter to coils e. the main or primary coils d and e are
wound for a different self-induction from that of the coils d' and
e', the relations being so fixed that if the currents in d and e
differ, for example, by a quarter-phase, the currents in each
secondary coil, as d' e', will differ from those in its appropriate
primary d or e by, say, forty-five degrees, or one-eighth of a
period.
now, assuming that an impulse or alternation in circuit or
branch e is just beginning, while in the branch d it is just falling
from maximum, the conditions are those of a quarter-phase
difference. the ideal resultant of the attractive forces of the two
sets of poles b c therefore may be considered as progressing from
poles b to poles c, while the impulse in e is rising to maximum,
and that in d is falling to zero or minimum. the polarity set up
in the armature, however, lags behind the manifestations of field
magnetism, and hence the maximum points of attraction in armature
and field, instead of coinciding, are angularly displaced.
this effect is counteracted by the supplemental poles b' c'. the
magnetic phases of these poles succeed those of poles b c by the
same, or nearly the same, period of time as elapses between the
effect of the poles b c and the corresponding induced effect in the
armature; hence the magnetic conditions of poles b' c' and of
the armature more nearly coincide and a better result is obtained.
as poles b' c' act in conjunction with the poles in the armature
established by poles b c, so in turn poles c b act similarly with
the poles set up by b' c', respectively. under such conditions
the retardation of the magnetic effect of the armature and that
of the secondary poles will bring the maximum of the two more
nearly into coincidence and a correspondingly stronger torque or
magnetic attraction secured.
in such a disposition as is shown in fig.  it will be observed[pg ]
that as the adjacent pole-pieces of either circuit are of like polarity
they will have a certain weakening effect upon one another.
mr. tesla therefore prefers to remove the secondary poles from
the direct influence of the others. this may be done by constructing
a motor with two independent sets of fields, and with
either one or two armatures electrically connected, or by using
two armatures and one field. these modifications are illustrated
further on.
fig. .fig. .
fig.  is a diagrammatic illustration of a motor and system in
which the difference of phase is artificially produced. there are
two coils d d in one branch and two coils e e in another branch
of the main circuit from the generator g. these two circuits or
branches are of different self-induction, one, as d, being higher
than the other. this is graphically indicated by making coils d
much larger than coils e. by reason of the difference in the
electrical character of the two circuits, the phases of current in
one are retarded to a greater extent than the other. let this
difference be thirty degrees. a motor thus constructed will
rotate under the action of an alternating current; but as happens
in the case previously described the corresponding magnetic effects
of the armature and field do not coincide owing to the time
that elapses between a given magnetic effect in the armature and[pg ]
the condition of the field that produces it. the secondary or
supplemental poles b' c' are therefore availed of. there being
thirty degrees difference of phase between the currents in coils
d e, the magnetic effect of poles b' c' should correspond to that
produced by a current differing from the current in coils d or e
by fifteen degrees. this we can attain by winding each supplemental
pole b' c' with two coils h h'. the coils h are included
in a derived circuit having the same self-induction as circuit d,
and coils h' in a circuit having the same self-induction as circuit
e, so that if these circuits differ by thirty degrees the magnetism
of poles b' c' will correspond to that produced by a current differing
from that in either d or e by fifteen degrees. this is true
in all other cases. for example, if in fig.  the coils d' e' be
replaced by the coils h h' included in the derived circuits, the
magnetism of the poles b' c' will correspond in effect or phase,
if it may be so termed, to that produced by a current differing
from that in either circuit d or e by forty-five degrees, or one-eighth
of a period.
this invention as applied to a derived circuit motor is illustrated
in figs.  and . the former is an end view of the motor
with the armature in section and a diagram of connections, and
fig.  a vertical section through the field. these figures are
also drawn to show one of the dispositions of two fields that may
be adopted in carrying out the principle. the poles b b c c are
in one field, the remaining poles in the other. the former are
wound with primary coils i j and secondary coils i' j', the latter
with coils k l. the primary coils i j are in derived circuits, between
which, by reason of their different self-induction, there is
a difference of phase, say, of thirty degrees. the coils i' k are
in circuit with one another, as also are coils j' l, and there should
be a difference of phase between the currents in coils k and l and
their corresponding primaries of, say, fifteen degrees. if the
poles b c are at right angles, the armature-coils should be connected
directly across, or a single armature core wound from end
to end may be used; but if the poles b c be in line there should
be an angular displacement of the armature coils, as will be well
understood.
the operation will be understood from the foregoing. the
maximum magnetic condition of a pair of poles, as b' b', coincides
closely with the maximum effect in the armature, which lags behind
the corresponding condition in poles b b.
[pg ]
motor based on the difference of phase in the magnetization
of the inner and outer parts of an iron core.
it is well known that if a magnetic core, even if laminated or
subdivided, be wound with an insulated coil and a current of
electricity be directed through the coil, the magnetization of the
entire core does not immediately ensue, the magnetizing effect
not being exhibited in all parts simultaneously. this may be attributed
to the fact that the action of the current is to energize
first those laminæ or parts of the core nearest the surface and
adjacent to the exciting-coil, and from thence the action progresses
toward the interior. a certain interval of time therefore
elapses between the manifestation of magnetism in the external
and the internal sections or layers of the core. if the core be
thin or of small mass, this effect may be inappreciable; but in
the case of a thick core, or even of a comparatively thin one, if
the number of alternations or rate of change of the current
strength be very great, the time interval occurring between the
manifestations of magnetism in the interior of the core and in
those parts adjacent to the coil is more marked. in the construction
of such apparatus as motors which are designed to be
run by alternating or equivalent currents—such as pulsating or
undulating currents generally—mr. tesla found it desirable and
even necessary to give due consideration to this phenomenon and
to make special provisions in order to obviate its consequences.
with the specific object of taking advantage of this action or
effect, and to render it more pronounced, he constructs a field
magnet in which the parts of the core or cores that exhibit at
different intervals of time the magnetic effect imparted to them
by alternating or equivalent currents in an energizing coil or coils,
are so placed with relation to a rotating armature as to exert
thereon their attractive effect successively in the order of their
magnetization. by this means he secures a result similar to that
which he had previously attained in other forms or types of mo[pg ]tor
in which by means of one or more alternating currents he
has produced the rotation or progression of the magnetic poles.
this new mode of operation will now be described. fig. 
is a side elevation of such motor. fig.  is a side elevation of
a more practicable and efficient embodiment of the invention.
fig.  is a central vertical section of the same in the plane of
the axis of rotation.
figs.  and .
referring to fig. , let x represent a large iron core, which
may be composed of a number of sheets or laminæ of soft iron
or steel. surrounding this core is a coil y, which is connected
with a source e of rapidly varying currents. let us consider now
the magnetic conditions existing in this core at any point, as b,
at or near the centre, and any other point, as a, nearer the surface.
when a current impulse is started in the magnetizing coil
y, the section or part at a, being close to the coil, is immediately
energized, while the section or part at b, which, to use a convenient
expression, is "protected" by the intervening sections or
layers between a and b, does not at once exhibit its magnetism.
however, as the magnetization of a increases, b becomes also
affected, reaching finally its maximum strength some time later
than a. upon the weakening of the current the magnetization
of a first diminishes, while b still exhibits its maximum strength;[pg ]
but the continued weakening of a is attended by a subsequent
weakening of b. assuming the current to be an alternating one,
a will now be reversed, while b still continues of the first imparted
polarity. this action continues the magnetic condition of b, following
that of a in the manner above described. if an armature—for
instance, a simple disc f, mounted to rotate freely on an
axis—be brought into proximity to the core, a movement of rotation
will be imparted to the disc, the direction depending upon
its position relatively to the core, the tendency being to turn the
portion of the disc nearest to the core from a to b, as indicated
in fig. .
fig. .
this action or principle of operation has been embodied in a
practicable form of motor, which is illustrated in fig. . let a
in that figure represent a circular frame of iron, from diametrically
opposite points of the interior of which the cores project.
each core is composed of three main parts b, b and c, and they
are similarly formed with a straight portion or body e, around
which the energizing coil is wound, a curved arm or extension c,
and an inwardly projecting pole or end d. each core is made up
of two parts b b, with their polar extensions reaching in one
direction, and a part c between the other two, and with its polar
extension reaching in the opposite direction. in order to lessen
in the cores the circulation of currents induced therein, the several
sections are insulated from one another in the manner usually[pg ]
followed in such cases. these cores are wound with coils d, which
are connected in the same circuit, either in parallel or series, and
supplied with an alternating or a pulsating current, preferably
the former, by a generator e, represented diagrammatically. between
the cores or their polar extensions is mounted a cylindrical
or similar armature f, wound with magnetizing coils g, closed
upon themselves.
the operation of this motor is as follows: when a current
impulse or alternation is directed through the coils d, the sections
b b of the cores, being on the surface and in close proximity to
the coils, are immediately energized. the sections c, on the other
hand, are protected from the magnetizing influence of the coil
by the interposed layers of iron b b. as the magnetism of b b
increases, however, the sections c are also energized; but they
do not attain their maximum strength until a certain time subsequent
to the exhibition by the sections b b of their maximum.
upon the weakening of the current the magnetic strength of b b
first diminishes, while the sections c have still their maximum
strength; but as b b continue to weaken the interior sections are
similarly weakened. b b may then begin to exhibit an opposite
polarity, which is followed later by a similar change on c, and
this action continues. b b and c may therefore be considered as
separate field-magnets, being extended so as to act on the armature
in the most efficient positions, and the effect is similar to
that in the other forms of tesla motor—viz., a rotation or progression
of the maximum points of the field of force. any
armature—such, for instance, as a disc—mounted in this field
would rotate from the pole first to exhibit its magnetism to that
which exhibits it later.
it is evident that the principle here described may be carried
out in conjunction with other means for securing a more favorable
or efficient action of the motor. for example, the polar
extensions of the sections c may be wound or surrounded by
closed coils. the effect of these coils will be to still more
effectively retard the magnetization of the polar extensions of c.
[pg ]
another type of tesla induction motor.
it will have been gathered by all who are interested in the
advance of the electrical arts, and who follow carefully, step by
step, the work of pioneers, that mr. tesla has been foremost to
utilize inductive effects in permanently closed circuits, in the
operation of alternating motors. in this chapter one simple type
of such a motor is described and illustrated, which will serve as
an exemplification of the principle.
let it be assumed that an ordinary alternating current generator
is connected up in a circuit of practically no self-induction,
such, for example, as a circuit containing incandescent lamps
only. on the operation of the machine, alternating currents will
be developed in the circuit, and the phases of these currents will
theoretically coincide with the phases of the impressed electromotive
force. such currents may be regarded and designated as
the "unretarded currents."
it will be understood, of course, that in practice there is always
more or less self-induction in the circuit, which modifies to
a corresponding extent these conditions; but for convenience
this may be disregarded in the consideration of the principle of
operation, since the same laws apply. assume next that a path
of currents be formed across any two points of the above circuit,
consisting, for example, of the primary of an induction device.
the phases of the currents passing through the primary,
owing to the self-induction of the same, will not coincide with
the phases of the impressed electromotive force, but will lag
behind, such lag being directly proportional to the self-induction
and inversely proportional to the resistance of the said coil.
the insertion of this coil will also cause a lagging or retardation
of the currents traversing and delivered by the generator behind
the impressed electromotive force, such lag being the mean or
resultant of the lag of the current through the primary alone and
of the "unretarded current" in the entire working circuit. next[pg ]
consider the conditions imposed by the association in inductive
relation with the primary coil, of a secondary coil. the current
generated in the secondary coil will react upon the primary current,
modifying the retardation of the same, according to the
amount of self-induction and resistance in the secondary circuit.
if the secondary circuit has but little self-induction—as, for instance,
when it contains incandescent lamps only—it will increase
the actual difference of phase between its own and the
primary current, first, by diminishing the lag between the primary
current and the impressed electromotive force, and, second,
by its own lag or retardation behind the impressed electromotive
force. on the other hand, if the secondary circuit have
a high self-induction, its lag behind the current in the primary is
directly increased, while it will be still further increased if the
primary have a very low self-induction. the better results are
obtained when the primary has a low self-induction.
fig. .fig. .
fig.  is a diagram of a tesla motor embodying this principle.
fig.  is a similar diagram of a modification of the same.
in fig.  let a designate the field-magnet of a motor which, as
in all these motors, is built up of sections or plates. b c are polar
projections upon which the coils are wound. upon one pair
of these poles, as c, are wound primary coils d, which are directly
connected to the circuit of an alternating current generator
g. on the same poles are also wound secondary coils f,
either side by side or over or under the primary coils, and these
are connected with other coils e, which surround the poles b b.[pg ]
the currents in both primary and secondary coils in such a motor
will be retarded or will lag behind the impressed electromotive
force; but to secure a proper difference in phase between
the primary and secondary currents themselves, mr. tesla increases
the resistance of the circuit of the secondary and reduces
as much as practicable its self-induction. this is done by using
for the secondary circuit, particularly in the coils e, wire of comparatively
small diameter and having but few turns around the
cores; or by using some conductor of higher specific resistance,
such as german silver; or by introducing at some point in the
secondary circuit an artificial resistance r. thus the self-induction
of the secondary is kept down and its resistance increased,
with the result of decreasing the lag between the impressed
electro-motive force and the current in the primary coils and increasing
the difference of phase between the primary and secondary
currents.
in the disposition shown in fig. , the lag in the secondary
is increased by increasing the self-induction of that circuit, while
the increasing tendency of the primary to lag is counteracted by
inserting therein a dead resistance. the primary coils d in this
case have a low self-induction and high resistance, while the coils
e f, included in the secondary circuit, have a high self-induction
and low resistance. this may be done by the proper winding of
the coils; or in the circuit including the secondary coils e f, we
may introduce a self-induction coil s, while in the primary circuit
from the generator g and including coils d, there may be inserted
a dead resistance r. by this means the difference of
phase between the primary and secondary is increased. it is evident
that both means of increasing the difference of phase—namely,
by the special winding as well as by the supplemental or
external inductive and dead resistance—may be employed conjointly.
in the operation of this motor the current impulses in the primary
coils induce currents in the secondary coils, and by the conjoint
action of the two the points of greatest magnetic attraction
are shifted or rotated.
in practice it is found desirable to wind the armature with
closed coils in which currents are induced by the action thereon
of the primaries.
[pg ]
combinations of synchronizing motor and torque motor.
in the preceding descriptions relative to synchronizing motors
and methods of operating them, reference has been made to the
plan adopted by mr. tesla, which consists broadly in winding or
arranging the motor in such manner that by means of suitable
switches it could be started as a multiple-circuit motor, or one
operating by a progression of its magnetic poles, and then, when
up to speed, or nearly so, converted into an ordinary synchronizing
motor, or one in which the magnetic poles were simply alternated.
in some cases, as when a large motor is used and when
the number of alternations is very high, there is more or less
difficulty in bringing the motor to speed as a double or multiple-circuit
motor, for the plan of construction which renders the
motor best adapted to run as a synchronizing motor impairs its
efficiency as a torque or double-circuit motor under the assumed
conditions on the start. this will be readily understood, for in a
large synchronizing motor the length of the magnetic circuit of
the polar projections, and their mass, are so great that apparently
considerable time is required for magnetization and demagnetization.
hence with a current of a very high number of alternations
the motor may not respond properly. to avoid this objection
and to start up a synchronizing motor in which these conditions
obtain, mr. tesla has combined two motors, one a synchronizing
motor, the other a multiple-circuit or torque motor, and by the
latter he brings the first-named up to speed, and then either
throws the whole current into the synchronizing motor or operates
jointly both of the motors.
this invention involves several novel and useful features. it
will be observed, in the first place, that both motors are run,
without commutators of any kind, and, secondly, that the speed
of the torque motor may be higher than that of the synchronizing
motor, as will be the case when it contains a fewer number of
poles or sets of poles, so that the motor will be more readily and[pg ]
easily brought up to speed. thirdly, the synchronizing motor
may be constructed so as to have a much more pronounced tendency
to synchronism without lessening the facility with which
it is started.
fig.  is a part sectional view of the two motors; fig.  an
end view of the synchronizing motor; fig.  an end view and
part section of the torque or double-circuit motor; fig.  a
diagram of the circuit connections employed; and figs. , ,
,  and  are diagrams of modified dispositions of the two
motors.
fig. .
inasmuch as neither motor is doing any work while the current
is acting upon the other, the two armatures are rigidly connected,
both being mounted upon the same shaft a, the field-magnets b
of the synchronizing and c of the torque motor being secured to
the same base d. the preferably larger synchronizing motor has
polar projections on its armature, which rotate in very close proximity
to the poles of the field, and in other respects it conforms
to the conditions that are necessary to secure synchronous action.
the pole-pieces of the armature are, however, wound with closed
coils e, as this obviates the employment of sliding contacts. the
smaller or torque motor, on the other hand, has, preferably, a
cylindrical armature f, without polar projections and wound with
closed coils g. the field-coils of the torque motor are connected
up in two series h and i, and the alternating current from the
generator is directed through or divided between these two circuits
in any manner to produce a progression of the poles or
points of maximum magnetic effect. this result is secured by
connecting the two motor-circuits in derivation with the circuit[pg ]
from the generator, inserting in one motor circuit a dead resistance
and in the other a self-induction coil, by which means a
difference in phase between the two divisions of the current is
secured. if both motors have the same number of field poles,
the torque motor for a given number of alternations will tend to
run at double the speed of the other, for, assuming the connections
to be such as to give the best results, its poles are divided
into two series and the number of poles is virtually reduced one-half,
which being acted upon by the same number of alternations
tend to rotate the armature at twice the speed. by this means
the main armature is more easily brought to or above the required
speed. when the speed necessary for synchronism is imparted
to the main motor, the current is shifted from the torque motor
into the other.
fig. .fig. .
a convenient arrangement for carrying out this invention is
shown in fig. , in which j j are the field coils of the synchronizing,
and h i the field coils of the torque motor. l l' are
the conductors of the main line. one end of, say, coils h is connected
to wire l through a self-induction coil m. one end of the
other set of coils i is connected to the same wire through a dead
resistance n. the opposite ends of these two circuits are connected
to the contact m of a switch, the handle or lever of which
is in connection with the line-wire l'. one end of the field circuit
of the synchronizing motor is connected to the wire l. the
other terminates in the switch-contact n. from the diagram it
will be readily seen that if the lever p be turned upon contact m,
the torque motor will start by reason of the difference of phase
between the currents in its two energizing circuits. then when
the desired speed is attained, if the lever p be shifted upon con[pg ]tact
n the entire current will pass through the field coils of the
synchronizing motor and the other will be doing no work.
the torque motor may be constructed and operated in various
ways, many of which have already been touched upon. it is not
necessary that one motor be cut out of circuit while the other is
in, for both may be acted upon by current at the same time, and
mr. tesla has devised various dispositions or arrangements of the
two motors for accomplishing this. some of these arrangements
are illustrated in figs.  to .
fig. .
referring to fig. , let t designate the torque or multiple
circuit motor and s the synchronizing motor, l l' being the line-wires
from a source of alternating current. the two circuits of
the torque motor of different degrees of self-induction, and designated
by n m, are connected in derivation to the wire l. they
are then joined and connected to the energizing circuit of the
synchronizing motor, the opposite terminal of which is connected
to wire l'. the two motors are thus in series. to start them
mr. tesla short-circuits the synchronizing motor by a switch p',
throwing the whole current through the torque motor. then
when the desired speed is reached the switch p' is opened, so
that the current passes through both motors. in such an arrangement
as this it is obviously desirable for economical and other
reasons that a proper relation between the speeds of the two
motors should be observed.
in fig.  another disposition is illustrated. s is the synchronizing
motor and t the torque motor, the circuits of both being in
parallel. w is a circuit also in derivation to the motor circuits
and containing a switch p''. s' is a switch in the synchronizing
motor circuit. on the start the switch s' is opened, cutting out
the motor s. then p'' is opened, throwing the entire current[pg ]
through the motor t, giving it a very strong torque. when the
desired speed is reached, switch s' is closed and the current divides
between both motors. by means of switch p'' both motors may
be cut out.
figs. , , ,  and .
[pg ]
in fig.  the arrangement is substantially the same, except
that a switch t' is placed in the circuit which includes the two circuits
of the torque motor. fig.  shows the two motors in
series, with a shunt around both containing a switch s t. there
is also a shunt around the synchronizing motor s, with a switch
p'. in fig.  the same disposition is shown; but each motor is
provided with a shunt, in which are switches p' and t'', as shown.
[pg ]
motor with a condenser in the armature circuit.
we now come to a new class of motors in which resort is had
to condensers for the purpose of developing the required difference
of phase and neutralizing the effects of self-induction. mr.
tesla early began to apply the condenser to alternating apparatus,
in just how many ways can only be learned from a perusal
of other portions of this volume, especially those dealing with
his high frequency work.
certain laws govern the action or effects produced by a condenser
when connected to an electric circuit through which an
alternating or in general an undulating current is made to pass.
some of the most important of such effects are as follows: first,
if the terminals or plates of a condenser be connected with two
points of a circuit, the potentials of which are made to rise and
fall in rapid succession, the condenser allows the passage, or more
strictly speaking, the transference of a current, although its
plates or armatures may be so carefully insulated as to prevent
almost completely the passage of a current of unvarying strength
or direction and of moderate electromotive force. second, if a
circuit, the terminals of which are connected with the plates of
the condenser, possess a certain self-induction, the condenser will
overcome or counteract to a greater or less degree, dependent
upon well-understood conditions, the effects of such self-induction.
third, if two points of a closed or complete circuit
through which a rapidly rising and falling current flows be
shunted or bridged by a condenser, a variation in the strength of
the currents in the branches and also a difference of phase of the
currents therein is produced. these effects mr. tesla has utilized
and applied in a variety of ways in the construction and operation
of his motors, such as by producing a difference in phase in the
two energizing circuits of an alternating current motor by connecting
the two circuits in derivation and connecting up a condenser
in series in one of the circuits. a further development,
[pg ]however, possesses certain novel features of practical value and involves
a knowledge of facts less generally understood. it comprises
the use of a condenser or condensers in connection with the induced
or armature circuit of a motor and certain details of the construction
of such motors. in an alternating current motor of the
type particularly referred to above, or in any other which has
an armature coil or circuit closed upon itself, the latter represents
not only an inductive resistance, but one which is period[pg ]ically
varying in value, both of which facts complicate and render
difficult the attainment of the conditions best suited to the most
efficient working conditions; in other words, they require, first,
that for a given inductive effect upon the armature there should
be the greatest possible current through the armature or induced
coils, and, second, that there should always exist between the
currents in the energizing and the induced circuits a given relation
of phase. hence whatever tends to decrease the self-induction
and increase the current in the induced circuits will, other
things being equal, increase the output and efficiency of the motor,
and the same will be true of causes that operate to maintain
the mutual attractive effect between the field magnets and armature
at its maximum. mr. tesla secures these results by connecting
with the induced circuit or circuits a condenser, in the
manner described below, and he also, with this purpose in view,
constructs the motor in a special manner.
fig. .
fig. .fig. .
fig. .
fig. .
referring to the drawings, fig. , is a view, mainly diagrammatic,
of an alternating current motor, in which the present
principle is applied. fig.  is a central section, in line with
the shaft, of a special form of armature core. fig.  is a similar
section of a modification of the same. fig.  is one of the
sections of the core detached. fig.  is a diagram showing a
modified disposition of the armature or induced circuits.
the general plan of the invention is illustrated in fig. .
a a in this figure represent the the frame and field magnets of
an alternating current motor, the poles or projections of which
are wound with coils b and c, forming independent energizing
circuits connected either to the same or to independent sources
of alternating currents, so that the currents flowing through the
circuits, respectively, will have a difference of phase. within
the influence of this field is an armature core d, wound with coils
e. in motors of this description heretofore these coils have been
closed upon themselves, or connected in a closed series; but in
the present case each coil or the connected series of coils terminates
in the opposite plates of a condenser f. for this purpose
the ends of the series of coils are brought out through the shaft
to collecting rings g, which are connected to the condenser by
contact brushes h and suitable conductors, the condenser being
independent of the machine. the armature coils are wound or
connected in such manner that adjacent coils produce opposite
poles.[pg ]
the action of this motor and the effect of the plan followed
in its construction are as follows: the motor being started in
operation and the coils of the field magnets being traversed by
alternating currents, currents are induced in the armature coils
by one set of field coils, as b, and the poles thus established are
acted upon by the other set, as c. the armature coils, however,
have necessarily a high self-induction, which opposes the flow of
the currents thus set up. the condenser f not only permits the
passage or transference of these currents, but also counteracts
the effects of self-induction, and by a proper adjustment of the
capacity of the condenser, the self-induction of the coils, and the
periods of the currents, the condenser may be made to overcome
entirely the effect of self-induction.
it is preferable on account of the undesirability of using sliding
contacts of any kind, to associate the condenser with the armature
directly, or make it a part of the armature. in some cases mr.
tesla builds up the armature of annular plates k k, held by bolts
l between heads m, which are secured to the driving shaft, and
in the hollow space thus formed he places a condenser f, generally
by winding the two insulated plates spirally around the
shaft. in other cases he utilizes the plates of the core itself
as the plates of the condenser. for example, in figs.  and ,
n is the driving shaft, m m are the heads of the armature-core,
and k k' the iron plates of which the core is built up. these
plates are insulated from the shaft and from one another, and are
held together by rods or bolts l. the bolts pass through a large
hole in one plate and a small hole in the one next adjacent, and
so on, connecting electrically all of plates k, as one armature of a
condenser, and all of plates k' as the other.
to either of the condensers above described the armature coils
may be connected, as explained by reference to fig. .
in motors in which the armature coils are closed upon themselves—as,
for example, in any form of alternating current motor
in which one armature coil or set of coils is in the position of
maximum induction with respect to the field coils or poles, while
the other is in the position of minimum induction—the coils are
best connected in one series, and two points of the circuit
thus formed are bridged by a condenser. this is illustrated in
fig. , in which e represents one set of armature coils and e'
the other. their points of union are joined through a condenser
f. it will be observed that in this disposition the self[pg ]-induction
of the two branches e and e' varies with their position
relatively to the field magnet, and that each branch is alternately
the predominating source of the induced current. hence the
effect of the condenser f is twofold. first, it increases the current
in each of the branches alternately, and, secondly, it alters
the phase of the currents in the branches, this being the well-known
effect which results from such a disposition of a condenser
with a circuit, as above described. this effect is favorable
to the proper working of the motor, because it increases the flow
of current in the armature circuits due to a given inductive
effect, and also because it brings more nearly into coincidence
the maximum magnetic effects of the coacting field and armature
poles.
it will be understood, of course, that the causes that contribute
to the efficiency of condensers when applied to such uses as
the above must be given due consideration in determining the
practicability and efficiency of the motors. chief among these
is, as is well known, the periodicity of the current, and hence the
improvements described are more particularly adapted to systems
in which a very high rate of alternation or change is maintained.
although this invention has been illustrated in connection
with a special form of motor, it will be understood that it is
equally applicable to any other alternating current motor in
which there is a closed armature coil wherein the currents are
induced by the action of the field, and the feature of utilizing
the plates or sections of a magnetic core for forming the condenser
is applicable, generally, to other kinds of alternating current
apparatus.
[pg ]
motor with condenser in one of the field circuits.
if the field or energizing circuits of a rotary phase motor be
both derived from the same source of alternating currents and a
condenser of proper capacity be included in one of the same, approximately,
the desired difference of phase may be obtained between
the currents flowing directly from the source and those
flowing through the condenser; but the great size and expense
of condensers for this purpose that would meet the requirements
of the ordinary systems of comparatively low potential are particularly
prohibitory to their employment.
another, now well-known, method or plan of securing a difference
of phase between the energizing currents of motors of this
kind is to induce by the currents in one circuit those in the other
circuit or circuits; but as no means had been proposed that
would secure in this way between the phases of the primary or
inducing and the secondary or induced currents that difference—theoretically
ninety degrees—that is best adapted for practical
and economical working, mr. tesla devised a means which renders
practicable both the above described plans or methods, and
by which he is enabled to obtain an economical and efficient alternating
current motor. his invention consists in placing a
condenser in the secondary or induced circuit of the motor above
described and raising the potential of the secondary currents to
such a degree that the capacity of the condenser, which is in
part dependent on the potential, need be quite small. the value
of this condenser is determined in a well-understood manner with
reference to the self-induction and other conditions of the circuit,
so as to cause the currents which pass through it to differ from
the primary currents by a quarter phase.
fig.  illustrates the invention as embodied in a motor
in which the inductive relation of the primary and secondary
circuits is secured by winding them inside the motor partly
upon the same cores; but the invention applies, generally, to[pg ]
other forms of motor in which one of the energizing currents is
induced in any way from the other.
let a b represent the poles of an alternating current motor, of
which c is the armature wound with coils d, closed upon themselves,
as is now the general practice in motors of this kind. the
poles a, which alternate with poles b, are wound with coils of
ordinary or coarse wire e in such direction as to make them of
alternate north and south polarity, as indicated in the diagram
by the characters n s. over these coils, or in other inductive relation
to the same, are wound long fine-wire coils f f, and in the
same direction throughout as the coils e. these coils are secondaries,
in which currents of very high potential are induced. all
the coils e in one series are connected, and all the secondaries f
in another.
fig. .
on the intermediate poles b are wound fine-wire energizing
coils g, which are connected in series with one another, and also
with the series of secondary coils f, the direction of winding being
such that a current-impulse induced from the primary coils
e imparts the same magnetism to the poles b as that produced[pg ]
in poles a by the primary impulse. this condition is indicated
by the characters n' s'.
in the circuit formed by the two sets of coils f and g is introduced
a condenser h; otherwise this circuit is closed upon
itself, while the free ends of the circuit of coils e are connected
to a source of alternating currents. as the condenser capacity
which is needed in any particular motor of this kind is dependent
upon the rate of alternation or the potential, or both, its size
or cost, as before explained, may be brought within economical
limits for use with the ordinary circuits if the potential of the
secondary circuit in the motor be sufficiently high. by giving
to the condenser proper values, any desired difference of phase
between the primary and secondary energizing circuits may be
obtained.
[pg ]
tesla polyphase transformer.
applying the polyphase principle to the construction of transformers
as well to the motors already noticed, mr. tesla has invented
some very interesting forms, which he considers free
from the defects of earlier and, at present, more familiar forms.
in these transformers he provides a series of inducing coils and
corresponding induced coils, which are generally wound upon a
core closed upon itself, usually a ring of laminated iron.
the two sets of coils are wound side by side or superposed or
otherwise placed in well-known ways to bring them into the most
effective relations to one another and to the core. the inducing
or primary coils wound on the core are divided into pairs or sets
by the proper electrical connections, so that while the coils of
one pair or set co-operate in fixing the magnetic poles of the
core at two given diametrically opposite points, the coils of the
other pair or set—assuming, for sake of illustration, that there
are but two—tend to fix the poles ninety degrees from such
points. with this induction device is used an alternating current
generator with coils or sets of coils to correspond with those of
the converter, and the corresponding coils of the generator and
converter are then connected up in independent circuits. it results
from this that the different electrical phases in the generator
are attended by corresponding magnetic changes in the converter;
or, in other words, that as the generator coils revolve,
the points of greatest magnetic intensity in the converter will be
progressively shifted or whirled around.
fig.  is a diagrammatic illustration of the converter and the
electrical connections of the same. fig.  is a horizontal central
cross-section of fig. . fig.  is a diagram of the circuits
of the entire system, the generator being shown in section.
figs.  and .
mr. tesla uses a core, a, which is closed upon itself—that is to
say, of an annular cylindrical or equivalent form—and as the
efficiency of the apparatus is largely increased by the subdivision[pg ]
of this core, he makes it of thin strips, plates, or wires of soft
iron electrically insulated as far as practicable. upon this core
are wound, say, four coils, b b b' b', used as primary coils, and for
which long lengths of comparatively fine wire are employed.
over these coils are then wound shorter coils of coarser wire, c c
c' c', to constitute the induced or secondary coils. the construction
of this or any equivalent form of converter may be carried
further, as above pointed out, by inclosing these coils with iron—as,
for example, by winding over the coils layers of insulated
iron wire.
fig. .
the device is provided with suitable binding posts, to which
the ends of the coils are led. the diametrically opposite coils
b b and b' b' are connected, respectively, in series, and the four
terminals are connected to the binding posts. the induced
coils are connected together in any desired manner. for example,
as shown in fig. , c c may be connected in multiple
arc when a quantity current is desired—as for running a group
of incandescent lamps—while c' c' may be independently connected
in series in a circuit including arc lamps or the like. the
generator in this system will be adapted to the converter in the
[pg ]manner illustrated. for example, in the present case there are
employed a pair of ordinary permanent or electro-magnets, e e,
between which is mounted a cylindrical armature on a shaft, f,
and wound with two coils, g g'. the terminals of these coils are
connected, respectively, to four insulated contact or collecting
rings, h h h' h', and the four line circuit wires l connect the
brushes k, bearing on these rings, to the converter in the order
shown. noting the results of this combination, it will be observed
that at a given point of time the coil g is in its neutral
position and is generating little or no current, while the other
coil, g', is in a position where it exerts its maximum effect.
assuming coil g to be connected in circuit with coils b b of the
converter, and coil g' with coils b' b', it is evident that the poles
of the ring a will be determined by coils b' b' alone; but as the
armature of the generator revolves, coil g develops more current
and coil g' less, until g reaches its maximum and g' its neutral
position. the obvious result will be to shift the poles of the
ring a through one-quarter of its periphery. the movement of
the coils through the next quarter of a turn—during which coil
g' enters a field of opposite polarity and generates a current of
opposite direction and increasing strength, while coil g, in passing
from its maximum to its neutral position generates a current of
decreasing strength and same direction as before—causes a further
shifting of the poles through the second quarter of the ring.
the second half-revolution will obviously be a repetition of the
same action. by the shifting of the poles of the ring a, a power[pg ]ful
dynamic inductive effect on the coils c c' is produced. besides
the currents generated in the secondary coils by dynamo-magnetic
induction, other currents will be set up in the same
coils in consequence of many variations in the intensity of the
poles in the ring a. this should be avoided by maintaining the
intensity of the poles constant, to accomplish which care should
be taken in designing and proportioning the generator and in
distributing the coils in the ring a, and balancing their effect.
when this is done, the currents are produced by dynamo-magnetic
induction only, the same result being obtained as though
the poles were shifted by a commutator with an infinite number
of segments.
the modifications which are applicable to other forms of converter
are in many respects applicable to this, such as those pertaining
more particularly to the form of the core, the relative
lengths and resistances of the primary and secondary coils, and
the arrangements for running or operating the same.
[pg ]
a constant current transformer with magnetic shield
between coils of primary and secondary.
mr. tesla has applied his principle of magnetic shielding of
parts to the construction also of transformers, the shield being
interposed between the primary and secondary coils. in transformers
of the ordinary type it will be found that the wave of
electromotive force of the secondary very nearly coincides with
that of the primary, being, however, in opposite sign. at the same
time the currents, both primary and secondary, lag behind their
respective electromotive forces; but as this lag is practically or
nearly the same in the case of each it follows that the maximum
and minimum of the primary and secondary currents will nearly
coincide, but differ in sign or direction, provided the secondary
be not loaded or if it contain devices having the property of
self-induction. on the other hand, the lag of the primary
behind the impressed electromotive force may be diminished by
loading the secondary with a non-inductive or dead resistance—such
as incandescent lamps—whereby the time interval between
the maximum or minimum periods of the primary and secondary
currents is increased. this time interval, however, is limited,
and the results obtained by phase difference in the operation of
such devices as the tesla alternating current motors can only be
approximately realized by such means of producing or securing
this difference, as above indicated, for it is desirable in such cases
that there should exist between the primary and secondary currents,
or those which, however produced, pass through the two
circuits of the motor, a difference of phase of ninety degrees;
or, in other words, the current in one circuit should be a maximum
when that in the other circuit is a minimum. to attain
to this condition more perfectly, an increased retardation of the
secondary current is secured in the following manner: instead
of bringing the primary and secondary coils or circuits of a
transformer into the closest possible relations, as has hitherto[pg ]
been done, mr. tesla protects in a measure the secondary from
the inductive action or effect of the primary by surrounding
either the primary or the secondary with a comparatively thin
magnetic shield or screen. under these modified conditions,
as long as the primary current has a small value, the shield
protects the secondary; but as soon as the primary current
has reached a certain strength, which is arbitrarily determined,
the protecting magnetic shield becomes saturated and the inductive
action upon the secondary begins. it results, therefore, that
the secondary current begins to flow at a certain fraction of a
period later than it would without the interposed shield, and
since this retardation may be obtained without necessarily retarding
the primary current also, an additional lag is secured, and
the time interval between the maximum or minimum periods of
the primary and secondary currents is increased. such a transformer
may, by properly proportioning its several elements and
determining the proper relations between the primary and
secondary windings, the thickness of the magnetic shield, and
other conditions, be constructed to yield a constant current at all
loads.
fig. .
fig.  is a cross-section of a transformer embodying this improvement.
fig.  is a similar view of a modified form of
transformer, showing diagrammatically the manner of using the
same.
a a is the main core of the transformer, composed of a ring
of soft annealed and insulated or oxidized iron wire. upon this
core is wound the secondary circuit or coil b b. this latter is
then covered with a layer or layers of annealed and insulated
iron wires c c, wound in a direction at right angles to the secondary[pg ]
coil. over the whole is then wound the primary coil or wire d d.
from the nature of this construction it will be obvious that
as long as the shield formed by the wires c is below magnetic
saturation the secondary coil or circuit is effectually protected or
shielded from the inductive influence of the primary, although
on open circuit it may exhibit some electromotive force. when
the strength of the primary reaches a certain value, the shield c,
becoming saturated, ceases to protect the secondary from inductive
action, and current is in consequence developed therein.
for similar reasons, when the primary current weakens, the
weakening of the secondary is retarded to the same or approximately
the same extent.
fig. .
the specific construction of the transformer is largely immaterial.
in fig. , for example, the core a is built up of thin
insulated iron plates or discs. the primary circuit d is wound
next the core a. over this is applied the shield c, which in this
case is made up of thin strips or plates of iron properly insulated
and surrounding the primary, forming a closed magnetic circuit.
the secondary b is wound over the shield c. in fig. , also,
e is a source of alternating or rapidly changing currents.
the primary of the transformer is connected with the circuit of
the generator. f is a two-circuit alternating current motor, one
of the circuits being connected with the main circuit from the
source e, and the other being supplied with currents from the
secondary of the transformer.
[pg ]
[pg ]
[pg ]
[pg ]
introduction.—the scope of the tesla lectures.
before proceeding to study the three tesla lectures here
presented, the reader may find it of some assistance to have his
attention directed to the main points of interest and significance
therein. the first of these lectures was delivered in new york,
at columbia college, before the american institute of electrical
engineers, may , . the urgent desire expressed immediately
from all parts of europe for an opportunity to witness the
brilliant and unusual experiments with which the lecture was
accompanied, induced mr. tesla to go to england early in ,
when he appeared before the institution of electrical engineers,
and a day later, by special request, before the royal institution.
his reception was of the most enthusiastic and flattering nature on
both occasions. he then went, by invitation, to france, and repeated
his novel demonstrations before the société internationale
des electriciens, and the société française de physique. mr. tesla
returned to america in the fall of , and in february, , delivered
his third lecture before the franklin institute of philadelphia,
in fulfilment of a long standing promise to prof. houston.
the following week, at the request of president james i. ayer,
of the national electric light association, the same lecture was
re-delivered in st. louis. it had been intended to limit the invitations
to members, but the appeals from residents in the city
were so numerous and pressing that it became necessary to secure
a very large hall. hence it came about that the lecture was
listened to by an audience of over , people, and was in some
parts of a more popular nature than either of its predecessors.
despite this concession to the need of the hour and occasion, mr.
tesla did not hesitate to show many new and brilliant experiments,
and to advance the frontier of discovery far beyond any
point he had theretofore marked publicly.
we may now proceed to a running review of the lectures themselves.
the ground covered by them is so vast that only the[pg ]
leading ideas and experiments can here be touched upon; besides,
it is preferable that the lectures should be carefully gone over for
their own sake, it being more than likely that each student will
discover a new beauty or stimulus in them. taking up the
course of reasoning followed by mr. tesla in his first lecture, it
will be noted that he started out with the recognition of the fact,
which he has now experimentally demonstrated, that for the production
of light waves, primarily, electrostatic effects must be
brought into play, and continued study has led him to the opinion
that all electrical and magnetic effects may be referred to electrostatic
molecular forces. this opinion finds a singular confirmation
in one of the most striking experiments which he
describes, namely, the production of a veritable flame by the
agitation of electrostatically charged molecules. it is of the
highest interest to observe that this result points out a way of
obtaining a flame which consumes no material and in which no
chemical action whatever takes place. it also throws a light on
the nature of the ordinary flame, which mr. tesla believes to be
due to electrostatic molecular actions, which, if true, would lead
directly to the idea that even chemical affinities might be electrostatic
in their nature and that, as has already been suggested,
molecular forces in general may be referable to one and the same
cause. this singular phenomenon accounts in a plausible manner
for the unexplained fact that buildings are frequently set on
fire during thunder storms without having been at all struck by
lightning. it may also explain the total disappearance of ships
at sea.
one of the striking proofs of the correctness of the ideas advanced
by mr. tesla is the fact that, notwithstanding the employment
of the most powerful electromagnetic inductive effects, but
feeble luminosity is obtainable, and this only in close proximity
to the source of disturbance; whereas, when the electrostatic
effects are intensified, the same initial energy suffices to excite
luminosity at considerable distances from the source. that there
are only electrostatic effects active seems to be clearly proved by
mr. tesla's experiments with an induction coil operated with
alternating currents of very high frequency. he shows how
tubes may be made to glow brilliantly at considerable distances
from any object when placed in a powerful, rapidly alternating,
electrostatic field, and he describes many interesting phenomena
observed in such a field. his experiments open up the possibility[pg ]
of lighting an apartment by simply creating in it such an electrostatic
field, and this, in a certain way, would appear to be the
ideal method of lighting a room, as it would allow the illuminating
device to be freely moved about. the power with which
these exhausted tubes, devoid of any electrodes, light up is certainly
remarkable.
that the principle propounded by mr. tesla is a broad one is
evident from the many ways in which it may be practically applied.
we need only refer to the variety of the devices shown
or described, all of which are novel in character and will, without
doubt, lead to further important results at the hands of mr.
tesla and other investigators. the experiment, for instance, of
lighting up a single filament or block of refractory material with
a single wire, is in itself sufficient to give mr. tesla's work the
stamp of originality, and the numerous other experiments and
effects which may be varied at will, are equally new and interesting.
thus, the incandescent filament spinning in an unexhausted
globe, the well-known crookes experiment on open circuit,
and the many others suggested, will not fail to interest the
reader. mr. tesla has made an exhaustive study of the various
forms of the discharge presented by an induction coil when operated
with these rapidly alternating currents, starting from the
thread-like discharge and passing through various stages to the
true electric flame.
a point of great importance in the introduction of high tension
alternating current which mr. tesla brings out is the necessity
of carefully avoiding all gaseous matter in the high tension
apparatus. he shows that, at least with very rapidly alternating
currents of high potential, the discharge may work through almost
any practicable thickness of the best insulators, if air is
present. in such cases the air included within the apparatus is
violently agitated and by molecular bombardment the parts may
be so greatly heated as to cause a rupture of the insulation.
the practical outcome of this is, that, whereas with steady currents,
any kind of insulation may be used, with rapidly alternating
currents oils will probably be the best to employ, a fact
which has been observed, but not until now satisfactorily explained.
the recognition of the above fact is of special importance
in the construction of the costly commercial induction coils
which are often rendered useless in an unaccountable manner.
the truth of these views of mr. tesla is made evident by the in[pg ]teresting
experiments illustrative of the behavior of the air between
charged surfaces, the luminous streams formed by the
charged molecules appearing even when great thicknesses of the
best insulators are interposed between the charged surfaces.
these luminous streams afford in themselves a very interesting
study for the experimenter. with these rapidly alternating currents
they become far more powerful and produce beautiful light
effects when they issue from a wire, pinwheel or other object attached
to a terminal of the coil; and it is interesting to note that
they issue from a ball almost as freely as from a point, when the
frequency is very high.
from these experiments we also obtain a better idea of the
importance of taking into account the capacity and self-induction
in the apparatus employed and the possibilities offered by the
use of condensers in conjunction with alternate currents, the employment
of currents of high frequency, among other things,
making it possible to reduce the condenser to practicable dimensions.
another point of interest and practical bearing is the
fact, proved by mr. tesla, that for alternate currents, especially
those of high frequency, insulators are required possessing a
small specific inductive capacity, which at the same time have a
high insulating power.
mr. tesla also makes interesting and valuable suggestion in regard
to the economical utilization of iron in machines and transformers.
he shows how, by maintaining by continuous magnetization
a flow of lines through the iron, the latter may be kept
near its maximum permeability and a higher output and economy
may be secured in such apparatus. this principle may prove of
considerable commercial importance in the development of alternating
systems. mr. tesla's suggestion that the same result can
be secured by heating the iron by hysteresis and eddy currents,
and increasing the permeability in this manner, while it may appear
less practical, nevertheless opens another direction for investigation
and improvement.
the demonstration of the fact that with alternating currents
of high frequency, sufficient energy may be transmitted under
practicable conditions through the glass of an incandescent lamp
by electrostatic or electromagnetic induction may lead to a departure
in the construction of such devices. another important
experimental result achieved is the operation of lamps, and even
motors, with the discharges of condensers, this method affording[pg ]
a means of converting direct or alternating currents. in this
connection mr. tesla advocates the perfecting of apparatus capable
of generating electricity of high tension from heat energy,
believing this to be a better way of obtaining electrical energy
for practical purposes, particularly for the production of light.
while many were probably prepared to encounter curious
phenomena of impedance in the use of a condenser discharged
disruptively, the experiments shown were extremely interesting
on account of their paradoxical character. the burning of an
incandescent lamp at any candle power when connected across a
heavy metal bar, the existence of nodes on the bar and the possibility
of exploring the bar by means of an ordinary cardew
voltmeter, are all peculiar developments, but perhaps the most
interesting observation is the phenomenon of impedance observed
in the lamp with a straight filament, which remains dark while
the bulb glows.
mr. tesla's manner of operating an induction coil by means of
the disruptive discharge, and thus obtaining enormous differences
of potential from comparatively small and inexpensive coils, will
be appreciated by experimenters and will find valuable application
in laboratories. indeed, his many suggestions and hints in
regard to the construction and use of apparatus in these investigations
will be highly valued and will aid materially in future
research.
the london lecture was delivered twice. in its first form,
before the institution of electrical engineers, it was in some
respects an amplification of several points not specially enlarged
upon in the new york lecture, but brought forward many additional
discoveries and new investigations. its repetition, in
another form, at the royal institution, was due to prof. dewar,
who with lord rayleigh, manifested a most lively interest in mr.
tesla's work, and whose kindness illustrated once more the strong
english love of scientific truth and appreciation of its votaries.
as an indefatigable experimenter, mr. tesla was certainly nowhere
more at home than in the haunts of faraday, and as the
guest of faraday's successor. this royal institution lecture
summed up the leading points of mr. tesla's work, in the high
potential, high frequency field, and we may here avail ourselves
of so valuable a summarization, in a simple form, of a subject by
no means easy of comprehension until it has been thoroughly
studied.[pg ]
in these london lectures, among the many notable points made
was first, the difficulty of constructing the alternators to obtain
the very high frequencies needed. to obtain the high frequencies
it was necessary to provide several hundred polar projections,
which were necessarily small and offered many drawbacks,
and this the more as exceedingly high peripheral speeds
had to be resorted to. in some of the first machines both armature
and field had polar projections. these machines produced
a curious noise, especially when the armature was started from
the state of rest, the field being charged. the most efficient
machine was found to be one with a drum armature, the iron
body of which consisted of very thin wire annealed with special
care. it was, of course, desirable to avoid the employment of
iron in the armature, and several machines of this kind, with
moving or stationary conductors were constructed, but the results
obtained were not quite satisfactory, on account of the
great mechanical and other difficulties encountered.
the study of the properties of the high frequency currents
obtained from these machines is very interesting, as nearly every
experiment discloses something new. two coils traversed by
such a current attract or repel each other with a force which,
owing to the imperfection of our sense of touch, seems continuous.
an interesting observation, already noted under another
form, is that a piece of iron, surrounded by a coil through which
the current is passing appears to be continuously magnetized.
this apparent continuity might be ascribed to the deficiency of
the sense of touch, but there is evidence that in currents of such
high frequencies one of the impulses preponderates over the
other.
as might be expected, conductors traversed by such currents
are rapidly heated, owing to the increase of the resistance, and
the heating effects are relatively much greater in the iron.
the hysteresis losses in iron are so great that an iron core,
even if finely subdivided, is heated in an incredibly short time.
to give an idea of this, an ordinary iron wire / inch in
diameter inserted within a coil having  turns, with a current
estimated to be five amperes passing through the coil, becomes
within two seconds' time so hot as to scorch wood. beyond a
certain frequency, an iron core, no matter how finely subdivided,
exercises a dampening effect, and it was easy to find a point at[pg ]
which the impedance of a coil was not affected by the presence
of a core consisting of a bundle of very thin well annealed and
varnished iron wires.
experiments with a telephone, a conductor in a strong magnetic
field, or with a condenser or arc, seem to afford certain
proof that sounds far above the usually accepted limit of hearing
would be perceived if produced with sufficient power. the arc
produced by these currents possesses several interesting features.
usually it emits a note the pitch of which corresponds to twice
the frequency of the current, but if the frequency be sufficiently
high it becomes noiseless, the limit of audition being determined
principally by the linear dimensions of the arc. a curious feature
of the arc is its persistency, which is due partly to the inability
of the gaseous column to cool and increase considerably
in resistance, as is the case with low frequencies, and partly to
the tendency of such a high frequency machine to maintain a
constant current.
in connection with these machines the condenser affords a particularly
interesting study. striking effects are produced by
proper adjustments of capacity and self-induction. it is easy to
raise the electromotive force of the machine to many times the
original value by simply adjusting the capacity of a condenser
connected in the induced circuit. if the condenser be at some
distance from the machine, the difference of potential on the
terminals of the latter may be only a small fraction of that on
the condenser.
but the most interesting experiences are gained when the tension
of the currents from the machine is raised by means of an
induction coil. in consequence of the enormous rate of change
obtainable in the primary current, much higher potential differences
are obtained than with coils operated in the usual ways,
and, owing to the high frequency, the secondary discharge possesses
many striking peculiarities. both the electrodes behave
generally alike, though it appears from some observations that
one current impulse preponderates over the other, as before
mentioned.
the physiological effects of the high tension discharge are
found to be so small that the shock of the coil can be supported
without any inconvenience, except perhaps a small burn produced
by the discharge upon approaching the hand to one of the terminals.
the decidedly smaller physiological effects of these cur[pg ]rents
are thought to be due either to a different distribution
through the body or to the tissues acting as condensers. but in
the case of an induction coil with a great many turns the harmlessness
is principally due to the fact that but little energy is available
in the external circuit when the same is closed through the
experimenter's body, on account of the great impedance of the
coil.
in varying the frequency and strength of the currents through
the primary of the coil, the character of the secondary discharge
is greatly varied, and no less than five distinct forms are observed:—a
weak, sensitive thread discharge, a powerful flaming
discharge, and three forms of brush or streaming discharges.
each of these possesses certain noteworthy features, but the most
interesting to study are the latter.
under certain conditions the streams, which are presumably
due to the violent agitation of the air molecules, issue freely
from all points of the coil, even through a thick insulation. if
there is the smallest air space between the primary and secondary,
they will form there and surely injure the coil by slowly warming
the insulation. as they form even with ordinary frequencies
when the potential is excessive, the air-space must be most carefully
avoided. these high frequency streamers differ in aspect
and properties from those produced by a static machine. the
wind produced by them is small and should altogether cease if
still considerably higher frequencies could be obtained. a peculiarity
is that they issue as freely from surfaces as from points.
owing to this, a metallic vane, mounted in one of the terminals of
the coil so as to rotate freely, and having one of its sides covered
with insulation, is spun rapidly around. such a vane would not
rotate with a steady potential, but with a high frequency coil it
will spin, even if it be entirely covered with insulation, provided
the insulation on one side be either thicker or of a higher specific
inductive capacity. a crookes electric radiometer is also spun
around when connected to one of the terminals of the coil, but
only at very high exhaustion or at ordinary pressures.
there is still another and more striking peculiarity of such a
high frequency streamer, namely, it is hot. the heat is easily
perceptible with frequencies of about ,, even if the potential
is not excessively high. the heating effect is, of course, due
to the molecular impacts and collisions. could the frequency
and potential be pushed far enough, then a brush could be pro[pg ]duced
resembling in every particular a flame and giving light
and heat, yet without a chemical process taking place.
the hot brush, when properly produced, resembles a jet of
burning gas escaping under great pressure, and it emits an extraordinary
strong smell of ozone. the great ozonizing action is
ascribed to the fact that the agitation of the molecules of the air
is more violent in such a brush than in the ordinary streamer of
a static machine. but the most powerful brush discharges were
produced by employing currents of much higher frequencies than
it was possible to obtain by means of the alternators. these
currents were obtained by disruptively discharging a condenser
and setting up oscillations. in this manner currents of a frequency
of several hundred thousand were obtained.
currents of this kind, mr. tesla pointed out, produce striking
effects. at these frequencies, the impedance of a copper bar is
so great that a potential difference of several hundred volts can
be maintained between two points of a short and thick bar, and
it is possible to keep an ordinary incandescent lamp burning at
full candle power by attaching the terminals of the lamp to two
points of the bar no more than a few inches apart. when the
frequency is extremely high, nodes are found to exist on such a
bar, and it is easy to locate them by means of a lamp.
by converting the high tension discharges of a low frequency
coil in this manner, it was found practicable to keep a few lamps
burning on the ordinary circuit in the laboratory, and by bringing
the undulation to a low pitch, it was possible to operate small
motors.
this plan likewise allows of converting high tension discharges
of one direction into low tension unidirectional currents, by adjusting
the circuit so that there are no oscillations. in passing
the oscillating discharges through the primary of a specially
constructed coil, it is easy to obtain enormous potential differences
with only few turns of the secondary.
great difficulties were at first experienced in producing a successful
coil on this plan. it was found necessary to keep all air,
or gaseous matter in general, away from the charged surfaces,
and oil immersion was resorted to. the wires used were heavily
covered with gutta-percha and wound in oil, or the air was pumped
out by means of a sprengel pump. the general arrangement
was the following:—an ordinary induction coil, operated from
a low frequency alternator, was used to charge leyden jars. the[pg ]
jars were made to discharge over a single or multiple gap through
the primary of the second coil. to insure the action of the gap,
the arc was blown out by a magnet or air blast. to adjust the
potential in the secondary a small oil condenser was used, or
polished brass spheres of different sizes were screwed on the
terminals and their distance adjusted.
when the conditions were carefully determined to suit each
experiment, magnificent effects were obtained. two wires,
stretched through the room, each being connected to one of the
terminals of the coil, emitted streams so powerful that the light
from them allowed distinguishing the objects in the room; the
wires became luminous even though covered with thick and
most excellent insulation. when two straight wires, or two concentric
circles of wire, are connected to the terminals, and set at
the proper distance, a uniform luminous sheet is produced between
them. it was possible in this way to cover an area of
more than one meter square completely with the streams. by
attaching to one terminal a large circle of wire and to the other
terminal a small sphere, the streams are focused upon the sphere,
produce a strongly lighted spot upon the same, and present the
appearance of a luminous cone. a very thin wire glued upon a
plate of hard rubber of great thickness, on the opposite side of
which is fastened a tinfoil coating, is rendered intensely luminous
when the coating is connected to the other terminal of the coil.
such an experiment can be performed also with low frequency
currents, but much less satisfactorily.
when the terminals of such a coil, even of a very small one,
are separated by a rubber or glass plate, the discharge spreads
over the plate in the form of streams, threads or brilliant sparks,
and affords a magnificent display, which cannot be equaled by
the largest coil operated in the usual ways. by a simple adjustment
it is possible to produce with the coil a succession of brilliant
sparks, exactly as with a holtz machine.
under certain conditions, when the frequency of the oscillation
is very great, white, phantom-like streams are seen to break forth
from the terminals of the coil. the chief interesting feature
about them is, that they stream freely against the outstretched
hand or other conducting object without producing any sensation,
and the hand may be approached very near to the terminal
without a spark being induced to jump. this is due presumably
to the fact that a considerable portion of the energy is carried[pg ]
away or dissipated in the streamers, and the difference of potential
between the terminal and the hand is diminished.
it is found in such experiments that the frequency of the
vibration and the quickness of succession of the sparks between
the knobs affect to a marked degree the appearance of the
streams. when the frequency is very low, the air gives way in
more or less the same manner as by a steady difference of potential,
and the streams consist of distinct threads, generally mingled
with thin sparks, which probably correspond to the successive
discharges occurring between the knobs. but when the frequency
is very high, and the arc of the discharge produces a
sound which is loud and smooth (which indicates both that oscillation
takes place and that the sparks succeed each other with
great rapidity), then the luminous streams formed are perfectly
uniform. they are generally of a purplish hue, but when the
molecular vibration is increased by raising the potential, they assume
a white color.
the luminous intensity of the streams increases rapidly when
the potential is increased; and with frequencies of only a few
hundred thousand, could the coil be made to withstand a sufficiently
high potential difference, there is no doubt that the
space around a wire could be made to emit a strong light,
merely by the agitation of the molecules of the air at ordinary
pressure.
such discharges of very high frequency which render luminous
the air at ordinary pressure we have very likely occasion to
witness in the aurora borealis. from many of these experiments
it seems reasonable to infer that sudden cosmic disturbances,
such as eruptions on the sun, set the electrostatic charge
of the earth in an extremely rapid vibration, and produce the
glow by the violent agitation of the air in the upper and even in
the lower strata. it is thought that if the frequency were low,
or even more so if the charge were not at all vibrating, the
lower dense strata would break down as in a lightning discharge.
indications of such breaking down have been repeatedly observed,
but they can be attributed to the fundamental disturbances,
which are few in number, for the superimposed vibration
would be so rapid as not to allow a disruptive break.
the study of these discharge phenomena has led mr. tesla to
the recognition of some important facts. it was found, as already
stated, that gaseous matter must be most carefully excluded from[pg ]
any dielectric which is subjected to great, rapidly changing electrostatic
stresses. since it is difficult to exclude the gas perfectly
when solid insulators are used, it is necessary to resort to liquid
dielectrics. when a solid dielectric is used, it matters little how
thick and how good it is; if air be present, streamers form,
which gradually heat the dielectric and impair its insulating
power, and the discharge finally breaks through. under ordinary
conditions the best insulators are those which possess the
highest specific inductive capacity, but such insulators are not
the best to employ when working with these high frequency
currents, for in most cases the higher specific inductive capacity
is rather a disadvantage. the prime quality of the insulating
medium for these currents is continuity. for this reason principally
it is necessary to employ liquid insulators, such as oils.
if two metal plates, connected to the terminals of the coil, are
immersed in oil and set a distance apart, the coil may be kept
working for any length of time without a break occurring, or
without the oil being warmed, but if air bubbles are introduced,
they become luminous; the air molecules, by their impact
against the oil, heat it, and after some time cause the insulation
to give way. if, instead of the oil, a solid plate of the best
dielectric, even several times thicker than the oil intervening
between the metal plates, is inserted between the latter, the air
having free access to the charged surfaces, the dielectric invariably
is warmed and breaks down.
the employment of oil is advisable or necessary even with low
frequencies, if the potentials are such that streamers form, but
only in such cases, as is evident from the theory of the action.
if the potentials are so low that streamers do not form, then it
is even disadvantageous to employ oil, for it may, principally by
confining the heat, be the cause of the breaking down of the insulation.
the exclusion of gaseous matter is not only desirable on account
of the safety of the apparatus, but also on account of
economy, especially in a condenser, in which considerable waste
of power may occur merely owing to the presence of air, if the
electric density on the charged surfaces is great.
in the course of these investigations a phenomenon of special
scientific interest was observed. it may be ranked among the
brush phenomena, in fact it is a kind of brush which forms at, or
near, a single terminal in high vacuum. in a bulb with a con[pg ]ducting
electrode, even if the latter be of aluminum, the brush
has only a very short existence, but it can be preserved for a considerable
length of time in a bulb devoid of any conducting electrode.
to observe the phenomenon it is found best to employ a
large spherical bulb having in its centre a small bulb supported
on a tube sealed to the neck of the former. the large bulb being
exhausted to a high degree, and the inside of the small bulb
being connected to one of the terminals of the coil, under certain
conditions there appears a misty haze around the small bulb,
which, after passing through some stages, assumes the form of a
brush, generally at right angles to the tube supporting the small
bulb. when the brush assumes this form it may be brought to
a state of extreme sensitiveness to electrostatic and magnetic influence.
the bulb hanging straight down, and all objects being
remote from it, the approach of the observer within a few paces
will cause the brush to fly to the opposite side, and if he walks
around the bulb it will always keep on the opposite side. it may
begin to spin around the terminal long before it reaches that sensitive
stage. when it begins to turn around, principally, but
also before, it is affected by a magnet, and at a certain stage it is
susceptible to magnetic influence to an astonishing degree. a
small permanent magnet, with its poles at a distance of no more
than two centimetres will affect it visibly at a distance of two metres,
slowing down or accelerating the rotation according to how
it is held relatively to the brush.
when the bulb hangs with the globe down, the rotation is always
clockwise. in the southern hemisphere it would occur in
the opposite direction, and on the (magnetic) equator the brush
should not turn at all. the rotation may be reversed by a magnet
kept at some distance. the brush rotates best, seemingly,
when it is at right angles to the lines of force of the earth. it
very likely rotates, when at its maximum speed, in synchronism
with the alternations, say, , times a second. the rotation
can be slowed down or accelerated by the approach or recession
of the observer, or any conducting body, but it cannot be reversed
by putting the bulb in any position. very curious experiments
may be performed with the brush when in its most sensitive
state. for instance, the brush resting in one position, the
experimenter may, by selecting a proper position, approach the
hand at a certain considerable distance to the bulb, and he may
cause the brush to pass off by merely stiffening the muscles of[pg ]
the arm, the mere change of configuration of the arm and the
consequent imperceptible displacement being sufficient to disturb
the delicate balance. when it begins to rotate slowly, and the
hands are held at a proper distance, it is impossible to make even
the slightest motion without producing a visible effect upon the
brush. a metal plate connected to the other terminal of the coil
affects it at a great distance, slowing down the rotation often to
one turn a second.
mr. tesla hopes that this phenomenon will prove a valuable
aid in the investigation of the nature of the forces acting in an
electrostatic or magnetic field. if there is any motion which is
measurable going on in the space, such a brush would be apt to
reveal it. it is, so to speak, a beam of light, frictionless, devoid
of inertia. on account of its marvellous sensitiveness to electrostatic
or magnetic disturbances it may be the means of sending
signals through submarine cables with any speed, and even of
transmitting intelligence to a distance without wires.
in operating an induction coil with these rapidly alternating
currents, it is astonishing to note, for the first time, the great
importance of the relation of capacity, self-induction, and frequency
as bearing upon the general result. the combined effect
of these elements produces many curious effects. for instance,
two metal plates are connected to the terminals and set at a small
distance, so that an arc is formed between them. this arc prevents
a strong current from flowing through the coil. if the arc
be interrupted by the interposition of a glass plate, the capacity
of the condenser obtained counteracts the self-induction, and a
stronger current is made to pass. the effects of capacity are the
most striking, for in these experiments, since the self-induction
and frequency both are high, the critical capacity is very small,
and need be but slightly varied to produce a very considerable
change. the experimenter brings his body in contact with the
terminals of the secondary of the coil, or attaches to one or both
terminals insulated bodies of very small bulk, such as exhausted
bulbs, and he produces a considerable rise or fall of potential on
the secondary, and greatly affects the flow of the current through
the primary coil.
in many of the phenomena observed, the presence of the air,
or, generally speaking, of a medium of a gaseous nature (using
this term not to imply specific properties, but in contradistinction
to homogeneity or perfect continuity) plays an important part,[pg ]
as it allows energy to be dissipated by molecular impact or bombardment.
the action is thus explained:—when an insulated
body connected to a terminal of the coil is suddenly charged to
high potential, it acts inductively upon the surrounding air, or
whatever gaseous medium there might be. the molecules or
atoms which are near it are, of course, more attracted, and move
through a greater distance than the further ones. when the
nearest molecules strike the body they are repelled, and collisions
occur at all distances within the inductive distance. it is now
clear that, if the potential be steady, but little loss of energy can
be caused in this way, for the molecules which are nearest to
the body having had an additional charge imparted to them by
contact, are not attracted until they have parted, if not with all,
at least with most of the additional charge, which can be accomplished
only after a great many collisions. this is inferred from
the fact that with a steady potential there is but little loss in dry
air. when the potential, instead of being steady, is alternating,
the conditions are entirely different. in this case a rhythmical
bombardment occurs, no matter whether the molecules after
coming in contact with the body lose the imparted charge or
not, and, what is more, if the charge is not lost, the impacts are
all the more violent. still, if the frequency of the impulses
be very small, the loss caused by the impacts and collisions would
not be serious unless the potential was excessive. but when
extremely high frequencies and more or less high potentials are
used, the loss may be very great. the total energy lost per unit
of time is proportionate to the product of the number of impacts
per second, or the frequency and the energy lost in each impact.
but the energy of an impact must be proportionate to the square
of the electric density of the body, on the assumption that the
charge imparted to the molecule is proportionate to that density.
it is concluded from this that the total energy lost must be proportionate
to the product of the frequency and the square of the
electric density; but this law needs experimental confirmation.
assuming the preceding considerations to be true, then, by rapidly
alternating the potential of a body immersed in an insulating
gaseous medium, any amount of energy may be dissipated
into space. most of that energy, then, is not dissipated in the
form of long ether waves, propagated to considerable distance,
as is thought most generally, but is consumed in impact and
collisional losses—that is, heat vibrations—on the surface and in[pg ]
the vicinity of the body. to reduce the dissipation it is necessary
to work with a small electric density—the smaller, the
higher the frequency.
the behavior of a gaseous medium to such rapid alternations
of potential makes it appear plausible that electrostatic disturbances
of the earth, produced by cosmic events, may have
great influence upon the meteorological conditions. when such
disturbances occur both the frequency of the vibrations of the
charge and the potential are in all probability excessive, and the
energy converted into heat may be considerable. since the
density must be unevenly distributed, either in consequence of
the irregularity of the earth's surface, or on account of the
condition of the atmosphere in various places, the effect produced
would accordingly vary from place to place. considerable
variations in the temperature and pressure of the atmosphere
may in this manner be caused at any point of the surface of the
earth. the variations may be gradual or very sudden, according
to the nature of the original disturbance, and may produce rain
and storms, or locally modify the weather in any way.
from many experiences gathered in the course of these investigations
it appears certain that in lightning discharges the air is
an element of importance. for instance, during a storm a
stream may form on a nail or pointed projection of a building.
if lightning strikes somewhere in the neighborhood, the harmless
static discharge may, in consequence of the oscillations set
up, assume the character of a high-frequency streamer, and the
nail or projection may be brought to a high temperature by the
violent impact of the air molecules. thus, it is thought, a
building may be set on fire without the lightning striking it. in
like manner small metallic objects may be fused and volatilized—as
frequently occurs in lightning discharges—merely because
they are surrounded by air. were they immersed in a practically
continuous medium, such as oil, they would probably be
safe, as the energy would have to spend itself elsewhere.
an instructive experience having a bearing on this subject is
the following:—a glass tube of an inch or so in diameter and
several inches long is taken, and a platinum wire sealed into it,
the wire running through the center of the tube from end to
end. the tube is exhausted to a moderate degree. if a steady
current is passed through the wire it is heated uniformly in all
parts and the gas in the tube is of no consequence. but if high[pg ]
frequency discharges are directed through the wire, it is heated
more on the ends than in the middle portion, and if the frequency,
or rate of charge, is high enough, the wire might as
well be cut in the middle as not, for most of the heating on the
ends is due to the rarefied gas. here the gas might only act as
a conductor of no impedance, diverting the current from the
wire as the impedance of the latter is enormously increased, and
merely heating the ends of the wire by reason of their resistance
to the passage of the discharge. but it is not at all necessary that
the gas in the tube should be conducting; it might be at an extremely
low pressure, still the ends of the wire would be heated;
however, as is ascertained by experience, only the two ends
would in such case not be electrically connected through the
gaseous medium. now, what with these frequencies and potentials
occurs in an exhausted tube, occurs in the lightning discharge
at ordinary pressure.
from the facility with which any amount of energy may be
carried off through a gas, mr. tesla infers that the best way to
render harmless a lightning discharge is to afford it in some way
a passage through a volume of gas.
the recognition of some of the above facts has a bearing upon
far-reaching scientific investigations in which extremely high
frequencies and potentials are used. in such cases the air is an
important factor to be considered. so, for instance, if two wires
are attached to the terminals of the coil, and the streamers issue
from them, there is dissipation of energy in the form of heat
and light, and the wires behave like a condenser of larger capacity.
if the wires be immersed in oil, the dissipation of energy
is prevented, or at least reduced, and the apparent capacity is
diminished. the action of the air would seem to make it very
difficult to tell, from the measured or computed capacity of a
condenser in which the air is acted upon, its actual capacity or
vibration period, especially if the condenser is of very small surface
and is charged to a very high potential. as many important
results are dependant upon the correctness of the estimation
of the vibration period, this subject demands the most careful
scrutiny of investigators.
in leyden jars the loss due to the presence of air is comparatively
small, principally on account of the great surface of the
coatings and the small external action, but if there are streamers
on the top, the loss may be considerable, and the period of vibra[pg ]tion
is affected. in a resonator, the density is small, but the
frequency is extreme, and may introduce a considerable error.
it appears certain, at any rate, that the periods of vibration of a
charged body in a gaseous and in a continuous medium, such
as oil, are different, on account of the action of the former, as
explained.
another fact recognized, which is of some consequence, is,
that in similar investigations the general considerations of static
screening are not applicable when a gaseous medium is present.
this is evident from the following experiment:—a short and
wide glass tube is taken and covered with a substantial coating of
bronze powder, barely allowing the light to shine a little through.
the tube is highly exhausted and suspended on a metallic clasp
from the end of a wire. when the wire is connected with one
of the terminals of the coil, the gas inside of the tube is lighted
in spite of the metal coating. here the metal evidently does
not screen the gas inside as it ought to, even if it be very thin
and poorly conducting. yet, in a condition of rest the metal
coating, however thin, screens the inside perfectly.
one of the most interesting results arrived at in pursuing these
experiments, is the demonstration of the fact that a gaseous medium,
upon which vibration is impressed by rapid changes of
electrostatic potential, is rigid. in illustration of this result an
experiment made by mr. tesla may by cited:—a glass tube about
one inch in diameter and three feet long, with outside condenser
coatings on the ends, was exhausted to a certain point, when, the
tube being suspended freely from a wire connecting the upper coating
to one of the terminals of the coil, the discharge appeared in
the form of a luminous thread passing through the axis of the tube.
usually the thread was sharply defined in the upper part of the
tube and lost itself in the lower part. when a magnet or the
finger was quickly passed near the upper part of the luminous
thread, it was brought out of position by magnetic or electrostatic
influence, and a transversal vibration like that of a suspended
cord, with one or more distinct nodes, was set up, which
lasted for a few minutes and gradually died out. by suspending
from the lower condenser coating metal plates of different sizes,
the speed of the vibration was varied. this vibration would
seem to show beyond doubt that the thread possessed rigidity,
at least to transversal displacements.
many experiments were tried to demonstrate this property in[pg ]
air at ordinary pressure. though no positive evidence has been
obtained, it is thought, nevertheless, that a high frequency brush
or streamer, if the frequency could be pushed far enough, would
be decidedly rigid. a small sphere might then be moved within
it quite freely, but if thrown against it the sphere would rebound.
an ordinary flame cannot possess rigidity to a marked degree
because the vibration is directionless; but an electric arc, it is
believed, must possess that property more or less. a luminous
band excited in a bulb by repeated discharges of a leyden jar
must also possess rigidity, and if deformed and suddenly released
should vibrate.
from like considerations other conclusions of interest are
reached. the most probable medium filling the space is one
consisting of independent carriers immersed in an insulating
fluid. if through this medium enormous electrostatic stresses
are assumed to act, which vary rapidly in intensity, it would
allow the motion of a body through it, yet it would be rigid and
elastic, although the fluid itself might be devoid of these properties.
furthermore, on the assumption that the independent
carriers are of any configuration such that the fluid resistance to
motion in one direction is greater than in another, a stress of
that nature would cause the carriers to arrange themselves in
groups, since they would turn to each other their sides of the
greatest electric density, in which position the fluid resistance to
approach would be smaller than to receding. if in a medium of
the above characteristics a brush would be formed by a steady
potential, an exchange of the carriers would go on continually,
and there would be less carriers per unit of volume in the brush
than in the space at some distance from the electrode, this corresponding
to rarefaction. if the potential were rapidly changing,
the result would be very different; the higher the frequency
of the pulses, the slower would be the exchange of the carriers;
finally, the motion of translation through measurable space would
cease, and, with a sufficiently high frequency and intensity of the
stress, the carriers would be drawn towards the electrode, and
compression would result.
an interesting feature of these high frequency currents is that
they allow of operating all kinds of devices by connecting the device
with only one leading wire to the electric source. in fact,
under certain conditions it may be more economical to supply the
electrical energy with one lead than with two.[pg ]
an experiment of special interest shown by mr. tesla, is the
running, by the use of only one insulated line, of a motor operating
on the principle of the rotating magnetic field enunciated
by mr. tesla. a simple form of such a motor is obtained by
winding upon a laminated iron core a primary and close to it a
secondary coil, closing the ends of the latter and placing a freely
movable metal disc within the influence of the moving field.
the secondary coil may, however, be omitted. when one of the
ends of the primary coil of the motor is connected to one of the
terminals of the high frequency coil and the other end to an
insulated metal plate, which, it should be stated, is not absolutely
necessary for the success of the experiment, the disc is set in
rotation.
experiments of this kind seem to bring it within possibility to
operate a motor at any point of the earth's surface from a central
source, without any connection to the same except through
the earth. if, by means of powerful machinery, rapid variations
of the earth's potential were produced, a grounded wire reaching
up to some height would be traversed by a current which could
be increased by connecting the free end of the wire to a body of
some size. the current might be converted to low tension and
used to operate a motor or other device. the experiment, which
would be one of great scientific interest, would probably best
succeed on a ship at sea. in this manner, even if it were not
possible to operate machinery, intelligence might be transmitted
quite certainly.
in the course of this experimental study special attention was
devoted to the heating effects produced by these currents, which
are not only striking, but open up the possibility of producing a
more efficient illuminant. it is sufficient to attach to the coil
terminal a thin wire or filament, to have the temperature of the
latter perceptibly raised. if the wire or filament be enclosed in
a bulb, the heating effect is increased by preventing the circulation
of the air. if the air in the bulb be strongly compressed,
the displacements are smaller, the impacts less violent, and the
heating effect is diminished. on the contrary, if the air in the
bulb be exhausted, an inclosed lamp filament is brought to incandescence,
and any amount of light may thus be produced.
the heating of the inclosed lamp filament depends on so
many things of a different nature, that it is difficult to give a
generally applicable rule under which the maximum heating[pg ]
occurs. as regards the size of the bulb, it is ascertained that at
ordinary or only slightly differing atmospheric pressures, when
air is a good insulator, the filament is heated more in a small
bulb, because of the better confinement of heat in this case. at
lower pressures, when air becomes conducting, the heating effect
is greater in a large bulb, but at excessively high degrees of
exhaustion there seems to be, beyond a certain and rather small
size of the vessel, no perceptible difference in the heating.
the shape of the vessel is also of some importance, and it has
been found of advantage for reasons of economy to employ a
spherical bulb with the electrode mounted in its centre, where
the rebounding molecules collide.
it is desirable on account of economy that all the energy supplied
to the bulb from the source should reach without loss the
body to be heated. the loss in conveying the energy from the
source to the body may be reduced by employing thin wires
heavily coated with insulation, and by the use of electrostatic
screens. it is to be remarked, that the screen cannot be connected
to the ground as under ordinary conditions.
in the bulb itself a large portion of the energy supplied may
be lost by molecular bombardment against the wire connecting
the body to be heated with the source. considerable improvement
was effected by covering the glass stem containing the wire
with a closely fitting conducting tube. this tube is made to
project a little above the glass, and prevents the cracking of the
latter near the heated body. the effectiveness of the conducting
tube is limited to very high degrees of exhaustion. it diminishes
the energy lost in bombardment for two reasons; first, the
charge given up by the atoms spreads over a greater area, and
hence the electric density at any point is small, and the atoms
are repelled with less energy than if they would strike against a
good insulator; secondly, as the tube is electrified by the atoms
which first come in contact with it, the progress of the following
atoms against the tube is more or less checked by the repulsion
which the electrified tube must exert upon the similarly electrified
atoms. this, it is thought, explains why the discharge through
a bulb is established with much greater facility when an insulator,
than when a conductor, is present.
during the investigations a great many bulbs of different construction,
with electrodes of different material, were experimented
upon, and a number of observations of interest were made. mr.[pg ]
tesla has found that the deterioration of the electrode is the less,
the higher the frequency. this was to be expected, as then the
heating is effected by many small impacts, instead by fewer and
more violent ones, which quickly shatter the structure. the deterioration
is also smaller when the vibration is harmonic. thus
an electrode, maintained at a certain degree of heat, lasts much
longer with currents obtained from an alternator, than with
those obtained by means of a disruptive discharge. one of the
most durable electrodes was obtained from strongly compressed
carborundum, which is a kind of carbon recently produced by
mr. e. g. acheson, of monongahela city, pa. from experience,
it is inferred, that to be most durable, the electrode should
be in the form of a sphere with a highly polished surface.
in some bulbs refractory bodies were mounted in a carbon cup
and put under the molecular impact. it was observed in
such experiments that the carbon cup was heated at first, until a
higher temperature was reached; then most of the bombardment
was directed against the refractory body, and the carbon
was relieved. in general, when different bodies were mounted
in the bulb, the hardest fusible would be relieved, and would
remain at a considerably lower temperature. this was necessitated
by the fact that most of the energy supplied would find
its way through the body which was more easily fused or "evaporated."
curiously enough it appeared in some of the experiments
made, that a body was fused in a bulb under the molecular impact
by evolution of less light than when fused by the application
of heat in ordinary ways. this may be ascribed to a
loosening of the structure of the body under the violent impacts
and changing stresses.
some experiments seem to indicate that under certain conditions
a body, conducting or nonconducting, may, when bombarded,
emit light, which to all appearances is due to phosphorescence,
but may in reality be caused by the incandescence of an
infinitesimal layer, the mean temperature of the body being
comparatively small. such might be the case if each single
rhythmical impact were capable of instantaneously exciting the
retina, and the rhythm were just high enough to cause a continuous
impression in the eye. according to this view, a coil operated
by disruptive discharge would be eminently adapted to produce
such a result, and it is found by experience that its power of[pg ]
exciting phosphorescence is extraordinarily great. it is capable
of exciting phosphorescence at comparatively low degrees of
exhaustion, and also projects shadows at pressures far greater
than those at which the mean free path is comparable to the
dimensions of the vessel. the latter observation is of some importance,
inasmuch as it may modify the generally accepted views
in regard to the "radiant state" phenomena.
a thought which early and naturally suggested itself to mr.
tesla, was to utilize the great inductive effects of high frequency
currents to produce light in a sealed glass vessel without the use
of leading in wires. accordingly, many bulbs were constructed
in which the energy necessary to maintain a button or filament
at high incandescence, was supplied through the glass by either
electrostatic or electrodynamic induction. it was easy to regulate
the intensity of the light emitted by means of an externally
applied condenser coating connected to an insulated plate, or
simply by means of a plate attached to the bulb which at the
same time performed the function of a shade.
a subject of experiment, which has been exhaustively treated
in england by prof. j. j. thomson, has been followed up independently
by mr. tesla from the beginning of this study, namely,
to excite by electrodynamic induction a luminous band in a closed
tube or bulb. in observing the behavior of gases, and the
luminous phenomena obtained, the importance of the electrostatic
effects was noted and it appeared desirable to produce
enormous potential differences, alternating with extreme rapidity.
experiments in this direction led to some of the most interesting
results arrived at in the course of these investigations. it
was found that by rapid alternations of a high electrostatic potential,
exhausted tubes could be lighted at considerable distances
from a conductor connected to a properly constructed coil, and
that it was practicable to establish with the coil an alternating
electrostatic field, acting through the whole room and lighting a
tube wherever it was placed within the four walls. phosphorescent
bulbs may be excited in such a field, and it is easy to regulate
the effect by connecting to the bulb a small insulated metal
plate. it was likewise possible to maintain a filament or button
mounted in a tube at bright incandescence, and, in one experiment,
a mica vane was spun by the incandescence of a platinum
wire.
coming now to the lecture delivered in philadelphia and st.[pg ]
louis, it may be remarked that to the superficial reader, mr.
tesla's introduction, dealing with the importance of the eye, might
appear as a digression, but the thoughtful reader will find therein
much food for meditation and speculation. throughout his discourse
one can trace mr. tesla's effort to present in a popular
way thoughts and views on the electrical phenomena which have
in recent years captivated the scientific world, but of which the
general public has even yet merely received an inkling. mr.
tesla also dwells rather extensively on his well-known method of
high-frequency conversion; and the large amount of detail information
will be gratefully received by students and experimenters
in this virgin field. the employment of apt analogies
in explaining the fundamental principles involved makes it easy
for all to gain a clear idea of their nature. again, the ease with
which, thanks to mr. tesla's efforts, these high-frequency currents
may now be obtained from circuits carrying almost any
kind of current, cannot fail to result in an extensive broadening
of this field of research, which offers so many possibilities. mr.
tesla, true philosopher as he is, does not hesitate to point out
defects in some of his methods, and indicates the lines which to
him seem the most promising. particular stress is laid by him
upon the employment of a medium in which the discharge
electrodes should be immersed in order that this method of conversion
may be brought to the highest perfection. he has evidently
taken pains to give as much useful information as possible
to those who wish to follow in his path, as he shows in detail the
circuit arrangements to be adopted in all ordinary cases met with
in practice, and although some of these methods were described
by him two years before, the additional information is still timely
and welcome.
in his experiments he dwells first on some phenomena produced
by electrostatic force, which he considers in the light of
modern theories to be the most important force in nature for us
to investigate. at the very outset he shows a strikingly novel
experiment illustrating the effect of a rapidly varying electrostatic
force in a gaseous medium, by touching with one hand one of
the terminals of a , volt transformer and bringing the
other hand to the opposite terminal. the powerful streamers
which issued from his hand and astonished his audiences formed
a capital illustration of some of the views advanced, and afforded
mr. tesla an opportunity of pointing out the true reasons why,[pg ]
with these currents, such an amount of energy can be passed
through the body with impunity. he then showed by experiment
the difference between a steady and a rapidly varying force
upon the dielectric. this difference is most strikingly illustrated
in the experiment in which a bulb attached to the end of a wire
in connection with one of the terminals of the transformer is
ruptured, although all extraneous bodies are remote from the
bulb. he next illustrates how mechanical motions are produced
by a varying electrostatic force acting through a gaseous medium.
the importance of the action of the air is particularly illustrated
by an interesting experiment.
taking up another class of phenomena, namely, those of dynamic
electricity, mr. tesla produced in a number of experiments
a variety of effects by the employment of only a single wire
with the evident intent of impressing upon his audience the idea
that electric vibration or current can be transmitted with ease,
without any return circuit; also how currents so transmitted can
be converted and used for many practical purposes. a number
of experiments are then shown, illustrating the effects of frequency,
self-induction and capacity; then a number of ways of
operating motive and other devices by the use of a single lead.
a number of novel impedance phenomena are also shown which
cannot fail to arouse interest.
mr. tesla next dwelt upon a subject which he thinks of great
importance, that is, electrical resonance, which he explained in a
popular way. he expressed his firm conviction that by observing
proper conditions, intelligence, and possibly even power, can
be transmitted through the medium or through the earth; and
he considers this problem worthy of serious and immediate consideration.
coming now to the light phenomena in particular, he illustrated
the four distinct kinds of these phenomena in an original way,
which to many must have been a revelation. mr. tesla attributes
these light effects to molecular or atomic impacts produced by a
varying electrostatic stress in a gaseous medium. he illustrated
in a series of novel experiments the effect of the gas surrounding
the conductor and shows beyond a doubt that with high frequency
and high potential currents, the surrounding gas is of
paramount importance in the heating of the conductor. he
attributes the heating partially to a conduction current and partially
to bombardment, and demonstrates that in many cases the[pg ]
heating may be practically due to the bombardment alone. he
pointed out also that the skin effect is largely modified by the
presence of the gas or of an atomic medium in general. he
showed also some interesting experiments in which the effect of
convection is illustrated. probably one of the most curious experiments
in this connection is that in which a thin platinum wire
stretched along the axis of an exhausted tube is brought to incandescence
at certain points corresponding to the position of
the striæ, while at others it remains dark. this experiment
throws an interesting light upon the nature of the striæ and may
lead to important revelations.
mr. tesla also demonstrated the dissipation of energy through
an atomic medium and dwelt upon the behavior of vacuous
space in conveying heat, and in this connection showed the curious
behavior of an electrode stream, from which he concludes that
the molecules of a gas probably cannot be acted upon directly
at measurable distances.
mr. tesla summarized the chief results arrived at in pursuing
his investigations in a manner which will serve as a valuable
guide to all who may engage in this work. perhaps most interest
will centre on his general statements regarding the phenomena
of phosphorescence, the most important fact revealed in this direction
being that when exciting a phosphorescent bulb a certain
definite potential gives the most economical result.
the lectures will now be presented in the order of their date
of delivery.
[pg ]
experiments with alternate currents of very high frequency
and their application to methods of artificial
illumination.[]
there is no subject more captivating, more worthy of study,
than nature. to understand this great mechanism, to discover
the forces which are active, and the laws which govern them, is
the highest aim of the intellect of man.
nature has stored up in the universe infinite energy. the
eternal recipient and transmitter of this infinite energy is the
ether. the recognition of the existence of ether, and of the
functions it performs, is one of the most important results of
modern scientific research. the mere abandoning of the idea of
action at a distance, the assumption of a medium pervading all
space and connecting all gross matter, has freed the minds of
thinkers of an ever present doubt, and, by opening a new horizon—new
and unforeseen possibilities—has given fresh interest to
phenomena with which we are familiar of old. it has been a
great step towards the understanding of the forces of nature and
their multifold manifestations to our senses. it has been for
the enlightened student of physics what the understanding of
the mechanism of the firearm or of the steam engine is for the
barbarian. phenomena upon which we used to look as wonders
baffling explanation, we now see in a different light. the spark
of an induction coil, the glow of an incandescent lamp, the manifestations
of the mechanical forces of currents and magnets are
no longer beyond our grasp; instead of the incomprehensible, as
before, their observation suggests now in our minds a simple
mechanism, and although as to its precise nature all is still conjecture,
yet we know that the truth cannot be much longer hidden,
and instinctively we feel that the understanding is dawning
upon us. we still admire these beautiful phenomena, these[pg ]
strange forces, but we are helpless no longer; we can in a certain
measure explain them, account for them, and we are hopeful of
finally succeeding in unraveling the mystery which surrounds
them.
in how far we can understand the world around us is the ultimate
thought of every student of nature. the coarseness of our
senses prevents us from recognizing the ulterior construction of
matter, and astronomy, this grandest and most positive of natural
sciences, can only teach us something that happens, as it were, in
our immediate neighborhood: of the remoter portions of the
boundless universe, with its numberless stars and suns, we know
nothing. but far beyond the limit of perception of our senses
the spirit still can guide us, and so we may hope that even these
unknown worlds—infinitely small and great—may in a measure
become known to us. still, even if this knowledge should reach
us, the searching mind will find a barrier, perhaps forever unsurpassable,
to the true recognition of that which seems to be, the
mere appearance of which is the only and slender basis of all
our philosophy.
of all the forms of nature's immeasurable, all-pervading
energy, which ever and ever changing and moving, like a soul
animates the inert universe, electricity and magnetism are perhaps
the most fascinating. the effects of gravitation, of heat
and light we observe daily, and soon we get accustomed to
them, and soon they lose for us the character of the marvelous
and wonderful; but electricity and magnetism, with their singular
relationship, with their seemingly dual character, unique among
the forces in nature, with their phenomena of attractions, repulsions
and rotations, strange manifestations of mysterious agents,
stimulate and excite the mind to thought and research. what is
electricity, and what is magnetism? these questions have been
asked again and again. the most able intellects have ceaselessly
wrestled with the problem; still the question has not as yet been
fully answered. but while we cannot even to-day state what
these singular forces are, we have made good headway towards
the solution of the problem. we are now confident that
electric and magnetic phenomena are attributable to ether, and
we are perhaps justified in saying that the effects of static electricity
are effects of ether under strain, and those of dynamic
electricity and electro-magnetism effects of ether in motion. but
this still leaves the question, as to what electricity and magnetism
are, unanswered.[pg ]
first, we naturally inquire, what is electricity, and is there
such a thing as electricity? in interpreting electric phenomena,
we may speak of electricity or of an electric condition, state or
effect. if we speak of electric effects we must distinguish two
such effects, opposite in character and neutralizing each other, as
observation shows that two such opposite effects exist. this is
unavoidable, for in a medium of the properties of ether, we cannot
possibly exert a strain, or produce a displacement or motion
of any kind, without causing in the surrounding medium an
equivalent and opposite effect. but if we speak of electricity,
meaning a thing, we must, i think, abandon the idea of two
electricities, as the existence of two such things is highly improbable.
for how can we imagine that there should be two things,
equivalent in amount, alike in their properties, but of opposite
character, both clinging to matter, both attracting and completely
neutralizing each other? such an assumption, though suggested
by many phenomena, though most convenient for explaining
them, has little to commend it. if there is such a thing as electricity,
there can be only one such thing, and excess and want
of that one thing, possibly; but more probably its condition determines
the positive and negative character. the old theory of
franklin, though falling short in some respects, is, from a certain
point of view, after all, the most plausible one. still, in spite
of this, the theory of the two electricities is generally accepted,
as it apparently explains electric phenomena in a more satisfactory
manner. but a theory which better explains the facts is not
necessarily true. ingenious minds will invent theories to suit
observation, and almost every independent thinker has his own
views on the subject.
it is not with the object of advancing an opinion, but with
the desire of acquainting you better with some of the results,
which i will describe, to show you the reasoning i have followed,
the departures i have made—that i venture to express,
in a few words, the views and convictions which have led me to
these results.
i adhere to the idea that there is a thing which we have been
in the habit of calling electricity. the question is, what is that
thing? or, what, of all things, the existence of which we know,
have we the best reason to call electricity? we know that it acts
like an incompressible fluid; that there must be a constant quantity
of it in nature; that it can be neither produced nor destroyed;[pg ]
and, what is more important, the electro-magnetic theory of light
and all facts observed teach us that electric and ether phenomena
are identical. the idea at once suggests itself, therefore, that
electricity might be called ether. in fact, this view has in a certain
sense been advanced by dr. lodge. his interesting work
has been read by everyone and many have been convinced by
his arguments. his great ability and the interesting nature of
the subject, keep the reader spellbound; but when the impressions
fade, one realizes that he has to deal only with ingenious
explanations. i must confess, that i cannot believe in two electricities,
much less in a doubly-constituted ether. the puzzling
behavior of the ether as a solid to waves of light and heat, and
as a fluid to the motion of bodies through it, is certainly explained
in the most natural and satisfactory manner by assuming
it to be in motion, as sir william thomson has suggested; but
regardless of this, there is nothing which would enable us to
conclude with certainty that, while a fluid is not capable of transmitting
transverse vibrations of a few hundred or thousand per
second, it might not be capable of transmitting such vibrations
when they range into hundreds of million millions per second.
nor can anyone prove that there are transverse ether waves
emitted from an alternate current machine, giving a small number
of alternations per second; to such slow disturbances, the ether,
if at rest, may behave as a true fluid.
returning to the subject, and bearing in mind that the existence
of two electricities is, to say the least, highly improbable,
we must remember, that we have no evidence of electricity, nor
can we hope to get it, unless gross matter is present. electricity,
therefore, cannot be called ether in the broad sense of the term;
but nothing would seem to stand in the way of calling electricity
ether associated with matter, or bound ether; or, in other words,
that the so-called static charge of the molecule is ether associated
in some way with the molecule. looking at it in that light, we
would be justified in saying, that electricity is concerned in all
molecular actions.
now, precisely what the ether surrounding the molecules is,
wherein it differs from ether in general, can only be conjectured.
it cannot differ in density, ether being incompressible:
it must, therefore, be under some strain or in motion, and the
latter is the most probable. to understand its functions, it
would be necessary to have an exact idea of the physical con[pg ]struction
of matter, of which, of course, we can only form a
mental picture.
but of all the views on nature, the one which assumes one
matter and one force, and a perfect uniformity throughout, is
the most scientific and most likely to be true. an infinitesimal
world, with the molecules and their atoms spinning and moving
in orbits, in much the same manner as celestial bodies, carrying
with them and probably spinning with them ether, or in other
words, carrying with them static charges, seems to my mind the
most probable view, and one which, in a plausible manner, accounts
for most of the phenomena observed. the spinning of
the molecules and their ether sets up the ether tensions or electrostatic
strains; the equalization of ether tensions sets up ether
motions or electric currents, and the orbital movements produce
the effects of electro and permanent magnetism.
about fifteen years ago, prof. rowland demonstrated a most
interesting and important fact, namely, that a static charge carried
around produces the effects of an electric current. leaving
out of consideration the precise nature of the mechanism, which
produces the attraction and repulsion of currents, and conceiving
the electrostatically charged molecules in motion, this experimental
fact gives us a fair idea of magnetism. we can conceive lines
or tubes of force which physically exist, being formed of rows
of directed moving molecules; we can see that these lines must be
closed, that they must tend to shorten and expand, etc. it likewise
explains in a reasonable way, the most puzzling phenomenon
of all, permanent magnetism, and, in general, has all the beauties
of the ampere theory without possessing the vital defect of the
same, namely, the assumption of molecular currents. without
enlarging further upon the subject, i would say, that i look upon
all electrostatic, current and magnetic phenomena as being due
to electrostatic molecular forces.
the preceding remarks i have deemed necessary to a full
understanding of the subject as it presents itself to my mind.
of all these phenomena the most important to study are the
current phenomena, on account of the already extensive and ever-growing
use of currents for industrial purposes. it is now a century
since the first practical source of current was produced,
and, ever since, the phenomena which accompany the flow of
currents have been diligently studied, and through the untiring
efforts of scientific men the simple laws which govern them have[pg ]
been discovered. but these laws are found to hold good only
when the currents are of a steady character. when the currents
are rapidly varying in strength, quite different phenomena, often
unexpected, present themselves, and quite different laws hold
good, which even now have not been determined as fully as is
desirable, though through the work, principally, of english scientists,
enough knowledge has been gained on the subject to enable
us to treat simple cases which now present themselves in daily
practice.
the phenomena which are peculiar to the changing character
of the currents are greatly exalted when the rate of change is
increased, hence the study of these currents is considerably facilitated
by the employment of properly constructed apparatus.
it was with this and other objects in view that i constructed
alternate current machines capable of giving more than two
million reversals of current per minute, and to this circumstance
it is principally due, that i am able to bring to your attention
some of the results thus far reached, which i hope will prove to
be a step in advance on account of their direct bearing upon one
of the most important problems, namely, the production of a
practical and efficient source of light.
the study of such rapidly alternating currents is very interesting.
nearly every experiment discloses something new. many
results may, of course, be predicted, but many more are unforeseen.
the experimenter makes many interesting observations.
for instance, we take a piece of iron and hold it against a magnet.
starting from low alternations and running up higher and higher
we feel the impulses succeed each other faster and faster, get
weaker and weaker, and finally disappear. we then observe a
continuous pull; the pull, of course, is not continuous; it only
appears so to us; our sense of touch is imperfect.
we may next establish an arc between the electrodes and
observe, as the alternations rise, that the note which accompanies
alternating arcs gets shriller and shriller, gradually weakens, and
finally ceases. the air vibrations, of course, continue, but they
are too weak to be perceived; our sense of hearing fails us.
we observe the small physiological effects, the rapid heating of
the iron cores and conductors, curious inductive effects, interesting
condenser phenomena, and still more interesting light phenomena
with a high tension induction coil. all these experiments
and observations would be of the greatest interest to the[pg ]
student, but their description would lead me too far from the
principal subject. partly for this reason, and partly on account
of their vastly greater importance, i will confine myself to the
description of the light effects produced by these currents.
in the experiments to this end a high tension induction coil or
equivalent apparatus for converting currents of comparatively
low into currents of high tension is used.
if you will be sufficiently interested in the results i shall describe
as to enter into an experimental study of this subject; if you
will be convinced of the truth of the arguments i shall advance—your
aim will be to produce high frequencies and high potentials;
in other words, powerful electrostatic effects. you will then encounter
many difficulties, which, if completely overcome, would
allow us to produce truly wonderful results.
first will be met the difficulty of obtaining the required frequencies
by means of mechanical apparatus, and, if they be obtained
otherwise, obstacles of a different nature will present
themselves. next it will be found difficult to provide the requisite
insulation without considerably increasing the size of the
apparatus, for the potentials required are high, and, owing to the
rapidity of the alternations, the insulation presents peculiar difficulties.
so, for instance, when a gas is present, the discharge
may work, by the molecular bombardment of the gas and consequent
heating, through as much as an inch of the best solid
insulating material, such as glass, hard rubber, porcelain, sealing
wax, etc.; in fact, through any known insulating substance. the
chief requisite in the insulation of the apparatus is, therefore, the
exclusion of any gaseous matter.
in general my experience tends to show that bodies which
possess the highest specific inductive capacity, such as glass,
afford a rather inferior insulation to others, which, while they are
good insulators, have a much smaller specific inductive capacity,
such as oils, for instance, the dielectric losses being no doubt
greater in the former. the difficulty of insulating, of course,
only exists when the potentials are excessively high, for with
potentials such as a few thousand volts there is no particular difficulty
encountered in conveying currents from a machine giving,
say, , alternations per second, to quite a distance. this
number of alternations, however, is by far too small for many
purposes, though quite sufficient for some practical applications.
this difficulty of insulating is fortunately not a vital drawback;[pg ]
it affects mostly the size of the apparatus, for, when excessively
high potentials would be used, the light-giving devices would be
located not far from the apparatus, and often they would be quite
close to it. as the air-bombardment of the insulated wire is dependent
on condenser action, the loss may be reduced to a trifle
by using excessively thin wires heavily insulated.
another difficulty will be encountered in the capacity and self-induction
necessarily possessed by the coil. if the coil be large,
that is, if it contain a great length of wire, it will be generally
unsuited for excessively high frequencies; if it be small, it may
be well adapted for such frequencies, but the potential might
then not be as high as desired. a good insulator, and preferably
one possessing a small specific inductive capacity, would
afford a two-fold advantage. first, it would enable us to construct
a very small coil capable of withstanding enormous differences
of potential; and secondly, such a small coil, by reason of
its smaller capacity and self-induction, would be capable of a
quicker and more vigorous vibration. the problem then of constructing
a coil or induction apparatus of any kind possessing
the requisite qualities i regard as one of no small importance,
and it has occupied me for a considerable time.
the investigator who desires to repeat the experiments which
i will describe, with an alternate current machine, capable of
supplying currents of the desired frequency, and an induction
coil, will do well to take the primary coil out and mount the secondary
in such a manner as to be able to look through the tube
upon which the secondary is wound. he will then be able to
observe the streams which pass from the primary to the insulating
tube, and from their intensity he will know how far he can
strain the coil. without this precaution he is sure to injure
the insulation. this arrangement permits, however, an easy
exchange of the primaries, which is desirable in these experiments.
the selection of the type of machine best suited for the purpose
must be left to the judgment of the experimenter. there
are here illustrated three distinct types of machines, which,
besides others, i have used in my experiments.
fig.  represents the machine used in my experiments before
this institute. the field magnet consists of a ring of wrought
iron with  pole projections. the armature comprises a steel
disc to which is fastened a thin, carefully welded rim of wrought[pg ]
iron. upon the rim are wound several layers of fine, well
annealed iron wire, which, when wound, is passed through
shellac. the armature wires are wound around brass pins,
wrapped with silk thread. the diameter of the armature wire
in this type of machine should not be more than / of the thickness
of the pole projections, else the local action will be considerable.
fig. .
fig.  represents a larger machine of a different type. the
field magnet of this machine consists of two like parts which
either enclose an exciting coil, or else are independently wound.
each part has  pole projections, the projections of one facing
those of the other. the armature consists of a wheel of hard
bronze, carrying the conductors which revolve between the projections
of the field magnet. to wind the armature conductors,
i have found it most convenient to proceed in the following
manner. i construct a ring of hard bronze of the required size.
this ring and the rim of the wheel are provided with the
proper number of pins, and both fastened upon a plate. the
armature conductors being wound, the pins are cut off and the
ends of the conductors fastened by two rings which screw to the[pg ]
bronze ring and the rim of the wheel, respectively. the whole
may then be taken off and forms a solid structure. the conductors
in such a type of machine should consist of sheet copper,
the thickness of which, of course, depends on the thickness of
the pole projections; or else twisted thin wires should be employed.
fig.  is a smaller machine, in many respects similar to the
former, only here the armature conductors and the exciting coil
are kept stationary, while only a block of wrought iron is revolved.
fig. .
it would be uselessly lengthening this description were i to
dwell more on the details of construction of these machines.
besides, they have been described somewhat more elaborately in
the electrical engineer, of march , . i deem it well,
however, to call the attention of the investigator to two things,
the importance of which, though self evident, he is nevertheless
apt to underestimate; namely, to the local action in the conductors
which must be carefully avoided, and to the clearance,
which must be small. i may add, that since it is desirable to use
very high peripheral speeds, the armature should be of very
large diameter in order to avoid impracticable belt speeds. of[pg ]
the several types of these machines which have been constructed
by me, i have found that the type illustrated in fig.  caused
me the least trouble in construction, as well as in maintenance,
and on the whole, it has been a good experimental machine.
in operating an induction coil with very rapidly alternating
currents, among the first luminous phenomena noticed are naturally
those presented by the high-tension discharge. as the number
of alternations per second is increased, or as—the number
being high—the current through the primary is varied, the discharge
gradually changes in appearance. it would be difficult to
describe the minor changes which occur, and the conditions which
bring them about, but one may note five distinct forms of the
discharge.
fig. .
first, one may observe a weak, sensitive discharge in the form
of a thin, feeble-colored thread. (fig. a.) it always occurs
when, the number of alternations per second being high, the current
through the primary is very small. in spite of the excessively
small current, the rate of change is great, and the difference
of potential at the terminals of the secondary is therefore
considerable, so that the arc is established at great distances; but
the quantity of "electricity" set in motion is insignificant, barely
sufficient to maintain a thin, threadlike arc. it is excessively
sensitive and may be made so to such a degree that the mere act
of breathing near the coil will affect it, and unless it is perfectly[pg ]
well protected from currents of air, it wriggles around constantly.
nevertheless, it is in this form excessively persistent, and when
the terminals are approached to, say, one-third of the striking
distance, it can be blown out only with difficulty. this exceptional
persistency, when short, is largely due to the arc being
excessively thin; presenting, therefore, a very small surface
to the blast. its great sensitiveness, when very long, is probably
due to the motion of the particles of dust suspended in the air.
fig. a.fig. b.
when the current through the primary is increased, the discharge
gets broader and stronger, and the effect of the capacity
of the coil becomes visible until, finally, under proper conditions,
a white flaming arc, fig. b, often as thick as one's finger, and
striking across the whole coil, is produced. it develops remarkable
heat, and may be further characterized by the absence of
the high note which accompanies the less powerful discharges.
to take a shock from the coil under these conditions would not
be advisable, although under different conditions, the potential
being much higher, a shock from the coil may be taken with
impunity. to produce this kind of discharge the number of
alternations per second must not be too great for the coil used;
and, generally speaking, certain relations between capacity, self-induction
and frequency must be observed.
the importance of these elements in an alternate current circuit
is now well-known, and under ordinary conditions, the general
rules are applicable. but in an induction coil exceptional
conditions prevail. first, the self-induction is of little importance
before the arc is established, when it asserts itself, but perhaps
never as prominently as in ordinary alternate current circuits,
because the capacity is distributed all along the coil, and by reason
of the fact that the coil usually discharges through very great
resistances; hence the currents are exceptionally small. secondly,[pg ]
the capacity goes on increasing continually as the potential rises,
in consequence of absorption which takes place to a considerable
extent. owing to this there exists no critical relationship between
these quantities, and ordinary rules would not seem to be applicable.
as the potential is increased either in consequence of the
increased frequency or of the increased current through the
primary, the amount of the energy stored becomes greater and
greater, and the capacity gains more and more in importance.
up to a certain point the capacity is beneficial, but after that it
begins to be an enormous drawback. it follows from this that
each coil gives the best result with a given frequency and primary
current. a very large coil, when operated with currents of very
high frequency, may not give as much as / inch spark. by adding
capacity to the terminals, the condition may be improved, but
what the coil really wants is a lower frequency.
when the flaming discharge occurs, the conditions are evidently
such that the greatest current is made to flow through the
circuit. these conditions may be attained by varying the frequency
within wide limits, but the highest frequency at which
the flaming arc can still be produced, determines, for a given
primary current, the maximum striking distance of the coil. in
the flaming discharge the eclat effect of the capacity is not perceptible;
the rate at which the energy is being stored then just
equals the rate at which it can be disposed of through the circuit.
this kind of discharge is the severest test for a coil; the break,
when it occurs, is of the nature of that in an overcharged leyden
jar. to give a rough approximation i would state that, with an
ordinary coil of, say , ohms resistance, the most powerful
arc would be produced with about , alternations per second.
when the frequency is increased beyond that rate, the potential,
of course, rises, but the striking distance may, nevertheless,
diminish, paradoxical as it may seem. as the potential rises the
coil attains more and more the properties of a static machine
until, finally, one may observe the beautiful phenomenon of the
streaming discharge, fig. , which may be produced across the
whole length of the coil. at that stage streams begin to issue
freely from all points and projections. these streams will also be
seen to pass in abundance in the space between the primary and
the insulating tube. when the potential is excessively high they
will always appear, even if the frequency be low, and even if the
primary be surrounded by as much as an inch of wax, hard rub[pg ]ber,
glass, or any other insulating substance. this limits greatly
the output of the coil, but i will later show how i have been able
to overcome to a considerable extent this disadvantage in the
ordinary coil.
besides the potential, the intensity of the streams depends on
the frequency; but if the coil be very large they show themselves,
no matter how low the frequencies used. for instance,
in a very large coil of a resistance of , ohms, constructed
by me some time ago, they appear with as low as  alternations
per second and less, the insulation of the secondary being / inch
of ebonite. when very intense they produce a noise similar to
that produced by the charging of a holtz machine, but much
more powerful, and they emit a strong smell of ozone. the
lower the frequency, the more apt they are to suddenly injure
the coil. with excessively high frequencies they may pass freely
without producing any other effect than to heat the insulation
slowly and uniformly.
fig. .fig. .
the existence of these streams shows the importance of constructing
an expensive coil so as to permit of one's seeing
through the tube surrounding the primary, and the latter should
be easily exchangeable; or else the space between the primary
and secondary should be completely filled up with insulating
material so as to exclude all air. the non-observance of this
simple rule in the construction of commercial coils is responsible
for the destruction of many an expensive coil.
at the stage when the streaming discharge occurs, or with
somewhat higher frequencies, one may, by approaching the terminals
quite nearly, and regulating properly the effect of capacity,
produce a veritable spray of small silver-white sparks, or a
bunch of excessively thin silvery threads (fig. ) amidst a
powerful brush—each spark or thread possibly corresponding[pg ]
to one alternation. this, when produced under proper conditions,
is probably the most beautiful discharge, and when an air
blast is directed against it, it presents a singular appearance.
the spray of sparks, when received through the body, causes
some inconvenience, whereas, when the discharge simply
streams, nothing at all is likely to be felt if large conducting
objects are held in the hands to protect them from receiving
small burns.
if the frequency is still more increased, then the coil refuses
to give any spark unless at comparatively small distances, and the
fifth typical form of discharge may be observed (fig. ). the
tendency to stream out and dissipate is then so great that when
the brush is produced at one terminal no sparking occurs, even
if, as i have repeatedly tried, the hand, or any conducting object,
is held within the stream; and, what is more singular, the luminous
stream is not at all easily deflected by the approach of a
conducting body.
fig. .fig. .
at this stage the streams seemingly pass with the greatest
freedom through considerable thicknesses of insulators, and it is
particularly interesting to study their behavior. for this purpose
it is convenient to connect to the terminals of the coil two
metallic spheres which may be placed at any desired distance,
fig. . spheres are preferable to plates, as the discharge can
be better observed. by inserting dielectric bodies between the
spheres, beautiful discharge phenomena may be observed. if
the spheres be quite close and a spark be playing between them, by
interposing a thin plate of ebonite between the spheres the spark
instantly ceases and the discharge spreads into an intensely luminous
circle several inches in diameter, provided the spheres are[pg ]
sufficiently large. the passage of the streams heats, and, after
a while, softens, the rubber so much that two plates may be
made to stick together in this manner. if the spheres are so far
apart that no spark occurs, even if they are far beyond the striking
distance, by inserting a thick plate of glass the discharge is
instantly induced to pass from the spheres to the glass in the
form of luminous streams. it appears almost as though these
streams pass through the dielectric. in reality this is not the
case, as the streams are due to the molecules of the air which
are violently agitated in the space between the oppositely charged
surfaces of the spheres. when no dielectric other than air is
present, the bombardment goes on, but is too weak to be visible;
by inserting a dielectric the inductive effect is much increased,
and besides, the projected air molecules find an obstacle and the
bombardment becomes so intense that the streams become luminous.
if by any mechanical means we could effect such a violent
agitation of the molecules we could produce the same phenomenon.
a jet of air escaping through a small hole under
enormous pressure and striking against an insulating substance,
such as glass, may be luminous in the dark, and it might be possible
to produce a phosphorescence of the glass or other insulators
in this manner.
the greater the specific inductive capacity of the interposed
dielectric, the more powerful the effect produced. owing to
this, the streams show themselves with excessively high potentials
even if the glass be as much as one and one-half to two
inches thick. but besides the heating due to bombardment,
some heating goes on undoubtedly in the dielectric, being apparently
greater in glass than in ebonite. i attribute this to the
greater specific inductive capacity of the glass, in consequence of
which, with the same potential difference, a greater amount of
energy is taken up in it than in rubber. it is like connecting to
a battery a copper and a brass wire of the same dimensions. the
copper wire, though a more perfect conductor, would heat more
by reason of its taking more current. thus what is otherwise
considered a virtue of the glass is here a defect. glass usually
gives way much quicker than ebonite; when it is heated to a certain
degree, the discharge suddenly breaks through at one point,
assuming then the ordinary form of an arc.
the heating effect produced by molecular bombardment of
the dielectric would, of course, diminish as the pressure of the[pg ]
air is increased, and at enormous pressure it would be negligible,
unless the frequency would increase correspondingly.
it will be often observed in these experiments that when the
spheres are beyond the striking distance, the approach of a glass
plate, for instance, may induce the spark to jump between the
spheres. this occurs when the capacity of the spheres is somewhat
below the critical value which gives the greatest difference
of potential at the terminals of the coil. by approaching a dielectric,
the specific inductive capacity of the space between the
spheres is increased, producing the same effect as if the capacity
of the spheres were increased. the potential at the terminals
may then rise so high that the air space is cracked. the experiment
is best performed with dense glass or mica.
another interesting observation is that a plate of insulating
material, when the discharge is passing through it, is strongly
attracted by either of the spheres, that is by the nearer one, this
being obviously due to the smaller mechanical effect of the bombardment
on that side, and perhaps also to the greater electrification.
from the behavior of the dielectrics in these experiments, we
may conclude that the best insulator for these rapidly alternating
currents would be the one possessing the smallest specific inductive
capacity and at the same time one capable of withstanding
the greatest differences of potential; and thus two diametrically
opposite ways of securing the required insulation are indicated,
namely, to use either a perfect vacuum or a gas under great pressure;
but the former would be preferable. unfortunately neither
of these two ways is easily carried out in practice.
it is especially interesting to note the behavior of an excessively
high vacuum in these experiments. if a test tube, provided
with external electrodes and exhausted to the highest possible
degree, be connected to the terminals of the coil, fig. , the
electrodes of the tube are instantly brought to a high temperature
and the glass at each end of the tube is rendered intensely phosphorescent,
but the middle appears comparatively dark, and for a
while remains cool.
when the frequency is so high that the discharge shown in
fig.  is observed, considerable dissipation no doubt occurs in
the coil. nevertheless the coil may be worked for a long time,
as the heating is gradual.
in spite of the fact that the difference of potential may be[pg ]
enormous, little is felt when the discharge is passed through the
body, provided the hands are armed. this is to some extent due
to the higher frequency, but principally to the fact that less energy
is available externally, when the difference of potential
reaches an enormous value, owing to the circumstance that, with
the rise of potential, the energy absorbed in the coil increases as
the square of the potential. up to a certain point the energy
available externally increases with the rise of potential, then it
begins to fall off rapidly. thus, with the ordinary high tension
induction coil, the curious paradox exists, that, while with a given
current through the primary the shock might be fatal, with many
times that current it might be perfectly harmless, even if the
frequency be the same. with high frequencies and excessively
high potentials when the terminals are not connected to bodies
of some size, practically all the energy supplied to the primary is
taken up by the coil. there is no breaking through, no local injury,
but all the material, insulating and conducting, is uniformly
heated.
fig. .fig. .
to avoid misunderstanding in regard to the physiological
effect of alternating currents of very high frequency, i think it
necessary to state that, while it is an undeniable fact that they are
incomparably less dangerous than currents of low frequencies,
it should not be thought that they are altogether harmless.
what has just been said refers only to currents from an ordinary
high tension induction coil, which currents are necessarily very
small; if received directly from a machine or from a secondary
of low resistance, they produce more or less powerful effects, and
may cause serious injury, especially when used in conjunction
with condensers.[pg ]
the streaming discharge of a high tension induction coil differs
in many respects from that of a powerful static machine. in
color it has neither the violet of the positive, nor the brightness
of the negative, static discharge, but lies somewhere between,
being, of course, alternatively positive and negative. but since
the streaming is more powerful when the point or terminal is
electrified positively, than when electrified negatively, it follows
that the point of the brush is more like the positive, and the root
more like the negative, static discharge. in the dark, when the
brush is very powerful, the root may appear almost white. the
wind produced by the escaping streams, though it may be very
strong—often indeed to such a degree that it may be felt quite a
distance from the coil—is, nevertheless, considering the quantity
of the discharge, smaller than that produced by the positive
brush of a static machine, and it affects the flame much less
powerfully. from the nature of the phenomenon we can conclude
that the higher the frequency, the smaller must, of course,
be the wind produced by the streams, and with sufficiently high
frequencies no wind at all would be produced at the ordinary
atmospheric pressures. with frequencies obtainable by means
of a machine, the mechanical effect is sufficiently great to revolve,
with considerable speed, large pin-wheels, which in the dark
present a beautiful appearance owing to the abundance of the
streams (fig. ).
fig. .fig. .
in general, most of the experiments usually performed with a
static machine can be performed with an induction coil when
operated with very rapidly alternating currents. the effects produced,
however, are much more striking, being of incomparably[pg ]
greater power. when a small length of ordinary cotton covered
wire, fig. , is attached to one terminal of the coil, the streams
issuing from all points of the wire may be so intense as to produce
a considerable light effect. when the potentials and frequencies
are very high, a wire insulated with gutta percha or rubber and
attached to one of the terminals, appears to be covered with a
luminous film. a very thin bare wire when attached to a terminal
emits powerful streams and vibrates continually to and fro
or spins in a circle, producing a singular effect (fig. ). some
of these experiments have been described by me in the electrical
world, of february , .
another peculiarity of the rapidly alternating discharge of the
induction coil is its radically different behavior with respect to
points and rounded surfaces.
if a thick wire, provided with a ball at one end and with a
point at the other, be attached to the positive terminal of a static
machine, practically all the charge will be lost through the point,
on account of the enormously greater tension, dependent on the
radius of curvature. but if such a wire is attached to one of the
terminals of the induction coil, it will be observed that with very
high frequencies streams issue from the ball almost as copiously
as from the point (fig. ).
it is hardly conceivable that we could produce such a condition
to an equal degree in a static machine, for the simple reason,
that the tension increases as the square of the density, which in
turn is proportional to the radius of curvature; hence, with a
steady potential an enormous charge would be required to make
streams issue from a polished ball while it is connected with a
point. but with an induction coil the discharge of which alternates
with great rapidity it is different. here we have to deal
with two distinct tendencies. first, there is the tendency to
escape which exists in a condition of rest, and which depends on
the radius of curvature; second, there is the tendency to dissipate
into the surrounding air by condenser action, which depends
on the surface. when one of these tendencies is a maximum,
the other is at a minimum. at the point the luminous
stream is principally due to the air molecules coming bodily in
contact with the point; they are attracted and repelled, charged
and discharged, and, their atomic charges being thus disturbed,
vibrate and emit light waves. at the ball, on the contrary, there
is no doubt that the effect is to a great extent produced induc[pg ]tively,
the air molecules not necessarily coming in contact with
the ball, though they undoubtedly do so. to convince ourselves
of this we only need to exalt the condenser action, for instance,
by enveloping the ball, at some distance, by a better conductor
than the surrounding medium, the conductor being, of course,
insulated; or else by surrounding it with a better dielectric and
approaching an insulated conductor; in both cases the streams
will break forth more copiously. also, the larger the ball with
a given frequency, or the higher the frequency, the more will
the ball have the advantage over the point. but, since a certain
intensity of action is required to render the streams visible, it is
obvious that in the experiment described the ball should not be
taken too large.
in consequence of this two-fold tendency, it is possible to produce
by means of points, effects identical to those produced by
capacity. thus, for instance, by attaching to one terminal of
the coil a small length of soiled wire, presenting many points
and offering great facility to escape, the potential of the coil
may be raised to the same value as by attaching to the terminal
a polished ball of a surface many times greater than that of the
wire.
fig. .fig. .
an interesting experiment, showing the effect of the points,
may be performed in the following manner: attach to one of
the terminals of the coil a cotton covered wire about two feet in
length, and adjust the conditions so that streams issue from the
wire. in this experiment the primary coil should be preferably
placed so that it extends only about half way into the secondary
coil. now touch the free terminal of the secondary with a conducting
object held in the hand, or else connect it to an insulated[pg ]
body of some size. in this manner the potential on the wire
may be enormously raised. the effect of this will be either to
increase, or to diminish, the streams. if they increase, the wire
is too short; if they diminish, it is too long. by adjusting the
length of the wire, a point is found where the touching of the
other terminal does not at all affect the streams. in this case
the rise of potential is exactly counteracted by the drop through
the coil. it will be observed that small lengths of wire produce
considerable difference in the magnitude and luminosity of the
streams. the primary coil is placed sidewise for two reasons:
first, to increase the potential at the wire; and, second, to increase
the drop through the coil. the sensitiveness is thus augmented.
there is still another and far more striking peculiarity of the
brush discharge produced by very rapidly alternating currents.
to observe this it is best to replace the usual terminals of the
coil by two metal columns insulated with a good thickness of
ebonite. it is also well to close all fissures and cracks with wax
so that the brushes cannot form anywhere except at the tops of
the columns. if the conditions are carefully adjusted—which,
of course, must be left to the skill of the experimenter—so that
the potential rises to an enormous value, one may produce two
powerful brushes several inches long, nearly white at their roots,
which in the dark bear a striking resemblance to two flames of
a gas escaping under pressure (fig. ). but they do not only
resemble, they are veritable flames, for they are hot. certainly
they are not as hot as a gas burner, but they would be so if the
frequency and the potential would be sufficiently high. produced
with, say, twenty thousand alternations per second, the heat is
easily perceptible even if the potential is not excessively high.
the heat developed is, of course, due to the impact of the air
molecules against the terminals and against each other. as, at
the ordinary pressures, the mean free path is excessively small,
it is possible that in spite of the enormous initial speed imparted
to each molecule upon coming in contact with the terminal, its
progress—by collision with other molecules—is retarded to such
an extent, that it does not get away far from the terminal, but
may strike the same many times in succession. the higher the
frequency, the less the molecule is able to get away, and this the
more so, as for a given effect the potential required is smaller;
and a frequency is conceivable—perhaps even obtainable—at[pg ]
which practically the same molecules would strike the terminal.
under such conditions the exchange of the molecules would be
very slow, and the heat produced at, and very near, the terminal
would be excessive. but if the frequency would go on increasing
constantly, the heat produced would begin to diminish for obvious
reasons. in the positive brush of a static machine the exchange
of the molecules is very rapid, the stream is constantly
of one direction, and there are fewer collisions; hence the heating
effect must be very small. anything that impairs the facility
of exchange tends to increase the local heat produced. thus, if
a bulb be held over the terminal of the coil so as to enclose the
brush, the air contained in the bulb is very quickly brought to
a high temperature. if a glass tube be held over the brush so
as to allow the draught to carry the brush upwards, scorching hot
air escapes at the top of the tube. anything held within the
brush is, of course, rapidly heated, and the possibility of using
such heating effects for some purpose or other suggests itself.
when contemplating this singular phenomenon of the hot
brush, we cannot help being convinced that a similar process
must take place in the ordinary flame, and it seems strange that
after all these centuries past of familiarity with the flame, now,
in this era of electric lighting and heating, we are finally led to
recognize, that since time immemorial we have, after all, always
had "electric light and heat" at our disposal. it is also of no
little interest to contemplate, that we have a possible way of
producing—by other than chemical means—a veritable flame,
which would give light and heat without any material being
consumed, without any chemical process taking place, and to
accomplish this, we only need to perfect methods of producing
enormous frequencies and potentials. i have no doubt that if
the potential could be made to alternate with sufficient rapidity
and power, the brush formed at the end of a wire would lose its
electrical characteristics and would become flamelike. the flame
must be due to electrostatic molecular action.
this phenomenon now explains in a manner which can hardly
be doubted the frequent accidents occurring in storms. it is well
known that objects are often set on fire without the lightning
striking them. we shall presently see how this can happen.
on a nail in a roof, for instance, or on a projection of any kind,
more or less conducting, or rendered so by dampness, a powerful
brush may appear. if the lightning strikes somewhere in the[pg ]
neighborhood the enormous potential may be made to alternate
or fluctuate perhaps many million times a second. the air
molecules are violently attracted and repelled, and by their impact
produce such a powerful heating effect that a fire is started.
it is conceivable that a ship at sea may, in this manner, catch fire
at many points at once. when we consider, that even with the
comparatively low frequencies obtained from a dynamo machine,
and with potentials of no more than one or two hundred thousand
volts, the heating effects are considerable, we may imagine
how much more powerful they must be with frequencies and potentials
many times greater; and the above explanation seems, to
say the least, very probable. similar explanations may have been
suggested, but i am not aware that, up to the present, the heating
effects of a brush produced by a rapidly alternating potential
have been experimentally demonstrated, at least not to such a
remarkable degree.
fig. .
by preventing completely the exchange of the air molecules,
the local heating effect may be so exalted as to bring a body to
incandescence. thus, for instance, if a small button, or preferably
a very thin wire or filament be enclosed in an unexhausted
globe and connected with the terminal of the coil, it may be
rendered incandescent. the phenomenon is made much more
interesting by the rapid spinning round in a circle of the top of
the filament, thus presenting the appearance of a luminous funnel,
fig. , which widens when the potential is increased.
when the potential is small the end of the filament may perform
irregular motions, suddenly changing from one to the other, or
it may describe an ellipse; but when the potential is very
high it always spins in a circle; and so does generally a thin[pg ]
straight wire attached freely to the terminal of the coil. these
motions are, of course, due to the impact of the molecules, and
the irregularity in the distribution of the potential, owing to the
roughness and dissymmetry of the wire or filament. with a
perfectly symmetrical and polished wire such motions would
probably not occur. that the motion is not likely to be due to
others causes is evident from the fact that it is not of a definite
direction, and that in a very highly exhausted globe it ceases
altogether. the possibility of bringing a body to incandescence
in an exhausted globe, or even when not at all enclosed, would
seem to afford a possible way of obtaining light effects, which,
in perfecting methods of producing rapidly alternating potentials,
might be rendered available for useful purposes.
fig. a.
in employing a commercial coil, the production of very powerful
brush effects is attended with considerable difficulties, for
when these high frequencies and enormous potentials are used,
the best insulation is apt to give way. usually the coil is insulated
well enough to stand the strain from convolution to convolution,
since two double silk covered paraffined wires will withstand
a pressure of several thousand volts; the difficulty lies
principally in preventing the breaking through from the secondary
to the primary, which is greatly facilitated by the streams
issuing from the latter. in the coil, of course, the strain is greatest
from section to section, but usually in a larger coil there are
so many sections that the danger of a sudden giving way is not
very great. no difficulty will generally be encountered in that
direction, and besides, the liability of injuring the coil internally
is very much reduced by the fact that the effect most likely to
be produced is simply a gradual heating, which, when far enough[pg ]
advanced, could not fail to be observed. the principal necessity
is then to prevent the streams between the primary and the tube,
not only on account of the heating and possible injury, but also
because the streams may diminish very considerably the potential
difference available at the terminals. a few hints as to how
this may be accomplished will probably be found useful in most
of these experiments with the ordinary induction coil.
fig. b.
one of the ways is to wind a short primary, fig. a, so that
the difference of potential is not at that length great enough to
cause the breaking forth of the streams through the insulating
tube. the length of the primary should be determined by experiment.
both the ends of the coil should be brought out on one
end through a plug of insulating material fitting in the tube as
illustrated. in such a disposition one terminal of the secondary
is attached to a body, the surface of which is determined with the
greatest care so as to produce the greatest rise in the potential.
at the other terminal a powerful brush appears, which may be
experimented upon.
the above plan necessitates the employment of a primary of
comparatively small size, and it is apt to heat when powerful effects
are desirable for a certain length of time. in such a case it
is better to employ a larger coil, fig. b, and introduce it
from one side of the tube, until the streams begin to appear. in
this case the nearest terminal of the secondary may be connected
to the primary or to the ground, which is practically the same
thing, if the primary is connected directly to the machine. in the
case of ground connections it is well to determine experimentally
the frequency which is best suited under the conditions of the
test. another way of obviating the streams, more or less, is to[pg ]
make the primary in sections and supply it from separate, well
insulated sources.
in many of these experiments, when powerful effects are
wanted for a short time, it is advantageous to use iron cores with
the primaries. in such case a very large primary coil may be
wound and placed side by side with the secondary, and, the nearest
terminal of the latter being connected to the primary, a laminated
iron core is introduced through the primary into the secondary
as far as the streams will permit. under these conditions
an excessively powerful brush, several inches long, which may
be appropriately called "st. elmo's hot fire," may be caused to
appear at the other terminal of the secondary, producing striking
effects. it is a most powerful ozonizer, so powerful indeed, that
only a few minutes are sufficient to fill the whole room with the
smell of ozone, and it undoubtedly possesses the quality of exciting
chemical affinities.
for the production of ozone, alternating currents of very
high frequency are eminently suited, not only on account of the
advantages they offer in the way of conversion but also because
of the fact, that the ozonizing action of a discharge is dependent
on the frequency as well as on the potential, this being undoubtedly
confirmed by observation.
in these experiments if an iron core is used it should be carefully
watched, as it is apt to get excessively hot in an incredibly
short time. to give an idea of the rapidity of the heating, i
will state, that by passing a powerful current through a coil with
many turns, the inserting within the same of a thin iron wire for
no more than one second's time is sufficient to heat the wire to
something like ° c.
but this rapid heating need not discourage us in the use
of iron cores in connection with rapidly alternating currents.
i have for a long time been convinced that in the industrial distribution
by means of transformers, some such plan as the following
might be practicable. we may use a comparatively small iron
core, subdivided, or perhaps not even subdivided. we may surround
this core with a considerable thickness of material which
is fire-proof and conducts the heat poorly, and on top of that we
may place the primary and secondary windings. by using either
higher frequencies or greater magnetizing forces, we may by
hysteresis and eddy currents heat the iron core so far as to bring
it nearly to its maximum permeability, which, as hopkinson has[pg ]
shown, may be as much as sixteen times greater than that at ordinary
temperatures. if the iron core were perfectly enclosed,
it would not be deteriorated by the heat, and, if the enclosure of
fire-proof material would be sufficiently thick, only a limited
amount of energy could be radiated in spite of the high temperature.
transformers have been constructed by me on that
plan, but for lack of time, no thorough tests have as yet been
made.
another way of adapting the iron core to rapid alternations,
or, generally speaking, reducing the frictional losses, is to produce
by continuous magnetization a flow of something like seven
thousand or eight thousand lines per square centimetre through
the core, and then work with weak magnetizing forces and preferably
high frequencies around the point of greatest permeability.
a higher efficiency of conversion and greater output are
obtainable in this manner. i have also employed this principle
in connection with machines in which there is no reversal of
polarity. in these types of machines, as long as there are only
few pole projections, there is no great gain, as the maxima and
minima of magnetization are far from the point of maximum
permeability; but when the number of the pole projections is
very great, the required rate of change may be obtained, without
the magnetization varying so far as to depart greatly from the
point of maximum permeability, and the gain is considerable.
the above described arrangements refer only to the use of
commercial coils as ordinarily constructed. if it is desired to
construct a coil for the express purpose of performing with it
such experiments as i have described, or, generally, rendering it
capable of withstanding the greatest possible difference of potential,
then a construction as indicated in fig.  will be found of
advantage. the coil in this case is formed of two independent
parts which are wound oppositely, the connection between both
being made near the primary. the potential in the middle being
zero, there is not much tendency to jump to the primary and not
much insulation is required. in some cases the middle point
may, however, be connected to the primary or to the ground. in
such a coil the places of greatest difference of potential are far
apart and the coil is capable of withstanding an enormous strain.
the two parts may be movable so as to allow a slight adjustment
of the capacity effect.
as to the manner of insulating the coil, it will be found con[pg ]venient
to proceed in the following way: first, the wire should
be boiled in paraffine until all the air is out; then the coil is
wound by running the wire through melted paraffine, merely for
the purpose of fixing the wire. the coil is then taken off from
the spool, immersed in a cylindrical vessel filled with pure melted
wax and boiled for a long time until the bubbles cease to appear.
the whole is then left to cool down thoroughly, and then the
mass is taken out of the vessel and turned up in a lathe. a coil
made in this manner and with care is capable of withstanding
enormous potential differences.
fig. .
it may be found convenient to immerse the coil in paraffine oil
or some other kind of oil; it is a most effective way of insulating,
principally on account of the perfect exclusion of air, but it may
be found that, after all, a vessel filled with oil is not a very convenient
thing to handle in a laboratory.
if an ordinary coil can be dismounted, the primary may be
taken out of the tube and the latter plugged up at one end, filled
with oil, and the primary reinserted. this affords an excellent
insulation and prevents the formation of the streams.
of all the experiments which may be performed with rapidly
alternating currents the most interesting are those which concern
the production of a practical illuminant. it cannot be denied
that the present methods, though they were brilliant advances,
are very wasteful. some better methods must be invented, some
more perfect apparatus devised. modern research has opened
new possibilities for the production of an efficient source of light,
and the attention of all has been turned in the direction indicated[pg ]
by able pioneers. many have been carried away by the enthusiasm
and passion to discover, but in their zeal to reach results, some
have been misled. starting with the idea of producing electro-magnetic
waves, they turned their attention, perhaps, too much
to the study of electro-magnetic effects, and neglected the study
of electrostatic phenomena. naturally, nearly every investigator
availed himself of an apparatus similar to that used in earlier
experiments. but in those forms of apparatus, while the electro-magnetic
inductive effects are enormous, the electrostatic effects
are excessively small.
in the hertz experiments, for instance, a high tension induction
coil is short circuited by an arc, the resistance of which is
very small, the smaller, the more capacity is attached to the terminals;
and the difference of potential at these is enormously
diminished. on the other hand, when the discharge is not passing
between the terminals, the static effects may be considerable,
but only qualitatively so, not quantitatively, since their rise and
fall is very sudden, and since their frequency is small. in neither
case, therefore, are powerful electrostatic effects perceivable.
similar conditions exist when, as in some interesting experiments
of dr. lodge, leyden jars are discharged disruptively. it has
been thought—and i believe asserted—that in such cases
most of the energy is radiated into space. in the light of the
experiments which i have described above, it will now not be
thought so. i feel safe in asserting that in such cases most of
the energy is partly taken up and converted into heat in the arc
of the discharge and in the conducting and insulating material of
the jar, some energy being, of course, given off by electrification
of the air; but the amount of the directly radiated energy is very
small.
when a high tension induction coil, operated by currents alternating
only , times a second, has its terminals closed through
even a very small jar, practically all the energy passes through
the dielectric of the jar, which is heated, and the electrostatic
effects manifest themselves outwardly only to a very weak degree.
now the external circuit of a leyden jar, that is, the arc and the
connections of the coatings, may be looked upon as a circuit generating
alternating currents of excessively high frequency and
fairly high potential, which is closed through the coatings and
the dielectric between them, and from the above it is evident
that the external electrostatic effects must be very small, even if a[pg ]
recoil circuit be used. these conditions make it appear that with
the apparatus usually at hand, the observation of powerful electrostatic
effects was impossible, and what experience has been
gained in that direction is only due to the great ability of the
investigators.
but powerful electrostatic effects are a sine qua non of light
production on the lines indicated by theory. electro-magnetic
effects are primarily unavailable, for the reason that to produce
the required effects we would have to pass current impulses
through a conductor, which, long before the required frequency
of the impulses could be reached, would cease to transmit them.
on the other hand, electro-magnetic waves many times longer
than those of light, and producible by sudden discharge of a condenser,
could not be utilized, it would seem, except we avail ourselves
of their effect upon conductors as in the present methods,
which are wasteful. we could not affect by means of such waves
the static molecular or atomic charges of a gas, cause them to vibrate
and to emit light. long transverse waves cannot, apparently,
produce such effects, since excessively small electro-magnetic
disturbances may pass readily through miles of air. such dark
waves, unless they are of the length of true light waves, cannot,
it would seem, excite luminous radiation in a geissler tube, and
the luminous effects, which are producible by induction in a tube
devoid of electrodes, i am inclined to consider as being of an electrostatic
nature.
to produce such luminous effects, straight electrostatic thrusts
are required; these, whatever be their frequency, may disturb
the molecular charges and produce light. since current impulses
of the required frequency cannot pass through a conductor of
measurable dimensions, we must work with a gas, and then the
production of powerful electrostatic effects becomes an imperative
necessity.
it has occurred to me, however, that electrostatic effects are in
many ways available for the production of light. for instance,
we may place a body of some refractory material in a closed, and
preferably more or less exhausted, globe, connect it to a source of
high, rapidly alternating potential, causing the molecules of the
gas to strike it many times a second at enormous speeds, and in
this manner, with trillions of invisible hammers, pound it until it
gets incandescent; or we may place a body in a very highly exhausted
globe, in a non-striking vacuum, and, by employing very[pg ]
high frequencies and potentials, transfer sufficient energy from it
to other bodies in the vicinity, or in general to the surroundings,
to maintain it at any degree of incandescence; or we may, by
means of such rapidly alternating high potentials, disturb the
ether carried by the molecules of a gas or their static charges,
causing them to vibrate and to emit light.
but, electrostatic effects being dependent upon the potential
and frequency, to produce the most powerful action it is desirable
to increase both as far as practicable. it may be possible to
obtain quite fair results by keeping either of these factors small,
provided the other is sufficiently great; but we are limited in
both directions. my experience demonstrates that we cannot go
below a certain frequency, for, first, the potential then becomes
so great that it is dangerous; and, secondly, the light production
is less efficient.
i have found that, by using the ordinary low frequencies, the
physiological effect of the current required to maintain at a certain
degree of brightness a tube four feet long, provided at the
ends with outside and inside condenser coatings, is so powerful
that, i think, it might produce serious injury to those not accustomed
to such shocks; whereas, with twenty thousand alternations
per second, the tube may be maintained at the same degree
of brightness without any effect being felt. this is due principally
to the fact that a much smaller potential is required to produce
the same light effect, and also to the higher efficiency in the
light production. it is evident that the efficiency in such cases
is the greater, the higher the frequency, for the quicker the process
of charging and discharging the molecules, the less energy
will be lost in the form of dark radiation. but, unfortunately,
we cannot go beyond a certain frequency on account of the difficulty
of producing and conveying the effects.
i have stated above that a body inclosed in an unexhausted
bulb may be intensely heated by simply connecting it with a
source of rapidly alternating potential. the heating in such a
case is, in all probability, due mostly to the bombardment of the
molecules of the gas contained in the bulb. when the bulb is
exhausted, the heating of the body is much more rapid, and there
is no difficulty whatever in bringing a wire or filament to any
degree of incandescence by simply connecting it to one terminal
of a coil of the proper dimensions. thus, if the well-known apparatus
of prof. crookes, consisting of a bent platinum wire with[pg ]
vanes mounted over it (fig. ), be connected to one terminal of
the coil—either one or both ends of the platinum wire being connected—the
wire is rendered almost instantly incandescent, and
the mica vanes are rotated as though a current from a battery
were used. a thin carbon filament, or, preferably, a button of
some refractory material (fig. ), even if it be a comparatively
poor conductor, inclosed in an exhausted globe, may be rendered
highly incandescent; and in this manner a simple lamp capable
of giving any desired candle power is provided.
the success of lamps of this kind would depend largely on the
selection of the light-giving bodies contained within the bulb.
since, under the conditions described, refractory bodies—which
are very poor conductors and capable of withstanding for a long
time excessively high degrees of temperature—may be used,
such illuminating devices may be rendered successful.
fig. .fig. .
it might be thought at first that if the bulb, containing the
filament or button of refractory material, be perfectly well exhausted—that
is, as far as it can be done by the use of the best
apparatus—the heating would be much less intense, and that in
a perfect vacuum it could not occur at all. this is not confirmed
by my experience; quite the contrary, the better the vacuum
the more easily the bodies are brought to incandescence. this
result is interesting for many reasons.
at the outset of this work the idea presented itself to me,
whether two bodies of refractory material enclosed in a bulb exhausted
to such a degree that the discharge of a large induction
coil, operated in the usual manner, cannot pass through, could be
rendered incandescent by mere condenser action. obviously, to
reach this result enormous potential differences and very high
frequencies are required, as is evident from a simple calculation.[pg ]
but such a lamp would possess a vast advantage over an ordinary
incandescent lamp in regard to efficiency. it is well-known
that the efficiency of a lamp is to some extent a function of the
degree of incandescence, and that, could we but work a filament
at many times higher degrees of incandescence, the efficiency
would be much greater. in an ordinary lamp this is impracticable
on account of the destruction of the filament, and it has been
determined by experience how far it is advisable to push the incandescence.
it is impossible to tell how much higher efficiency
could be obtained if the filament could withstand indefinitely,
as the investigation to this end obviously cannot be carried beyond
a certain stage; but there are reasons for believing that it
would be very considerably higher. an improvement might be
made in the ordinary lamp by employing a short and thick carbon;
but then the leading-in wires would have to be thick, and,
besides, there are many other considerations which render such a
modification entirely impracticable. but in a lamp as above described,
the leading in wires may be very small, the incandescent
refractory material may be in the shape of blocks offering a very
small radiating surface, so that less energy would be required to
keep them at the desired incandescence; and in addition to this,
the refractory material need not be carbon, but may be manufactured
from mixtures of oxides, for instance, with carbon or other
material, or may be selected from bodies which are practically
non-conductors, and capable of withstanding enormous degrees of
temperature.
all this would point to the possibility of obtaining a much
higher efficiency with such a lamp than is obtainable in ordinary
lamps. in my experience it has been demonstrated that the
blocks are brought to high degrees of incandescence with much
lower potentials than those determined by calculation, and the
blocks may be set at greater distances from each other. we may
freely assume, and it is probable, that the molecular bombardment
is an important element in the heating, even if the globe
be exhausted with the utmost care, as i have done; for although
the number of the molecules is, comparatively speaking, insignificant,
yet on account of the mean free path being very great,
there are fewer collisions, and the molecules may reach much
higher speeds, so that the heating effect due to this cause may
be considerable, as in the crookes experiments with radiant
matter.[pg ]
but it is likewise possible that we have to deal here with an
increased facility of losing the charge in very high vacuum, when
the potential is rapidly alternating, in which case most of the
heating would be directly due to the surging of the charges in
the heated bodies. or else the observed fact may be largely
attributable to the effect of the points which i have mentioned
above, in consequence of which the blocks or filaments contained
in the vacuum are equivalent to condensers of many times
greater surface than that calculated from their geometrical dimensions.
scientific men still differ in opinion as to whether a
charge should, or should not, be lost in a perfect vacuum, or in
other words, whether ether is, or is not, a conductor. if the
former were the case, then a thin filament enclosed in a perfectly
exhausted globe, and connected to a source of enormous, steady
potential, would be brought to incandescence.
fig. .fig. .
various forms of lamps on the above described principle, with
the refractory bodies in the form of filaments, fig. , or blocks,
fig. , have been constructed and operated by me, and investigations
are being carried on in this line. there is no difficulty in
reaching such high degrees of incandescence that ordinary carbon
is to all appearance melted and volatilized. if the vacuum
could be made absolutely perfect, such a lamp, although inoperative
with apparatus ordinarily used, would, if operated with cur[pg ]rents
of the required character, afford an illuminant which would
never be destroyed, and which would be far more efficient than
an ordinary incandescent lamp. this perfection can, of course,
never be reached, and a very slow destruction and gradual diminution
in size always occurs, as in incandescent filaments; but there
is no possibility of a sudden and premature disabling which occurs
in the latter by the breaking of the filament, especially
when the incandescent bodies are in the shape of blocks.
with these rapidly alternating potentials there is, however, no
necessity of enclosing two blocks in a globe, but a single block,
as in fig. , or filament, fig. , may be used. the potential
in this case must of course be higher, but is easily obtainable,
and besides it is not necessarily dangerous.
fig. .
the facility with which the button or filament in such a lamp
is brought to incandescence, other things being equal, depends
on the size of the globe. if a perfect vacuum could be obtained,
the size of the globe would not be of importance, for then the
heating would be wholly due to the surging of the charges, and
all the energy would be given off to the surroundings by radiation.
but this can never occur in practice. there is always
some gas left in the globe, and although the exhaustion may be
carried to the highest degree, still the space inside of the bulb
must be considered as conducting when such high potentials are
used, and i assume that, in estimating the energy that may be
given off from the filament to the surroundings, we may consider[pg ]
the inside surface of the bulb as one coating of a condenser, the
air and other objects surrounding the bulb forming the other
coating. when the alternations are very low there is no doubt
that a considerable portion of the energy is given off by the electrification
of the surrounding air.
in order to study this subject better, i carried on some experiments
with excessively high potentials and low frequencies. i
then observed that when the hand is approached to the bulb,—the
filament being connected with one terminal of the coil,—a
powerful vibration is felt, being due to the attraction and repulsion
of the molecules of the air which are electrified by induction
through the glass. in some cases when the action is very
intense i have been able to hear a sound, which must be due to
the same cause.
fig. .fig. .
when the alternations are low, one is apt to get an excessively
powerful shock from the bulb. in general, when one attaches
bulbs or objects of some size to the terminals of the coil, one
should look out for the rise of potential, for it may happen that
by merely connecting a bulb or plate to the terminal, the potential
may rise to many times its original value. when lamps are
attached to the terminals, as illustrated in fig. , then the
capacity of the bulbs should be such as to give the maximum
rise of potential under the existing conditions. in this manner
one may obtain the required potential with fewer turns of
wire.
the life of such lamps as described above depends, of course,
largely on the degree of exhaustion, but to some extent also on
the shape of the block of refractory material. theoretically it[pg ]
would seem that a small sphere of carbon enclosed in a sphere of
glass would not suffer deterioration from molecular bombardment,
for, the matter in the globe being radiant, the molecules
would move in straight lines, and would seldom strike the sphere
obliquely. an interesting thought in connection with such a
lamp is, that in it "electricity" and electrical energy apparently
must move in the same lines.
fig. a.fig. b.
the use of alternating currents of very high frequency makes
it possible to transfer, by electrostatic or electromagnetic induction
through the glass of a lamp, sufficient energy to keep a filament
at incandescence and so do away with the leading-in wires.
such lamps have been proposed, but for want of proper apparatus
they have not been successfully operated. many forms of
lamps on this principle with continuous and broken filaments
have been constructed by me and experimented upon. when
using a secondary enclosed within the lamp, a condenser is advantageously
combined with the secondary. when the transference
is effected by electrostatic induction, the potentials used are,
of course, very high with frequencies obtainable from a machine.
for instance, with a condenser surface of forty square centimetres,[pg ]
which is not impracticably large, and with glass of good quality
 mm. thick, using currents alternating twenty thousand times
a second, the potential required is approximately , volts.
this may seem large, but since each lamp may be included
in the secondary of a transformer of very small dimensions, it
would not be inconvenient, and, moreover, it would not produce
fatal injury. the transformers would all be preferably in series.
the regulation would offer no difficulties, as with currents of such
frequencies it is very easy to maintain a constant current.
in the accompanying engravings some of the types of lamps of
this kind are shown. fig.  is such a lamp with a broken filament,
and figs.  a and  b one with a single outside and
inside coating and a single filament. i have also made lamps
with two outside and inside coatings and a continuous loop connecting
the latter. such lamps have been operated by me with
current impulses of the enormous frequencies obtainable by the
disruptive discharge of condensers.
the disruptive discharge of a condenser is especially suited for
operating such lamps—with no outward electrical connections—by
means of electromagnetic induction, the electromagnetic inductive
effects being excessively high; and i have been able to
produce the desired incandescence with only a few short turns of
wire. incandescence may also be produced in this manner in a
simple closed filament.
leaving now out of consideration the practicability of such
lamps, i would only say that they possess a beautiful and desirable
feature, namely, that they can be rendered, at will, more or
less brilliant simply by altering the relative position of the outside
and inside condenser coatings, or inducing and induced circuits.
when a lamp is lighted by connecting it to one terminal only
of the source, this may be facilitated by providing the globe with
an outside condenser coating, which serves at the same time as a
reflector, and connecting this to an insulated body of some size.
lamps of this kind are illustrated in fig.  and fig. .
fig.  shows the plan of connection. the brilliancy of the
lamp may, in this case, be regulated within wide limits by varying
the size of the insulated metal plate to which the coating is
connected.
it is likewise practicable to light with one leading wire lamps
such as illustrated in fig.  and fig. , by connecting one[pg ]
terminal of the lamp to one terminal of the source, and the
other to an insulated body of the required size. in all cases
the insulated body serves to give off the energy into the surrounding
space, and is equivalent to a return wire. obviously,
in the two last-named cases, instead of connecting the wires to
an insulated body, connections may be made to the ground.
the experiments which will prove most suggestive and of
most interest to the investigator are probably those performed
with exhausted tubes. as might be anticipated, a source of such
rapidly alternating potentials is capable of exciting the tubes at
a considerable distance, and the light effects produced are remarkable.
fig. .fig. .
during my investigations in this line i endeavored to excite
tubes, devoid of any electrodes, by electromagnetic induction,
making the tube the secondary of the induction device, and
passing through the primary the discharges of a leyden jar.
these tubes were made of many shapes, and i was able to
obtain luminous effects which i then thought were due wholly
to electromagnetic induction. but on carefully investigating
the phenomena i found that the effects produced were more
of an electrostatic nature. it may be attributed to this circumstance
that this mode of exciting tubes is very wasteful,
namely, the primary circuit being closed, the potential, and
consequently the electrostatic inductive effect, is much diminished.[pg ]
when an induction coil, operated as above described, is used,
there is no doubt that the tubes are excited by electrostatic induction,
and that electromagnetic induction has little, if anything,
to do with the phenomena.
fig. .
this is evident from many experiments. for instance, if a
tube be taken in one hand, the observer being near the coil, it is
brilliantly lighted and remains so no matter in what position it is
held relatively to the observer's body. were the action electromagnetic,
the tube could not be lighted when the observer's
body is interposed between it and the coil, or at least its luminosity
should be considerably diminished. when the tube is
held exactly over the centre of the coil—the latter being wound
in sections and the primary placed symmetrically to the secondary—it
may remain completely dark, whereas it is rendered
intensely luminous by moving it slightly to the right or left
from the centre of the coil. it does not light because in the
middle both halves of the coil neutralize each other, and the
electric potential is zero. if the action were electromagnetic,
the tube should light best in the plane through the centre of the
coil, since the electromagnetic effect there should be a maximum.
when an arc is established between the terminals, the tubes and
lamps in the vicinity of the coil go out, but light up again
when the arc is broken, on account of the rise of potential. yet
the electromagnetic effect should be practically the same in both
cases.
by placing a tube at some distance from the coil, and nearer to
one terminal—preferably at a point on the axis of the coil—one
may light it by touching the remote terminal with an insulated
body of some size or with the hand, thereby raising the potential
at that terminal nearer to the tube. if the tube is shifted nearer
to the coil so that it is lighted by the action of the nearer termi[pg ]nal,
it may be made to go out by holding, on an insulated support,
the end of a wire connected to the remote terminal, in the
vicinity of the nearer terminal, by this means counteracting the
action of the latter upon the tube. these effects are evidently
electrostatic. likewise, when a tube is placed at a considerable
distance from the coil, the observer may, standing upon an insulated
support between coil and tube, light the latter by approaching
the hand to it; or he may even render it luminous by simply
stepping between it and the coil. this would be impossible with
electro-magnetic induction, for the body of the observer would
act as a screen.
when the coil is energized by excessively weak currents, the
experimenter may, by touching one terminal of the coil with the
tube, extinguish the latter, and may again light it by bringing it
out of contact with the terminal and allowing a small arc to form.
this is clearly due to the respective lowering and raising of the
potential at that terminal. in the above experiment, when the
tube is lighted through a small arc, it may go out when the arc is
broken, because the electrostatic inductive effect alone is too
weak, though the potential may be much higher; but when the
arc is established, the electrification of the end of the tube is
much greater, and it consequently lights.
if a tube is lighted by holding it near to the coil, and in the
hand which is remote, by grasping the tube anywhere with the
other hand, the part between the hands is rendered dark, and the
singular effect of wiping out the light of the tube may be produced
by passing the hand quickly along the tube and at the
same time withdrawing it gently from the coil, judging properly
the distance so that the tube remains dark afterwards.
if the primary coil is placed sidewise, as in fig.  b for instance,
and an exhausted tube be introduced from the other side
in the hollow space, the tube is lighted most intensely because of
the increased condenser action, and in this position the striæ are
most sharply defined. in all these experiments described, and in
many others, the action is clearly electrostatic.
the effects of screening also indicate the electrostatic nature
of the phenomena and show something of the nature of electrification
through the air. for instance, if a tube is placed in the
direction of the axis of the coil, and an insulated metal plate be
interposed, the tube will generally increase in brilliancy, or if it
be too far from the coil to light, it may even be rendered lumin[pg ]ous
by interposing an insulated metal plate. the magnitude of
the effects depends to some extent on the size of the plate. but if
the metal plate be connected by a wire to the ground, its interposition
will always make the tube go out even if it be very near the
coil. in general, the interposition of a body between the coil and
tube, increases or diminishes the brilliancy of the tube, or its
facility to light up, according to whether it increases or diminishes
the electrification. when experimenting with an insulated
plate, the plate should not be taken too large, else it will generally
produce a weakening effect by reason of its great facility for giving
off energy to the surroundings.
if a tube be lighted at some distance from the coil, and a plate
of hard rubber or other insulating substance be interposed, the
tube may be made to go out. the interposition of the dielectric
in this case only slightly increases the inductive effect, but diminishes
considerably the electrification through the air.
in all cases, then, when we excite luminosity in exhausted
tubes by means of such a coil, the effect is due to the rapidly
alternating electrostatic potential; and, furthermore, it must be
attributed to the harmonic alternation produced directly by the
machine, and not to any superimposed vibration which might be
thought to exist. such superimposed vibrations are impossible
when we work with an alternate current machine. if a spring be
gradually tightened and released, it does not perform independent
vibrations; for this a sudden release is necessary. so with
the alternate currents from a dynamo machine; the medium is
harmonically strained and released, this giving rise to only one
kind of waves; a sudden contact or break, or a sudden giving
way of the dielectric, as in the disruptive discharge of a leyden
jar, are essential for the production of superimposed waves.
in all the last described experiments, tubes devoid of any electrodes
may be used, and there is no difficulty in producing by
their means sufficient light to read by. the light effect is, however,
considerably increased by the use of phosphorescent bodies
such as yttria, uranium glass, etc. a difficulty will be found
when the phosphorescent material is used, for with these powerful
effects, it is carried gradually away, and it is preferable to use
material in the form of a solid.
instead of depending on induction at a distance to light the
tube, the same may be provided with an external—and, if desired,
also with an internal—condenser coating, and it may then[pg ]
be suspended anywhere in the room from a conductor connected
to one terminal of the coil, and in this manner a soft illumination
may be provided.
fig. .
the ideal way of lighting a hall or room would, however, be
to produce such a condition in it that an illuminating device
could be moved and put anywhere, and that it is lighted, no matter
where it is put and without being electrically connected to[pg ]
anything. i have been able to produce such a condition by creating
in the room a powerful, rapidly alternating electrostatic
field. for this purpose i suspend a sheet of metal a distance
from the ceiling on insulating cords and connect it to one terminal
of the induction coil, the other terminal being preferably connected
to the ground. or else i suspend two sheets as illustrated
in fig. , each sheet being connected with one of the terminals
of the coil, and their size being carefully determined. an exhausted
tube may then be carried in the hand anywhere between
the sheets or placed anywhere, even a certain distance
beyond them; it remains always luminous.
in such an electrostatic field interesting phenomena may be
observed, especially if the alternations are kept low and the potentials
excessively high. in addition to the luminous phenomena
mentioned, one may observe that any insulated conductor gives
sparks when the hand or another object is approached to it, and
the sparks may often be powerful. when a large conducting
object is fastened on an insulating support, and the hand approached
to it, a vibration, due to the rythmical motion of the
air molecules is felt, and luminous streams may be perceived
when the hand is held near a pointed projection. when a telephone
receiver is made to touch with one or both of its terminals
an insulated conductor of some size, the telephone emits a loud
sound; it also emits a sound when a length of wire is attached to
one or both terminals, and with very powerful fields a sound may
be perceived even without any wire.
how far this principle is capable of practical application, the
future will tell. it might be thought that electrostatic effects
are unsuited for such action at a distance. electromagnetic inductive
effects, if available for the production of light, might be
thought better suited. it is true the electrostatic effects diminish
nearly with the cube of the distance from the coil, whereas
the electromagnetic inductive effects diminish simply with the
distance. but when we establish an electrostatic field of force,
the condition is very different, for then, instead of the differential
effect of both the terminals, we get their conjoint effect.
besides, i would call attention to the effect, that in an alternating
electrostatic field, a conductor, such as an exhausted tube,
for instance, tends to take up most of the energy, whereas in an
electromagnetic alternating field the conductor tends to take up
the least energy, the waves being reflected with but little loss.[pg ]
this is one reason why it is difficult to excite an exhausted tube,
at a distance, by electromagnetic induction. i have wound coils
of very large diameter and of many turns of wire, and connected
a geissler tube to the ends of the coil with the object of exciting
the tube at a distance; but even with the powerful inductive
effects producible by leyden jar discharges, the tube could not
be excited unless at a very small distance, although some judgment
was used as to the dimensions of the coil. i have also
found that even the most powerful leyden jar discharges are
capable of exciting only feeble luminous effects in a closed exhausted
tube, and even these effects upon thorough examination
i have been forced to consider of an electrostatic nature.
how then can we hope to produce the required effects at a
distance by means of electromagnetic action, when even in the
closest proximity to the source of disturbance, under the most
advantageous conditions, we can excite but faint luminosity? it
is true that when acting at a distance we have the resonance to
help us out. we can connect an exhausted tube, or whatever
the illuminating device may be, with an insulated system of the
proper capacity, and so it may be possible to increase the effect
qualitatively, and only qualitatively, for we would not get more
energy through the device. so we may, by resonance effect,
obtain the required electromotive force in an exhausted tube, and
excite faint luminous effects, but we cannot get enough energy to
render the light practically available, and a simple calculation,
based on experimental results, shows that even if all the energy
which a tube would receive at a certain distance from the source
should be wholly converted into light, it would hardly satisfy the
practical requirements. hence the necessity of directing, by
means of a conducting circuit, the energy to the place of transformation.
but in so doing we cannot very sensibly depart from
present methods, and all we could do would be to improve the
apparatus.
from these considerations it would seem that if this ideal way
of lighting is to be rendered practicable it will be only by the use
of electrostatic effects. in such a case the most powerful electrostatic
inductive effects are needed; the apparatus employed must,
therefore, be capable of producing high electrostatic potentials
changing in value with extreme rapidity. high frequencies are
especially wanted, for practical considerations make it desirable
to keep down the potential. by the employment of machines,[pg ]
or, generally speaking, of any mechanical apparatus, but low
frequencies can be reached; recourse must, therefore, be had to
some other means. the discharge of a condenser affords us a
means of obtaining frequencies by far higher than are obtainable
mechanically, and i have accordingly employed condensers in the
experiments to the above end.
when the terminals of a high tension induction coil, fig. ,
are connected to a leyden jar, and the latter is discharging disruptively
into a circuit, we may look upon the arc playing between
the knobs as being a source of alternating, or generally
speaking, undulating currents, and then we have to deal with
the familiar system of a generator of such currents, a circuit connected
to it, and a condenser bridging the circuit. the condenser
in such case is a veritable transformer, and since the frequency is
excessive, almost any ratio in the strength of the currents in both
the branches may be obtained. in reality the analogy is not quite
complete, for in the disruptive discharge we have most generally
a fundamental instantaneous variation of comparatively low frequency,
and a superimposed harmonic vibration, and the laws
governing the flow of currents are not the same for both.
in converting in this manner, the ratio of conversion should
not be too great, for the loss in the arc between the knobs increases
with the square of the current, and if the jar be discharged
through very thick and short conductors, with the view of obtaining
a very rapid oscillation, a very considerable portion of the
energy stored is lost. on the other hand, too small ratios are not
practicable for many obvious reasons.
as the converted currents flow in a practically closed circuit,
the electrostatic effects are necessarily small, and i therefore convert
them into currents or effects of the required character. i
have effected such conversions in several ways. the preferred
plan of connections is illustrated in fig. . the manner of operating
renders it easy to obtain by means of a small and inexpensive
apparatus enormous differences of potential which have been
usually obtained by means of large and expensive coils. for this
it is only necessary to take an ordinary small coil, adjust to it a
condenser and discharging circuit, forming the primary of an
auxiliary small coil, and convert upward. as the inductive effect
of the primary currents is excessively great, the second coil need
have comparatively but very few turns. by properly adjusting
the elements, remarkable results may be secured.[pg ]
in endeavoring to obtain the required electrostatic effects in
this manner, i have, as might be expected, encountered many
difficulties which i have been gradually overcoming, but i am not
as yet prepared to dwell upon my experiences in this direction.
i believe that the disruptive discharge of a condenser will play
an important part in the future, for it offers vast possibilities,
not only in the way of producing light in a more efficient manner
and in the line indicated by theory, but also in many other respects.
fig. .
for years the efforts of inventors have been directed towards
obtaining electrical energy from heat by means of the thermopile.
it might seem invidious to remark that but few know
what is the real trouble with the thermopile. it is not the inefficiency
or small output—though these are great drawbacks—but
the fact that the thermopile has its phylloxera, that is, that
by constant use it is deteriorated, which has thus far prevented its
introduction on an industrial scale. now that all modern research
seems to point with certainty to the use of electricity of excessively
high tension, the question must present itself to many
whether it is not possible to obtain in a practicable manner this
form of energy from heat. we have been used to look upon
an electrostatic machine as a plaything, and somehow we couple
with it the idea of the inefficient and impractical. but now we
must think differently, for now we know that everywhere we
have to deal with the same forces, and that it is a mere question
of inventing proper methods or apparatus for rendering them
available.
in the present systems of electrical distribution, the employment
of the iron with its wonderful magnetic properties allows
us to reduce considerably the size of the apparatus; but, in spite
of this, it is still very cumbersome. the more we progress in
the study of electric and magnetic phenomena, the more we be[pg ]come
convinced that the present methods will be short-lived. for
the production of light, at least, such heavy machinery would
seem to be unnecessary. the energy required is very small, and
if light can be obtained as efficiently as, theoretically, it appears
possible, the apparatus need have but a very small output.
there being a strong probability that the illuminating methods
of the future will involve the use of very high potentials, it seems
very desirable to perfect a contrivance capable of converting the
energy of heat into energy of the requisite form. nothing to
speak of has been done towards this end, for the thought that
electricity of some , or , volts pressure or more, even
if obtained, would be unavailable for practical purposes, has deterred
inventors from working in this direction.
fig. .
in fig.  a plan of connections is shown for converting
currents of high, into currents of low, tension by means of the
disruptive discharge of a condenser. this plan has been used by
me frequently for operating a few incandescent lamps required
in the laboratory. some difficulties have been encountered in the
arc of the discharge which i have been able to overcome to a great
extent; besides this, and the adjustment necessary for the proper
working, no other difficulties have been met with, and it was easy
to operate ordinary lamps, and even motors, in this manner.
the line being connected to the ground, all the wires could be
handled with perfect impunity, no matter how high the potential
at the terminals of the condenser. in these experiments a high
tension induction coil, operated from a battery or from an alternate
current machine, was employed to charge the condenser; but
the induction coil might be replaced by an apparatus of a different
kind, capable of giving electricity of such high tension. in
this manner, direct or alternating currents may be converted, and
in both cases the current-impulses may be of any desired frequency.
when the currents charging the condenser are of the[pg ]
same direction, and it is desired that the converted currents
should also be of one direction, the resistance of the discharging
circuit should, of course, be so chosen that there are no
oscillations.
fig. .
in operating devices on the above plan i have observed curious
phenomena of impedance which are of interest. for instance
if a thick copper bar be bent, as indicated in fig. , and shunted
by ordinary incandescent lamps, then, by passing the discharge
between the knobs, the lamps may be brought to incandescence
although they are short-circuited. when a large induction coil
is employed it is easy to obtain nodes on the bar, which are
rendered evident by the different degree of brilliancy of the
lamps, as shown roughly in fig. . the nodes are never clearly
defined, but they are simply maxima and minima of potentials
along the bar. this is probably due to the irregularity of the arc
between the knobs. in general when the above-described plan
of conversion from high to low tension is used, the behavior of
the disruptive discharge may be closely studied. the nodes may
also be investigated by means of an ordinary cardew voltmeter[pg ]
which should be well insulated. geissler tubes may also be
lighted across the points of the bent bar; in this case, of course,
it is better to employ smaller capacities. i have found it practicable
to light up in this manner a lamp, and even a geissler
tube, shunted by a short, heavy block of metal, and this result
seems at first very curious. in fact, the thicker the copper bar
in fig. , the better it is for the success of the experiments, as
they appear more striking. when lamps with long slender filaments
are used it will be often noted that the filaments are from
time to time violently vibrated, the vibration being smallest at
the nodal points. this vibration seems to be due to an electrostatic
action between the filament and the glass of the bulb.
fig. .
in some of the above experiments it is preferable to use special
lamps having a straight filament as shown in fig. . when
such a lamp is used a still more curious phenomenon than those
described may be observed. the lamp may be placed across the
copper bar and lighted, and by using somewhat larger capacities,
or, in other words, smaller frequencies or smaller impulsive impedances,
the filament may be brought to any desired degree of
incandescence. but when the impedance is increased, a point is
reached when comparatively little current passes through the
carbon, and most of it through the rarefied gas; or perhaps it
may be more correct to state that the current divides nearly
evenly through both, in spite of the enormous difference in the
resistance, and this would be true unless the gas and the filament
behave differently. it is then noted that the whole bulb is brilliantly
illuminated, and the ends of the leading-in wires become
incandescent and often throw off sparks in consequence of the
violent bombardment, but the carbon filament remains dark.
this is illustrated in fig. . instead of the filament a single[pg ]
wire extending through the whole bulb may be used, and in this
case the phenomenon would seem to be still more interesting.
from the above experiment it will be evident, that when ordinary
lamps are operated by the converted currents, those should
be preferably taken in which the platinum wires are far apart,
and the frequencies used should not be too great, else the discharge
will occur at the ends of the filament or in the base of the
lamp between the leading-in wires, and the lamp might then be
damaged.
in presenting to you these results of my investigation on the
subject under consideration, i have paid only a passing notice to
facts upon which i could have dwelt at length, and among many
observations i have selected only those which i thought most
likely to interest you. the field is wide and completely unexplored,
and at every step a new truth is gleaned, a novel fact
observed.
how far the results here borne out are capable of practical
applications will be decided in the future. as regards the production
of light, some results already reached are encouraging
and make me confident in asserting that the practical solution of
the problem lies in the direction i have endeavored to indicate.
still, whatever may be the immediate outcome of these experiments
i am hopeful that they will only prove a step in further
development towards the ideal and final perfection. the possibilities
which are opened by modern research are so vast that
even the most reserved must feel sanguine of the future. eminent
scientists consider the problem of utilizing one kind of
radiation without the others a rational one. in an apparatus designed
for the production of light by conversion from any form
of energy into that of light, such a result can never be reached,
for no matter what the process of producing the required vibrations,
be it electrical, chemical or any other, it will not be possible
to obtain the higher light vibrations without going through
the lower heat vibrations. it is the problem of imparting to a
body a certain velocity without passing through all lower velocities.
but there is a possibility of obtaining energy not only in
the form of light, but motive power, and energy of any other
form, in some more direct way from the medium. the time will
be when this will be accomplished, and the time has come when
one may utter such words before an enlightened audience without
being considered a visionary. we are whirling through[pg ]
endless space with an inconceivable speed, all around us everything
is spinning, everything is moving, everywhere is energy.
there must be some way of availing ourselves of this energy
more directly. then, with the light obtained from the medium,
with the power derived from it, with every form of energy
obtained without effort, from the store forever inexhaustible,
humanity will advance with giant strides. the mere contemplation
of these magnificent possibilities expands our minds, strengthens
our hopes and fills our hearts with supreme delight.
[pg ]
experiments with alternate currents of high potential
and high frequency.[]
i cannot find words to express how deeply i feel the honor of
addressing some of the foremost thinkers of the present time,
and so many able scientific men, engineers and electricians, of
the country greatest in scientific achievements.
the results which i have the honor to present before such a
gathering i cannot call my own. there are among you not a
few who can lay better claim than myself on any feature of
merit which this work may contain. i need not mention many
names which are world-known—names of those among you who
are recognized as the leaders in this enchanting science; but one,
at least, i must mention—a name which could not be omitted in
a demonstration of this kind. it is a name associated with the
most beautiful invention ever made: it is crookes!
when i was at college, a good while ago, i read, in a translation
(for then i was not familiar with your magnificent language), the
description of his experiments on radiant matter. i read it only
once in my life—that time—yet every detail about that charming
work i can remember to this day. few are the books, let me
say, which can make such an impression upon the mind of a
student.
but if, on the present occasion, i mention this name as one of
many your institution can boast of, it is because i have more
than one reason to do so. for what i have to tell you and to
show you this evening concerns, in a large measure, that same
vague world which professor crookes has so ably explored; and,
more than this, when i trace back the mental process which led
me to these advances—which even by myself cannot be considered
trifling, since they are so appreciated by you—i believe
that their real origin, that which started me to work in this
[pg ]direction, and brought me to them, after a long period of constant
thought, was that fascinating little book which i read many
years ago.
and now that i have made a feeble effort to express my
homage and acknowledge my indebtedness to him and others
among you, i will make a second effort, which i hope you will
not find so feeble as the first, to entertain you.
give me leave to introduce the subject in a few words.
a short time ago i had the honor to bring before our american
institute of electrical engineers some results then arrived
at by me in a novel line of work. i need not assure you that
the many evidences which i have received that english scientific
men and engineers were interested in this work have been for
me a great reward and encouragement. i will not dwell upon
the experiments already described, except with the view of completing,
or more clearly expressing, some ideas advanced by me
before, and also with the view of rendering the study here presented
self-contained, and my remarks on the subject of this
evening's lecture consistent.
this investigation, then, it goes without saying, deals with
alternating currents, and to be more precise, with alternating
currents of high potential and high frequency. just in how
much a very high frequency is essential for the production of
the results presented is a question which, even with my present
experience, would embarrass me to answer. some of the experiments
may be performed with low frequencies; but very high
frequencies are desirable, not only on account of the many effects
secured by their use, but also as a convenient means of obtaining,
in the induction apparatus employed, the high potentials, which in
their turn are necessary to the demonstration of most of the experiments
here contemplated.
of the various branches of electrical investigation, perhaps the
most interesting and the most immediately promising is that
dealing with alternating currents. the progress in this branch
of applied science has been so great in recent years that it justifies
the most sanguine hopes. hardly have we become familiar
with one fact, when novel experiences are met and new avenues
of research are opened. even at this hour possibilities not
dreamed of before are, by the use of these currents, partly realized.
as in nature all is ebb and tide, all is wave motion, so it
seems that in all branches of industry alternating currents—electric
wave motion—will have the sway.[pg ]
one reason, perhaps, why this branch of science is being so
rapidly developed is to be found in the interest which is attached
to its experimental study. we wind a simple ring of iron with
coils; we establish the connections to the generator, and with
wonder and delight we note the effects of strange forces which
we bring into play, which allow us to transform, to transmit and
direct energy at will. we arrange the circuits properly, and we
see the mass of iron and wires behave as though it were endowed
with life, spinning a heavy armature, through invisible connections,
with great speed and power—with the energy possibly conveyed
from a great distance. we observe how the energy of an
alternating current traversing the wire manifests itself—not so
much in the wire as in the surrounding space—in the most surprising
manner, taking the forms of heat, light, mechanical
energy, and, most surprising of all, even chemical affinity. all
these observations fascinate us, and fill us with an intense desire
to know more about the nature of these phenomena. each day
we go to our work in the hope of discovering,—in the hope that
some one, no matter who, may find a solution of one of the pending
great problems,—and each succeeding day we return to our
task with renewed ardor; and even if we are unsuccessful, our
work has not been in vain, for in these strivings, in these efforts,
we have found hours of untold pleasure, and we have directed
our energies to the benefit of mankind.
we may take—at random, if you choose—any of the many experiments
which may be performed with alternating currents;
a few of which only, and by no means the most striking, form
the subject of this evening's demonstration; they are all equally
interesting, equally inciting to thought.
here is a simple glass tube from which the air has been partially
exhausted. i take hold of it; i bring my body in contact
with a wire conveying alternating currents of high potential, and
the tube in my hand is brilliantly lighted. in whatever position
i may put it, wherever i move it in space, as far as i can reach,
its soft, pleasing light persists with undiminished brightness.
here is an exhausted bulb suspended from a single wire.
standing on an insulated support, i grasp it, and a platinum button
mounted in it is brought to vivid incandescence.
here, attached to a leading wire, is another bulb, which, as i
touch its metallic socket, is filled with magnificent colors of phosphorescent
light.[pg ]
here still another, which by my fingers' touch casts a shadow—the
crookes shadow—of the stem inside of it.
here, again, insulated as i stand on this platform, i bring my
body in contact with one of the terminals of the secondary of
this induction coil—with the end of a wire many miles long—and
you see streams of light break forth from its distant end, which
is set in violent vibration.
here, once more, i attach these two plates of wire gauze to the
terminals of the coil; i set them a distance apart, and i set the
coil to work. you may see a small spark pass between the
plates. i insert a thick plate of one of the best dielectrics between
them, and instead of rendering altogether impossible, as
we are used to expect, i aid the passage of the discharge, which,
as i insert the plate, merely changes in appearance and assumes
the form of luminous streams.
is there, i ask, can there be, a more interesting study than that
of alternating currents?
in all these investigations, in all these experiments, which are
so very, very interesting, for many years past—ever since the
greatest experimenter who lectured in this hall discovered its
principle—we have had a steady companion, an appliance familiar
to every one, a plaything once, a thing of momentous importance
now—the induction coil. there is no dearer appliance to the
electrician. from the ablest among you, i dare say, down to the
inexperienced student, to your lecturer, we all have passed many
delightful hours in experimenting with the induction coil. we
have watched its play, and thought and pondered over the beautiful
phenomena which it disclosed to our ravished eyes. so
well known is this apparatus, so familiar are these phenomena to
every one, that my courage nearly fails me when i think that i
have ventured to address so able an audience, that i have ventured
to entertain you with that same old subject. here in reality
is the same apparatus, and here are the same phenomena, only
the apparatus is operated somewhat differently, the phenomena
are presented in a different aspect. some of the results we find
as expected, others surprise us, but all captivate our attention, for
in scientific investigation each novel result achieved may be the
centre of a new departure, each novel fact learned may lead to
important developments.
usually in operating an induction coil we have set up a vibration
of moderate frequency in the primary, either by means of an[pg ]
interrupter or break, or by the use of an alternator. earlier
english investigators, to mention only spottiswoode and j. e. h.
gordon, have used a rapid break in connection with the coil.
our knowledge and experience of to-day enables us to see clearly
why these coils under the conditions of the test did not disclose
any remarkable phenomena, and why able experimenters failed
to perceive many of the curious effects which have since been
observed.
in the experiments such as performed this evening, we operate
the coil either from a specially constructed alternator capable of
giving many thousands of reversals of current per second, or, by
disruptively discharging a condenser through the primary, we set
up a vibration in the secondary circuit of a frequency of many
hundred thousand or millions per second, if we so desire; and in
using either of these means we enter a field as yet unexplored.
it is impossible to pursue an investigation in any novel line
without finally making some interesting observation or learning
some useful fact. that this statement is applicable to the subject
of this lecture the many curious and unexpected phenomena
which we observe afford a convincing proof. by way of illustration,
take for instance the most obvious phenomena, those of the
discharge of the induction coil.
here is a coil which is operated by currents vibrating with
extreme rapidity, obtained by disruptively discharging a leyden
jar. it would not surprise a student were the lecturer to say
that the secondary of this coil consists of a small length of comparatively
stout wire; it would not surprise him were the lecturer
to state that, in spite of this, the coil is capable of giving any
potential which the best insulation of the turns is able to withstand;
but although he may be prepared, and even be indifferent
as to the anticipated result, yet the aspect of the discharge of the
coil will surprise and interest him. every one is familiar with
the discharge of an ordinary coil; it need not be reproduced
here. but, by way of contrast, here is a form of discharge of a
coil, the primary current of which is vibrating several hundred
thousand times per second. the discharge of an ordinary coil
appears as a simple line or band of light. the discharge of this
coil appears in the form of powerful brushes and luminous
streams issuing from all points of the two straight wires attached
to the terminals of the secondary. (fig. .)
fig. .fig. .
now compare this phenomenon which you have just witnessed
[pg ]with the discharge of a holtz or wimshurst machine—that other
interesting appliance so dear to the experimenter. what a difference
there is between these phenomena! and yet, had i made
the necessary arrangements—which could have been made easily,
were it not that they would interfere with other experiments—i
could have produced with this coil sparks which, had i the coil
hidden from your view and only two knobs exposed, even the
keenest observer among you would find it difficult, if not impossible,
to distinguish from those of an influence or friction machine.
this may be done in many ways—for instance, by operating
the induction coil which charges the condenser from an
alternating-current machine of very low frequency, and preferably
adjusting the discharge circuit so that there are no oscillations
set up in it. we then obtain in the secondary circuit, if the
knobs are of the required size and properly set, a more or less[pg ]
rapid succession of sparks of great intensity and small quantity,
which possess the same brilliancy, and are accompanied by the
same sharp crackling sound, as those obtained from a friction or
influence machine.
another way is to pass through two primary circuits, having a
common secondary, two currents of a slightly different period,
which produce in the secondary circuit sparks occurring at comparatively
long intervals. but, even with the means at hand
this evening, i may succeed in imitating the spark of a holtz
machine. for this purpose i establish between the terminals of
the coil which charges the condenser a long, unsteady arc, which
is periodically interrupted by the upward current of air produced
by it. to increase the current of air i place on each side of the
arc, and close to it, a large plate of mica. the condenser charged
from this coil discharges into the primary circuit of a second
coil through a small air gap, which is necessary to produce a
sudden rush of current through the primary. the scheme of
connections in the present experiment is indicated in fig. .
g is an ordinarily constructed alternator, supplying the primary
p of an induction coil, the secondary s of which charges
the condensers or jars c c. the terminals of the secondary are
connected to the inside coatings of the jars, the outer coatings
being connected to the ends of the primary p p of a second induction
coil. this primary p p has a small air gap a b.
the secondary s of this coil is provided with knobs or spheres
k k of the proper size and set at a distance suitable for the experiment.
a long arc is established between the terminals a b of the first
induction coil. m m are the mica plates.
each time the arc is broken between a and b the jars are
quickly charged and discharged through the primary p p, producing
a snapping spark between the knobs k k. upon the arc
forming between a and b the potential falls, and the jars cannot
be charged to such high potential as to break through the air
gap a b until the arc is again broken by the draught.
in this manner sudden impulses, at long intervals, are produced
in the primary p p, which in the secondary s give a corresponding
number of impulses of great intensity. if the secondary
knobs or spheres, k k, are of the proper size, the sparks
show much resemblance to those of a holtz machine.
but these two effects, which to the eye appear so very differ[pg ]ent,
are only two of the many discharge phenomena. we only
need to change the conditions of the test, and again we make
other observations of interest.
when, instead of operating the induction coil as in the last
two experiments, we operate it from a high frequency alternator,
as in the next experiment, a systematic study of the phenomena
is rendered much more easy. in such case, in varying the
strength and frequency of the currents through the primary, we
may observe five distinct forms of discharge, which i have described
in my former paper on the subject before the american
institute of electrical engineers, may , .
it would take too much time, and it would lead us too far
from the subject presented this evening, to reproduce all these
forms, but it seems to me desirable to show you one of them. it
is a brush discharge, which is interesting in more than one respect.
viewed from a near position it resembles much a jet of
gas escaping under great pressure. we know that the phenomenon
is due to the agitation of the molecules near the terminal,
and we anticipate that some heat must be developed by the impact
of the molecules against the terminal or against each other.
indeed, we find that the brush is hot, and only a little thought
leads us to the conclusion that, could we but reach sufficiently
high frequencies, we could produce a brush which would give
intense light and heat, and which would resemble in every particular
an ordinary flame, save, perhaps, that both phenomena
might not be due to the same agent—save, perhaps, that chemical
affinity might not be electrical in its nature.
as the production of heat and light is here due to the impact
of the molecules, or atoms of air, or something else besides,
and, as we can augment the energy simply by raising the
potential, we might, even with frequencies obtained from
a dynamo machine, intensify the action to such a degree as to
bring the terminal to melting heat. but with such low frequencies
we would have to deal always with something of the nature
of an electric current. if i approach a conducting object to the
brush, a thin little spark passes, yet, even with the frequencies
used this evening, the tendency to spark is not very great. so,
for instance, if i hold a metallic sphere at some distance above
the terminal, you may see the whole space between the terminal
and sphere illuminated by the streams without the spark passing;
and with the much higher frequencies obtainable by the disrup[pg ]tive
discharge of a condenser, were it not for the sudden impulses,
which are comparatively few in number, sparking would not
occur even at very small distances. however, with incomparably
higher frequencies, which we may yet find means to produce
efficiently, and provided that electric impulses of such high
frequencies could be transmitted through a conductor, the electrical
characteristics of the brush discharge would completely
vanish—no spark would pass, no shock would be felt—yet we
would still have to deal with an electric phenomenon, but in the
broad, modern interpretation of the word. in my first paper, before
referred to, i have pointed out the curious properties of the
brush, and described the best manner of producing it, but i have
thought it worth while to endeavor to express myself more clearly
in regard to this phenomenon, because of its absorbing interest.
when a coil is operated with currents of very high frequency,
beautiful brush effects may be produced, even if the coil be of
comparatively small dimensions. the experimenter may vary
them in many ways, and, if it were for nothing else, they afford a
pleasing sight. what adds to their interest is that they may be
produced with one single terminal as well as with two—in fact,
often better with one than with two.
but of all the discharge phenomena observed, the most pleasing
to the eye, and the most instructive, are those observed with
a coil which is operated by means of the disruptive discharge of
a condenser. the power of the brushes, the abundance of the
sparks, when the conditions are patiently adjusted, is often amazing.
with even a very small coil, if it be so well insulated as to
stand a difference of potential of several thousand volts per turn,
the sparks may be so abundant that the whole coil may appear
a complete mass of fire.
curiously enough the sparks, when the terminals of the coil
are set at a considerable distance, seem to dart in every possible
direction as though the terminals were perfectly independent of
each other. as the sparks would soon destroy the insulation, it
is necessary to prevent them. this is best done by immersing
the coil in a good liquid insulator, such as boiled-out oil. immersion
in a liquid may be considered almost an absolute necessity
for the continued and successful working of such a coil.
it is, of course, out of the question, in an experimental lecture,
with only a few minutes at disposal for the performance of each
experiment, to show these discharge phenomena to advantage,[pg ]
as, to produce each phenomenon at its best, a very careful adjustment
is required. but even if imperfectly produced, as they are
likely to be this evening, they are sufficiently striking to interest
an intelligent audience.
before showing some of these curious effects i must, for the
sake of completeness, give a short description of the coil and
other apparatus used in the experiments with the disruptive discharge
this evening.
fig. .
it is contained in a box b (fig. ) of thick boards of hard
wood, covered on the outside with a zinc sheet z, which is carefully
soldered all around. it might be advisable, in a strictly scientific
investigation, when accuracy is of great importance, to do away
with the metal cover, as it might introduce many errors, principally
on account of its complex action upon the coil, as a condenser
of very small capacity and as an electrostatic and electromagnetic
screen. when the coil is used for such experiments as
are here contemplated, the employment of the metal cover offers
some practical advantages, but these are not of sufficient importance
to be dwelt upon.
the coil should be placed symmetrically to the metal cover,[pg ]
and the space between should, of course, not be too small, certainly
not less than, say, five centimetres, but much more if possible;
especially the two sides of the zinc box, which are at right
angles to the axis of the coil, should be sufficiently remote from
the latter, as otherwise they might impair its action and be a
source of loss.
the coil consists of two spools of hard rubber r r, held apart
at a distance of  centimetres by bolts c and nuts n, likewise of
hard rubber. each spool comprises a tube t of approximately 
centimetres inside diameter, and  millimetres thick, upon which
are screwed two flanges f f,  centimetres square, the space between
the flanges being about  centimetres. the secondary, s s,
of the best gutta percha-covered wire, has  layers,  turns in
each, giving for each half a total of  turns. the two halves
are wound oppositely and connected in series, the connection between
both being made over the primary. this disposition, besides
being convenient, has the advantage that when the coil is
well balanced—that is, when both of its terminals t, t, are connected
to bodies or devices of equal capacity—there is not much
danger of breaking through to the primary, and the insulation
between the primary and the secondary need not be thick. in
using the coil it is advisable to attach to both terminals devices of
nearly equal capacity, as, when the capacity of the terminals is
not equal, sparks will be apt to pass to the primary. to avoid
this, the middle point of the secondary may be connected to the
primary, but this is not always practicable.
the primary p p is wound in two parts, and oppositely, upon
a wooden spool w, and the four ends are led out of the oil through
hard rubber tubes t t. the ends of the secondary t t, are also
led out of the oil through rubber tubes t t of great thickness.
the primary and secondary layers are insulated by cotton cloth,
the thickness of the insulation, of course, bearing some proportion
to the difference of potential between the turns of the different
layers. each half of the primary has four layers,  turns
in each, this giving a total of  turns. when both the parts
are connected in series, this gives a ratio of conversion of about
:., and with the primaries in multiple, :.; but in operating
with very rapidly alternating currents this ratio does not convey
even an approximate idea of the ratio of the e. m. f's. in the
primary and secondary circuits. the coil is held in position in
the oil on wooden supports, there being about  centimetres[pg ]
thickness of oil all round. where the oil is not specially needed,
the space is filled with pieces of wood, and for this purpose
principally the wooden box b surrounding the whole is used.
the construction here shown is, of course, not the best on
general principles, but i believe it is a good and convenient one
for the production of effects in which an excessive potential and
a very small current are needed.
in connection with the coil i use either the ordinary form of
discharger or a modified form. in the former i have introduced
two changes which secure some advantages, and which are obvious.
if they are mentioned, it is only in the hope that some
experimenter may find them of use.
one of the changes is that the adjustable knobs a and b (fig.
), of the discharger are held in jaws of brass, j j, by spring
pressure, this allowing of turning them successively into different
positions, and so doing away with the tedious process of frequent
polishing up.
fig. .
the other change consists in the employment of a strong electromagnet
n s, which is placed with its axis at right angles to
the line joining the knobs a and b, and produces a strong magnetic
field between them. the pole pieces of the magnet are
movable and properly formed so as to protrude between the brass
knobs, in order to make the field as intense as possible; but to
prevent the discharge from jumping to the magnet the pole
pieces are protected by a layer of mica, m m, of sufficient thickness;
s s and s s are screws for fastening the wires. on each
side one of the screws is for large and the other for small wires.
l l are screws for fixing in position the rods r r, which support
the knobs.[pg ]
in another arrangement with the magnet i take the discharge
between the rounded pole pieces themselves, which in such
case are insulated and preferably provided with polished brass
caps.
the employment of an intense magnetic field is of advantage
principally when the induction coil or transformer which charges
the condenser is operated by currents of very low frequency. in
such a case the number of the fundamental discharges between
the knobs may be so small as to render the currents produced in
the secondary unsuitable for many experiments. the intense
magnetic field then serves to blow out the arc between the knobs
as soon as it is formed, and the fundamental discharges occur in
quicker succession.
fig. .
instead of the magnet, a draught or blast of air may be employed
with some advantage. in this case the arc is preferably
established between the knobs a b, in fig.  (the knobs a b
being generally joined, or entirely done away with), as in this
disposition the arc is long and unsteady, and is easily affected by
the draught.
when a magnet is employed to break the arc, it is better to
choose the connection indicated diagrammatically in fig. ,
as in this case the currents forming the arc are much more powerful,
and the magnetic field exercises a greater influence. the
use of the magnet permits, however, of the arc being replaced by
a vacuum tube, but i have encountered great difficulties in working
with an exhausted tube.
the other form of discharger used in these and similar experiments
is indicated in figs.  and . it consists of a number
of brass pieces c c (fig. ), each of which comprises a spherical
middle portion m with an extension e below—which is merely used
to fasten the piece in a lathe when polishing up the discharging[pg ]
surface—and a column above, which consists of a knurled flange
f surmounted by a threaded stem l carrying a nut n, by means
of which a wire is fastened to the column. the flange f conveniently
serves for holding the brass piece when fastening the
wire, and also for turning it in any position when it becomes
necessary to present a fresh discharging surface. two stout
strips of hard rubber r r, with planed grooves g g (fig. ) to fit
the middle portion of the pieces c c, serve to clamp the latter
and hold them firmly in position by means of two bolts c c
(of which only one is shown) passing through the ends of the
strips.
fig. .
fig. .
in the use of this kind of discharger i have found three principal
advantages over the ordinary form. first, the dielectric
strength of a given total width of air space is greater when a
great many small air gaps are used instead of one, which permits
of working with a smaller length of air gap, and that means
smaller loss and less deterioration of the metal; secondly, by
reason of splitting the arc up into smaller arcs, the polished
surfaces are made to last much longer; and, thirdly, the appa[pg ]ratus
affords some gauge in the experiments. i usually set the
pieces by putting between them sheets of uniform thickness at a
certain very small distance which is known from the experiments
of sir william thomson to require a certain electromotive force
to be bridged by the spark.
it should, of course, be remembered that the sparking distance
is much diminished as the frequency is increased. by taking
any number of spaces the experimenter has a rough idea of the
electromotive force, and he finds it easier to repeat an experiment,
as he has not the trouble of setting the knobs again and
again. with this kind of discharger i have been able to maintain
an oscillating motion without any spark being visible with
the naked eye between the knobs, and they would not show a
very appreciable rise in temperature. this form of discharge
also lends itself to many arrangements of condensers and circuits
which are often very convenient and time-saving. i have used
it preferably in a disposition similar to that indicated in fig. ,
when the currents forming the arc are small.
i may here mention that i have also used dischargers with
single or multiple air gaps, in which the discharge surfaces were
rotated with great speed. no particular advantage was, however,
gained by this method, except in cases where the currents
from the condenser were large and the keeping cool of the surfaces
was necessary, and in cases when, the discharge not being
oscillating of itself, the arc as soon as established was broken by
the air current, thus starting the vibration at intervals in rapid
succession. i have also used mechanical interrupters in many
ways. to avoid the difficulties with frictional contacts, the preferred
plan adopted was to establish the arc and rotate through
it at great speed a rim of mica provided with many holes and
fastened to a steel plate. it is understood, of course, that the
employment of a magnet, air current, or other interrupter, produces
no effect worth noticing, unless the self-induction, capacity
and resistance are so related that there are oscillations set up
upon each interruption.
i will now endeavor to show you some of the most noteworthy
of these discharge phenomena.
i have stretched across the room two ordinary cotton covered
wires, each about seven metres in length. they are supported
on insulating cords at a distance of about thirty centimetres. i
attach now to each of the terminals of the coil one of the wires,[pg ]
and set the coil in action. upon turning the lights off in the
room you see the wires strongly illuminated by the streams issuing
abundantly from their whole surface in spite of the cotton
covering, which may even be very thick. when the experiment
is performed under good conditions, the light from the wires is
sufficiently intense to allow distinguishing the objects in a room.
to produce the best result it is, of course, necessary to adjust
carefully the capacity of the jars, the arc between the knobs and
the length of the wires. my experience is that calculation of the
length of the wires leads, in such case, to no result whatever. the
experimenter will do best to take the wires at the start very long,
and then adjust by cutting off first long pieces, and then smaller
and smaller ones as he approaches the right length.
a convenient way is to use an oil condenser of very small
capacity, consisting of two small adjustable metal plates, in connection
with this and similar experiments. in such case i take
wires rather short and at the beginning set the condenser plates
at maximum distance. if the streams from the wires increase by
approach of the plates, the length of the wires is about right; if
they diminish, the wires are too long for that frequency and potential.
when a condenser is used in connection with experiments
with such a coil, it should be an oil condenser by all means,
as in using an air condenser considerable energy might be wasted.
the wires leading to the plates in the oil should be very thin,
heavily coated with some insulating compound, and provided
with a conducting covering—this preferably extending under the
surface of the oil. the conducting cover should not be too near
the terminals, or ends, of the wire, as a spark would be apt to
jump from the wire to it. the conducting coating is used to
diminish the air losses, in virtue of its action as an electrostatic
screen. as to the size of the vessel containing the oil, and the
size of the plates, the experimenter gains at once an idea from a
rough trial. the size of the plates in oil is, however, calculable,
as the dielectric losses are very small.
in the preceding experiment it is of considerable interest to
know what relation the quantity of the light emitted bears to
the frequency and potential of the electric impulses. my opinion
is that the heat as well as light effects produced should be proportionate,
under otherwise equal conditions of test, to the product
of frequency and square of potential, but the experimental verification
of the law, whatever it may be, would be exceedingly[pg ]
difficult. one thing is certain, at any rate, and that is, that in
augmenting the potential and frequency we rapidly intensify the
streams; and, though it may be very sanguine, it is surely not
altogether hopeless to expect that we may succeed in producing
a practical illuminant on these lines. we would then be simply
using burners or flames, in which there would be no chemical
process, no consumption of material, but merely a transfer of
energy, and which would, in all probability, emit more light and
less heat than ordinary flames.
fig. .
the luminous intensity of the streams is, of course, considerably
increased when they are focused upon a small surface. this may
be shown by the following experiment:
i attach to one of the terminals of the coil a wire w (fig. ),
bent in a circle of about  centimetres in diameter, and to the
other terminal i fasten a small brass sphere s, the surface of the
wire being preferably equal to the surface of the sphere, and the
centre of the latter being in a line at right angles to the plane of
the wire circle and passing through its centre. when the discharge
is established under proper conditions, a luminous hollow
cone is formed, and in the dark one-half of the brass sphere is
strongly illuminated, as shown in the cut.
by some artifice or other it is easy to concentrate the streams[pg ]
upon small surfaces and to produce very strong light effects.
two thin wires may thus be rendered intensely luminous.
in order to intensify the streams the wires should be very thin
and short; but as in this case their capacity would be generally
too small for the coil—at least for such a one as the present—it
is necessary to augment the capacity to the required value, while,
at the same time, the surface of the wires remains very small.
this may be done in many ways.
fig. .
here, for instance, i have two plates, r r, of hard rubber (fig.
), upon which i have glued two very thin wires w w, so as to
form a name. the wires may be bare or covered with the best
insulation—it is immaterial for the success of the experiment.
well insulated wires, if anything, are preferable. on the back
of each plate, indicated by the shaded portion, is a tinfoil coating
t t. the plates are placed in line at a sufficient distance to prevent
a spark passing from one wire to the other. the two tinfoil
coatings i have joined by a conductor c, and the two wires i
presently connect to the terminals of the coil. it is now easy, by
varying the strength and frequency of the currents through the
primary, to find a point at which the capacity of the system is
best suited to the conditions, and the wires become so strongly
luminous that, when the light in the room is turned off the name
formed by them appears in brilliant letters.
it is perhaps preferable to perform this experiment with a
coil operated from an alternator of high frequency, as then,[pg ]
owing to the harmonic rise and fall, the streams are very uniform,
though they are less abundant than when produced with such a
coil as the present one. this experiment, however, may be performed
with low frequencies, but much less satisfactorily.
fig. .
when two wires, attached to the terminals of the coil, are set
at the proper distance, the streams between them may be so intense
as to produce a continuous luminous sheet. to show this
phenomenon i have here two circles, c and c (fig. ), of rather
stout wire, one being about  centimetres and the other  centimetres
in diameter. to each of the terminals of the coil i
attach one of the circles. the supporting wires are so bent that
the circles may be placed in the same plane, coinciding as nearly
as possible. when the light in the room is turned off and the
coil set to work, you see the whole space between the wires uniformly
filled with streams, forming a luminous disc, which could
be seen from a considerable distance, such is the intensity of the
streams. the outer circle could have been much larger than the
present one; in fact, with this coil i have used much larger
circles, and i have been able to produce a strongly luminous
sheet, covering an area of more than one square metre, which is
a remarkable effect with this very small coil. to avoid uncer[pg ]tainty,
the circle has been taken smaller, and the area is now
about . square metre.
the frequency of the vibration, and the quickness of succession
of the sparks between the knobs, affect to a marked degree
the appearance of the streams. when the frequency is very
low, the air gives way in more or less the same manner, as by a
steady difference of potential, and the streams consist of distinct
threads, generally mingled with thin sparks, which probably correspond
to the successive discharges occurring between the
knobs. but when the frequency is extremely high, and the arc
of the discharge produces a very loud and smooth sound—showing
both that oscillation takes place and that the sparks succeed
each other with great rapidity—then the luminous streams
formed are perfectly uniform. to reach this result very small
coils and jars of small capacity should be used. i take two
tubes of thick bohemian glass, about  centimetres in diameter
and  centimetres long. in each of the tubes i slip a primary
of very thick copper wire. on the top of each tube i wind a
secondary of much thinner gutta-percha covered wire. the two
secondaries i connect in series, the primaries preferably in multiple
arc. the tubes are then placed in a large glass vessel, at a distance
of  to  centimetres from each other, on insulating supports,
and the vessel is filled with boiled-out oil, the oil reaching
about an inch above the tubes. the free ends of the secondary
are lifted out of the coil and placed parallel to each other at a
distance of about ten centimetres. the ends which are scraped
should be dipped in the oil. two four-pint jars joined in series
may be used to discharge through the primary. when the necessary
adjustments in the length and distance of the wires above
the oil and in the arc of discharge are made, a luminous sheet is
produced between the wires which is perfectly smooth and textureless,
like the ordinary discharge through a moderately exhausted
tube.
i have purposely dwelt upon this apparently insignificant experiment.
in trials of this kind the experimenter arrives at the
startling conclusion that, to pass ordinary luminous discharges
through gases, no particular degree of exhaustion is needed, but
that the gas may be at ordinary or even greater pressure. to
accomplish this, a very high frequency is essential; a high potential
is likewise required, but this is merely an incidental necessity.
these experiments teach us that, in endeavoring to dis[pg ]cover
novel methods of producing light by the agitation of atoms,
or molecules, of a gas, we need not limit our research to the
vacuum tube, but may look forward quite seriously to the possibility
of obtaining the light effects without the use of any vessel
whatever, with air at ordinary pressure.
such discharges of very high frequency, which render luminous
the air at ordinary pressures, we have probably occasion often to
witness in nature. i have no doubt that if, as many believe, the
aurora borealis is produced by sudden cosmic disturbances, such
as eruptions at the sun's surface, which set the electrostatic charge
of the earth in an extremely rapid vibration, the red glow observed
is not confined to the upper rarefied strata of the air, but
the discharge traverses, by reason of its very high frequency,
also the dense atmosphere in the form of a glow, such as we ordinarily
produce in a slightly exhausted tube. if the frequency
were very low, or even more so, if the charge were not at all
vibrating, the dense air would break down as in a lightning discharge.
indications of such breaking down of the lower dense
strata of the air have been repeatedly observed at the occurrence
of this marvelous phenomenon; but if it does occur, it can only
be attributed to the fundamental disturbances, which are few in
number, for the vibration produced by them would be far too
rapid to allow a disruptive break. it is the original and irregular
impulses which affect the instruments; the superimposed vibrations
probably pass unnoticed.
when an ordinary low frequency discharge is passed through
moderately rarefied air, the air assumes a purplish hue. if by
some means or other we increase the intensity of the molecular,
or atomic, vibration, the gas changes to a white color. a similar
change occurs at ordinary pressures with electric impulses of very
high frequency. if the molecules of the air around a wire are
moderately agitated, the brush formed is reddish or violet; if
the vibration is rendered sufficiently intense, the streams become
white. we may accomplish this in various ways. in the experiment
before shown with the two wires across the room, i have
endeavored to secure the result by pushing to a high value both
the frequency and potential; in the experiment with the thin
wires glued on the rubber plate i have concentrated the action
upon a very small surface—in other words, i have worked with
a great electric density.
fig. .
a most curious form of discharge is observed with such a coil
[pg ]when the frequency and potential are pushed to the extreme
limit. to perform the experiment, every part of the coil should
be heavily insulated, and only two small spheres—or, better still,
two sharp-edged metal discs (d d, fig. ) of no more than
a few centimetres in diameter—should be exposed to the air.
the coil here used is immersed in oil, and the ends of the
secondary reaching out of the oil are covered with an air-tight
cover of hard rubber of great thickness. all cracks, if there
are any, should be carefully stopped up, so that the brush discharge
cannot form anywhere except on the small spheres or
plates which are exposed to the air. in this case, since there
are no large plates or other bodies of capacity attached to the
terminals, the coil is capable of an extremely rapid vibration.
the potential may be raised by increasing, as far as the experimenter
judges proper, the rate of change of the primary current.
with a coil not widely differing from the present, it is
best to connect the two primaries in multiple arc; but if the
secondary should have a much greater number of turns the
primaries should preferably be used in series, as otherwise the
vibration might be too fast for the secondary. it occurs under
these conditions that misty white streams break forth from the
edges of the discs and spread out phantom-like into space.
with this coil, when fairly well produced, they are about  to
 centimetres long. when the hand is held against them no
sensation is produced, and a spark, causing a shock, jumps from[pg ]
the terminal only upon the hand being brought much nearer.
if the oscillation of the primary current is rendered intermittent
by some means or other, there is a corresponding throbbing of
the streams, and now the hand or other conducting object may
be brought in still greater proximity to the terminal without a
spark being caused to jump.
among the many beautiful phenomena which may be produced
with such a coil, i have here selected only those which appear
to possess some features of novelty, and lead us to some
conclusions of interest. one will not find it at all difficult to
produce in the laboratory, by means of it, many other phenomena
which appeal to the eye even more than these here shown, but
present no particular feature of novelty.
early experimenters describe the display of sparks produced by
an ordinary large induction coil upon an insulating plate separating
the terminals. quite recently siemens performed some experiments
in which fine effects were obtained, which were seen
by many with interest. no doubt large coils, even if operated
with currents of low frequencies, are capable of producing
beautiful effects. but the largest coil ever made could not, by
far, equal the magnificent display of streams and sparks obtained
from such a disruptive discharge coil when properly adjusted.
to give an idea, a coil such as the present one will cover easily
a plate of one metre in diameter completely with the streams.
the best way to perform such experiments is to take a very thin
rubber or a glass plate and glue on one side of it a narrow ring
of tinfoil of very large diameter, and on the other a circular
washer, the centre of the latter coinciding with that of the ring,
and the surfaces of both being preferably equal, so as to keep
the coil well balanced. the washer and ring should be connected
to the terminals by heavily insulated thin wires. it is easy in
observing the effect of the capacity to produce a sheet of uniform
streams, or a fine network of thin silvery threads, or a
mass of loud brilliant sparks, which completely cover the plate.
since i have advanced the idea of the conversion by means of
the disruptive discharge, in my paper before the american institute
of electrical engineers at the beginning of the past year,
the interest excited in it has been considerable. it affords us a
means for producing any potentials by the aid of inexpensive
coils operated from ordinary systems of distribution, and—what
is perhaps more appreciated—it enables us to convert currents of[pg ]
any frequency into currents of any other lower or higher frequency.
but its chief value will perhaps be found in the help
which it will afford us in the investigations of the phenomena
of phosphorescence, which a disruptive discharge coil is capable
of exciting in innumerable cases where ordinary coils, even the
largest, would utterly fail.
considering its probable uses for many practical purposes, and
its possible introduction into laboratories for scientific research,
a few additional remarks as to the construction of such a coil
will perhaps not be found superfluous.
it is, of course, absolutely necessary to employ in such a coil
wires provided with the best insulation.
good coils may be produced by employing wires covered with
several layers of cotton, boiling the coil a long time in pure wax,
and cooling under moderate pressure. the advantage of such a
coil is that it can be easily handled, but it cannot probably give
as satisfactory results as a coil immersed in pure oil. besides, it
seems that the presence of a large body of wax affects the coil
disadvantageously, whereas this does not seem to be the case with
oil. perhaps it is because the dielectric losses in the liquid are
smaller.
i have tried at first silk and cotton covered wires with oil immersions,
but i have been gradually led to use gutta-percha
covered wires, which proved most satisfactory. gutta-percha
insulation adds, of course, to the capacity of the coil, and this,
especially if the coil be large, is a great disadvantage when extreme
frequencies are desired; but, on the other hand, gutta-percha
will withstand much more than an equal thickness of oil,
and this advantage should be secured at any price. once the
coil has been immersed, it should never be taken out of the oil
for more than a few hours, else the gutta-percha will crack up
and the coil will not be worth half as much as before. gutta-percha
is probably slowly attacked by the oil, but after an immersion
of eight to nine months i have found no ill effects.
i have obtained two kinds of gutta-percha wire known in commerce:
in one the insulation sticks tightly to the metal, in the
other it does not. unless a special method is followed to expel all
air, it is much safer to use the first kind. i wind the coil within
an oil tank so that all interstices are filled up with the oil. between
the layers i use cloth boiled out thoroughly in oil,
calculating the thickness according to the difference of potential[pg ]
between the turns. there seems not to be a very great difference
whatever kind of oil is used; i use paraffine or linseed oil.
to exclude more perfectly the air, an excellent way to proceed,
and easily practicable with small coils, is the following:
construct a box of hardwood of very thick boards which have
been for a long time boiled in oil. the boards should be so
joined as to safely withstand the external air pressure. the coil
being placed and fastened in position within the box, the latter
is closed with a strong lid, and covered with closely fitting metal
sheets, the joints of which are soldered very carefully. on the
top two small holes are drilled, passing through the metal sheet
and the wood, and in these holes two small glass tubes are inserted
and the joints made air-tight. one of the tubes is connected
to a vacuum pump, and the other with a vessel containing a
sufficient quantity of boiled-out oil. the latter tube has a very
small hole at the bottom, and is provided with a stopcock.
when a fairly good vacuum has been obtained, the stopcock is
opened and the oil slowly fed in. proceeding in this manner,
it is impossible that any big bubbles, which are the principal
danger, should remain between the turns. the air is most completely
excluded, probably better than by boiling out, which,
however, when gutta-percha coated wires are used, is not practicable.
for the primaries i use ordinary line wire with a thick cotton
coating. strands of very thin insulated wires properly interlaced
would, of course, be the best to employ for the primaries,
but they are not to be had.
in an experimental coil the size of the wires is not of great
importance. in the coil here used the primary is no.  and the
secondary no.  brown & sharpe gauge wire; but the sections
may be varied considerably. it would only imply different adjustments;
the results aimed at would not be materially affected.
i have dwelt at some length upon the various forms of brush
discharge because, in studying them, we not only observe phenomena
which please our eye, but also afford us food for thought,
and lead us to conclusions of practical importance. in the use
of alternating currents of very high tension, too much precaution
cannot be taken to prevent the brush discharge. in a main conveying
such currents, in an induction coil or transformer, or in a
condenser, the brush discharge is a source of great danger to the
insulation. in a condenser, especially, the gaseous matter must[pg ]
be most carefully expelled, for in it the charged surfaces are near
each other, and if the potentials are high, just as sure as a weight
will fall if let go, so the insulation will give way if a single
gaseous bubble of some size be present, whereas, if all gaseous
matter were carefully excluded, the condenser would safely
withstand a much higher difference of potential. a main conveying
alternating currents of very high tension may be injured
merely by a blow hole or small crack in the insulation, the more
so as a blowhole is apt to contain gas at low pressure; and as it
appears almost impossible to completely obviate such little imperfections,
i am led to believe that in our future distribution of
electrical energy by currents of very high tension, liquid insulation
will be used. the cost is a great drawback, but if we employ
an oil as an insulator the distribution of electrical energy
with something like , volts, and even more, becomes, at
least with higher frequencies, so easy that it could be hardly
called an engineering feat. with oil insulation and alternate current
motors, transmissions of power can be affected with safety
and upon an industrial basis at distances of as much as a thousand
miles.
a peculiar property of oils, and liquid insulation in general,
when subjected to rapidly changing electric stresses, is to disperse
any gaseous bubbles which may be present, and diffuse them
through its mass, generally long before any injurious break can
occur. this feature may be easily observed with an ordinary induction
coil by taking the primary out, plugging up the end of
the tube upon which the secondary is wound, and filling it with
some fairly transparent insulator, such as paraffine oil. a primary
of a diameter something like six millimetres smaller than the
inside of the tube may be inserted in the oil. when the coil is
set to work one may see, looking from the top through the oil,
many luminous points—air bubbles which are caught by inserting
the primary, and which are rendered luminous in consequence
of the violent bombardment. the occluded air, by its impact
against the oil, heats it; the oil begins to circulate, carrying some
of the air along with it, until the bubbles are dispersed and the
luminous points disappear. in this manner, unless large bubbles
are occluded in such way that circulation is rendered impossible,
a damaging break is averted, the only effect being a moderate
warming up of the oil. if, instead of the liquid, a solid insulation,
no matter how thick, were used, a breaking through and injury
of the apparatus would be inevitable.[pg ]
the exclusion of gaseous matter from any apparatus in which
the dielectric is subjected to more or less rapidly changing electric
forces is, however, not only desirable in order to avoid a
possible injury of the apparatus, but also on account of economy.
in a condenser, for instance, as long as only a solid or only a
liquid dielectric is used, the loss is small; but if a gas under ordinary
or small pressure be present the loss may be very great.
whatever the nature of the force acting in the dielectric may be,
it seems that in a solid or liquid the molecular displacement produced
by the force is small: hence the product of force and
displacement is insignificant, unless the force be very great; but
in a gas the displacement, and therefore this product, is considerable;
the molecules are free to move, they reach high speeds, and
the energy of their impact is lost in heat or otherwise. if the
gas be strongly compressed, the displacement due to the force is
made smaller, and the losses are reduced.
in most of the succeeding experiments i prefer, chiefly on
account of the regular and positive action, to employ the alternator
before referred to. this is one of the several machines
constructed by me for the purpose of these investigations. it has
 pole projections, and is capable of giving currents of a frequency
of about , per second. this machine has been illustrated
and briefly described in my first paper before the american
institute of electrical engineers, may th, , to which i have
already referred. a more detailed description, sufficient to enable
any engineer to build a similar machine, will be found in
several electrical journals of that period.
the induction coils operated from the machine are rather small,
containing from , to , turns in the secondary. they
are immersed in boiled-out linseed oil, contained in wooden boxes
covered with zinc sheet.
i have found it advantageous to reverse the usual position of
the wires, and to wind, in these coils, the primaries on the top;
thus allowing the use of a much larger primary, which, of course,
reduces the danger of overheating and increases the output of
the coil. i make the primary on each side at least one centimetre
shorter than the secondary, to prevent the breaking through on the
ends, which would surely occur unless the insulation on the top
of the secondary be very thick, and this, of course, would be disadvantageous.
when the primary is made movable, which is necessary in[pg ]
some experiments, and many times convenient for the purposes
of adjustment, i cover the secondary with wax, and turn it off
in a lathe to a diameter slightly smaller than the inside of the
primary coil. the latter i provide with a handle reaching out
of the oil, which serves to shift it in any position along the
secondary.
i will now venture to make, in regard to the general manipulation
of induction coils, a few observations bearing upon points
which have not been fully appreciated in earlier experiments
with such coils, and are even now often overlooked.
the secondary of the coil possesses usually such a high self-induction
that the current through the wire is inappreciable, and
may be so even when the terminals are joined by a conductor of
small resistance. if capacity is added to the terminals, the self-induction
is counteracted, and a stronger current is made to flow
through the secondary, though its terminals are insulated from
each other. to one entirely unacquainted with the properties of
alternating currents nothing will look more puzzling. this feature
was illustrated in the experiment performed at the beginning
with the top plates of wire gauze attached to the terminals and
the rubber plate. when the plates of wire gauze were close together,
and a small arc passed between them, the arc prevented a
strong current from passing through the secondary, because it
did away with the capacity on the terminals; when the rubber
plate was inserted between, the capacity of the condenser formed
counteracted the self-induction of the secondary, a stronger current
passed now, the coil performed more work, and the discharge
was by far more powerful.
the first thing, then, in operating the induction coil is to combine
capacity with the secondary to overcome the self-induction.
if the frequencies and potentials are very high, gaseous matter
should be carefully kept away from the charged surfaces. if
leyden jars are used, they should be immersed in oil, as otherwise
considerable dissipation may occur if the jars are greatly
strained. when high frequencies are used, it is of equal importance
to combine a condenser with the primary. one may
use a condenser connected to the ends of the primary or to the
terminals of the alternator, but the latter is not to be recommended,
as the machine might be injured. the best way is
undoubtedly to use the condenser in series with the primary and
with the alternator, and to adjust its capacity so as to annul the[pg ]
self-induction of both the latter. the condenser should be adjustable
by very small steps, and for a finer adjustment a small
oil condenser with movable plates may be used conveniently.
i think it best at this juncture to bring before you a phenomenon,
observed by me some time ago, which to the purely
scientific investigator may perhaps appear more interesting than
any of the results which i have the privilege to present to you
this evening.
it may be quite properly ranked among the brush phenomena—in
fact, it is a brush, formed at, or near, a single terminal
in high vacuum.
fig. .fig. .
in bulbs provided with a conducting terminal, though it be of
aluminum, the brush has but an ephemeral existence, and cannot,
unfortunately, be indefinitely preserved in its most sensitive
state, even in a bulb devoid of any conducting electrode.
in studying the phenomenon, by all means a bulb having no
leading-in wire should be used. i have found it best to use
bulbs constructed as indicated in figs.  and .
in fig.  the bulb comprises an incandescent lamp globe l,
in the neck of which is sealed a barometer tube b, the end of which
is blown out to form a small sphere s. this sphere should be
sealed as closely as possible in the centre of the large globe.
before sealing, a thin tube t, of aluminum sheet, may be slipped
in the barometer tube, but it is not important to employ it.[pg ]
the small hollow sphere s is filled with some conducting
powder, and a wire w is cemented in the neck for the purpose of
connecting the conducting powder with the generator.
the construction shown in fig.  was chosen in order to
remove from the brush any conducting body which might possibly
affect it. the bulb consists in this case of a lamp globe l,
which has a neck n, provided with a tube b and small sphere s,
sealed to it, so that two entirely independent compartments are
formed, as indicated in the drawing. when the bulb is in use
the neck n is provided with a tinfoil coating, which is connected
to the generator and acts inductively upon the moderately rarefied
and highly conducted gas inclosed in the neck. from there
the current passes through the tube b into the small sphere s, to
act by induction upon the gas contained in the globe l.
it is of advantage to make the tube t very thick, the hole
through it very small, and to blow the sphere s very thin. it is
of the greatest importance that the sphere s be placed in the
centre of the globe l.
fig. .
figs. ,  and  indicate different forms, or stages, of
the brush. fig.  shows the brush as it first appears in a bulb
provided with a conducting terminal; but, as in such a bulb it
very soon disappears—often after a few minutes—i will confine
myself to the description of the phenomenon as seen in a bulb
without conducting electrode. it is observed under the following
conditions:
when the globe l (figs.  and ) is exhausted to a very
high degree, generally the bulb is not excited upon connecting
the wire w (fig. ) or the tinfoil coating of the bulb (fig.[pg ]
) to the terminal of the induction coil. to excite it, it is
usually sufficient to grasp the globe l with the hand. an intense
phosphorescence then spreads at first over the globe, but
soon gives place to a white, misty light. shortly afterward one
may notice that the luminosity is unevenly distributed in the
globe, and after passing the current for some time the bulb appears
as in fig. . from this stage the phenomenon will
gradually pass to that indicated in fig. , after some minutes,
hours, days or weeks, according as the bulb is worked. warming
the bulb or increasing the potential hastens the transit.
fig. .fig. .
when the brush assumes the form indicated in fig. , it may
be brought to a state of extreme sensitiveness to electrostatic
and magnetic influence. the bulb hanging straight down from
a wire, and all objects being remote from it, the approach of the
observer at a few paces from the bulb will cause the brush to fly
to the opposite side, and if he walks around the bulb it will
always keep on the opposite side. it may begin to spin around
the terminal long before it reaches that sensitive stage. when
it begins to turn around, principally, but also before, it is affected
by a magnet, and at a certain stage it is susceptible to magnetic
influence to an astonishing degree. a small permanent magnet,
with its poles at a distance of no more than two centimetres, will
affect it visibly at a distance of two metres, slowing down or accelerating
the rotation according to how it is held relatively to[pg ]
the brush. i think i have observed that at the stage when it is
most sensitive to magnetic, it is not most sensitive to electrostatic,
influence. my explanation is, that the electrostatic attraction
between the brush and the glass of the bulb, which retards the
rotation, grows much quicker than the magnetic influence when
the intensity of the stream is increased.
when the bulb hangs with the globe l down, the rotation is
always clockwise. in the southern hemisphere it would occur
in the opposite direction and on the equator the brush should
not turn at all. the rotation may be reversed by a magnet kept
at some distance. the brush rotates best, seemingly, when it is
at right angles to the lines of force of the earth. it very likely
rotates, when at its maximum speed, in synchronism with the
alternations, say, , times a second. the rotation can be
slowed down or accelerated by the approach or receding of the
observer, or any conducting body, but it cannot be reversed by
putting the bulb in any position. when it is in the state of the
highest sensitiveness and the potential or frequency be varied,
the sensitiveness is rapidly diminished. changing either of
these but little will generally stop the rotation. the sensitiveness
is likewise affected by the variations of temperature. to
attain great sensitiveness it is necessary to have the small sphere
s in the centre of the globe l, as otherwise the electrostatic
action of the glass of the globe will tend to stop the rotation.
the sphere s should be small and of uniform thickness; any dissymmetry
of course has the effect to diminish the sensitiveness.
the fact that the brush rotates in a definite direction in a permanent
magnetic field seems to show that in alternating currents
of very high frequency the positive and negative impulses are
not equal, but that one always preponderates over the other.
of course, this rotation in one direction may be due to the
action of the two elements of the same current upon each other,
or to the action of the field produced by one of the elements
upon the other, as in a series motor, without necessarily one impulse
being stronger than the other. the fact that the brush
turns, as far as i could observe, in any position, would speak for
this view. in such case it would turn at any point of the earth's
surface. but, on the other hand, it is then hard to explain why
a permanent magnet should reverse the rotation, and one must
assume the preponderance of impulses of one kind.
as to the causes of the formation of the brush or stream, i[pg ]
think it is due to the electrostatic action of the globe and the
dissymmetry of the parts. if the small bulb s and the globe l
were perfect concentric spheres, and the glass throughout of the
same thickness and quality, i think the brush would not form,
as the tendency to pass would be equal on all sides. that the
formation of the stream is due to an irregularity is apparent from
the fact that it has the tendency to remain in one position, and
rotation occurs most generally only when it is brought out of
this position by electrostatic or magnetic influence. when in an
extremely sensitive state it rests in one position, most curious experiments
may be performed with it. for instance, the experimenter
may, by selecting a proper position, approach the hand
at a certain considerable distance to the bulb, and he may cause
the brush to pass off by merely stiffening the muscles of the arm.
when it begins to rotate slowly, and the hands are held at a
proper distance, it is impossible to make even the slightest motion
without producing a visible effect upon the brush. a metal
plate connected to the other terminal of the coil affects it at a
great distance, slowing down the rotation often to one turn a
second.
i am firmly convinced that such a brush, when we learn how
to produce it properly, will prove a valuable aid in the investigation
of the nature of the forces acting in an electrostatic or
magnetic field. if there is any motion which is measurable going
on in the space, such a brush ought to reveal it. it is, so to
speak, a beam of light, frictionless, devoid of inertia.
i think that it may find practical applications in telegraphy.
with such a brush it would be possible to send dispatches across
the atlantic, for instance, with any speed, since its sensitiveness
may be so great that the slightest changes will affect it. if it
were possible to make the stream more intense and very narrow,
its deflections could be easily photographed.
i have been interested to find whether there is a rotation of
the stream itself, or whether there is simply a stress traveling
around the bulb. for this purpose i mounted a light mica fan
so that its vanes were in the path of the brush. if the stream
itself was rotating the fan would be spun around. i could produce
no distinct rotation of the fan, although i tried the experiment
repeatedly; but as the fan exerted a noticeable influence
on the stream, and the apparent rotation of the latter was, in this
case, never quite satisfactory, the experiment did not appear to
be conclusive.[pg ]
i have been unable to produce the phenomenon with the disruptive
discharge coil, although every other of these phenomena
can be well produced by it—many, in fact, much better than
with coils operated from an alternator.
it may be possible to produce the brush by impulses of one
direction, or even by a steady potential, in which case it would
be still more sensitive to magnetic influence.
in operating an induction coil with rapidly alternating currents,
we realize with astonishment, for the first time, the great importance
of the relation of capacity, self-induction and frequency as
regards the general results. the effects of capacity are the most
striking, for in these experiments, since the self-induction and
frequency both are high, the critical capacity is very small, and
need be but slightly varied to produce a very considerable change.
the experimenter may bring his body in contact with the terminals
of the secondary of the coil, or attach to one or both terminals
insulated bodies of very small bulk, such as bulbs, and he
may produce a considerable rise or fall of potential, and greatly
affect the flow of the current through the primary. in the experiment
before shown, in which a brush appears at a wire
attached to one terminal, and the wire is vibrated when the experimenter
brings his insulated body in contact with the other
terminal of the coil, the sudden rise of potential was made evident.
i may show you the behavior of the coil in another manner
which possesses a feature of some interest. i have here a little light
fan of aluminum sheet, fastened to a needle and arranged to
rotate freely in a metal piece screwed to one of the terminals of
the coil. when the coil is set to work, the molecules of the air
are rhythmically attracted and repelled. as the force with
which they are repelled is greater than that with which they are
attracted, it results that there is a repulsion exerted on the surfaces
of the fan. if the fan were made simply of a metal sheet,
the repulsion would be equal on the opposite sides, and would
produce no effect. but if one of the opposing surfaces is screened,
or if, generally speaking, the bombardment on this side is
weakened in some way or other, there remains the repulsion exerted
upon the other, and the fan is set in rotation. the screening
is best effected by fastening upon one of the opposing sides
of the fan insulated conducting coatings, or, if the fan is made
in the shape of an ordinary propeller screw, by fastening on one[pg ]
side, and close to it, an insulated metal plate. the static screen
may, however, be omitted, and simply a thickness of insulating
material fastened to one of the sides of the fan.
to show the behavior of the coil, the fan may be placed upon
the terminal and it will readily rotate when the coil is operated
by currents of very high frequency. with a steady potential,
of course, and even with alternating currents of very low frequency,
it would not turn, because of the very slow exchange of
air and, consequently, smaller bombardment; but in the latter
case it might turn if the potential were excessive. with a pin
wheel, quite the opposite rule holds good; it rotates best with
a steady potential, and the effort is the smaller the higher the
frequency. now, it is very easy to adjust the conditions so that
the potential is normally not sufficient to turn the fan, but that
by connecting the other terminal of the coil with an insulated
body it rises to a much greater value, so as to rotate the fan, and
it is likewise possible to stop the rotation by connecting to the
terminal a body of different size, thereby diminishing the potential.
instead of using the fan in this experiment, we may use the
"electric" radiometer with similar effect. but in this case it will
be found that the vanes will rotate only at high exhaustion or at
ordinary pressures; they will not rotate at moderate pressures,
when the air is highly conducting. this curious observation was
made conjointly by professor crookes and myself. i attribute
the result to the high conductivity of the air, the molecules of
which then do not act as independent carriers of electric charges,
but act all together as a single conducting body. in such case,
of course, if there is any repulsion at all of the molecules from
the vanes, it must be very small. it is possible, however, that
the result is in part due to the fact that the greater part of the
discharge passes from the leading-in wire through the highly conducting
gas, instead of passing off from the conducting vanes.
in trying the preceding experiment with the electric radiometer
the potential should not exceed a certain limit, as then the electrostatic
attraction between the vanes and the glass of the bulb
may be so great as to stop the rotation.
a most curious feature of alternate currents of high frequencies
and potentials is that they enable us to perform many experiments
by the use of one wire only. in many respects this feature
is of great interest.[pg ]
in a type of alternate current motor invented by me some years
ago i produced rotation by inducing, by means of a single alternating
current passed through a motor circuit, in the mass or other
circuits of the motor, secondary currents, which, jointly with the
primary or inducing current, created a moving field of force. a
simple but crude form of such a motor is obtained by winding
upon an iron core a primary, and close to it a secondary coil, joining
the ends of the latter and placing a freely movable metal disc
within the influence of the field produced by both. the iron core
is employed for obvious reasons, but it is not essential to the
operation. to improve the motor, the iron core is made to encircle
the armature. again to improve, the secondary coil is
made to partly overlap the primary, so that it cannot free itself
from a strong inductive action of the latter, repel its lines as it
may. once more to improve, the proper difference of phase is
obtained between the primary and secondary currents by a condenser,
self-induction, resistance or equivalent windings.
i had discovered, however, that rotation is produced by means
of a single coil and core; my explanation of the phenomenon, and
leading thought in trying the experiment, being that there must
be a true time lag in the magnetization of the core. i remember
the pleasure i had when, in the writings of professor ayrton,
which came later to my hand, i found the idea of the time lag
advocated. whether there is a true time lag, or whether the retardation
is due to eddy currents circulating in minute paths, must
remain an open question, but the fact is that a coil wound upon
an iron core and traversed by an alternating current creates a
moving field of force, capable of setting an armature in rotation.
it is of some interest, in conjunction with the historical arago
experiment, to mention that in lag or phase motors i have produced
rotation in the opposite direction to the moving field, which
means that in that experiment the magnet may not rotate, or may
even rotate in the opposite direction to the moving disc. here,
then, is a motor (diagrammatically illustrated in fig. ), comprising
a coil and iron core, and a freely movable copper disc in
proximity to the latter.
fig. .
to demonstrate a novel and interesting feature, i have, for a
reason which i will explain, selected this type of motor. when
the ends of the coil are connected to the terminals of an alternator
the disc is set in rotation. but it is not this experiment,
now well known, which i desire to perform. what i wish to
[pg ]show you is that this motor rotates with one single connection between
it and the generator; that is to say, one terminal of the
motor is connected to one terminal of the generator—in this case
the secondary of a high-tension induction coil—the other terminals
of motor and generator being insulated in space. to produce
rotation it is generally (but not absolutely) necessary to
connect the free end of the motor coil to an insulated body of
some size. the experimenter's body is more than sufficient. if
he touches the free terminal with an object held in the hand, a
current passes through the coil and the copper disc is set in rotation.
if an exhausted tube is put in series with the coil, the tube
lights brilliantly, showing the passage of a strong current. instead
of the experimenter's body, a small metal sheet suspended
on a cord may be used with the same result. in this case the
plate acts as a condenser in series with the coil. it counteracts
the self-induction of the latter and allows a strong current to
pass. in such a combination, the greater the self-induction of
the coil the smaller need be the plate, and this means that a lower
frequency, or eventually a lower potential, is required to operate
the motor. a single coil wound upon a core has a high self-induction;
for this reason, principally, this type of motor was
chosen to perform the experiment. were a secondary closed
coil wound upon the core, it would tend to diminish the
self-[pg ]induction, and then it would be necessary to employ a much
higher frequency and potential. neither would be advisable, for
a higher potential would endanger the insulation of the small
primary coil, and a higher frequency would result in a materially
diminished torque.
it should be remarked that when such a motor with a
closed secondary is used, it is not at all easy to obtain rotation
with excessive frequencies, as the secondary cuts off
almost completely the lines of the primary—and this, of
course, the more, the higher the frequency—and allows the passage
of but a minute current. in such a case, unless the secondary
is closed through a condenser, it is almost essential, in order
to produce rotation, to make the primary and secondary coils
overlap each other more or less.
but there is an additional feature of interest about this motor,
namely, it is not necessary to have even a single connection between
the motor and generator, except, perhaps, through the
ground; for not only is an insulated plate capable of giving off
energy into space, but it is likewise capable of deriving it from
an alternating electrostatic field, though in the latter case the
available energy is much smaller. in this instance one of the
motor terminals is connected to the insulated plate or body
located within the alternating electrostatic field, and the other
terminal preferably to the ground.
it is quite possible, however, that such "no wire" motors, as
they might be called, could be operated by conduction through
the rarefied air at considerable distances. alternate currents,
especially of high frequencies, pass with astonishing freedom
through even slightly rarefied gases. the upper strata of the air
are rarefied. to reach a number of miles out into space requires
the overcoming of difficulties of a merely mechanical nature.
there is no doubt that with the enormous potentials obtainable by
the use of high frequencies and oil insulation, luminous discharges
might be passed through many miles of rarefied air, and that, by
thus directing the energy of many hundreds or thousands of horse-power,
motors or lamps might be operated at considerable
distances from stationary sources. but such schemes are mentioned
merely as possibilities. we shall have no need to transmit
power in this way. we shall have no need to transmit power
at all. ere many generations pass, our machinery will be driven
by a power obtainable at any point of the universe. this idea is[pg ]
not novel. men have been led to it long ago by instinct or reason.
it has been expressed in many ways, and in many places, in the
history of old and new. we find it in the delightful myth of
antheus, who derives power from the earth; we find it among
the subtle speculations of one of your splendid mathematicians,
and in many hints and statements of thinkers of the present time.
throughout space there is energy. is this energy static or kinetic?
if static our hopes are in vain; if kinetic—and this we know it
is, for certain—then it is a mere question of time when men will
succeed in attaching their machinery to the very wheelwork of
nature. of all, living or dead, crookes came nearest to doing it.
his radiometer will turn in the light of day and in the darkness
of the night; it will turn everywhere where there is heat, and
heat is everywhere. but, unfortunately, this beautiful little
machine, while it goes down to posterity as the most interesting,
must likewise be put on record as the most inefficient machine
ever invented!
the preceding experiment is only one of many equally interesting
experiments which may be performed by the use of only
one wire with alternations of high potential and frequency. we
may connect an insulated line to a source of such currents, we
may pass an inappreciable current over the line, and on any
point of the same we are able to obtain a heavy current, capable
of fusing a thick copper wire. or we may, by the help of some
artifice, decompose a solution in any electrolytic cell by connecting
only one pole of the cell to the line or source of energy.
or we may, by attaching to the line, or only bringing into its
vicinity, light up an incandescent lamp, an exhausted tube, or a
phosphorescent bulb.
however impracticable this plan of working may appear in
many cases, it certainly seems practicable, and even recommendable,
in the production of light. a perfected lamp would require
but little energy, and if wires were used at all we ought to be able
to supply that energy without a return wire.
it is now a fact that a body may be rendered incandescent or
phosphorescent by bringing it either in single contact or merely
in the vicinity of a source of electric impulses of the proper
character, and that in this manner a quantity of light sufficient
to afford a practical illuminant may be produced. it is, therefore,
to say the least, worth while to attempt to determine the
best conditions and to invent the best appliances for attaining
this object.[pg ]
some experiences have already been gained in this direction,
and i will dwell on them briefly, in the hope that they might
prove useful.
the heating of a conducting body inclosed in a bulb, and connected
to a source of rapidly alternating electric impulses, is
dependent on so many things of a different nature, that it would
be difficult to give a generally applicable rule under which the
maximum heating occurs. as regards the size of the vessel, i
have lately found that at ordinary or only slightly differing
atmospheric pressures, when air is a good insulator, and hence
practically the same amount of energy by a certain potential and
frequency is given off from the body, whether the bulb be small
or large, the body is brought to a higher temperature if enclosed
in a small bulb, because of the better confinement of heat in this
case.
at lower pressures, when air becomes more or less conducting,
or if the air be sufficiently warmed to become conducting, the
body is rendered more intensely incandescent in a large bulb,
obviously because, under otherwise equal conditions of test, more
energy may be given off from the body when the bulb is large.
at very high degrees of exhaustion, when the matter in the
bulb becomes "radiant," a large bulb has still an advantage, but
a comparatively slight one, over the small bulb.
finally, at excessively high degrees of exhaustion, which cannot
be reached except by the employment of special means, there
seems to be, beyond a certain and rather small size of vessel, no
perceptible difference in the heating.
these observations were the result of a number of experiments,
of which one, showing the effect of the size of the bulb at a high
degree of exhaustion, may be described and shown here, as it
presents a feature of interest. three spherical bulbs of  inches,
 inches and  inches diameter were taken, and in the centre of
each was mounted an equal length of an ordinary incandescent
lamp filament of uniform thickness. in each bulb the piece of
filament was fastened to the leading-in wire of platinum, contained
in a glass stem sealed in the bulb; care being taken, of
course, to make everything as nearly alike as possible. on each
glass stem in the inside of the bulb was slipped a highly polished
tube made of aluminum sheet, which fitted the stem and was held
on it by spring pressure. the function of this aluminum tube will
be explained subsequently. in each bulb an equal length of fila[pg ]ment
protruded above the metal tube. it is sufficient to say now
that under these conditions equal lengths of filament of the same
thickness—in other words, bodies of equal bulk—were brought
to incandescence. the three bulbs were sealed to a glass tube,
which was connected to a sprengel pump. when a high vacuum
had been reached, the glass tube carrying the bulbs was sealed
off. a current was then turned on successively on each bulb,
and it was found that the filaments came to about the same
brightness, and, if anything, the smallest bulb, which was placed
midway between the two larger ones, may have been slightly
brighter. this result was expected, for when either of the bulbs
was connected to the coil the luminosity spread through the
other two, hence the three bulbs constituted really one vessel.
when all the three bulbs were connected in multiple arc to the
coil, in the largest of them the filament glowed brightest, in the
next smaller it was a little less bright, and in the smallest it only
came to redness. the bulbs were then sealed off and separately
tried. the brightness of the filaments was now such as would
have been expected on the supposition that the energy given off
was proportionate to the surface of the bulb, this surface in each
case representing one of the coatings of a condenser. accordingly,
there was less difference between the largest and the
middle sized than between the latter and the smallest bulb.
an interesting observation was made in this experiment. the
three bulbs were suspended from a straight bare wire connected
to a terminal of a coil, the largest bulb being placed at the end
of the wire, at some distance from it the smallest bulb, and at an
equal distance from the latter the middle-sized one. the carbons
glowed then in both the larger bulbs about as expected, but the
smallest did not get its share by far. this observation led me to
exchange the position of the bulbs, and i then observed that
whichever of the bulbs was in the middle was by far less bright
than it was in any other position. this mystifying result was,
of course, found to be due to the electrostatic action between the
bulbs. when they were placed at a considerable distance, or
when they were attached to the corners of an equilateral triangle
of copper wire, they glowed in about the order determined by
their surfaces.
as to the shape of the vessel, it is also of some importance, especially
at high degrees of exhaustion. of all the possible constructions,
it seems that a spherical globe with the refractory body[pg ]
mounted in its centre is the best to employ. by experience it
has been demonstrated that in such a globe a refractory body of
a given bulk is more easily brought to incandescence than when
differently shaped bulbs are used. there is also an advantage in
giving to the incandescent body the shape of a sphere, for self-evident
reasons. in any case the body should be mounted in the
centre, where the atoms rebounding from the glass collide. this
object is best attained in the spherical bulb; but it is also attained
in a cylindrical vessel with one or two straight filaments
coinciding with its axis, and possibly also in parabolical or spherical
bulbs with refractory body or bodies placed in the focus or
foci of the same; though the latter is not probable, as the electrified
atoms should in all cases rebound normally from the
surface they strike, unless the speed were excessive, in which
case they would probably follow the general law of reflection.
no matter what shape the vessel may have, if the exhaustion be
low, a filament mounted in the globe is brought to the same
degree of incandescence in all parts; but if the exhaustion be
high and the bulb be spherical or pear-shaped, as usual, focal
points form and the filament is heated to a higher degree at or
near such points.
to illustrate the effect, i have here two small bulbs which are
alike, only one is exhausted to a low and the other to a very high
degree. when connected to the coil, the filament in the former
glows uniformly throughout all its length; whereas in the latter,
that portion of the filament which is in the centre of the bulb
glows far more intensely than the rest. a curious point is that
the phenomenon occurs even if two filaments are mounted in a
bulb, each being connected to one terminal of the coil, and, what
is still more curious, if they be very near together, provided the
vacuum be very high. i noted in experiments with such bulbs
that the filaments would give way usually at a certain point, and
in the first trials i attributed it to a defect in the carbon. but
when the phenomenon occurred many times in succession i
recognized its real cause.
in order to bring a refractory body inclosed in a bulb to incandescence,
it is desirable, on account of economy, that all the
energy supplied to the bulb from the source should reach without
loss the body to be heated; from there, and from nowhere else,
it should be radiated. it is, of course, out of the question to
reach this theoretical result, but it is possible by a proper construction
of the illuminating device to approximate it more or less.[pg ]
for many reasons, the refractory body is placed in the centre
of the bulb, and it is usually supported on a glass stem containing
the leading-in wire. as the potential of this wire is alternated,
the rarefied gas surrounding the stem is acted upon inductively,
and the glass stem is violently bombarded and heated. in this
manner by far the greater portion of the energy supplied to the
bulb—especially when exceedingly high frequencies are used—may
be lost for the purpose contemplated. to obviate this loss,
or at least to reduce it to a minimum, i usually screen the rarefied
gas surrounding the stem from the inductive action of the leading-in
wire by providing the stem with a tube or coating of conducting
material. it seems beyond doubt that the best among metals to
employ for this purpose is aluminum, on account of its many remarkable
properties. its only fault is that it is easily fusible,
and, therefore, its distance from the incandescing body should be
properly estimated. usually, a thin tube, of a diameter somewhat
smaller than that of the glass stem, is made of the finest
aluminum sheet, and slipped on the stem. the tube is conveniently
prepared by wrapping around a rod fastened in a lathe a
piece of aluminum sheet of proper size, grasping the sheet firmly
with clean chamois leather or blotting paper, and spinning the
rod very fast. the sheet is wound tightly around the rod, and a
highly polished tube of one or three layers of the sheet is obtained.
when slipped on the stem, the pressure is generally sufficient to
prevent it from slipping off, but, for safety, the lower edge of
the sheet may be turned inside. the upper inside corner of the
sheet—that is, the one which is nearest to the refractory incandescent
body—should be cut out diagonally, as it often happens
that, in consequence of the intense heat, this corner turns toward
the inside and comes very near to, or in contact with, the wire, or
filament, supporting the refractory body. the greater part of
the energy supplied to the bulb is then used up in heating the
metal tube, and the bulb is rendered useless for the purpose.
the aluminum sheet should project above the glass stem more or
less—one inch or so—or else, if the glass be too close to the incandescing
body, it may be strongly heated and become more or
less conducting, whereupon it may be ruptured, or may, by its
conductivity, establish a good electrical connection between the
metal tube and the leading-in wire, in which case, again, most of
the energy will be lost in heating the former. perhaps the best
way is to make the top of the glass tube, for about an inch, of a[pg ]
much smaller diameter. to still further reduce the danger
arising from the heating of the glass stem, and also with the view
of preventing an electrical connection between the metal tube
and the electrode, i preferably wrap the stem with several layers
of thin mica, which extends at least as far as the metal tube. in
some bulbs i have also used an outside insulating cover.
the preceding remarks are only made to aid the experimenter
in the first trials, for the difficulties which he encounters he may
soon find means to overcome in his own way.
to illustrate the effect of the screen, and the advantage of
using it, i have here two bulbs of the same size, with their stems,
leading-in wires and incandescent lamp filaments tied to the latter,
as nearly alike as possible. the stem of one bulb is provided
with an aluminum tube, the stem of the other has none. originally
the two bulbs were joined by a tube which was connected
to a sprengel pump. when a high vacuum had been reached,
first the connecting tube, and then the bulbs, were sealed off;
they are therefore of the same degree of exhaustion. when they
are separately connected to the coil giving a certain potential, the
carbon filament in the bulb provided with the aluminum screen
is rendered highly incandescent, while the filament in the other
bulb may, with the same potential, not even come to redness,
although in reality the latter bulb takes generally more energy
than the former. when they are both connected together to the
terminal, the difference is even more apparent, showing the importance
of the screening. the metal tube placed on the stem containing
the leading-in wire performs really two distinct functions: first,
it acts more or less as an electrostatic screen, thus economizing
the energy supplied to the bulb; and, second, to whatever extent
it may fail to act electrostatically, it acts mechanically, preventing
the bombardment, and consequently intense heating and
possible deterioration of the slender support of the refractory incandescent
body, or of the glass stem containing the leading-in
wire. i say slender support, for it is evident that in order to
confine the heat more completely to the incandescing body its support
should be very thin, so as to carry away the smallest possible
amount of heat by conduction. of all the supports used i have
found an ordinary incandescent lamp filament to be the best,
principally because among conductors it can withstand the highest
degree of heat.
the effectiveness of the metal tube as an electrostatic screen
depends largely on the degree of exhaustion.[pg ]
at excessively high degrees of exhaustion—which are reached
by using great care and special means in connection with the
sprengel pump—when the matter in the globe is in the ultra-radiant
state, it acts most perfectly. the shadow of the upper
edge of the tube is then sharply defined upon the bulb.
at a somewhat lower degree of exhaustion, which is about the
ordinary "non-striking" vacuum, and generally as long as the
matter moves predominantly in straight lines, the screen still
does well. in elucidation of the preceding remark it is necessary
to state that what is a "non-striking" vacuum for a coil operated
as ordinarily, by impulses, or currents, of low frequency, is not
so, by far, when the coil is operated by currents of very high frequency.
in such case the discharge may pass with great freedom
through the rarefied gas through which a low frequency discharge
may not pass, even though the potential be much higher.
at ordinary atmospheric pressures just the reverse rule holds
good: the higher the frequency, the less the spark discharge is
able to jump between the terminals, especially if they are knobs
or spheres of some size.
finally, at very low degrees of exhaustion, when the gas is well
conducting, the metal tube not only does not act as an electrostatic
screen, but even is a drawback, aiding to a considerable
extent the dissipation of the energy laterally from the leading-in
wire. this, of course, is to be expected. in this case, namely,
the metal tube is in good electrical connection with the leading-in
wire, and most of the bombardment is directed upon the tube.
as long as the electrical connection is not good, the conducting
tube is always of some advantage, for although it may not greatly
economize energy, still it protects the support of the refractory
button, and is the means of concentrating more energy upon the
same.
to whatever extent the aluminum tube performs the function
of a screen, its usefulness is therefore limited to very high degrees
of exhaustion when it is insulated from the electrode—that
is, when the gas as a whole is non-conducting, and the molecules,
or atoms, act as independent carriers of electric charges.
in addition to acting as a more or less effective screen, in the
true meaning of the word, the conducting tube or coating may
also act, by reason of its conductivity, as a sort of equalizer or
dampener of the bombardment against the stem. to be explicit,
i assume the action to be as follows: suppose a rhythmical bom[pg ]bardment
to occur against the conducting tube by reason of its
imperfect action as a screen, it certainly must happen that some
molecules, or atoms, strike the tube sooner than others. those
which come first in contact with it give up their superfluous
charge, and the tube is electrified, the electrification instantly
spreading over its surface. but this must diminish the energy
lost in the bombardment, for two reasons: first, the charge given
up by the atoms spreads over a great area, and hence the electric
density at any point is small, and the atoms are repelled with less
energy than they would be if they struck against a good insulator;
secondly, as the tube is electrified by the atoms which first
come in contact with it, the progress of the following atoms
against the tube is more or less checked by the repulsion which
the electrified tube must exert upon the similarly electrified
atoms. this repulsion may perhaps be sufficient to prevent a
large portion of the atoms from striking the tube, but at any rate
it must diminish the energy of their impact. it is clear that
when the exhaustion is very low, and the rarefied gas well conducting,
neither of the above effects can occur, and, on the other
hand, the fewer the atoms, with the greater freedom they move;
in other words, the higher the degree of exhaustion, up to a
limit, the more telling will be both the effects.
fig. .fig. .
what i have just said may afford an explanation of the phenomenon
observed by prof. crookes, namely, that a discharge
through a bulb is established with much greater facility when an[pg ]
insulator than when a conductor is present in the same. in my
opinion, the conductor acts as a dampener of the motion of the
atoms in the two ways pointed out; hence, to cause a visible discharge
to pass through the bulb, a much higher potential is
needed if a conductor, especially of much surface, be present.
for the sake of elucidating of some of the remarks before made,
i must now refer to figs. ,  and , which illustrate
various arrangements with a type of bulb most generally used.
fig.  is a section through a spherical bulb l, with the glass
stem s, contains the leading-in wire w, which has a lamp filament
l fastened to it, serving to support the refractory button m in the
centre. m is a sheet of thin mica wound in several layers around
the stem s, and a is the aluminum tube.
fig.  illustrates such a bulb in a somewhat more advanced
stage of perfection. a metallic tube s is fastened by means of
some cement to the neck of the tube. in the tube is screwed a
plug p, of insulating material, in the centre of which is fastened
a metallic terminal t, for the connection to the leading-in wire w.
this terminal must be well insulated from the metal tube s;
therefore, if the cement used is conducting—and most generally
it is sufficiently so—the space between the plug p and the neck
of the bulb should be filled with some good insulating material,
such as mica powder.
fig.  shows a bulb made for experimental purposes. in this
bulb the aluminum tube is provided with an external connection,
which serves to investigate the effect of the tube under various
conditions. it is referred to chiefly to suggest a line of experiment
followed.
since the bombardment against the stem containing the leading-in
wire is due to the inductive action of the latter upon the
rarefied gas, it is of advantage to reduce this action as far as
practicable by employing a very thin wire, surrounded by a very
thick insulation of glass or other material, and by making the
wire passing through the rarefied gas as short as practicable. to
combine these features i employ a large tube t (fig. ), which
protrudes into the bulb to some distance, and carries on the top a
very short glass stem s, into which is sealed the leading-in wire
w, and i protect the top of the glass stem against the heat by a
small aluminum tube a and a layer of mica underneath the same,
as usual. the wire w, passing through the large tube to the
outside of the bulb, should be well insulated—with a glass tube,[pg ]
for instance—and the space between ought to be filled out with
some excellent insulator. among many insulating powders i
have found that mica powder is the best to employ. if this precaution
is not taken, the tube t, protruding into the bulb, will
surely be cracked in consequence of the heating by the brushes
which are apt to form in the upper part of the tube, near the exhausted
globe, especially if the vacuum be excellent, and therefore
the potential necessary to operate the lamp be very high.
fig. .fig. .
fig.  illustrates a similar arrangement, with a large tube t
protruding into the part of the bulb containing the refractory
button m. in this case the wire leading from the outside into
the bulb is omitted, the energy required being supplied through
condenser coatings c c. the insulating packing p should in
this construction be tightly fitting to the glass, and rather wide,
or otherwise the discharge might avoid passing through the wire
w, which connects the inside condenser coating to the incandescent
button m.
the molecular bombardment against the glass stem in the bulb
is a source of great trouble. as an illustration i will cite a phenomenon
only too frequently and unwillingly observed. a bulb,
preferably a large one, may be taken, and a good conducting
body, such as a piece of carbon, may be mounted in it upon a platinum
wire sealed in the glass stem. the bulb may be exhausted
to a fairly high degree, nearly to the point when phosphorescence[pg ]
begins to appear. when the bulb is connected with the coil, the
piece of carbon, if small, may become highly incandescent at
first, but its brightness immediately diminishes, and then the discharge
may break through the glass somewhere in the middle of
the stem, in the form of bright sparks, in spite of the fact that
the platinum wire is in good electrical connection with the rarefied
gas through the piece of carbon or metal at the top. the
first sparks are singularly bright, recalling those drawn from a
clear surface of mercury. but, as they heat the glass rapidly,
they, of course, lose their brightness, and cease when the glass at
the ruptured place becomes incandescent, or generally sufficiently
hot to conduct. when observed for the first time the phenomenon
must appear very curious, and shows in a striking manner
how radically different alternate currents, or impulses, of high
frequency behave, as compared with steady currents, or currents
of low frequency. with such currents—namely, the latter—the
phenomenon would of course not occur. when frequencies such
as are obtained by mechanical means are used, i think that the rupture
of the glass is more or less the consequence of the bombardment,
which warms it up and impairs its insulating power; but
with frequencies obtainable with condensers i have no doubt
that the glass may give way without previous heating. although
this appears most singular at first, it is in reality what we might
expect to occur. the energy supplied to the wire leading into
the bulb is given off partly by direct action through the carbon
button, and partly by inductive action through the glass surrounding
the wire. the case is thus analogous to that in which a condenser
shunted by a conductor of low resistance is connected to
a source of alternating current. as long as the frequencies are
low, the conductor gets the most and the condenser is perfectly
safe; but when the frequency becomes excessive, the role of the
conductor may become quite insignificant. in the latter case the
difference of potential at the terminals of the condenser may become
so great as to rupture the dielectric, notwithstanding the
fact that the terminals are joined by a conductor of low resistance.
it is, of course, not necessary, when it is desired to produce
the incandescence of a body inclosed in a bulb by means of these
currents, that the body should be a conductor, for even a perfect
non-conductor may be quite as readily heated. for this purpose
it is sufficient to surround a conducting electrode with a non-con[pg ]ducting
material, as, for instance, in the bulb described before in
fig. , in which a thin incandescent lamp filament is coated
with a non-conductor, and supports a button of the same material
on the top. at the start the bombardment goes on by inductive
action through the non-conductor, until the same is sufficiently
heated to become conducting, when the bombardment continues
in the ordinary way.
fig. .fig. .
a different arrangement used in some of the bulbs constructed
is illustrated in fig. . in this instance a non-conductor m is
mounted in a piece of common arc light carbon so as to project
some small distance above the latter. the carbon piece is connected
to the leading-in wire passing through a glass stem, which
is wrapped with several layers of mica. an aluminum tube a is
employed as usual for screening. it is so arranged that it reaches
very nearly as high as the carbon and only the non-conductor m
projects a little above it. the bombardment goes at first against
the upper surface of carbon, the lower parts being protected by
the aluminum tube. as soon, however, as the non-conductor m
is heated it is rendered good conducting, and then it becomes the
centre of the bombardment, being most exposed to the same.
i have also constructed during these experiments many such
single-wire bulbs with or without internal electrode, in which the
radiant matter was projected against, or focused upon, the body[pg ]
to be rendered incandescent. fig.  (page ) illustrates one
of the bulbs used. it consists of a spherical globe l, provided
with a long neck n, on top, for increasing the action in some cases
by the application of an external conducting coating. the globe l
is blown out on the bottom into a very small bulb b, which serves
to hold it firmly in a socket s of insulating material into which it
is cemented. a fine lamp filament f, supported on a wire w,
passes through the centre of the globe l. the filament is rendered
incandescent in the middle portion, where the bombardment
proceeding from the lower inside surface of the globe is
most intense. the lower portion of the globe, as far as the
socket s reaches, is rendered conducting, either by a tinfoil coating
or otherwise, and the external electrode is connected to a
terminal of the coil.
the arrangement diagrammatically indicated in fig.  was
found to be an inferior one when it was desired to render incandescent
a filament or button supported in the centre of the globe,
but it was convenient when the object was to excite phosphorescence.
in many experiments in which bodies of different kind were
mounted in the bulb as, for instance, indicated in fig. , some
observations of interest were made.
it was found, among other things, that in such cases, no matter
where the bombardment began, just as soon as a high temperature
was reached there was generally one of the bodies
which seemed to take most of the bombardment upon itself, the
other, or others, being thereby relieved. the quality appeared
to depend principally on the point of fusion, and on the facility
with which the body was "evaporated," or, generally speaking,
disintegrated—meaning by the latter term not only the throwing
off of atoms, but likewise of large lumps. the observation made
was in accordance with generally accepted notions. in a highly
exhausted bulb, electricity is carried off from the electrode by
independent carriers, which are partly the atoms, or molecules,
of the residual atmosphere, and partly the atoms, molecules, or
lumps thrown off from the electrode. if the electrode is composed
of bodies of different character, and if one of these is more
easily disintegrated than the other, most of the electricity supplied
is carried off from that body, which is then brought to a
higher temperature than the others, and this the more, as upon
an increase of the temperature the body is still more easily disintegrated.
[pg ]
it seems to me quite probable that a similar process takes place
in the bulb even with a homogeneous electrode, and i think it
to be the principal cause of the disintegration. there is bound
to be some irregularity, even if the surface is highly polished,
which, of course, is impossible with most of the refractory bodies
employed as electrodes. assume that a point of the electrode
gets hotter; instantly most of the discharge passes through that
point, and a minute patch it probably fused and evaporated. it
is now possible that in consequence of the violent disintegration
the spot attacked sinks in temperature, or that a counter force is
created, as in an arc; at any rate, the local tearing off meets with
the limitations incident to the experiment, whereupon the same
process occurs on another place. to the eye the electrode appears
uniformly brilliant, but there are upon it points constantly
shifting and wandering around, of a temperature far above the
mean, and this materially hastens the process of deterioration.
that some such thing occurs, at least when the electrode is at a lower
temperature, sufficient experimental evidence can be obtained in
the following manner: exhaust a bulb to a very high degree, so
that with a fairly high potential the discharge cannot pass—that
is, not a luminous one, for a weak invisible discharge occurs
always, in all probability. now raise slowly and carefully the
potential, leaving the primary current on no more than for an
instant. at a certain point, two, three, or half a dozen phosphorescent
spots will appear on the globe. these places of the
glass are evidently more violently bombarded than others, this
being due to the unevenly distributed electric density, necessitated,
of course, by sharp projections, or, generally speaking, irregularities
of the electrode. but the luminous patches are
constantly changing in position, which is especially well observable
if one manages to produce very few, and this indicates that
the configuration of the electrode is rapidly changing.
from experiences of this kind i am led to infer that, in order
to be most durable, the refractory button in the bulb should be
in the form of a sphere with a highly polished surface. such a
small sphere could be manufactured from a diamond or some
other crystal, but a better way would be to fuse, by the employment
of extreme degrees of temperature, some oxide—as, for
instance, zirconia—into a small drop, and then keep it in the
bulb at a temperature somewhat below its point of fusion.
interesting and useful results can, no doubt, be reached in the[pg ]
direction of extreme degrees of heat. how can such high temperatures
be arrived at? how are the highest degrees of heat
reached in nature? by the impact of stars, by high speeds and
collisions. in a collision any rate of heat generation may be
attained. in a chemical process we are limited. when oxygen
and hydrogen combine, they fall, metaphorically speaking, from
a definite height. we cannot go very far with a blast, nor by
confining heat in a furnace, but in an exhausted bulb we can
concentrate any amount of energy upon a minute button. leaving
practicability out of consideration, this, then, would be the
means which, in my opinion, would enable us to reach the highest
temperature. but a great difficulty when proceeding in this way
is encountered, namely, in most cases the body is carried off before
it can fuse and form a drop. this difficulty exists principally
with an oxide, such as zirconia, because it cannot be compressed
in so hard a cake that it would not be carried off quickly.
i have endeavored repeatedly to fuse zirconia, placing it in a cup of
arc light carbon, as indicated in fig. . it glowed with a most
intense light, and the stream of the particles projected out of the
carbon cup was of a vivid white; but whether it was compressed
in a cake or made into a paste with carbon, it was carried off
before it could be fused. the carbon cup, containing zirconia,
had to be mounted very low in the neck of a large bulb, as the
heating of the glass by the projected particles of the oxide was
so rapid that in the first trial the bulb was cracked almost in an
instant, when the current was turned on. the heating of the
glass by the projected particles was found to be always greater
when the carbon cup contained a body which was rapidly carried
off—i presume, because in such cases, with the same potential,
higher speeds were reached, and also because, per unit of time,
more matter was projected—that is, more particles would strike
the glass.
the before-mentioned difficulty did not exist, however, when
the body mounted in the carbon cup offered great resistance to
deterioration. for instance, when an oxide was first fused in
an oxygen blast, and then mounted in the bulb, it melted very
readily into a drop.
generally, during the process of fusion, magnificent light
effects were noted, of which it would be difficult to give an adequate
idea. fig.  is intended to illustrate the effect observed
with a ruby drop. at first one may see a narrow funnel of[pg ]
white light projected against the top of the globe, where it
produces an irregularly outlined phosphorescent patch. when the
point of the ruby fuses, the phosphorescence becomes very powerful;
but as the atoms are projected with much greater speed
from the surface of the drop, soon the glass gets hot and "tired,"
and now only the outer edge of the patch glows. in this manner
an intensely phosphorescent, sharply defined line, l, corresponding
to the outline of the drop, is produced, which spreads slowly
over the globe as the drop gets larger. when the mass begins
to boil, small bubbles and cavities are formed, which cause dark
colored spots to sweep across the globe. the bulb may be
turned downward without fear of the drop falling off, as the
mass possesses considerable viscosity.
i may mention here another feature of some interest, which
i believe to have noted in the course of these experiments,
though the observations do not amount to a certitude. it appeared
that under the molecular impact caused by the rapidly
alternating potential, the body was fused and maintained in that
state at a lower temperature in a highly exhausted bulb than
was the case at normal pressure and application of heat in the
ordinary way—that is, at least, judging from the quantity of the
light emitted. one of the experiments performed may be mentioned
here by way of illustration. a small piece of pumice
stone was stuck on a platinum wire, and first melted to it in a
gas burner. the wire was next placed between two pieces of
charcoal, and a burner applied, so as to produce an intense heat,
sufficient to melt down the pumice stone into a small glass-like
button. the platinum wire had to be taken of sufficient thickness,
to prevent its melting in the fire. while in the charcoal
fire, or when held in a burner to get a better idea of the degree
of heat, the button glowed with great brilliancy. the wire with
the button was then mounted in a bulb, and upon exhausting the
same to a high degree, the current was turned on slowly, so as to
prevent the cracking of the button. the button was heated to
the point of fusion, and when it melted, it did not, apparently,
glow with the same brilliancy as before, and this would indicate
a lower temperature. leaving out of consideration the observer's
possible, and even probable, error, the question is, can a body
under these conditions be brought from a solid to a liquid state
with the evolution of less light?
when the potential of a body is rapidly alternated, it is certain[pg ]
that the structure is jarred. when the potential is very high,
although the vibrations may be few—say , per second—the
effect upon the structure may be considerable. suppose, for example,
that a ruby is melted into a drop by a steady application
of energy. when it forms a drop, it will emit visible and invisible
waves, which will be in a definite ratio, and to the eye the
drop will appear to be of a certain brilliancy. next, suppose we
diminish to any degree we choose the energy steadily supplied,
and, instead, supply energy which rises and falls according to a
certain law. now, when the drop is formed, there will be emitted
from it three different kinds of vibrations—the ordinary
visible, and two kinds of invisible waves: that is, the ordinary
dark waves of all lengths, and, in addition, waves of a well defined
character. the latter would not exist by a steady supply
of the energy; still they help to jar and loosen the structure. if
this really be the case, then the ruby drop will emit relatively
less visible and more invisible waves than before. thus it would
seem that when a platinum wire, for instance, is fused by currents
alternating with extreme rapidity, it emits at the point of fusion
less light and more visible radiation than it does when melted by
a steady current, though the total energy used up in the process
of fusion is the same in both cases. or, to cite another example,
a lamp filament is not capable of withstanding as long with currents
of extreme frequency as it does with steady currents,
assuming that it be worked at the same luminous intensity. this
means that for rapidly alternating currents the filament should
be shorter and thicker. the higher the frequency—that is, the
greater the departure from the steady flow—the worse it would
be for the filament. but if the truth of this remark were demonstrated,
it would be erroneous to conclude that such a refractory
button as used in these bulbs would be deteriorated quicker
by currents of extremely high frequency than by steady or low
frequency currents. from experience i may say that just the
opposite holds good: the button withstands the bombardment
better with currents of very high frequency. but this is due to
the fact that a high frequency discharge passes through a rarefied
gas with much greater freedom than a steady or low frequency
discharge, and this will mean that with the former we can work
with a lower potential or with a less violent impact. as long,
then, as the gas is of no consequence, a steady or low frequency
current is better; but as soon as the action of the gas is desired
and important, high frequencies are preferable.[pg ]
in the course of these experiments a great many trials were
made with all kinds of carbon buttons. electrodes made of ordinary
carbon buttons were decidedly more durable when the
buttons were obtained by the application of enormous pressure.
electrodes prepared by depositing carbon in well known ways
did not show up well; they blackened the globe very quickly.
from many experiences i conclude that lamp filaments obtained
in this manner can be advantageously used only with low potentials
and low frequency currents. some kinds of carbon withstand
so well that, in order to bring them to the point of fusion, it is
necessary to employ very small buttons. in this case the observation
is rendered very difficult on account of the intense heat
produced. nevertheless there can be no doubt that all kinds of
carbon are fused under the molecular bombardment, but the
liquid state must be one of great instability. of all the bodies
tried there were two which withstood best—diamond and carborundum.
these two showed up about equally, but the latter
was preferable for many reasons. as it is more than likely that
this body is not yet generally known, i will venture to call your
attention to it.
it has been recently produced by mr. e. g. acheson, of
monongahela city, pa., u. s. a. it is intended to replace ordinary
diamond powder for polishing precious stones, etc., and i
have been informed that it accomplishes this object quite successfully.
i do not know why the name "carborundum" has
been given to it, unless there is something in the process of its
manufacture which justifies this selection. through the kindness
of the inventor, i obtained a short while ago some samples which
i desired to test in regard to their qualities of phosphorescence
and capability of withstanding high degrees of heat.
carborundum can be obtained in two forms—in the form of
"crystals" and of powder. the former appear to the naked eye
dark colored, but are very brilliant; the latter is of nearly the
same color as ordinary diamond powder, but very much finer.
when viewed under a microscope the samples of crystals given
to me did not appear to have any definite form, but rather resembled
pieces of broken up egg coal of fine quality. the
majority were opaque, but there were some which were transparent
and colored. the crystals are a kind of carbon containing
some impurities; they are extremely hard, and withstand for a
long time even an oxygen blast. when the blast is directed[pg ]
against them they at first form a cake of some compactness, probably
in consequence of the fusion of impurities they contain. the
mass withstands for a very long time the blast without further
fusion; but a slow carrying off, or burning, occurs, and, finally,
a small quantity of a glass-like residue is left, which, i suppose,
is melted alumina. when compressed strongly they conduct very
well, but not as well as ordinary carbon. the powder, which is
obtained from the crystals in some way, is practically non-conducting.
it affords a magnificent polishing material for stones.
the time has been too short to make a satisfactory study of
the properties of this product, but enough experience has been
gained in a few weeks i have experimented upon it to say that
it does possess some remarkable properties in many respects. it
withstands excessively high degrees of heat, it is little deteriorated
by molecular bombardment, and it does not blacken the globe as
ordinary carbon does. the only difficulty which i have experienced
in its use in connection with these experiments was to find some
binding material which would resist the heat and the effect of the
bombardment as successfully as carborundum itself does.
i have here a number of bulbs which i have provided with
buttons of carborundum. to make such a button of carborundum
crystals i proceed in the following manner: i take an ordinary
lamp filament and dip its point in tar, or some other
thick substance or paint which may be readily carbonized. i
next pass the point of the filament through the crystals, and then
hold it vertically over a hot plate. the tar softens and forms a
drop on the point of the filament, the crystals adhering to the
surface of the drop. by regulating the distance from the plate
the tar is slowly dried out and the button becomes solid. i then
once more dip the button in tar and hold it again over a plate
until the tar is evaporated, leaving only a hard mass which firmly
binds the crystals. when a larger button is required i repeat
the process several times, and i generally also cover the filament
a certain distance below the button with crystals. the button
being mounted in a bulb, when a good vacuum has been reached,
first a weak and then a strong discharge is passed through the
bulb to carbonize the tar and expel all gases, and later it is brought
to a very intense incandescence.
when the powder is used i have found it best to proceed as
follows: i make a thick paint of carborundum and tar, and pass
a lamp filament through the paint. taking then most of the[pg ]
paint off by rubbing the filament against a piece of chamois
leather, i hold it over a hot plate until the tar evaporates and the
coating becomes firm. i repeat this process as many times as it
is necessary to obtain a certain thickness of coating. on the
point of the coated filament i form a button in the same
manner.
there is no doubt that such a button—properly prepared under
great pressure—of carborundum, especially of powder of the best
quality, will withstand the effect of the bombardment fully as
well as anything we know. the difficulty is that the binding
material gives way, and the carborundum is slowly thrown off
after some time. as it does not seem to blacken the globe in the
least, it might be found useful for coating the filaments of ordinary
incandescent lamps, and i think that it is even possible to produce
thin threads or sticks of carborundum which will replace the ordinary
filaments in an incandescent lamp. a carborundum coating
seems to be more durable than other coatings, not only
because the carborundum can withstand high degrees of heat, but
also because it seems to unite with the carbon better than any
other material i have tried. a coating of zirconia or any other
oxide, for instance, is far more quickly destroyed. i prepared
buttons of diamond dust in the same manner as of carborundum,
and these came in durability nearest to those prepared of carborundum,
but the binding paste gave way much more quickly
in the diamond buttons; this, however, i attributed to the size
and irregularity of the grains of the diamond.
it was of interest to find whether carborundum possesses the
quality of phosphorescence. one is, of course, prepared to encounter
two difficulties: first, as regards the rough product, the
"crystals," they are good conducting, and it is a fact that conductors
do not phosphoresce; second, the powder, being exceedingly
fine, would not be apt to exhibit very prominently this
quality, since we know that when crystals, even such as diamond
or ruby, are finely powdered, they lose the property of phosphorescence
to a considerable degree.
the question presents itself here, can a conductor phosphoresce?
what is there in such a body as a metal, for instance, that
would deprive it of the quality of phosphoresence, unless it is
that property which characterizes it as a conductor? for it is a
fact that most of the phosphorescent bodies lose that quality when
they are sufficiently heated to become more or less conducting.[pg ]
then, if a metal be in a large measure, or perhaps entirely, deprived
of that property, it should be capable of phosphoresence.
therefore it is quite possible that at some extremely high frequency,
when behaving practically as a non-conductor, a metal
or any other conductor might exhibit the quality of phosphoresence,
even though it be entirely incapable of phosphorescing
under the impact of a low-frequency discharge. there is, however,
another possible way how a conductor might at least appear
to phosphoresce.
considerable doubt still exists as to what really is phosphorescence,
and as to whether the various phenomena comprised
under this head are due to the same causes. suppose that in an
exhausted bulb, under the molecular impact, the surface of a
piece of metal or other conductor is rendered strongly luminous,
but at the same time it is found that it remains comparatively
cool, would not this luminosity be called phosphorescence? now
such a result, theoretically at least, is possible, for it is a mere
question of potential or speed. assume the potential of the
electrode, and consequently the speed of the projected atoms, to
be sufficiently high, the surface of the metal piece, against which
the atoms are projected, would be rendered highly incandescent,
since the process of heat generation would be incomparably faster
than that of radiating or conducting away from the surface of
the collision. in the eye of the observer a single impact of the
atoms would cause an instantaneous flash, but if the impacts were
repeated with sufficient rapidity, they would produce a continuous
impression upon his retina. to him then the surface of the
metal would appear continuously incandescent and of constant
luminous intensity, while in reality the light would be either
intermittent, or at least changing periodically in intensity. the
metal piece would rise in temperature until equilibrium was
attained—that is, until the energy continuously radiated would
equal that intermittently supplied. but the supplied energy
might under such conditions not be sufficient to bring the body
to any more than a very moderate mean temperature, especially
if the frequency of the atomic impacts be very low—just enough
that the fluctuation of the intensity of the light emitted could
not be detected by the eye. the body would now, owing to the
manner in which the energy is supplied, emit a strong light, and
yet be at a comparatively very low mean temperature. how
should the observer name the luminosity thus produced? even if[pg ]
the analysis of the light would teach him something definite, still
he would probably rank it under the phenomena of phosphorescence.
it is conceivable that in such a way both conducting
and non-conducting bodies may be maintained at a certain luminous
intensity, but the energy required would very greatly vary
with the nature and properties of the bodies.
these and some foregoing remarks of a speculative nature
were made merely to bring out curious features of alternate
currents or electric impulses. by their help we may cause a body
to emit more light, while at a certain mean temperature, than it
would emit if brought to that temperature by a steady supply;
and, again, we may bring a body to the point of fusion, and cause
it to emit less light than when fused by the application of energy
in ordinary ways. it all depends on how we supply the energy,
and what kind of vibrations we set up; in one case the vibrations
are more, in the other less, adapted to affect our sense of vision.
some effects, which i had not observed before, obtained with
carborundum in the first trials, i attributed to phosphorescence,
but in subsequent experiments it appeared that it was devoid of
that quality. the crystals possess a noteworthy feature. in a
bulb provided with a single electrode in the shape of a small
circular metal disc, for instance, at a certain degree of exhaustion
the electrode is covered with a milky film, which is separated by
a dark space from the glow filling the bulb. when the metal
disc is covered with carborundum crystals, the film is far more
intense, and snow-white. this i found later to be merely an
effect of the bright surface of the crystals, for when an aluminum
electrode was highly polished, it exhibited more or less the same
phenomenon. i made a number of experiments with the samples
of crystals obtained, principally because it would have been of
special interest to find that they are capable of phosphorescence,
on account of their being conducting. i could not produce phosphorescence
distinctly, but i must remark that a decisive opinion
cannot be formed until other experimenters have gone over the
same ground.
the powder behaved in some experiments as though it contained
alumina, but it did not exhibit with sufficient distinctness
the red of the latter. its dead color brightens considerably under
the molecular impact, but i am now convinced it does not
phosphoresce. still, the tests with the powder are not conclusive,
because powdered carborundum probably does not behave like a[pg ]
phosphorescent sulphide, for example, which could be finely
powdered without impairing the phosphorescence, but rather like
powdered ruby or diamond, and therefore it would be necessary,
in order to make a decisive test, to obtain it in a large lump and
polish up the surface.
if the carborundum proves useful in connection with these
and similar experiments, its chief value will be found in the
production of coatings, thin conductors, buttons, or other electrodes
capable of withstanding extremely high degrees of heat.
the production of a small electrode, capable of withstanding
enormous temperatures, i regard as of the greatest importance
in the manufacture of light. it would enable us to obtain, by
means of currents of very high frequencies, certainly  times, if
not more, the quantity of light which is obtained in the present
incandescent lamp by the same expenditure of energy. this
estimate may appear to many exaggerated, but in reality i think
it is far from being so. as this statement might be misunderstood,
i think it is necessary to expose clearly the problem with
which, in this line of work, we are confronted, and the manner
in which, in my opinion, a solution will be arrived at.
any one who begins a study of the problem will be apt to
think that what is wanted in a lamp with an electrode is a very
high degree of incandescence of the electrode. there he will be
mistaken. the high incandescence of the button is a necessary
evil, but what is really wanted is the high incandescence of the
gas surrounding the button. in other words, the problem in
such a lamp is to bring a mass of gas to the highest possible incandescence.
the higher the incandescence, the quicker the
mean vibration, the greater is the economy of the light production.
but to maintain a mass of gas at a high degree of incandescence
in a glass vessel, it will always be necessary to keep the incandescent
mass away from the glass; that is, to confine it as much as
possible to the central portion of the globe.
in one of the experiments this evening a brush was produced
at the end of a wire. the brush was a flame, a source of heat
and light. it did not emit much perceptible heat, nor did it
glow with an intense light; but is it the less a flame because it
does not scorch my hand? is it the less a flame because it does
not hurt my eyes by its brilliancy? the problem is precisely to
produce in the bulb such a flame, much smaller in size, but incomparably
more powerful. were there means at hand for[pg ]
producing electric impulses of a sufficiently high frequency, and
for transmitting them, the bulb could be done away with, unless
it were used to protect the electrode, or to economize the energy
by confining the heat. but as such means are not at disposal, it
becomes necessary to place the terminal in the bulb and rarefy
the air in the same. this is done merely to enable the apparatus
to perform the work which it is not capable of performing at ordinary
air pressure. in the bulb we are able to intensify the
action to any degree—so far that the brush emits a powerful
light.
the intensity of the light emitted depends principally on the
frequency and potential of the impulses, and on the electric density
on the surface of the electrode. it is of the greatest importance
to employ the smallest possible button, in order to push
the density very far. under the violent impact of the molecules
of the gas surrounding it, the small electrode is of course brought
to an extremely high temperature, but around it is a mass of
highly incandescent gas, a flame photosphere, many hundred
times the volume of the electrode. with a diamond, carborundum
or zirconia button the photosphere can be as much as one
thousand times the volume of the button. without much reflection
one would think that in pushing so far the incandescence
of the electrode it would be instantly volatilized. but after a
careful consideration one would find that, theoretically, it should
not occur, and in this fact—which, moreover, is experimentally
demonstrated—lies principally the future value of such a lamp.
at first, when the bombardment begins, most of the work is
performed on the surface of the button, but when a highly conducting
photosphere is formed the button is comparatively relieved.
the higher the incandescence of the photosphere, the
more it approaches in conductivity to that of the electrode, and
the more, therefore, the solid and the gas form one conducting
body. the consequence is that the further the incandescence is
forced the more work, comparatively, is performed on the gas,
and the less on the electrode. the formation of a powerful
photosphere is consequently the very means for protecting the
electrode. this protection, of course, is a relative one, and it
should not be thought that by pushing the incandescence higher
the electrode is actually less deteriorated. still, theoretically,
with extreme frequencies, this result must be reached, but probably
at a temperature too high for most of the refractory bodies[pg ]
known. given, then, an electrode which can withstand to a very
high limit the effect of the bombardment and outward strain, it
would be safe, no matter how much it was forced beyond that
limit. in an incandescent lamp quite different considerations
apply. there the gas is not at all concerned; the whole of the
work is performed on the filament; and the life of the lamp
diminishes so rapidly with the increase of the degree of incandescence
that economical reasons compel us to work it at a low
incandescence. but if an incandescent lamp is operated with
currents of very high frequency, the action of the gas cannot be
neglected, and the rules for the most economical working must
be considerably modified.
in order to bring such a lamp with one or two electrodes to a
great perfection, it is necessary to employ impulses of very high
frequency. the high frequency secures, among others, two chief
advantages, which have a most important bearing upon the
economy of the light production. first, the deterioration of the
electrode is reduced by reason of the fact that we employ a great
many small impacts, instead of a few violent ones, which quickly
shatter the structure; secondly, the formation of a large photosphere
is facilitated.
in order to reduce the deterioration of the electrode to the
minimum, it is desirable that the vibration be harmonic, for any
suddenness hastens the process of destruction. an electrode lasts
much longer when kept at incandescence by currents, or impulses,
obtained from a high frequency alternator, which rise and fall
more or less harmonically, than by impulses obtained from a disruptive
discharge coil. in the latter case there is no doubt that
most of the damage is done by the fundamental sudden discharges.
one of the elements of loss in such a lamp is the bombardment
of the globe. as the potential is very high, the molecules
are projected with great speed; they strike the glass, and usually excite
a strong phosphorescence. the effect produced is very pretty,
but for economical reasons it would be perhaps preferable to prevent,
or at least reduce to a minimum, the bombardment against
the globe, as in such case it is, as a rule, not the object to excite
phosphorescence, and as some loss of energy results from the
bombardment. this loss in the bulb is principally dependent
on the potential of the impulses and on the electric density on
the surface of the electrode. in employing very high frequen[pg ]cies
the loss of energy by the bombardment is greatly reduced,
for, first, the potential needed to perform a given amount of work
is much smaller; and, secondly, by producing a highly conducting
photosphere around the electrode, the same result is obtained
as though the electrode were much larger, which is equivalent to
a smaller electric density. but be it by the diminution of the
maximum potential or of the density, the gain is effected in the
same manner, namely, by avoiding violent shocks, which strain
the glass much beyond its limit of elasticity. if the frequency
could be brought high enough, the loss due to the imperfect
elasticity of the glass would be entirely negligible. the loss due
to bombardment of the globe may, however, be reduced by using
two electrodes instead of one. in such case each of the electrodes
may be connected to one of the terminals; or else, if it is
preferable to use only one wire, one electrode may be connected
to one terminal and the other to the ground or to an insulated
body of some surface, as, for instance, a shade on the lamp. in
the latter case, unless some judgment is used, one of the electrodes
might glow more intensely than the other.
but on the whole i find it preferable, when using such high
frequencies, to employ only one electrode and one connecting
wire. i am convinced that the illuminating device of the near
future will not require for its operation more than one lead, and,
at any rate, it will have no leading-in wire, since the energy required
can be as well transmitted through the glass. in experimental
bulbs the leading-in wire is not generally used on account
of convenience, as in employing condenser coatings in the manner
indicated in fig. , for example, there is some difficulty in
fitting the parts, but these difficulties would not exist if a great
many bulbs were manufactured; otherwise the energy can be
conveyed through the glass as well as through a wire, and with
these high frequencies the losses are very small. such illustrating
devices will necessarily involve the use of very high
potentials, and this, in the eyes of practical men, might be an objectionable
feature. yet, in reality, high potentials are not
objectionable—certainly not in the least so far as the safety of
the devices is concerned.
there are two ways of rendering an electric appliance safe.
one is to use low potentials, the other is to determine the dimensions
of the apparatus so that it is safe, no matter how high a
potential is used. of the two, the latter seems to me the better[pg ]
way, for then the safety is absolute, unaffected by any possible
combination of circumstances which might render even a low-potential
appliance dangerous to life and property. but the practical
conditions require not only the judicious determination of the
dimensions of the apparatus; they likewise necessitate the employment
of energy of the proper kind. it is easy, for instance,
to construct a transformer capable of giving, when operated from
an ordinary alternate current machine of low tension, say ,
volts, which might be required to light a highly exhausted phosphorescent
tube, so that, in spite of the high potential, it is
perfectly safe, the shock from it producing no inconvenience.
still such a transformer would be expensive, and in itself inefficient;
and, besides, what energy was obtained from it would not
be economically used for the production of light. the economy
demands the employment of energy in the form of extremely rapid
vibrations. the problem of producing light has been likened to
that of maintaining a certain high-pitch note by means of a bell.
it should be said a barely audible note; and even these words
would not express it, so wonderful is the sensitiveness of the eye.
we may deliver powerful blows at long intervals, waste a good
deal of energy, and still not get what we want; or we may keep
up the note by delivering frequent taps, and get nearer to the
object sought by the expenditure of much less energy. in the
production of light, as far as the illuminating device is concerned,
there can be only one rule—that is, to use as high frequencies as
can be obtained; but the means for the production and conveyance
of impulses of such character impose, at present at least,
great limitations. once it is decided to use very high frequencies,
the return wire becomes unnecessary, and all the appliances
are simplified. by the use of obvious means the same result is
obtained as though the return wire were used. it is sufficient for
this purpose to bring in contact with the bulb, or merely in the
vicinity of the same, an insulated body of some surface. the
surface need, of course, be the smaller, the higher the frequency
and potential used, and necessarily, also, the higher the economy
of the lamp or other device.
this plan of working has been resorted to on several occasions
this evening. so, for instance, when the incandescence of a
button was produced by grasping the bulb with the hand, the
body of the experimenter merely served to intensify the action.
the bulb used was similar to that illustrated in fig. , and[pg ]
the coil was excited to a small potential, not sufficient to bring
the button to incandescence when the bulb was hanging from
the wire; and incidentally, in order to perform the experiment
in a more suitable manner, the button was taken so large that a
perceptible time had to elapse before, upon grasping the bulb, it
could be rendered incandescent. the contact with the bulb was,
of course, quite unnecessary. it is easy, by using a rather large
bulb with an exceedingly small electrode, to adjust the conditions
so that the latter is brought to bright incandescence by the mere
approach of the experimenter within a few feet of the bulb, and
that the incandescence subsides upon his receding.
fig. .fig. .
in another experiment, when phosphorescence was excited, a
similar bulb was used. here again, originally, the potential was
not sufficient to excite phosphorescence until the action was intensified—in
this case, however, to present a different feature, by
touching the socket with a metallic object held in the hand. the
electrode in the bulb was a carbon button so large that it could
not be brought to incandescence, and thereby spoil the effect
produced by phosphorescence.
again, in another of the early experiments, a bulb was used,[pg ]
as illustrated in fig. . in this instance, by touching the bulb
with one or two fingers, one or two shadows of the stem inside
were projected against the glass, the touch of the finger producing
the same results as the application of an external negative electrode
under ordinary circumstances.
in all these experiments the action was intensified by augmenting
the capacity at the end of the lead connected to the terminal.
as a rule, it is not necessary to resort to such means, and would
be quite unnecessary with still higher frequencies; but when it
is desired, the bulb, or tube, can be easily adapted to the purpose.
in fig. , for example, an experimental bulb, l, is shown,
which is provided with a neck, n, on the top, for the application
of an external tinfoil coating, which may be connected to a body
of larger surface. such a lamp as illustrated in fig.  may
also be lighted by connecting the tinfoil coating on the neck n
to the terminal, and the leading-in wire, w, to an insulated plate.
if the bulb stands in a socket upright, as shown in the cut, a
shade of conducting material may be slipped in the neck, n, and
the action thus magnified.
a more perfected arrangement used in some of these bulbs is
illustrated in fig. . in this case the construction of the bulb
is as shown and described before, when reference was made to
fig. . a zinc sheet, z, with a tubular extension, t, is applied
over the metallic socket, s. the bulb hangs downward from the
terminal, t, the zinc sheet, z, performing the double office of intensifier
and reflector. the reflector is separated from the terminal,
t, by an extension of the insulating plug, p.
a similar disposition with a phosphorescent tube is illustrated
in fig. . the tube, t, is prepared from two short tubes of
different diameter, which are sealed on the ends. on the lower
end is placed an inside conducting coating, c, which connects to
the wire w. the wire has a hook on the upper end for suspension,
and passes through the centre of the inside tube, which is
filled with some good and tightly packed insulator. on the outside
of the upper end of the tube, t, is another conducting coating,
c, upon which is slipped a metallic reflector z, which should
be separated by a thick insulation from the end of wire w.
the economical use of such a reflector or intensifier would require
that all energy supplied to an air condenser should be recoverable,
or, in other words, that there should not be any losses,[pg ]
neither in the gaseous medium nor through its action elsewhere.
this is far from being so, but, fortunately, the losses may be reduced
to anything desired. a few remarks are necessary on
this subject, in order to make the experiences gathered in the
course of these investigations perfectly clear.
fig. .
suppose a small helix with many well insulated turns, as in
experiment fig. , has one of its ends connected to one of the
terminals of the induction coil, and the other to a metal plate,
or, for the sake of simplicity, a sphere, insulated in space. when
the coil is set to work, the potential of the sphere is alternated,
and a small helix now behaves as though its free end were connected
to the other terminal of the induction coil. if an iron
rod be held within a small helix, it is quickly brought to a high
temperature, indicating the passage of a strong current through
the helix. how does the insulated sphere act in this case? it
can be a condenser, storing and returning the energy supplied to
it, or it can be a mere sink of energy, and the conditions of the
experiment determine whether it is rather one than the other.
the sphere being charged to a high potential, it acts inductively
upon the surrounding air, or whatever gaseous medium there might
be. the molecules, or atoms, which are near the sphere, are of
course more attracted, and move through a greater distance than
the farther ones. when the nearest molecules strike the sphere,
they are repelled, and collisions occur at all distances within the
inductive action of the sphere. it is now clear that, if the poten[pg ]tial
be steady, but little loss of energy can be caused in this way,
for the molecules which are nearest to the sphere, having had an
additional charge imparted to them by contact, are not attracted
until they have parted, if not with all, at least with most of the
additional charge, which can be accomplished only after a great
many collisions. from the fact, that with a steady potential
there is but little loss in dry air, one must come to such a conclusion.
when the potential of a sphere, instead of being steady,
is alternating, the conditions are entirely different. in this case
a rhythmical bombardment occurs, no matter whether the molecules,
after coming in contact with the sphere, lose the imparted
charge or not; what is more, if the charge is not lost, the impacts
are only the more violent. still, if the frequency of the impulses
be very small, the loss caused by the impacts and collisions
would not be serious, unless the potential were excessive. but
when extremely high frequencies and more or less high potentials
are used, the loss may very great. the total energy lost per unit
of time is proportionate to the product of the number of impacts
per second, or the frequency and the energy lost in each impact.
but the energy of an impact must be proportionate to the square
of the electric density of the sphere, since the charge imparted
[pg ]to the molecule is proportionate to that density. i conclude from
this that the total energy lost must be proportionate to the product
of the frequency and the square of the electric density; but
this law needs experimental confirmation. assuming the preceding
considerations to be true, then, by rapidly alternating the
potential of a body immersed in an insulating gaseous medium,
any amount of energy may be dissipated into space. most of
that energy then, i believe, is not dissipated in the form of long
ether waves, propagated to considerable distance, as is thought
most generally, but is consumed—in the case of an insulated
sphere, for example—in impact and collisional losses—that is,
heat vibrations—on the surface and in the vicinity of the sphere.
to reduce the dissipation, it is necessary to work with a small
electric density—the smaller, the higher the frequency.
fig. .
but since, on the assumption before made, the loss is diminished
with the square of the density, and since currents of very
high frequencies involve considerable waste when transmitted
through conductors, it follows that, on the whole, it is better to
employ one wire than two. therefore, if motors, lamps, or devices
of any kind are perfected, capable of being advantageously
operated by currents of extremely high frequency, economical
reasons will make it advisable to use only one wire, especially if
the distances are great.
when energy is absorbed in a condenser, the same behaves as
though its capacity were increased. absorption always exists
more or less, but generally it is small and of no consequence as
long as the frequencies are not very great. in using extremely
high frequencies, and, necessarily in such case, also high potentials,
the absorption—or, what is here meant more particularly
by this term, the loss of energy due to the presence of a gaseous
medium—is an important factor to be considered, as the energy
absorbed in the air condenser may be any fraction of the supplied
energy. this would seem to make it very difficult to tell from
the measured or computed capacity of an air condenser its actual
capacity or vibration period, especially if the condenser is of very
small surface and is charged to a very high potential. as many
important results are dependent upon the correctness of the
estimation of the vibration period, this subject demands the most
careful scrutiny of other investigators. to reduce the probable
error as much as possible in experiments of the kind alluded to,
it is advisable to use spheres or plates of large surface, so as to[pg ]
make the density exceedingly small. otherwise, when it is
practicable, an oil condenser should be used in preference. in
oil or other liquid dielectrics there are seemingly no such losses
as in gaseous media. it being impossible to exclude entirely the
gas in condensers with solid dielectrics, such condensers should
be immersed in oil, for economical reasons, if nothing else; they
can then be strained to the utmost, and will remain cool. in
leyden jars the loss due to air is comparatively small, as the tinfoil
coatings are large, close together, and the charged surfaces
not directly exposed; but when the potentials are very high, the
loss may be more or less considerable at, or near, the upper edge
of the foil, where the air is principally acted upon. if the jar
be immersed in boiled-out oil, it will be capable of performing
four times the amount of work which it can for any length of
time when used in the ordinary way, and the loss will be inappreciable.
it should not be thought that the loss in heat in an air condenser
is necessarily associated with the formation of visible
streams or brushes. if a small electrode, inclosed in an unexhausted
bulb, is connected to one of the terminals of the coil,
streams can be seen to issue from the electrode, and the air in the
bulb is heated; if instead of a small electrode a large sphere is
inclosed in the bulb, no streams are observed, still the air is
heated.
nor should it be thought that the temperature of an air condenser
would give even an approximate idea of the loss in heat
incurred, as in such case heat must be given off much more
quickly, since there is, in addition to the ordinary radiation, a
very active carrying away of heat by independent carriers going
on, and since not only the apparatus, but the air at some distance
from it is heated in consequence of the collisions which must
occur.
owing to this, in experiments with such a coil, a rise of temperature
can be distinctly observed only when the body connected
to the coil is very small. but with apparatus on a larger scale,
even a body of considerable bulk would be heated, as, for instance,
the body of a person; and i think that skilled physicians might
make observations of utility in such experiments, which, if the
apparatus were judiciously designed, would not present the slightest
danger.
a question of some interest, principally to meteorologists,[pg ]
presents itself here. how does the earth behave? the earth is
an air condenser, but is it a perfect or a very imperfect one—a
mere sink of energy? there can be little doubt that to such
small disturbance as might be caused in an experiment, the earth
behaves as an almost perfect condenser. but it might be different
when its charge is set in vibration by some sudden disturbance
occurring in the heavens. in such case, as before stated,
probably only little of the energy of the vibrations set up would
be lost into space in the form of long ether radiations, but most
of the energy, i think, would spend itself in molecular impacts
and collisions, and pass off into space in the form of short heat,
and possibly light, waves. as both the frequency of the vibrations
of the charge and the potential are in all probability excessive,
the energy converted into heat may be considerable. since
the density must be unevenly distributed, either in consequence
of the irregularity of the earth's surface, or on account of the
condition of the atmosphere in various places, the effect produced
would accordingly vary from place to place. considerable variations
in the temperature and pressure of the atmosphere may in
this manner be caused at any point of the surface of the earth.
the variations may be gradual or very sudden, according to the
nature of the general disturbance, and may produce rain and
storms, or locally modify the weather in any way.
from the remarks before made, one may see what an important
factor of loss the air in the neighborhood of a charged surface
becomes when the electric density is great and the frequency of
the impulses excessive. but the action, as explained, implies
that the air is insulating—that is, that it is composed of independent
carriers immersed in an insulating medium. this is the case
only when the air is at something like ordinary or greater, or at
extremely small, pressure. when the air is slightly rarefied and
conducting, then true conduction losses occur also. in such case,
of course, considerable energy may be dissipated into space even
with a steady potential, or with impulses of low frequency, if the
density is very great.
when the gas is at very low pressure, an electrode is heated
more because higher speeds can be reached. if the gas around
the electrode is strongly compressed, the displacements, and
consequently the speeds, are very small, and the heating is insignificant.
but if in such case the frequency could be sufficiently
increased, the electrode would be brought to a high tem[pg ]perature
as well as if the gas were at very low pressure; in fact,
exhausting the bulb is only necessary because we cannot produce,
(and possibly not convey) currents of the required frequency.
returning to the subject of electrode lamps, it is obviously of
advantage in such a lamp to confine as much as possible the heat
to the electrode by preventing the circulation of the gas in the
bulb. if a very small bulb be taken, it would confine the heat
better than a large one, but it might not be of sufficient capacity
to be operated from the coil, or, if so, the glass might get too
hot. a simple way to improve in this direction is to employ a
globe of the required size, but to place a small bulb, the diameter
of which is properly estimated, over the refractory button contained
in the globe. this arrangement is illustrated in fig. .
fig. .fig. .
the globe l has in this case a large neck n, allowing the small
bulb b to slip through. otherwise the construction is the same
as shown in fig. , for example. the small bulb is conveniently
supported upon the stem s, carrying the refractory button
m. it is separated from the aluminum tube a by several layers
of mica m, in order to prevent the cracking of the neck by the
rapid heating of the aluminum tube upon a sudden turning on
of the current. the inside bulb should be as small as possible
when it is desired to obtain light only by incandescence of the
electrode. if it is desired to produce phosphorescence, the bulb[pg ]
should be larger, else it would be apt to get too hot, and the
phosphorescence would cease. in this arrangement usually only
the small bulb shows phosphorescence, as there is practically no
bombardment against the outer globe. in some of these bulbs
constructed as illustrated in fig. , the small tube was coated
with phosphorescent paint, and beautiful effects were obtained.
instead of making the inside bulb large, in order to avoid undue
heating, it answers the purpose to make the electrode m larger.
in this case the bombardment is weakened by reason of the
smaller electric density.
many bulbs were constructed on the plan illustrated in fig.
. here a small bulb b, containing the refractory button m,
upon being exhausted to a very high degree was sealed in a large
globe l, which was then moderately exhausted and sealed off.
the principal advantage of this construction was that it allowed
of reaching extremely high vacua, and, at the same time of using a
large bulb. it was found, in the course of experiments with
bulbs such as illustrated in fig. , that it was well to make
the stem s, near the seal at e, very thick, and the leading-in wire
w thin, as it occurred sometimes that the stem at e was heated
and the bulb was cracked. often the outer globe l was exhausted
only just enough to allow the discharge to pass through, and the
space between the bulbs appeared crimson, producing a curious
effect. in some cases, when the exhaustion in globe l was very
low, and the air good conducting, it was found necessary, in order
to bring the button m to high incandescence, to place, preferably
on the upper part of the neck of the globe, a tinfoil coating which
was connected to an insulated body, to the ground, or to the
other terminal of the coil, as the highly conducting air weakened
the effect somewhat, probably by being acted upon inductively
from the wire w, where it entered the bulb at e. another difficulty—which,
however, is always present when the refractory
button is mounted in a very small bulb—existed in the construction
illustrated in fig. , namely, the vacuum in the bulb b
would be impaired in a comparatively short time.
the chief idea in the two last described constructions was to
confine the heat to the central portion of the globe by preventing
the exchange of air. an advantage is secured, but owing to the
heating of the inside bulb and slow evaporation of the glass, the
vacuum is hard to maintain, even if the construction illustrated
in fig.  be chosen, in which both bulbs communicate.[pg ]
but by far the better way—the ideal way—would be to reach
sufficiently high frequencies. the higher the frequency, the
slower would be the exchange of the air, and i think that a frequency
may be reached, at which there would be no exchange
whatever of the air molecules around the terminal. we would
then produce a flame in which there would be no carrying away
of material, and a queer flame it would be, for it would be rigid!
with such high frequencies the inertia of the particles would come
into play. as the brush, or flame, would gain rigidity in virtue
of the inertia of the particles, the exchange of the latter would
be prevented. this would necessarily occur, for, the number of
impulses being augmented, the potential energy of each would
diminish, so that finally only atomic vibrations could be set up,
and the motion of translation through measurable space would
cease. thus an ordinary gas burner connected to a source of
rapidly alternating potential might have its efficiency augmented
to a certain limit, and this for two reasons—because of the additional
vibration imparted, and because of a slowing down of the
process of carrying off. but the renewal being rendered difficult,
a renewal being necessary to maintain the burner, a continued
increase of the frequency of the impulses, assuming they could
be transmitted to and impressed upon the flame, would result in
the "extinction" of the latter, meaning by this term only the
cessation of the chemical process.
i think, however, that in the case of an electrode immersed in
a fluid insulating medium, and surrounded by independent carriers
of electric charges, which can be acted upon inductively, a
sufficient high frequency of the impulses would probably result
in a gravitation of the gas all around toward the electrode. for
this it would be only necessary to assume that the independent
bodies are irregularly shaped; they would then turn toward the
electrode their side of the greatest electric density, and this
would be a position in which the fluid resistance to approach
would be smaller than that offered to the receding.
the general opinion, i do not doubt, is that it is out of the
question to reach any such frequencies as might—assuming some
of the views before expressed to be true—produce any of the results
which i have pointed out as mere possibilities. this may be
so, but in the course of these investigations, from the observation
of many phenomena, i have gained the conviction that these frequencies
would be much lower than one is apt to estimate at[pg ]
first. in a flame we set up light vibrations by causing molecules,
or atoms, to collide. but what is the ratio of the frequency of
the collisions and that of the vibrations set up? certainly it
must be incomparably smaller than that of the strokes of the bell
and the sound vibrations, or that of the discharges and the oscillations
of the condenser. we may cause the molecules of the
gas to collide by the use of alternate electric impulses of high
frequency, and so we may imitate the process in a flame; and
from experiments with frequencies which we are now able to
obtain, i think that the result is producible with impulses which
are transmissible through a conductor.
in connection with thoughts of a similar nature, it appeared to
me of great interest to demonstrate the rigidity of a vibrating gaseous
column. although with such low frequencies as, say ,
per second, which i was able to obtain without difficulty from a
specially constructed alternator, the task looked discouraging at
first, i made a series of experiments. the trials with air at ordinary
pressure led to no result, but with air moderately rarefied i
obtain what i think to be an unmistakable experimental evidence
of the property sought for. as a result of this kind might lead
able investigators to conclusions of importance, i will describe
one of the experiments performed.
it is well known that when a tube is slightly exhausted, the
discharge may be passed through it in the form of a thin luminous
thread. when produced with currents of low frequency,
obtained from a coil operated as usual, this thread is inert. if a
magnet be approached to it, the part near the same is attracted
or repelled, according to the direction of the lines of force of the
magnet. it occurred to me that if such a thread would be produced
with currents of very high frequency, it should be more
or less rigid, and as it was visible it could be easily studied.
accordingly i prepared a tube about one inch in diameter and
one metre long, with outside coating at each end. the tube was
exhausted to a point at which, by a little working, the thread discharge
could be obtained. it must be remarked here that the
general aspect of the tube, and the degree of exhaustion, are
quite other than when ordinary low frequency currents are
used. as it was found preferable to work with one terminal,
the tube prepared was suspended from the end of a wire connected
to the terminal, the tinfoil coating being connected to the
wire, and to the lower coating sometimes a small insulated plate[pg ]
was attached. when the thread was formed, it extended through
the upper part of the tube and lost itself in the lower end. if it
possessed rigidity it resembled, not exactly an elastic cord
stretched tight between two supports, but a cord suspended from
a height with a small weight attached at the end. when the
finger or a small magnet was approached to the upper end of the
luminous thread, it could be brought locally out of position by
electrostatic or magnetic action; and when the disturbing object
was very quickly removed, an analogous result was produced, as
though a suspended cord would be displaced and quickly released
near the point of suspension. in doing this the luminous thread
was set in vibration, and two very sharply marked nodes, and a
third indistinct one, were formed. the vibration, once set up,
continued for fully eight minutes, dying gradually out. the
speed of the vibration often varied perceptibly, and it could be
observed that the electrostatic attraction of the glass affected the
vibrating thread; but it was clear that the electrostatic action
was not the cause of the vibration, for the thread was most generally
stationary, and could always be set in vibration by passing
the finger quickly near the upper part of the tube. with a
magnet the thread could be split in two and both parts vibrated.
by approaching the hand to the lower coating of the tube, or
insulation plate if attached, the vibration was quickened; also, as
far as i could see, by raising the potential or frequency. thus,
either increasing the frequency or passing a stronger discharge
of the same frequency corresponded to a tightening of the cord.
i did not obtain any experimental evidence with condenser discharges.
a luminous band excited in the bulb by repeated discharges
of a leyden jar must possess rigidity, and if deformed
and suddenly released, should vibrate. but probably the amount
of vibrating matter is so small that in spite of the extreme speed,
the inertia cannot prominently assert itself. besides, the observation
in such a case is rendered extremely difficult on account
of the fundamental vibration.
the demonstration of the fact—which still needs better experimental
confirmation—that a vibrating gaseous column possesses
rigidity, might greatly modify the views of thinkers.
when with low frequencies and insignificant potentials indications
of that property may be noted, how must a gaseous medium behave
under the influence of enormous electrostatic stresses which
may be active in the interstellar space, and which may alternate[pg ]
with inconceivable rapidity? the existence of such an electrostatic,
rhythmically throbbing force—of a vibrating electrostatic
field—would show a possible way how solids might have formed
from the ultra-gaseous uterus, and how transverse and all kinds
of vibrations may be transmitted through a gaseous medium filling
all space. then, ether might be a true fluid, devoid of
rigidity, and at rest, it being merely necessary as a connecting
link to enable interaction. what determines the rigidity of a
body? it must be the speed and the amount of motive matter.
in a gas the speed maybe considerable, but the density is exceedingly
small; in a liquid the speed would be likely to be small,
though the density may be considerable; and in both cases the
inertia resistance offered to displacement is practically nil. but
place a gaseous (or liquid) column in an intense, rapidly alternating
electrostatic field, set the particles vibrating with enormous
speeds, then the inertia resistance asserts itself. a body might
move with more or less freedom through the vibrating mass, but
as a whole it would be rigid.
there is a subject which i must mention in connection with
these experiments: it is that of high vacua. this is a subject,
the study of which is not only interesting, but useful, for it may
lead to results of great practical importance. in commercial apparatus,
such as incandescent lamps, operated from ordinary
systems of distribution, a much higher vacuum than is obtained at
present would not secure a very great advantage. in such a case
the work is performed on the filament, and the gas is little concerned;
the improvement, therefore, would be but trifling. but
when we begin to use very high frequencies and potentials, the
action of the gas becomes all important, and the degree of exhaustion
materially modifies the results. as long as ordinary
coils, even very large ones, were used, the study of the subject
was limited, because just at a point when it became most interesting
it had to be interrupted on account of the "non-striking"
vacuum being reached. but at present we are able to obtain
from a small disruptive discharge coil potentials much higher
than even the largest coil was capable of giving, and, what is
more, we can make the potential alternate with great rapidity.
both of these results enable us now to pass a luminous discharge
through almost any vacua obtainable, and the field of our investigations
is greatly extended. think we as we may, of all the
possible directions to develop a practical illuminant, the line of[pg ]
high vacua seems to be the most promising at present. but to
reach extreme vacua the appliances must be much more improved,
and ultimate perfection will not be attained until we shall have
discharged the mechanical and perfected an electrical vacuum
pump. molecules and atoms can be thrown out of a bulb under
the action of an enormous potential: this will be the principle
of the vacuum pump of the future. for the present, we must
secure the best results we can with mechanical appliances. in
this respect, it might not be out of the way to say a few words
about the method of, and apparatus for, producing excessively
high degrees of exhaustion of which i have availed myself in the
course of these investigations. it is very probable that other experimenters
have used similar arrangements; but as it is possible
that there may be an item of interest in their description, a few
remarks, which will render this investigation more complete,
might be permitted.
fig. .
the apparatus is illustrated in a drawing shown in fig. .
s represents a sprengel pump, which has been specially constructed
to better suit the work required. the stop-cock which[pg ]
is usually employed has been omitted, and instead of it a hollow
stopper s has been fitted in the neck of the reservoir r. this
stopper has a small hole h, through which the mercury descends;
the size of the outlet o being properly determined with respect
to the section of the fall tube t, which is sealed to the reservoir
instead of being connected to it in the usual manner. this
arrangement overcomes the imperfections and troubles which
often arise from the use of the stopcock on the reservoir and the
connections of the latter with the fall tube.
the pump is connected through a u-shaped tube t to a very
large reservoir r. especial care was taken in fitting the grinding
surfaces of the stoppers p and p, and both of these and the
mercury caps above them were made exceptionally long. after
the u-shaped tube was fitted and put in place, it was heated, so
as to soften and take off the strain resulting from imperfect
fitting. the u-shaped tube was provided with a stopcock c,
and two ground connections g and g,—one for a small bulb b,
usually containing caustic potash, and the other for the receiver
r, to be exhausted.
the reservoir r, was connected by means of a rubber tube to
a slightly larger reservoir r, each of the two reservoirs being
provided with a stopcock c and c, respectively. the reservoir
r could be raised and lowered by a wheel and rack, and the
range of its motion was so determined that when it was filled
with mercury and the stopcock c closed, so as to form a torricellian
vacuum in it when raised, it could be lifted so high that
the reservoir r would stand a little above stopcock c; and when
this stopcock was closed and the reservoir r descended, so as to
form a torricellian vacuum in reservoir r, it could be lowered
so far as to completely empty the latter, the mercury filling the
reservoir r up to a little above stopcock c.
the capacity of the pump and of the connections was taken
as small as possible relatively to the volume of reservoir, r,
since, of course, the degree of exhaustion depended upon the
ratio of these quantities.
with this apparatus i combined the usual means indicated by
former experiments for the production of very high vacua. in
most of the experiments it was most convenient to use caustic
potash. i may venture to say, in regard to its use, that much
time is saved and a more perfect action of the pump insured by
fusing and boiling the potash as soon as, or even before, the[pg ]
pump settles down. if this course is not followed, the sticks, as
ordinarily employed, may give off moisture at a certain very
slow rate, and the pump may work for many hours without
reaching a very high vacuum. the potash was heated either by
a spirit lamp or by passing a discharge through it, or by passing
a current through a wire contained in it. the advantage in the
latter case was that the heating could be more rapidly repeated.
generally the process of exhaustion was the following:—at
the start, the stop-cocks c and c being open, and all other connections
closed, the reservoir r was raised so far that the mercury
filled the reservoir r and a part of the narrow connecting
u-shaped tube. when the pump was set to work, the mercury
would, of course, quickly rise in the tube, and reservoir r was
lowered, the experimenter keeping the mercury at about the
same level. the reservoir r was balanced by a long spring
which facilitated the operation, and the friction of the parts was
generally sufficient to keep it in almost any position. when the
sprengel pump had done its work, the reservoir r was further lowered
and the mercury descended in r and filled r, whereupon stopcock
c was closed. the air adhering to the walls of r and that
absorbed by the mercury was carried off, and to free the mercury
of all air the reservoir r was for a long time worked up and
down. during this process some air, which would gather below
stopcock c, was expelled from r by lowering it far enough and
opening the stopcock, closing the latter again before raising the
reservoir. when all the air had been expelled from the mercury,
and no air would gather in r when it was lowered, the caustic
potash was resorted to. the reservoir r was now again raised
until the mercury in r, stood above stopcock c. the caustic
potash was fused and boiled, and moisture partly carried off by
the pump and partly re-absorbed; and this process of heating
and cooling was repeated many times, and each time, upon the
moisture being absorbed or carried off, the reservoir r was for
a long time raised and lowered. in this manner all the moisture
was carried off from the mercury, and both the reservoirs were
in proper condition to be used. the reservoir r was then again
raised to the top, and the pump was kept working for a long
time. when the highest vacuum obtainable with the pump had
been reached, the potash bulb was usually wrapped with cotton
which was sprinkled with ether so as to keep the potash at a
very low temperature, then the reservoir r was lowered, and upon
[pg ]reservoir
r being emptied the receiver was quickly sealed up.
when a new bulb was put on, the mercury was always raised
above stopcock c, which was closed, so as to always keep the
mercury and both the reservoirs in fine condition, and the mercury
was never withdrawn from r except when the pump had
reached the highest degree of exhaustion. it is necessary to observe
this rule if it is desired to use the apparatus to advantage.
by means of this arrangement i was able to proceed very
quickly, and when the apparatus was in perfect order it was possible
to reach the phosphorescent stage in a small bulb in less
than fifteen minutes, which is certainly very quick work for a
small laboratory arrangement requiring all in all about  pounds
of mercury. with ordinary small bulbs the ratio of the capacity
of the pump, receiver, and connections, and that of reservoir r
was about  to , and the degrees of exhaustion reached were
necessarily very high, though i am unable to make a precise and
reliable statement how far the exhaustion was carried.
what impresses the investigator most in the course of these
experiences is the behavior of gases when subjected to great rapidly
alternating electrostatic stresses. but he must remain in
doubt as to whether the effects observed are due wholly to the
molecules, or atoms, of the gas which chemical analysis discloses
to us, or whether there enters into play another medium of a
gaseous nature, comprising atoms, or molecules, immersed in a
fluid pervading the space. such a medium surely must exist,
and i am convinced that, for instance, even if air were absent,
the surface and neighborhood of a body in space would be heated
by rapidly alternating the potential of the body; but no such
heating of the surface or neighborhood could occur if all free
atoms were removed and only a homogeneous, incompressible, and
elastic fluid—such as ether is supposed to be—would remain, for
then there would be no impacts, no collisions. in such a case,
as far as the body itself is concerned, only frictional losses in the
inside could occur.
it is a striking fact that the discharge through a gas is established
with ever-increasing freedom as the frequency of the
impulses is augmented. it behaves in this respect quite contrarily
to a metallic conductor. in the latter the impedance enters
prominently into play as the frequency is increased, but the gas
acts much as a series of condensers would; the facility with
which the discharge passes through, seems to depend on the rate
of change of potential. if it acts so, then in a vacuum tube even[pg ]
of great length, and no matter how strong the current, self-induction
could not assert itself to any appreciable degree. we
have, then, as far as we can now see, in the gas a conductor
which is capable of transmitting electric impulses of any frequency
which we may be able to produce. could the frequency be
brought high enough, then a queer system of electric distribution,
which would be likely to interest gas companies, might be realized:
metal pipes filled with gas—the metal being the insulator,
the gas the conductor—supplying phosphorescent bulbs, or perhaps
devices as yet uninvented. it is certainly possible to take
a hollow core of copper, rarefy the gas in the same, and by passing
impulses of sufficiently high frequency through a circuit
around it, bring the gas inside to a high degree of incandescence;
but as to the nature of the forces there would be considerable
uncertainty, for it would be doubtful whether with such impulses
the copper core would act as a static screen. such paradoxes and
apparent impossibilities we encounter at every step in this line of
work, and therein lies, to a great extent, the charm of the study.
i have here a short and wide tube which is exhausted to a
high degree and covered with a substantial coating of bronze, the
coating barely allowing the light to shine through. a metallic
cap, with a hook for suspending the tube, is fastened around the
middle portion of the latter, the clasp being in contact with the
bronze coating. i now want to light the gas inside by suspending
the tube on a wire connected to the coil. any one who
would try the experiment for the first time, not having any previous
experience, would probably take care to be quite alone
when making the trial, for fear that he might become the joke of
his assistants. still, the bulb lights in spite of the metal coating,
and the light can be distinctly perceived through the latter. a
long tube covered with aluminum bronze lights when held in
one hand—the other touching the terminal of the coil—quite
powerfully. it might be objected that the coatings are not
sufficiently conducting; still, even if they were highly resistant,
they ought to screen the gas. they certainly screen it perfectly
in a condition of rest, but far from perfectly when the charge
is surging in the coating. but the loss of energy which occurs
within the tube, notwithstanding the screen, is occasioned principally
by the presence of the gas. were we to take a large
hollow metallic sphere and fill it with a perfect, incompressible,
fluid dielectric, there would be no loss inside of the sphere, and[pg ]
consequently the inside might be considered as perfectly screened,
though the potential be very rapidly alternating. even were
the sphere filled with oil, the loss would be incomparably smaller
than when the fluid is replaced by a gas, for in the latter case the
force produces displacements; that means impact and collisions
in the inside.
no matter what the pressure of the gas may be, it becomes an
important factor in the heating of a conductor when the electric
density is great and the frequency very high. that in the heating
of conductors by lightning discharges, air is an element of
great importance, is almost as certain as an experimental fact. i
may illustrate the action of the air by the following experiment:
i take a short tube which is exhausted to a moderate degree and
has a platinum wire running through the middle from one end
to the other. i pass a steady or low frequency current through
the wire, and it is heated uniformly in all parts. the heating
here is due to conduction, or frictional losses, and the gas around
the wire has—as far as we can see—no function to perform.
but now let me pass sudden discharges, or high frequency currents,
through the wire. again the wire is heated, this time
principally on the ends and least in the middle portion; and if
the frequency of the impulses, or the rate of change, is high
enough, the wire might as well be cut in the middle as not, for
practically all heating is due to the rarefied gas. here the gas
might only act as a conductor of no impedance diverting the current
from the wire as the impedance of the latter is enormously
increased, and merely heating the ends of the wire by reason of
their resistance to the passage of the discharge. but it is not
at all necessary that the gas in the tube should be conducting; it
might be at an extremely low pressure, still the ends of the wire
would be heated—as, however, is ascertained by experience—only
the two ends would in such case not be electrically connected
through the gaseous medium. now what with these frequencies
and potentials occurs in an exhausted tube, occurs in the
lightning discharges at ordinary pressure. we only need remember
one of the facts arrived at in the course of these investigations,
namely, that to impulses of very high frequency the gas
at ordinary pressure behaves much in the same manner as though
it were at moderately low pressure. i think that in lightning
discharges frequently wires or conducting objects are volatilized
merely because air is present, and that, were the conductor im[pg ]mersed
in an insulating liquid, it would be safe, for then the
energy would have to spend itself somewhere else. from the
behavior of gases under sudden impulses of high potential, i am
led to conclude that there can be no surer way of diverting a
lightning discharge than by affording it a passage through a
volume of gas, if such a thing can be done in a practical manner.
there are two more features upon which i think it necessary
to dwell in connection with these experiments—the "radiant
state" and the "non-striking vacuum."
any one who has studied crookes' work must have received
the impression that the "radiant state" is a property of the gas
inseparably connected with an extremely high degree of exhaustion.
but it should be remembered that the phenomena
observed in an exhausted vessel are limited to the character and
capacity of the apparatus which is made use of. i think that in
a bulb a molecule, or atom, does not precisely move in a straight
line because it meets no obstacle, but because the velocity imparted
to it is sufficient to propel it in a sensibly straight line.
the mean free path is one thing, but the velocity—the energy
associated with the moving body—is another, and under ordinary
circumstances i believe that it is a mere question of potential or
speed. a disruptive discharge coil, when the potential is pushed
very far, excites phosphorescence and projects shadows, at comparatively
low degrees of exhaustion. in a lightning discharge,
matter moves in straight lines at ordinary pressure when the
mean free path is exceedingly small, and frequently images of
wires or other metallic objects have been produced by the particles
thrown off in straight lines.
i have prepared a bulb to illustrate by an experiment the
correctness of these assertions. in a globe l, fig. , i have
mounted upon a lamp filament f a piece of lime l. the lamp
filament is connected with a wire which leads into the bulb, and
the general construction of the latter is as indicated in fig. ,
before described. the bulb being suspended from a wire
connected to the terminal of the coil, and the latter being set to
work, the lime piece l and the projecting parts of the filament f
are bombarded. the degree of exhaustion is just such that with
the potential the coil is capable of giving, phosphorescence of the
glass is produced, but disappears as soon as the vacuum is impaired.
the lime containing moisture, and moisture being given
off as soon as heating occurs, the phosphorescence lasts only for[pg ]
a few moments. when the lime has been sufficiently heated,
enough moisture has been given off to impair materially the
vacuum of the bulb. as the bombardment goes on, one point
of the lime piece is more heated than other points, and the result
is that finally practically all the discharge passes through that
point which is intensely heated, and a white stream of lime particles
(fig. ) then breaks forth from that point. this stream
is composed of "radiant" matter, yet the degree of exhaustion
is low. but the particles move in straight lines because the
velocity imparted to them is great, and this is due to three
causes—to the great electric density, the high temperature of the
small point, and the fact that the particles of the lime are easily
torn and thrown off—far more easily than those of carbon. with
frequencies such as we are able to obtain, the particles are bodily
thrown off and projected to a considerable distance; but with
sufficiently high frequencies no such thing would occur; in such
case only a stress would spread or a vibration would be propagated
through the bulb. it would be out of the question to
reach any such frequency on the assumption that the atoms move
with the speed of light; but i believe that such a thing is impossible;
for this an enormous potential would be required.
with potentials which we are able to obtain, even with a disruptive
discharge coil, the speed must be quite insignificant.
fig. .
as to the "non-striking vacuum," the point to be noted is,
that it can occur only with low frequency impulses, and it is[pg ]
necessitated by the impossibility of carrying off enough energy
with such impulses in high vacuum, since the few atoms which
are around the terminal upon coming in contact with the same,
are repelled and kept at a distance for a comparatively long
period of time, and not enough work can be performed to render
the effect perceptible to the eye. if the difference of potential
between the terminals is raised, the dielectric breaks down. but
with very high frequency impulses there is no necessity for such
breaking down, since any amount of work can be performed by
continually agitating the atoms in the exhausted vessel, provided
the frequency is high enough. it is easy to reach—even with
frequencies obtained from an alternator as here used—a stage at
which the discharge does not pass between two electrodes in a
narrow tube, each of these being connected to one of the terminals
of the coil, but it is difficult to reach a point at which a
luminous discharge would not occur around each electrode.
a thought which naturally presents itself in connection with
high frequency currents, is to make use of their powerful electrodynamic
inductive action to produce light effects in a sealed glass
globe. the leading-in wire is one of the defects of the present
incandescent lamp, and if no other improvement were made,
that imperfection at least should be done away with. following[pg ]
this thought, i have carried on experiments in various directions,
of which some were indicated in my former paper. i may here
mention one or two more lines of experiment which have been
followed up.
many bulbs were constructed as shown in fig.  and fig.
fig. .fig. .
in fig. , a wide tube, t, was sealed to a smaller w shaped
tube u, of phosphorescent glass. in the tube t, was placed a coil
c, of aluminum wire, the ends of which were provided with
small spheres, t and t, of aluminum, and reached into the u tube.
the tube t was slipped into a socket containing a primary coil,
through which usually the discharges of leyden jars were directed,
and the rarefied gas in the small u tube was excited to
strong luminosity by the high-tension current induced in the coil c.
when leyden jar discharges were used to induce currents in the
coil c, it was found necessary to pack the tube t tightly with insulating
powder, as a discharge would occur frequently between
the turns of the coil, especially when the primary was thick and
the air gap, through which the jars discharged, large, and no
little trouble was experienced in this way.
in fig.  is illustrated another form of the bulb constructed.
in this case a tube t is sealed to a globe l. the tube contains a
coil c, the ends of which pass through two small glass tubes t
and t, which are sealed to the tube t. two refractory buttons
m and m, are mounted on lamp filaments which are fastened to
the ends of the wires passing through the glass tubes t and t.
generally in bulbs made on this plan the globe l communicated
with the tube t. for this purpose the ends of the small tubes t
and t were heated just a trifle in the burner, merely to hold the
wires, but not to interfere with the communication. the tube t,
with the small tubes, wires through the same, and the refractory
buttons m and m, were first prepared, and then sealed to globe l,
whereupon the coil c was slipped in and the connections made to
its ends. the tube was then packed with insulating powder,
jamming the latter as tight as possible up to very nearly the end;
then it was closed and only a small hole left through which the
remainder of the powder was introduced, and finally the end of
the tube was closed. usually in bulbs constructed as shown in
fig.  an aluminum tube a was fastened to the upper end s
of each of the tubes t and t in order to protect that end against
[pg ]the heat. the buttons m and m could be brought to any degree
of incandescence by passing the discharges of leyden jars
around the coil c. in such bulbs with two buttons a very curious
effect is produced by the formation of the shadows of each
of the two buttons.
another line of experiment, which has been assiduously followed,
was to induce by electro-dynamic induction a current or
luminous discharge in an exhausted tube or bulb. this matter
has received such able treatment at the hands of prof. j. j.
thomson, that i could add but little to what he has made known,
even had i made it the special subject of this lecture. still,
since experiments in this line have gradually led me to the present
views and results, a few words must be devoted here to this
subject.
it has occurred, no doubt, to many that as a vacuum tube is
made longer, the electromotive force per unit length of the tube,
necessary to pass a luminous discharge through the latter, becomes
continually smaller; therefore, if the exhausted tube be made
long enough, even with low frequencies a luminous discharge
could be induced in such a tube closed upon itself. such a tube
might be placed around a hall or on a ceiling, and at once a simple
appliance capable of giving considerable light would be obtained.
but this would be an appliance hard to manufacture
and extremely unmanageable. it would not do to make the
tube up of small lengths, because there would be with ordinary
frequencies considerable loss in the coatings, and besides, if coatings
were used, it would be better to supply the current directly
to the tube by connecting the coatings to a transformer. but
even if all objections of such nature were removed, with
low frequencies the light conversion itself would be inefficient,
as i have before stated. in using extremely high frequencies
the length of the secondary—in other words, the size of the vessel—can
be reduced as much as desired, and the efficiency of the
light conversion is increased, provided that means are invented
for efficiently obtaining such high frequencies. thus one is led,
from theoretical and practical considerations, to the use of high
frequencies, and this means high electromotive forces and small
currents in the primary. when one works with condenser
charges—and they are the only means up to the present known
for reaching these extreme frequencies—one gets to electromotive
forces of several thousands of volts per turn of the primary. we
cannot multiply the electro-dynamic inductive effect by taking[pg ]
more turns in the primary, for we arrive at the conclusion that
the best way is to work with one single turn—though we must
sometimes depart from this rule—and we must get along with
whatever inductive effect we can obtain with one turn. but before
one has long experimented with the extreme frequencies required
to set up in a small bulb an electromotive force of several
thousands of volts, one realizes the great importance of electrostatic
effects, and these effects grow relatively to the electro-dynamic
in significance as the frequency is increased.
now, if anything is desirable in this case, it is to increase the
frequency, and this would make it still worse for the electrodynamic
effects. on the other hand, it is easy to exalt the electrostatic
action as far as one likes by taking more turns on the
secondary, or combining self-induction and capacity to raise the
potential. it should also be remembered that, in reducing the
current to the smallest value and increasing the potential,
the electric impulses of high frequency can be more easily transmitted
through a conductor.
these and similar thoughts determined me to devote more attention
to the electrostatic phenomena, and to endeavor to produce
potentials as high as possible, and alternating as fast as
they could be made to alternate. i then found that i could excite
vacuum tubes at considerable distance from a conductor
connected to a properly constructed coil, and that i could, by
converting the oscillatory current of a conductor to a higher potential,
establish electrostatic alternating fields which acted
through the whole extent of the room, lighting up a tube no
matter where it was held in space. i thought i recognized that
i had made a step in advance, and i have persevered in this line;
but i wish to say that i share with all lovers of science and progress
the one and only desire—to reach a result of utility to men
in any direction to which thought or experiment may lead me.
i think that this departure is the right one, for i cannot see,
from the observation of the phenomena which manifest themselves
as the frequency is increased, what there would remain to
act between two circuits conveying, for instance, impulses of
several hundred millions per second, except electrostatic forces.
even with such trifling frequencies the energy would be practically
all potential, and my conviction has grown strong that, to whatever
kind of motion light may be due, it is produced by tremendous
electrostatic stresses vibrating with extreme rapidity.[pg ]
fig. .fig. .
of all these phenomena observed with currents, or electric
impulses, of high frequency, the most fascinating for an audience
are certainly those which are noted in an electrostatic field
acting through considerable distance; and the best an unskilled
lecturer can do is to begin and finish with the exhibition of these
singular effects. i take a tube in my hand and move it about,
and it is lighted wherever i may hold it; throughout space the
invisible forces act. but i may take another tube and it might
not light, the vacuum being very high. i excite it by means of a
disruptive discharge coil, and now it will light in the electrostatic
field. i may put it away for a few weeks or months, still it retains
the faculty of being excited. what change have i produced in the
tube in the act of exciting it? if a motion imparted to atoms, it
is difficult to perceive how it can persist so long without being
arrested by frictional losses; and if a strain exerted in the dielectric,
such as a simple electrification would produce, it is easy to
see how it may persist indefinitely, but very difficult to understand
why such a condition should aid the excitation when we
have to deal with potentials which are rapidly alternating.[pg ]
since i have exhibited these phenomena for the first time, i
have obtained some other interesting effects. for instance, i
have produced the incandescence of a button, filament, or wire
enclosed in a tube. to get to this result it was necessary to
economize the energy which is obtained from the field, and direct
most of it on the small body to be rendered incandescent. at
the beginning the task appeared difficult, but the experiences
gathered permitted me to reach the result easily. in fig. 
and fig. , two such tubes are illustrated, which are prepared for
the occasion. in fig.  a short tube t, sealed to another long
tube t, is provided with a stem s, with a platinum wire sealed in
the latter. a very thin lamp filament l, is fastened to this wire
and connection to the outside is made through a thin copper wire
w. the tube is provided with outside and inside coatings, c and
c, respectively, and is filled as far as the coatings reach with conducting,
and the space above with insulating, powder. these
coatings are merely used to enable me to perform two experiments
with the tube—namely, to produce the effect desired either
by direct connection of the body of the experimenter or of another
body to the wire w, or by acting inductively through the
glass. the stem s is provided with an aluminum tube a, for
purposes before explained, and only a small part of the filament
reaches out of this tube. by holding the tube t anywhere in
the electrostatic field, the filament is rendered incandescent.
a more interesting piece of apparatus is illustrated in fig. .
the construction is the same as before, only instead of the lamp
filament a small platinum wire p, sealed in a stem s, and bent
above it in a circle, is connected to the copper wire w, which is
joined to an inside coating c. a small stem s is provided with
a needle, on the point of which is arranged, to rotate very freely,
a very light fan of mica v. to prevent the fan from falling out,
a thin stem of glass g, is bent properly and fastened to the aluminum
tube. when the glass tube is held anywhere in the electrostatic
field the platinum wire becomes incandescent, and the
mica vanes are rotated very fast.
intense phosphorescence may be excited in a bulb by merely
connecting it to a plate within the field, and the plate need not
be any larger than an ordinary lamp shade. the phosphorescence
excited with these currents is incomparably more powerful
than with ordinary apparatus. a small phosphorescent bulb,
when attached to a wire connected to a coil, emits sufficient light[pg ]
to allow reading ordinary print at a distance of five to six paces.
it was of interest to see how some of the phosphorescent bulbs
of professor crookes would behave with these currents, and he
has had the kindness to lend me a few for the occasion. the
effects produced are magnificent, especially by the sulphide of
calcium and sulphide of zinc. with the disruptive discharge
coil they glow intensely merely by holding them in the hand and
connecting the body to the terminal of the coil.
to whatever results investigations of this kind may lead, the
chief interest lies, for the present, in the possibilities they offer
for the production of an efficient illuminating device. in no
branch of electric industry is an advance more desired than in
the manufacture of light. every thinker, when considering the
barbarous methods employed, the deplorable losses incurred in
our best systems of light production, must have asked himself,
what is likely to be the light of the future? is it to be an incandescent
solid, as in the present lamp, or an incandescent gas,
or a phosphorescent body, or something like a burner, but incomparably
more efficient?
there is little chance to perfect a gas burner; not, perhaps,
because human ingenuity has been bent upon that problem for
centuries without a radical departure having been made—though
the argument is not devoid of force—but because in a
burner the highest vibrations can never be reached, except by
passing through all the low ones. for how is a flame to proceed
unless by a fall of lifted weights? such process cannot be maintained
without renewal, and renewal is repeated passing from low
to high vibrations. one way only seems to be open to improve
a burner, and that is by trying to reach higher degrees of incandescence.
higher incandescence is equivalent to a quicker vibration:
that means more light from the same material, and that
again, means more economy. in this direction some improvements
have been made, but the progress is hampered by many
limitations. discarding, then, the burner, there remains the
three ways first mentioned, which are essentially electrical.
suppose the light of the immediate future to be a solid, rendered
incandescent by electricity. would it not seem that it is
better to employ a small button than a frail filament? from
many considerations it certainly must be concluded that a button
is capable of a higher economy, assuming, of course, the difficulties
connected with the operation of such a lamp to be effec[pg ]tively
overcome. but to light such a lamp we require a high
potential; and to get this economically, we must use high frequencies.
such considerations apply even more to the production of light
by the incandescence of a gas, or by phosphorescence. in all
cases we require high frequencies and high potentials. these
thoughts occurred to me a long time ago.
incidentally we gain, by the use of high frequencies, many advantages,
such as higher economy in the light production, the
possibility of working with one lead, the possibility of doing away
with the leading-in wire, etc.
the question is, how far can we go with frequencies? ordinary
conductors rapidly lose the facility of transmitting electric
impulses when the frequency is greatly increased. assume the
means for the production of impulses of very great frequency
brought to the utmost perfection, every one will naturally ask
how to transmit them when the necessity arises. in transmitting
such impulses through conductors we must remember that we
have to deal with pressure and flow, in the ordinary interpretation
of these terms. let the pressure increase to an enormous value,
and let the flow correspondingly diminish, then such impulses—variations
merely of pressure, as it were—can no doubt be
transmitted through a wire even if their frequency be many
hundreds of millions per second. it would, of course, be out of
question to transmit such impulses through a wire immersed in a
gaseous medium, even if the wire were provided with a thick
and excellent insulation, for most of the energy would be lost in
molecular bombardment and consequent heating. the end of
the wire connected to the source would be heated, and the remote
end would receive but a trifling part of the energy supplied.
the prime necessity, then, if such electric impulses are
to be used, is to find means to reduce as much as possible the
dissipation.
the first thought is, to employ the thinnest possible wire surrounded
by the thickest practicable insulation. the next thought
is to employ electrostatic screens. the insulation of the wire
may be covered with a thin conducting coating and the latter
connected to the ground. but this would not do, as then all the
energy would pass through the conducting coating to the ground
and nothing would get to the end of the wire. if a ground connection
is made it can only be made through a conductor offer[pg ]ing
an enormous impedance, or through a condenser of extremely
small capacity. this, however, does not do away with
other difficulties.
if the wave length of the impulses is much smaller than the
length of the wire, then corresponding short waves will be set
up in the conducting coating, and it will be more or less the
same as though the coating were directly connected to earth. it
is therefore necessary to cut up the coating in sections much
shorter than the wave length. such an arrangement does not
still afford a perfect screen, but it is ten thousand times better
than none. i think it preferable to cut up the conducting coating
in small sections, even if the current waves be much longer
than the coating.
if a wire were provided with a perfect electrostatic screen, it
would be the same as though all objects were removed from it at
infinite distance. the capacity would then be reduced to the
capacity of the wire itself, which would be very small. it
would then be possible to send over the wire current vibrations
of very high frequencies at enormous distances, without affecting
greatly the character of the vibrations. a perfect screen is of
course out of the question, but i believe that with a screen such
as i have just described telephony could be rendered practicable
across the atlantic. according to my ideas, the gutta-percha
covered wire should be provided with a third conducting coating
subdivided in sections. on the top of this should be again
placed a layer of gutta-percha and other insulation, and on the
top of the whole the armor. but such cables will not be constructed,
for ere long intelligence—transmitted without wires—will
throb through the earth like a pulse through a living organism.
the wonder is that, with the present state of knowledge
and the experiences gained, no attempt is being made to disturb
the electrostatic or magnetic condition of the earth, and
transmit, if nothing else, intelligence.
it has been my chief aim in presenting these results to point
out phenomena or features of novelty, and to advance ideas
which i am hopeful will serve as starting points of new departures.
it has been my chief desire this evening to entertain you
with some novel experiments. your applause, so frequently
and generously accorded, has told me that i have succeeded.
in conclusion, let me thank you most heartily for your kindness
and attention, and assure you that the honor i have had in[pg ]
addressing such a distinguished audience, the pleasure i have had
in presenting these results to a gathering of so many able men—and
among them also some of those in whose work for many
years past i have found enlightenment and constant pleasure—i
shall never forget.
[pg ]
on light and other high frequency phenomena.[]
when we look at the world around us, on nature, we are impressed
with its beauty and grandeur. each thing we perceive,
though it may be vanishingly small, is in itself a world, that is,
like the whole of the universe, matter and force governed by
law,—a world, the contemplation of which fills us with feelings
of wonder and irresistibly urges us to ceaseless thought and inquiry.
but in all this vast world, of all objects our senses reveal
to us, the most marvellous, the most appealing to our
imagination, appears no doubt a highly developed organism, a
thinking being. if there is anything fitted to make us admire
nature's handiwork, it is certainly this inconceivable structure,
which performs its innumerable motions of obedience to external
influence. to understand its workings, to get a deeper insight
into this nature's masterpiece, has ever been for thinkers a fascinating
aim, and after many centuries of arduous research men have
arrived at a fair understanding of the functions of its organs and
senses. again, in all the perfect harmony of its parts, of the
parts which constitute the material or tangible of our being, of all
its organs and senses, the eye is the most wonderful. it is the
most precious, the most indispensable of our perceptive or directive
organs, it is the great gateway through which all knowledge
enters the mind. of all our organs, it is the one, which is in the
[pg ]most intimate relation with that which we call intellect. so intimate
is this relation, that it is often said, the very soul shows
itself in the eye.
it can be taken as a fact, which the theory of the action of the
eye implies, that for each external impression, that is, for each
image produced upon the retina, the ends of the visual nerves,
concerned in the conveyance of the impression to the mind, must
be under a peculiar stress or in a vibratory state. it now does
not seem improbable that, when by the power of thought an image
is evoked, a distinct reflex action, no matter how weak, is
exerted upon certain ends of the visual nerves, and therefore
upon the retina. will it ever be within human power to analyze
the condition of the retina when disturbed by thought or reflex
action, by the help of some optical or other means of such sensitiveness,
that a clear idea of its state might be gained at any
time? if this were possible, then the problem of reading one's
thoughts with precision, like the characters of an open book,
might be much easier to solve than many problems belonging to
the domain of positive physical science, in the solution of which
many, if not the majority, of scientific men implicitly believe.
helmholtz, has shown that the fundi of the eye are themselves,
luminous, and he was able to see, in total darkness, the movement
of his arm by the light of his own eyes. this is one of the
most remarkable experiments recorded in the history of science,
and probably only a few men could satisfactorily repeat it, for it
is very likely, that the luminosity of the eyes is associated with
uncommon activity of the brain and great imaginative power. it
is fluorescence of brain action, as it were.
another fact having a bearing on this subject which has probably
been noted by many, since it is stated in popular expressions,
but which i cannot recollect to have found chronicled as a positive
result of observation is, that at times, when a sudden idea or
image presents itself to the intellect, there is a distinct and sometimes
painful sensation of luminosity produced in the eye, observable
even in broad daylight.
the saying then, that the soul shows itself in the eye, is deeply
founded, and we feel that it expresses a great truth. it has a
profound meaning even for one who, like a poet or artist, only
following his inborn instinct or love for nature, finds delight in
aimless thoughts and in the mere contemplation of natural phenomena,
but a still more profound meaning for one who, in the
[pg ]spirit of positive scientific investigation, seeks to ascertain the
causes of the effects. it is principally the natural philosopher,
the physicist, for whom the eye is the subject of the most intense
admiration.
two facts about the eye must forcibly impress the mind of the
physicist, notwithstanding he may think or say that it is an
imperfect optical instrument, forgetting, that the very conception
of that which is perfect or seems so to him, has been gained
through this same instrument. first, the eye is, as far as our
positive knowledge goes, the only organ which is directly affected
by that subtile medium, which as science teaches us, must fill all
space; secondly, it is the most sensitive of our organs, incomparably
more sensitive to external impressions than any other.
the organ of hearing implies the impact of ponderable bodies,
the organ of smell the transference of detached material particles,
and the organs of taste, and of touch or force, the direct contact,
or at least some interference of ponderable matter, and this is
true even in those instances of animal organisms, in which some
of these organs are developed to a degree of truly marvelous
perfection. this being so, it seems wonderful that the organ of
sight solely should be capable of being stirred by that, which all
our other organs are powerless to detect, yet which plays an essential
part in all natural phenomena, which transmits all energy
and sustains all motion and, that most intricate of all, life, but
which has properties such that even a scientifically trained mind
cannot help drawing a distinction between it and all that is called
matter. considering merely this, and the fact that the eye, by
its marvelous power, widens our otherwise very narrow range of
perception far beyond the limits of the small world which is our
own, to embrace myriads of other worlds, suns and stars in the
infinite depths of the universe, would make it justifiable to assert,
that it is an organ of a higher order. its performances are beyond
comprehension. nature as far as we know never produced anything
more wonderful. we can get barely a faint idea of its
prodigious power by analyzing what it does and by comparing.
when ether waves impinge upon the human body, they produce
the sensations of warmth or cold, pleasure or pain, or perhaps other
sensations of which we are not aware, and any degree or intensity
of these sensations, which degrees are infinite in number, hence an
infinite number of distinct sensations. but our sense of touch, or
our sense of force, cannot reveal to us these differences in degree[pg ]
or intensity, unless they are very great. now we can readily conceive
how an organism, such as the human, in the eternal process
of evolution, or more philosophically speaking, adaptation to
nature, being constrained to the use of only the sense of touch or
force, for instance, might develop this sense to such a degree of
sensitiveness or perfection, that it would be capable of distinguishing
the minutest differences in the temperature of a body even
at some distance, to a hundredth, or thousandth, or millionth part
of a degree. yet, even this apparently impossible performance
would not begin to compare with that of the eye, which is capable
of distinguishing and conveying to the mind in a single
instant innumerable peculiarities of the body, be it in form,
or color, or other respects. this power of the eye rests upon
two things, namely, the rectilinear propagation of the disturbance
by which it is effected, and upon its sensitiveness.
to say that the eye is sensitive is not saying anything. compared
with it, all other organs are monstrously crude. the organ of
smell which guides a dog on the trail of a deer, the organ of touch
or force which guides an insect in its wanderings, the organ of
hearing, which is affected by the slightest disturbances of the air,
are sensitive organs, to be sure, but what are they compared with
the human eye! no doubt it responds to the faintest echoes or
reverberations of the medium; no doubt, it brings us tidings from
other worlds, infinitely remote, but in a language we cannot as
yet always understand. and why not? because we live in a
medium filled with air and other gases, vapors and a dense mass
of solid particles flying about. these play an important part in
many phenomena; they fritter away the energy of the vibrations
before they can reach the eye; they too, are the carriers of germs
of destruction, they get into our lungs and other organs, clog up
the channels and imperceptibly, yet inevitably, arrest the stream
of life. could we but do away with all ponderable matter in the
line of sight of the telescope, it would reveal to us undreamt of
marvels. even the unaided eye, i think, would be capable of distinguishing
in the pure medium, small objects at distances measured
probably by hundreds or perhaps thousands of miles.
but there is something else about the eye which impresses us
still more than these wonderful features which we observed, viewing
it from the standpoint of a physicist, merely as an optical
instrument,—something which appeals to us more than its marvelous
faculty of being directly affected by the vibrations of the[pg ]
medium, without interference of gross matter, and more than its
inconceivable sensitiveness and discerning power. it is its significance
in the processes of life. no matter what one's views on
nature and life may be, he must stand amazed when, for the first
time in his thoughts, he realizes the importance of the eye in the
physical processes and mental performances of the human organism.
and how could it be otherwise, when he realizes, that the
eye is the means through which the human race has acquired
the entire knowledge it possesses, that it controls all our motions,
more still, all our actions.
there is no way of acquiring knowledge except through the eye.
what is the foundation of all philosophical systems of ancient
and modern times, in fact, of all the philosophy of man? i am,
i think; i think, therefore i am. but how could i think and how
would i know that i exist, if i had not the eye? for knowledge
involves consciousness; consciousness involves ideas, conceptions;
conceptions involve pictures or images, and images the sense of
vision, and therefore the organ of sight. but how about blind
men, will be asked? yes, a blind man may depict in magnificent
poems, forms and scenes from real life, from a world he physically
does not see. a blind man may touch the keys of an instrument
with unerring precision, may model the fastest boat, may discover
and invent, calculate and construct, may do still greater wonders—but
all the blind men who have done such things have descended
from those who had seeing eyes. nature may reach the same result
in many ways. like a wave in the physical world, in the infinite
ocean of the medium which pervades all, so in the world of
organisms, in life, an impulse started proceeds onward, at times,
may be, with the speed of light, at times, again, so slowly that
for ages and ages it seems to stay, passing through processes of a
complexity inconceivable to men, but in all its forms, in all its
stages, its energy ever and ever integrally present. a single ray
of light from a distant star falling upon the eye of a tyrant in bygone
times, may have altered the course of his life, may have
changed the destiny of nations, may have transformed the surface
of the globe, so intricate, so inconceivably complex are the
processes in nature. in no way can we get such an overwhelming
idea of the grandeur of nature, as when we consider, that in
accordance with the law of the conservation of energy, throughout
the infinite, the forces are in a perfect balance, and hence the
energy of a single thought may determine the motion of a uni[pg ]verse.
it is not necessary that every individual, not even that
every generation or many generations, should have the physical
instrument of sight, in order to be able to form images and to
think, that is, form ideas or conceptions; but sometime or other,
during the process of evolution, the eye certainly must have existed,
else thought, as we understand it, would be impossible;
else conceptions, like spirit, intellect, mind, call it as you may,
could not exist. it is conceivable, that in some other world, in
some other beings, the eye is replaced by a different organ, equally
or more perfect, but these beings cannot be men.
now what prompts us all to voluntary motions and actions of
any kind? again the eye. if i am conscious of the motion, i
must have an idea or conception, that is, an image, therefore the
eye. if i am not precisely conscious of the motion, it is, because
the images are vague or indistinct, being blurred by the superimposition
of many. but when i perform the motion, does the
impulse which prompts me to the action come from within or from
without? the greatest physicists have not disdained to endeavor
to answer this and similar questions and have at times
abandoned themselves to the delights of pure and unrestrained
thought. such questions are generally considered not to belong
to the realm of positive physical science, but will before long be
annexed to its domain. helmholtz has probably thought more
on life than any modern scientist. lord kelvin expressed his
belief that life's process is electrical and that there is a force inherent
to the organism and determining its motions. just as
much as i am convinced of any physical truth i am convinced
that the motive impulse must come from the outside. for, consider
the lowest organism we know—and there are probably
many lower ones—an aggregation of a few cells only. if it is
capable of voluntary motion it can perform an infinite number
of motions, all definite and precise. but now a mechanism consisting
of a finite number of parts and few at that, cannot perform
an infinite number of definite motions, hence the impulses
which govern its movements must come from the environment.
so, the atom, the ulterior element of the universe's structure, is
tossed about in space, eternally, a play to external influences, like
a boat in a troubled sea. were it to stop its motion it would die.
matter at rest, if such a thing could exist, would be matter dead.
death of matter! never has a sentence of deeper philosophical
meaning been uttered. this is the way in which prof. dewar[pg ]
forcibly expresses it in the description of his admirable experiments,
in which liquid oxygen is handled as one handles water,
and air at ordinary pressure is made to condense and even to
solidify by the intense cold. experiments, which serve to illustrate,
in his language, the last feeble manifestations of life, the
last quiverings of matter about to die. but human eyes shall
not witness such death. there is no death of matter, for
throughout the infinite universe, all has to move, to vibrate, that
is, to live.
i have made the preceding statements at the peril of treading
upon metaphysical ground, in my desire to introduce the subject
of this lecture in a manner not altogether uninteresting, i may
hope, to an audience such as i have the honor to address. but
now, then, returning to the subject, this divine organ of sight,
this indispensable instrument for thought and all intellectual enjoyment,
which lays open to us the marvels of this universe,
through which we have acquired what knowledge we possess, and
which prompts us to, and controls, all our physical and mental
activity. by what is it affected? by light! what is light?
we have witnessed the great strides which have been made in
all departments of science in recent years. so great have been
the advances that we cannot refrain from asking ourselves, is
this all true, or is it but a dream? centuries ago men have
lived, have thought, discovered, invented, and have believed that
they were soaring, while they were merely proceeding at a snail's
pace. so we too may be mistaken. but taking the truth of the
observed events as one of the implied facts of science, we must
rejoice in the immense progress already made and still more in the
anticipation of what must come, judging from the possibilities
opened up by modern research. there is, however, an advance
which we have been witnessing, which must be particularly
gratifying to every lover of progress. it is not a discovery, or
an invention, or an achievement in any particular direction. it
is an advance in all directions of scientific thought and experiment.
i mean the generalization of the natural forces and phenomena,
the looming up of a certain broad idea on the scientific
horizon. it is this idea which has, however, long ago taken possession
of the most advanced minds, to which i desire to call your
attention, and which i intend to illustrate in a general way, in
these experiments, as the first step in answering the question
"what is light?" and to realize the modern meaning of this
word.[pg ]
it is beyond the scope of my lecture to dwell upon the subject
of light in general, my object being merely to bring presently to
your notice a certain class of light effects and a number of phenomena
observed in pursuing the study of these effects. but to
be consistent in my remarks it is necessary to state that, according
to that idea, now accepted by the majority of scientific men as a
positive result of theoretical and experimental investigation, the
various forms or manifestations of energy which were generally
designated as "electric" or more precisely "electromagnetic" are
energy manifestations of the same nature as those of radiant
heat and light. therefore the phenomena of light and heat and
others besides these, may be called electrical phenomena. thus
electrical science has become the mother science of all and its
study has become all important. the day when we shall know
exactly what "electricity" is, will chronicle an event probably
greater, more important than any other recorded in the history
of the human race. the time will come when the comfort, the
very existence, perhaps, of man will depend upon that wonderful
agent. for our existence and comfort we require heat, light
and mechanical power. how do we now get all these? we get
them from fuel, we get them by consuming material. what
will man do when the forests disappear, when the coal fields are
exhausted? only one thing, according to our present knowledge
will remain; that is, to transmit power at great distances. men
will go to the waterfalls, to the tides, which are the stores of an
infinitesimal part of nature's immeasurable energy. there will
they harness the energy and transmit the same to their settlements,
to warm their homes by, to give them light, and to keep
their obedient slaves, the machines, toiling. but how will they
transmit this energy if not by electricity? judge then, if the
comfort, nay, the very existence, of man will not depend on electricity.
i am aware that this view is not that of a practical
engineer, but neither is it that of an illusionist, for it is certain,
that power transmission, which at present is merely a stimulus to
enterprise, will some day be a dire necessity.
it is more important for the student, who takes up the study
of light phenomena, to make himself thoroughly acquainted with
certain modern views, than to peruse entire books on the subject
of light itself, as disconnected from these views. were i therefore
to make these demonstrations before students seeking
information—and for the sake of the few of those who may be[pg ]
present, give me leave to so assume—it would be my principal
endeavor to impress these views upon their minds in this series of
experiments.
it might be sufficient for this purpose to perform a simple and
well-known experiment. i might take a familiar appliance, a
leyden jar, charge it from a frictional machine, and then discharge
it. in explaining to you its permanent state when charged,
and its transitory condition when discharging, calling your attention
to the forces which enter into play and to the various phenomena
they produce, and pointing out the relation of the forces
and phenomena, i might fully succeed in illustrating that modern
idea. no doubt, to the thinker, this simple experiment would
appeal as much as the most magnificent display. but this is to
be an experimental demonstration, and one which should possess,
besides instructive, also entertaining features and as such, a simple
experiment, such as the one cited, would not go very far towards
the attainment of the lecturer's aim. i must therefore choose
another way of illustrating, more spectacular certainly, but perhaps
also more instructive. instead of the frictional machine and
leyden jar, i shall avail myself in these experiments, of an induction
coil of peculiar properties, which was described in detail by me
in a lecture before the london institution of electrical engineers,
in feb., . this induction coil is capable of yielding currents of
enormous potential differences, alternating with extreme rapidity.
with this apparatus i shall endeavor to show you three distinct
classes of effects, or phenomena, and it is my desire that each
experiment, while serving for the purposes of illustration, should
at the same time teach us some novel truth, or show us some
novel aspect of this fascinating science. but before doing this, it
seems proper and useful to dwell upon the apparatus employed,
and method of obtaining the high potentials and high-frequency
currents which are made use of in these experiments.
[pg ]
these high-frequency currents are obtained in a peculiar manner.
the method employed was advanced by me about two
years ago in an experimental lecture before the american institute
of electrical engineers. a number of ways, as practiced in
the laboratory, of obtaining these currents either from continuous
or low frequency alternating currents, is diagramatically indicated
in fig. , which will be later described in detail. the general
[pg ]
plan is to charge condensers, from a direct or alternate-current
source, preferably of high-tension, and to discharge them
disruptively while observing well-known conditions necessary
to maintain the oscillations of the current. in view of the
general interest taken in high-frequency currents and effects producible
by them, it seems to me advisable to dwell at some length
upon this method of conversion. in order to give you a clear
idea of the action, i will suppose that a continuous-current generator
is employed, which is often very convenient. it is desirable
that the generator should possess such high tension as to be able
to break through a small air space. if this is not the case, then
auxiliary means have to be resorted to, some of which will be indicated
subsequently. when the condensers are charged to a
certain potential, the air, or insulating space, gives way and a disruptive
discharge occurs. there is then a sudden rush of current
and generally a large portion of accumulated electrical energy
spends itself. the condensers are thereupon quickly charged and
the same process is repeated in more or less rapid succession.
to produce such sudden rushes of current it is necessary to observe
certain conditions. if the rate at which the condensers are
discharged is the same as that at which they are charged, then,
clearly, in the assumed case the condensers do not come into
play. if the rate of discharge be smaller than the rate of charging,
then, again, the condensers cannot play an important part.
but if, on the contrary, the rate of discharging is greater than
that of charging, then a succession of rushes of current is obtained.
it is evident that, if the rate at which the energy is
dissipated by the discharge is very much greater than the rate of
supply to the condensers, the sudden rushes will be comparatively
few, with long-time intervals between. this always occurs
when a condenser of considerable capacity is charged by means
of a comparatively small machine. if the rates of supply and
dissipation are not widely different, then the rushes of current
will be in quicker succession, and this the more, the more nearly
equal both the rates are, until limitations incident to each case
and depending upon a number of causes are reached. thus we
are able to obtain from a continuous-current generator as rapid a
succession of discharges as we like. of course, the higher the
tension of the generator, the smaller need be the capacity of the
condensers, and for this reason, principally, it is of advantage to
employ a generator of very high tension. besides, such a generator
permits the attaining of greater rates of vibration.[pg ]
fig. .
the rushes of current may be of the same direction under the
conditions before assumed, but most generally there is an oscillation
superimposed upon the fundamental vibration of the current.
when the conditions are so determined that there are no oscillations,
the current impulses are unidirectional and thus a means is
provided of transforming a continuous current of high tension,
into a direct current of lower tension, which i think may find
employment in the arts.
this method of conversion is exceedingly interesting and i
was much impressed by its beauty when i first conceived it. it is
ideal in certain respects. it involves the employment of no mechanical
devices of any kind, and it allows of obtaining currents
of any desired frequency from an ordinary circuit, direct or alternating.
the frequency of the fundamental discharges depending
on the relative rates of supply and dissipation can be readily
varied within wide limits, by simple adjustments of these quantities,
and the frequency of the superimposed vibration by the
determination of the capacity, self-induction and resistance of the
circuit. the potential of the currents, again, may be raised as
high as any insulation is capable of withstanding safely by combining
capacity and self-induction or by induction in a secondary,
which need have but comparatively few turns.
as the conditions are often such that the intermittence or oscillation
does not readily establish itself, especially when a direct
current source is employed, it is of advantage to associate an interrupter
with the arc, as i have, some time ago, indicated the
use of an air-blast or magnet, or other such device readily at
hand. the magnet is employed with special advantage in the
conversion of direct currents, as it is then very effective. if the
primary source is an alternate current generator, it is desirable,
as i have stated on another occasion, that the frequency should
be low, and that the current forming the arc be large, in order
to render the magnet more effective.
a form of such discharger with a magnet which has been
found convenient, and adopted after some trials, in the conversion
of direct currents particularly, is illustrated in fig. . n s are
the pole pieces of a very strong magnet which is excited by a coil
c. the pole pieces are slotted for adjustment and can be fastened
in any position by screws s s. the discharge rods d d, thinned
down on the ends in order to allow a closer approach of the magnetic
pole pieces, pass through the columns of brass b b and are
[pg ]fastened in position by screws s s. springs r r and collars c c
are slipped on the rods, the latter serving to set the points of the
rods at a certain suitable distance by means of screws s s, and
the former to draw the points apart. when it is desired to start
the arc, one of the large rubber handles h h is tapped quickly
with the hand, whereby the points of the rods are brought in
contact but are instantly separated by the springs r r. such an
arrangement has been found to be often necessary, namely in
cases when the e. m. f. was not large enough to cause the discharge
to break through the gap, and also when it was desirable to avoid
short circuiting of the generator by the metallic contact of the
rods. the rapidity of the interruptions of the current with a
magnet depends on the intensity of the magnetic field and on the
potential difference at the end of the arc. the interruptions are
generally in such quick succession as to produce a musical sound.
years ago it was observed that when a powerful induction coil
is discharged between the poles of a strong magnet, the discharge
produces a loud noise, not unlike a small pistol shot. it was
vaguely stated that the spark was intensified by the presence of
the magnetic field. it is now clear that the discharge current,
flowing for some time, was interrupted a great number of times
by the magnet, thus producing the sound. the phenomenon is
especially marked when the field circuit of a large magnet or
dynamo is broken in a powerful magnetic field.
fig. .
[pg ]
when the current through the gap is comparatively large, it is
of advantage to slip on the points of the discharge rods pieces of
very hard carbon and let the arc play between the carbon pieces.
this preserves the rods, and besides has the advantage of keeping
the air space hotter, as the heat is not conducted away as
quickly through the carbons, and the result is that a smaller
e. m. f. in the arc gap is required to maintain a succession of
discharges.
fig. .
another form of discharger, which may be employed with advantage
in some cases, is illustrated in fig. . in this form
the discharge rods d d pass through perforations in a wooden
box b, which is thickly coated with mica on the inside, as indicated
by the heavy lines. the perforations are provided with
mica tubes m m of some thickness, which are preferably not in
contact with the rods d d. the box has a cover c which is a
little larger and descends on the outside of the box. the spark
gap is warmed by a small lamp l contained in the box. a plate
p above the lamp allows the draught to pass only through the
chimney e of the lamp, the air entering through holes o o in or
near the bottom of the box and following the path indicated by
the arrows. when the discharger is in operation, the door of the
box is closed so that the light of the arc is not visible outside.[pg ]
it is desirable to exclude the light as perfectly as possible, as it
interferes with some experiments. this form of discharger is simple
and very effective when properly manipulated. the air
being warmed to a certain temperature, has its insulating power
impaired; it becomes dielectrically weak, as it were, and the consequence
is that the arc can be established at much greater distance.
the arc should, of course, be sufficiently insulating to
allow the discharge to pass through the gap disruptively. the
arc formed under such conditions, when long, may be made extremely
sensitive, and the weak draught through the lamp
chimney c is quite sufficient to produce rapid interruptions. the
adjustment is made by regulating the temperature and velocity
of the draught. instead of using the lamp, it answers the purpose
to provide for a draught of warm air in other ways. a
very simple way which has been practiced is to enclose the arc
in a long vertical tube, with plates on the top and bottom for
regulating the temperature and velocity of the air current.
some provision had to be made for deadening the sound.
the air may be rendered dielectrically weak also by rarefaction.
dischargers of this kind have likewise been used by me
in connection with a magnet. a large tube is for this purpose
provided with heavy electrodes of carbon or metal, between
which the discharge is made to pass, the tube being placed in a
powerful magnetic field. the exhaustion of the tube is carried
to a point at which the discharge breaks through easily, but the
pressure should be more than  millimetres, at which the ordinary
thread discharge occurs. in another form of discharger,
combining the features before mentioned, the discharge was
made to pass between two adjustable magnetic pole pieces, the
space between them being kept at an elevated temperature.
it should be remarked here that when such, or interrupting
devices of any kind, are used and the currents are passed through
the primary of a disruptive discharge coil, it is not, as a rule, of
advantage to produce a number of interruptions of the current
per second greater than the natural frequency of vibration of the
dynamo supply circuit, which is ordinarily small. it should also
be pointed out here, that while the devices mentioned in connection
with the disruptive discharge are advantageous under certain
conditions, they may be sometimes a source of trouble, as
they produce intermittences and other irregularities in the vibration
which it would be very desirable to overcome.[pg ]
there is, i regret to say, in this beautiful method of conversion
a defect, which fortunately is not vital, and which i have been
gradually overcoming. i will best call attention to this defect
and indicate a fruitful line of work, by comparing the electrical
process with its mechanical analogue. the process may be illustrated
in this manner. imagine a tank with a wide opening at
the bottom, which is kept closed by spring pressure, but so that
it snaps off suddenly when the liquid in the tank has reached a
certain height. let the fluid be supplied to the tank by means
of a pipe feeding at a certain rate. when the critical height of
the liquid is reached, the spring gives way and the bottom of the
tank drops out. instantly the liquid falls through the wide opening,
and the spring, reasserting itself, closes the bottom again.
the tank is now filled, and after a certain time interval the same
process is repeated. it is clear, that if the pipe feeds the fluid
quicker than the bottom outlet is capable of letting it pass
through, the bottom will remain off and the tank will still overflow.
if the rates of supply are exactly equal, then the bottom lid will
remain partially open and no vibration of the same and of the
liquid column will generally occur, though it might, if started by
some means. but if the inlet pipe does not feed the fluid fast
enough for the outlet, then there will be always vibration.
again, in such case, each time the bottom flaps up or down, the
spring and the liquid column, if the pliability of the spring and
the inertia of the moving parts are properly chosen, will perform
independent vibrations. in this analogue the fluid may be likened
to electricity or electrical energy, the tank to the condenser,
the spring to the dielectric, and the pipe to the conductor through
which electricity is supplied to the condenser. to make this
analogy quite complete it is necessary to make the assumption,
that the bottom, each time it gives way, is knocked violently
against a non-elastic stop, this impact involving some loss of energy;
and that, besides, some dissipation of energy results due to
frictional losses. in the preceding analogue the liquid is supposed
to be under a steady pressure. if the presence of the fluid
be assumed to vary rhythmically, this may be taken as corresponding
to the case of an alternating current. the process is
then not quite as simple to consider, but the action is the same in
principle.
it is desirable, in order to maintain the vibration economically,
to reduce the impact and frictional losses as much as possible.[pg ]
as regards the latter, which in the electrical analogue correspond
to the losses due to the resistance of the circuits, it is impossible
to obviate them entirely, but they can be reduced to a minimum
by a proper selection of the dimensions of the circuits and by the
employment of thin conductors in the form of strands. but
the loss of energy caused by the first breaking through of the
dielectric—which in the above example corresponds to the violent
knock of the bottom against the inelastic stop—would be more important
to overcome. at the moment of the breaking through,
the air space has a very high resistance, which is probably reduced
to a very small value when the current has reached some
strength, and the space is brought to a high temperature. it
would materially diminish the loss of energy if the space were
always kept at an extremely high temperature, but then there
would be no disruptive break. by warming the space moderately
by means of a lamp or otherwise, the economy as far as the
arc is concerned is sensibly increased. but the magnet or other
interrupting device does not diminish the loss in the arc. likewise,
a jet of air only facilitates the carrying off of the energy.
air, or a gas in general, behaves curiously in this respect. when
two bodies charged to a very high potential, discharge disruptively
through an air space, any amount of energy may be carried
off by the air. this energy is evidently dissipated by bodily
carriers, in impact and collisional losses of the molecules. the
exchange of the molecules in the space occurs with inconceivable
rapidity. a powerful discharge taking place between two electrodes,
they may remain entirely cool, and yet the loss in the
air may represent any amount of energy. it is perfectly practicable,
with very great potential differences in the gap, to dissipate
several horse-power in the arc of the discharge without even
noticing a small increase in the temperature of the electrodes.
all the frictional losses occur then practically in the air. if the
exchange of the air molecules is prevented, as by enclosing the air
hermetically, the gas inside of the vessel is brought quickly to a
high temperature, even with a very small discharge. it is difficult
to estimate how much of the energy is lost in sound waves,
audible or not, in a powerful discharge. when the currents
through the gap are large, the electrodes may become rapidly
heated, but this is not a reliable measure of the energy wasted in
the arc, as the loss through the gap itself may be comparatively
small. the air or a gas in general is, at ordinary pressure at least,[pg ]
clearly not the best medium through which a disruptive discharge
should occur. air or other gas under great pressure is of
course a much more suitable medium for the discharge gap. i
have carried on long-continued experiments in this direction, unfortunately
less practicable on account of the difficulties and expense
in getting air under great pressure. but even if the
medium in the discharge space is solid or liquid, still the same
losses take place, though they are generally smaller, for just as
soon as the arc is established, the solid or liquid is volatilized.
indeed, there is no body known which would not be disintegrated
by the arc, and it is an open question among scientific men,
whether an arc discharge could occur at all in the air itself without
the particles of the electrodes being torn off. when the
current through the gap is very small and the arc very long, i
believe that a relatively considerable amount of heat is taken up
in the disintegration of the electrodes, which partially on this account
may remain quite cold.
the ideal medium for a discharge gap should only crack, and
the ideal electrode should be of some material which cannot be
disintegrated. with small currents through the gap it is best to
employ aluminum, but not when the currents are large. the disruptive
break in the air, or more or less in any ordinary medium,
is not of the nature of a crack, but it is rather comparable to the
piercing of innumerable bullets through a mass offering great
frictional resistances to the motion of the bullets, this involving
considerable loss of energy. a medium which would merely
crack when strained electrostatically—and this possibly might be
the case with a perfect vacuum, that is, pure ether—would involve
a very small loss in the gap, so small as to be entirely negligible,
at least theoretically, because a crack may be produced by an
infinitely small displacement. in exhausting an oblong bulb
provided with two aluminum terminals, with the greatest care, i
have succeeded in producing such a vacuum that the secondary
discharge of a disruptive discharge coil would break disruptively
through the bulb in the form of fine spark streams. the
curious point was that the discharge would completely ignore the
terminals and start far behind the two aluminum plates which
served as electrodes. this extraordinary high vacuum could only
be maintained for a very short while. to return to the ideal
medium, think, for the sake of illustration, of a piece of glass or
similar body clamped in a vice, and the latter tightened more and[pg ]
more. at a certain point a minute increase of the pressure will
cause the glass to crack. the loss of energy involved in splitting
the glass may be practically nothing, for though the force is great,
the displacement need be but extremely small. now imagine
that the glass would possess the property of closing again perfectly
the crack upon a minute diminution of the pressure.
this is the way the dielectric in the discharge space should
behave. but inasmuch as there would be always some loss in the
gap, the medium, which should be continuous, should exchange
through the gap at a rapid rate. in the preceding example, the
glass being perfectly closed, it would mean that the dielectric in
the discharge space possesses a great insulating power; the glass
being cracked, it would signify that the medium in the space is
a good conductor. the dielectric should vary enormously in
resistance by minute variations of the e. m. f. across the
discharge space. this condition is attained, but in an extremely
imperfect manner, by warming the air space to a certain
critical temperature, dependent on the e. m. f. across the gap,
or by otherwise impairing the insulating power of the air. but
as a matter of fact the air does never break down disruptively,
if this term be rigorously interpreted, for before the sudden
rush of the current occurs, there is always a weak current
preceding it, which rises first gradually and then with comparative
suddenness. that is the reason why the rate of change is
very much greater when glass, for instance, is broken through,
than when the break takes place through an air space of equivalent
dielectric strength. as a medium for the discharge space, a
solid, or even a liquid, would be preferable therefor. it is somewhat
difficult to conceive of a solid body which would possess the
property of closing instantly after it has been cracked. but a
liquid, especially under great pressure, behaves practically like a
solid, while it possesses the property of closing the crack. hence
it was thought that a liquid insulator might be more suitable as a
dielectric than air. following out this idea, a number of different
forms of dischargers in which a variety of such insulators, sometimes
under great pressure, were employed, have been experimented
upon. it is thought sufficient to dwell in a few words
upon one of the forms experimented upon. one of these dischargers
is illustrated in figs. a and b.
fig. a.fig. b.
a hollow metal pulley p (fig. a), was fastened upon an arbor
a, which by suitable means was rotated at a considerable
[pg ]speed. on the inside of the pulley, but disconnected from the
same, was supported a thin disc h (which is shown thick for the
sake of clearness), of hard rubber in which there were embedded
two metal segments s s with metallic extensions e e into which
were screwed conducting terminals t t covered with thick tubes
of hard rubber t t. the rubber disc h with its metallic segments
s s, was finished in a lathe, and its entire surface highly polished
so as to offer the smallest possible frictional resistance to the motion
through a fluid. in the hollow of the pulley an insulating
liquid such as a thin oil was poured so as to reach very nearly to
the opening left in the flange f, which was screwed tightly on the
front side of the pulley. the terminals t t, were connected to the
opposite coatings of a battery of condensers so that the discharge
occurred through the liquid. when the pulley was rotated, the
liquid was forced against the rim of the pulley and considerable
fluid pressure resulted. in this simple way the discharge gap
was filled with a medium which behaved practically like a solid,
which possessed the quality of closing instantly upon the occurrence
of the break, and which moreover was circulating through
the gap at a rapid rate. very powerful effects were produced by
discharges of this kind with liquid interrupters, of which a number
of different forms were made. it was found that, as expected,
a longer spark for a given length of wire was obtainable
in this way than by using air as an interrupting device. generally
the speed, and therefore also the fluid pressure, was limited
by reason of the fluid friction, in the form of discharger described,
but the practically obtainable speed was more than sufficient to
produce a number of breaks suitable for the circuits ordinarily
used. in such instances the metal pulley p was provided with a
few projections inwardly, and a definite number of breaks was
then produced which could be computed from the speed of[pg ]
rotation of the pulley. experiments were also carried on with
liquids of different insulating power with the view of reducing
the loss in the arc. when an insulating liquid is moderately
warmed, the loss in the arc is diminished.
a point of some importance was noted in experiments with
various discharges of this kind. it was found, for instance, that
whereas the conditions maintained in these forms were favorable
for the production of a great spark length, the current so obtained
was not best suited to the production of light effects. experience
undoubtedly has shown, that for such purposes a harmonic
rise and fall of the potential is preferable. be it that a
solid is rendered incandescent, or phosphorescent, or be it that energy
is transmitted by condenser coating through the glass, it is
quite certain that a harmonically rising and falling potential produces
less destructive action, and that the vacuum is more permanently
maintained. this would be easily explained if it were
ascertained that the process going on in an exhausted vessel is of
an electrolytic nature.
in the diagrammatical sketch, fig. , which has been already
referred to, the cases which are most likely to be met with in
practice are illustrated. one has at his disposal either direct or
alternating currents from a supply station. it is convenient for
an experimenter in an isolated laboratory to employ a machine g,
such as illustrated, capable of giving both kinds of currents. in
such case it is also preferable to use a machine with multiple
circuits, as in many experiments it is useful and convenient to
have at one's disposal currents of different phases. in the
sketch, d represents the direct and a the alternating circuit. in
each of these, three branch circuits are shown, all of which are
provided with double line switches s s s s s s. consider first the
direct current conversion; ia represents the simplest case. if
the e. m. f. of the generator is sufficient to break through a small
air space, at least when the latter is warmed or otherwise rendered
poorly insulating, there is no difficulty in maintaining a
vibration with fair economy by judicious adjustment of the
capacity, self-induction and resistance of the circuit l containing
the devices l l m. the magnet n, s, can be in this case advantageously
combined with the air space. the discharger d d with
the magnet may be placed either way, as indicated by the full or
by the dotted lines. the circuit ia with the connections and devices
is supposed to possess dimensions such as are suitable for[pg ]
the maintenance of a vibration. but usually the e. m. f. on the
circuit or branch ia will be something like a  volts or so, and
in this case it is not sufficient to break through the gap. many
different means may be used to remedy this by raising the e. m. f.
across the gap. the simplest is probably to insert a large self-induction
coil in series with the circuit l. when the arc is
established, as by the discharger illustrated in fig. , the magnet
blows the arc out the instant it is formed. now the extra
current of the break, being of high e. m. f., breaks through the
gap, and a path of low resistance for the dynamo current being
again provided, there is a sudden rush of current from the
dynamo upon the weakening or subsidence of the extra current.
this process is repeated in rapid succession, and in this manner i
have maintained oscillation with as low as  volts, or even less,
across the gap. but conversion on this plan is not to be recommended
on account of the too heavy currents through the gap
and consequent heating of the electrodes; besides, the frequencies
obtained in this way are low, owing to the high self-induction
necessarily associated with the circuit. it is very desirable
to have the e. m. f. as high as possible, first, in order to increase
the economy of the conversion, and, secondly, to obtain high
frequencies. the difference of potential in this electric oscillation
is, of course, the equivalent of the stretching force in the
mechanical vibration of the spring. to obtain very rapid vibration
in a circuit of some inertia, a great stretching force or difference
of potential is necessary. incidentally, when the e. m. f. is
very great, the condenser which is usually employed in connection
with the circuit need but have a small capacity, and many
other advantages are gained. with a view of raising the e. m. f.
to a many times greater value than obtainable from ordinary
distribution circuits, a rotating transformer g is used, as indicated
at iia, fig. , or else a separate high potential machine
is driven by means of a motor operated from the generator g.
the latter plan is in fact preferable, as changes are easier made.
the connections from the high tension winding are quite similar
to those in branch ia with the exception that a condenser c,
which should be adjustable, is connected to the high tension
circuit. usually, also, an adjustable self-induction coil in series
with the circuit has been employed in these experiments. when
the tension of the currents is very high, the magnet ordinarily
used in connection with the discharger is of comparatively small[pg ]
value, as it is quite easy to adjust the dimensions of the circuit
so that oscillation is maintained. the employment of a steady
e. m. f. in the high frequency conversion affords some advantages
over the employment of alternating e. m. f., as the adjustments
are much simpler and the action can be easier controlled.
but unfortunately one is limited by the obtainable potential difference.
the winding also breaks down easily in consequence
of the sparks which form between the sections of the armature
or commutator when a vigorous oscillation takes place. besides,
these transformers are expensive to build. it has been found by
experience that it is best to follow the plan illustrated at iiia.
in this arrangement a rotating transformer g, is employed to
convert the low tension direct currents into low frequency alternating
currents, preferably also of small tension. the tension
of the currents is then raised in a stationary transformer t. the
secondary s of this transformer is connected to an adjustable condenser
c which discharges through the gap or discharger d d, placed
in either of the ways indicated, through the primary p of a disruptive
discharge coil, the high frequency current being obtained
from the secondary s of this coil, as described on previous occasions.
this will undoubtedly be found the cheapest and most convenient
way of converting direct currents.
the three branches of the circuit a represent the usual cases
met in practice when alternating currents are converted. in
fig. b a condenser c, generally of large capacity, is connected to the
circuit l containing the devices l l, m m. the devices m m are supposed
to be of high self-induction so as to bring the frequency of
the circuit more or less to that of the dynamo. in this instance
the discharger d d should best have a number of makes and breaks
per second equal to twice the frequency of the dynamo. if not
so, then it should have at least a number equal to a multiple or
even fraction of the dynamo frequency. it should be observed,
referring to ib, that the conversion to a high potential is also
effected when the discharger d d, which is shown in the sketch, is
omitted. but the effects which are produced by currents which
rise instantly to high values, as in a disruptive discharge, are
entirely different from those produced by dynamo currents which
rise and fall harmonically. so, for instance, there might be in a
given case a number of makes and breaks at d d equal to just
twice the frequency of the dynamo, or in other words, there may
be the same number of fundamental oscillations as would be pro[pg ]duced
without the discharge gap, and there might even not be any
quicker superimposed vibration; yet the differences of potential at
the various points of the circuit, the impedance and other phenomena,
dependent upon the rate of change, will bear no similarity in
the two cases. thus, when working with currents discharging disruptively,
the element chiefly to be considered is not the frequency,
as a student might be apt to believe, but the rate of change per
unit of time. with low frequencies in a certain measure the same
effects may be obtained as with high frequencies, provided the rate
of change is sufficiently great. so if a low frequency current is
raised to a potential of, say, , volts, and the high tension current
passed through a series of high resistance lamp filaments, the
importance of the rarefied gas surrounding the filament is clearly
noted, as will be seen later; or, if a low frequency current of several
thousand amperes is passed through a metal bar, striking phenomena
of impedance are observed, just as with currents of high
frequencies. but it is, of course, evident that with low frequency
currents it is impossible to obtain such rates of change per unit of
time as with high frequencies, hence the effects produced by the
latter are much more prominent. it is deemed advisable to
make the preceding remarks, inasmuch as many more recently
described effects have been unwittingly identified with high
frequencies. frequency alone in reality does not mean anything,
except when an undisturbed harmonic oscillation is considered.
in the branch iiib a similar disposition to that in ib is illustrated,
with the difference that the currents discharging through the gap
d d are used to induce currents in the secondary s of a transformer
t. in such case the secondary should be provided with an
adjustable condenser for the purpose of tuning it to the primary.
iib illustrates a plan of alternate current high frequency
conversion which is most frequently used and which is found to
be most convenient. this plan has been dwelt upon in detail on
previous occasions and need not be described here.
some of these results were obtained by the use of a high
frequency alternator. a description of such machines will be
found in my original paper before the american institute of
electrical engineers, and in periodicals of that period, notably
in the electrical engineer of march , .
i will now proceed with the experiments.[pg ]
the first class of effects i intend to show you are effects produced
by electrostatic force. it is the force which governs the
the motion of the atoms, which causes them to collide and develop
the life-sustaining energy of heat and light, and which
causes them to aggregate in an infinite variety of ways, according
to nature's fanciful designs, and to form all these wondrous
structures we perceive around us; it is, in fact, if our present
views be true, the most important force for us to consider in nature.
as the term electrostatic might imply a steady electric
condition, it should be remarked, that in these experiments the
force is not constant, but varies at a rate which may be considered
moderate, about one million times a second, or thereabouts.
this enables me to produce many effects which are not producible
with an unvarying force.
when two conducting bodies are insulated and electrified,
we say that an electrostatic force is acting between them. this
force manifests itself in attractions, repulsions and stresses in the
bodies and space or medium without. so great may be the strain
exerted in the air, or whatever separates the two conducting
bodies, that it may break down, and we observe sparks or bundles
of light or streamers, as they are called. these streamers form
abundantly when the force through the air is rapidly varying. i
will illustrate this action of electrostatic force in a novel experiment
in which i will employ the induction coil before referred
to. the coil is contained in a trough filled with oil, and placed
under the table. the two ends of the secondary wire pass
through the two thick columns of hard rubber which protrude
to some height above the table. it is necessary to insulate the
ends or terminals of the secondary heavily with hard rubber, because
even dry wood is by far too poor an insulator for these currents
of enormous potential differences. on one of the terminals
of the coil, i have placed a large sphere of sheet brass, which
is connected to a larger insulated brass plate, in order to enable
me to perform the experiments under conditions, which, as you
will see, are more suitable for this experiment. i now set the
coil to work and approach the free terminal with a metallic object
held in my hand, this simply to avoid burns. as i approach the
metallic object to a distance of eight or ten inches, a torrent of furious
sparks breaks forth from the end of the secondary wire, which[pg ]
passes through the rubber column. the sparks cease when the
metal in my hand touches the wire. my arm is now traversed
by a powerful electric current, vibrating at about the rate of one
million times a second. all around me the electrostatic force
makes itself felt, and the air molecules and particles of dust flying
about are acted upon and are hammering violently against my
body. so great is this agitation of the particles, that when the
lights are turned out you may see streams of feeble light appear
on some parts of my body. when such a streamer breaks out on
any part of the body, it produces a sensation like the pricking of
a needle. were the potentials sufficiently high and the frequency
of the vibration rather low, the skin would probably be ruptured
under the tremendous strain, and the blood would rush out
with great force in the form of fine spray or jet so thin as to be
invisible, just as oil will when placed on the positive terminal of
a holtz machine. the breaking through of the skin though it
may seem impossible at first, would perhaps occur, by reason of
the tissues under the skin being incomparably better conducting.
this, at least, appears plausible, judging from some observations.
fig. .
i can make these streams of light visible to all, by touching
with the metallic object one of the terminals as before, and
approaching my free hand to the brass sphere, which is connected
to the second terminal of the coil. as the hand is
approached, the air between it and the sphere, or in the immediate
neighborhood, is more violently agitated, and you see
streams of light now break forth from my finger tips and
from the whole hand (fig. ). were i to approach the hand
closer, powerful sparks would jump from the brass sphere to
my hand, which might be injurious. the streamers offer no
particular inconvenience, except that in the ends of the finger[pg ]
tips a burning sensation is felt. they should not be confounded
with those produced by an influence machine, because in many
respects they behave differently. i have attached the brass sphere
and plate to one of the terminals in order to prevent the formation
of visible streamers on that terminal, also in order to prevent
sparks from jumping at a considerable distance. besides, the
attachment is favorable for the working of the coil.
the streams of light which you have observed issuing from my
hand are due to a potential of about , volts, alternating in
rather irregular intervals, sometimes like a million times a second.
a vibration of the same amplitude, but four times as fast, to maintain
which over ,, volts would be required, would be
more than sufficient to envelop my body in a complete sheet of
flame. but this flame would not burn me up; quite contrarily,
the probability is that i would not be injured in the least. yet a
hundredth part of that energy, otherwise directed, would be amply
sufficient to kill a person.
the amount of energy which may thus be passed into the body
of a person depends on the frequency and potential of the currents,
and by making both of these very great, a vast amount of
energy may be passed into the body without causing any discomfort,
except perhaps, in the arm, which is traversed by a true
conduction current. the reason why no pain in the body is felt,
and no injurious effect noted, is that everywhere, if a current be
imagined to flow through the body, the direction of its flow
would be at right angles to the surface; hence the body of the
experimenter offers an enormous section to the current, and the
density is very small, with the exception of the arm, perhaps,
where the density may be considerable. but if only a small
fraction of that energy would be applied in such a way that a current
would traverse the body in the same manner as a low frequency
current, a shock would be received which might be fatal.
a direct or low frequency alternating current is fatal, i think,
principally because its distribution through the body is not
uniform, as it must divide itself in minute streamlets of great
density, whereby some organs are vitally injured. that such a
process occurs i have not the least doubt, though no evidence
might apparently exist, or be found upon examination. the
surest to injure and destroy life, is a continuous current, but the
most painful is an alternating current of very low frequency.
the expression of these views, which are the result of long con[pg ]tinued
experiment and observation, both with steady and varying
currents, is elicited by the interest which is at present taken in
this subject, and by the manifestly erroneous ideas which are
daily propounded in journals on this subject.
i may illustrate an effect of the electrostatic force by another
striking experiment, but before, i must call your attention to one
or two facts. i have said before, that when the medium between
two oppositely electrified bodies is strained beyond a certain
limit it gives way and, stated in popular language, the
opposite electric charges unite and neutralize each other. this
breaking down of the medium occurs principally when the force
acting between the bodies is steady, or varies at a moderate rate.
were the variation sufficiently rapid, such a destructive break
would not occur, no matter how great the force, for all the energy
would be spent in radiation, convection and mechanical and
chemical action. thus the spark length, or greatest distance
which a spark will jump between the electrified bodies is the
smaller, the greater the variation or time rate of change. but
this rule may be taken to be true only in a general way, when
comparing rates which are widely different.
fig. a.fig. b.
i will show you by an experiment the difference in the effect
produced by a rapidly varying and a steady or moderately varying
force. i have here two large circular brass plates p p (fig.
a and fig. b), supported on movable insulating stands on
the table, connected to the ends of the secondary of a coil similar
to the one used before. i place the plates ten or twelve inches
apart and set the coil to work. you see the whole space between
the plates, nearly two cubic feet, filled with uniform light, fig.
a. this light is due to the streamers you have seen in the first
experiment, which are now much more intense. i have already
pointed out the importance of these streamers in commercial apparatus
and their still greater importance in some purely scientific
investigations. often they are too weak to be visible, but[pg ]
they always exist, consuming energy and modifying the action
of the apparatus. when intense, as they are at present, they
produce ozone in great quantity, and also, as professor crookes
has pointed out, nitrous acid. so quick is the chemical action that
if a coil, such as this one, is worked for a very long time it will
make the atmosphere of a small room unbearable, for the eyes
and throat are attacked. but when moderately produced, the
streamers refresh the atmosphere wonderfully, like a thunder-storm,
and exercises unquestionably a beneficial effect.
in this experiment the force acting between the plates changes
in intensity and direction at a very rapid rate. i will now make
the rate of change per unit time much smaller. this i effect by
rendering the discharges through the primary of the induction
coil less frequent, and also by diminishing the rapidity of the vibration
in the secondary. the former result is conveniently secured
by lowering the e. m. f. over the air gap in the primary
circuit, the latter by approaching the two brass plates to a distance
of about three or four inches. when the coil is set to work,
you see no streamers or light between the plates, yet the medium
between them is under a tremendous strain. i still further augment
the strain by raising the e. m. f. in the primary circuit, and
soon you see the air give way and the hall is illuminated by a
shower of brilliant and noisy sparks, fig. b. these sparks could
be produced also with unvarying force; they have been for many
years a familiar phenomenon, though they were usually obtained
from an entirely different apparatus. in describing these two
phenomena so radically different in appearance, i have advisedly
spoken of a "force" acting between the plates. it would be in
accordance with accepted views to say, that there was an "alternating
e. m. f," acting between the plates. this term is quite
proper and applicable in all cases where there is evidence of at
least a possibility of an essential inter-dependence of the electric
state of the plates, or electric action in their neighborhood. but
if the plates were removed to an infinite distance, or if at a finite
distance, there is no probability or necessity whatever for such
dependence. i prefer to use the term "electrostatic force," and
to say that such a force is acting around each plate or electrified insulated
body in general. there is an inconvenience in using this
expression as the term incidentally means a steady electric condition;
but a proper nomenclature will eventually settle this difficulty.[pg ]
i now return to the experiment to which i have already alluded,
and with which i desire to illustrate a striking effect produced
by a rapidly varying electrostatic force. i attach to the end
of the wire, l (fig. ), which is in connection with one of the
terminals of the secondary of the induction coil, an exhausted
bulb b. this bulb contains a thin carbon filament f, which is
fastened to a platinum wire w, sealed in the glass and leading
outside of the bulb, where it connects to the wire l. the
bulb may be exhausted to any degree attainable with ordinary
apparatus. just a moment before, you have witnessed the breaking
down of the air between the charged brass plates. you know
that a plate of glass, or any other insulating material, would break
down in like manner. had i therefore a metallic coating attached
to the outside of the bulb, or placed near the same, and
were this coating connected to the other terminal of the coil, you
would be prepared to see the glass give way if the strain were
sufficiently increased. even were the coating not connected to
the other terminal, but to an insulated plate, still, if you have
followed recent developments, you would naturally expect a rupture
of the glass.
fig. .fig. a.fig. b.
but it will certainly surprise you to note that under the action
of the varying electrostatic force, the glass gives way when all
other bodies are removed from the bulb. in fact, all the surrounding
bodies we perceive might be removed to an infinite distance
without affecting the result in the slightest. when the coil
is set to work, the glass is invariably broken through at the seal,
or other narrow channel, and the vacuum is quickly impaired.[pg ]
such a damaging break would not occur with a steady force, even
if the same were many times greater. the break is due to the
agitation of the molecules of the gas within the bulb, and outside
of the same. this agitation, which is generally most violent in
the narrow pointed channel near the seal, causes a heating and
rupture of the glass. this rupture, would, however, not occur,
not even with a varying force, if the medium filling the inside of
the bulb, and that surrounding it, were perfectly homogeneous.
the break occurs much quicker if the top of the bulb is drawn
out into a fine fibre. in bulbs used with these coils such narrow,
pointed channels must therefore be avoided.
when a conducting body is immersed in air, or similar insulating
medium, consisting of, or containing, small freely movable
particles capable of being electrified, and when the electrification
of the body is made to undergo a very rapid change—which is
equivalent to saying that the electrostatic force acting around
the body is varying in intensity,—the small particles are attracted
and repelled, and their violent impacts against the body may
cause a mechanical motion of the latter. phenomena of this
kind are noteworthy, inasmuch as they have not been observed
before with apparatus such as has been commonly in use. if a
very light conducting sphere be suspended on an exceedingly fine
wire, and charged to a steady potential, however high, the sphere
will remain at rest. even if the potential would be rapidly
varying, provided that the small particles of matter, molecules or
atoms, are evenly distributed, no motion of the sphere should result.
but if one side of the conducting sphere is covered with a
thick insulating layer, the impacts of the particles will cause the
sphere to move about, generally in irregular curves, fig. a.
in like manner, as i have shown on a previous occasion, a fan of
sheet metal, fig. b, covered partially with insulating material
as indicated, and placed upon the terminal of the coil so as to turn
freely on it, is spun around.
all these phenomena you have witnessed and others which
will be shown later, are due to the presence of a medium like
air, and would not occur in a continuous medium. the action
of the air may be illustrated still better by the following experiment.
i take a glass tube t, fig. , of about an inch in diameter,
which has a platinum wire w sealed in the lower end,
and to which is attached a thin lamp filament f. i connect the
wire with the terminal of the coil and set the coil to work. the[pg ]
platinum wire is now electrified positively and negatively
in rapid succession and the wire and air inside of the tube
is rapidly heated by the impacts of the particles, which may be
so violent as to render the filament incandescent. but if i pour
oil in the tube, just as soon as the wire is covered with the oil,
all action apparently ceases and there is no marked evidence of
heating. the reason of this is that the oil is a practically continuous
medium. the displacements in such a continuous medium
are, with these frequencies, to all appearance incomparably
smaller than in air, hence the work performed in such a medium
is insignificant. but oil would behave very differently with frequencies
many times as great, for even though the displacements
be small, if the frequency were much greater, considerable work
might be performed in the oil.
fig. .fig. .
the electrostatic attractions and repulsions between bodies of
measurable dimensions are, of all the manifestations of this force,
the first so-called electrical phenomena noted. but though they
have been known to us for many centuries, the precise nature of
the mechanism concerned in these actions is still unknown to us,
and has not been even quite satisfactorily explained. what kind
of mechanism must that be? we cannot help wondering when
we observe two magnets attracting and repelling each other with
a force of hundreds of pounds with apparently nothing between
them. we have in our commercial dynamos magnets capable of
sustaining in mid-air tons of weight. but what are even these[pg ]
forces acting between magnets when compared with the tremendous
attractions and repulsions produced by electrostatic force, to
which there is apparently no limit as to intensity. in lightning
discharges bodies are often charged to so high a potential that
they are thrown away with inconceivable force and torn asunder
or shattered into fragments. still even such effects cannot compare
with the attractions and repulsions which exist between
charged molecules or atoms, and which are sufficient to project
them with speeds of many kilometres a second, so that under their
violent impact bodies are rendered highly incandescent and are
volatilized. it is of special interest for the thinker who inquires
into the nature of these forces to note that whereas the actions
between individual molecules or atoms occur seemingly under any
conditions, the attractions and repulsions of bodies of measurable
dimensions imply a medium possessing insulating properties. so,
if air, either by being rarefied or heated, is rendered more or less
conducting, these actions between two electrified bodies practically
cease, while the actions between the individual atoms continue to
manifest themselves.
an experiment may serve as an illustration and as a means of
bringing out other features of interest. some time ago i showed
that a lamp filament or wire mounted in a bulb and connected to
one of the terminals of a high tension secondary coil is set spinning,
the top of the filament generally describing a circle. this
vibration was very energetic when the air in the bulb was at
ordinary pressure and became less energetic when the air in the
bulb was strongly compressed. it ceased altogether when the air
was exhausted so as to become comparatively good conducting. i
found at that time that no vibration took place when the bulb
was very highly exhausted. but i conjectured that the vibration
which i ascribed to the electrostatic action between the walls of
the bulb and the filament should take place also in a highly
exhausted bulb. to test this under conditions which were more
favorable, a bulb like the one in fig. , was constructed. it
comprised a globe b, in the neck of which was sealed a platinum
wire w carrying a thin lamp filament f. in the lower part of
the globe a tube t was sealed so as to surround the filament. the
exhaustion was carried as far as it was practicable with the apparatus
employed.
this bulb verified my expectation, for the filament was set
spinning when the current was turned on, and became incandes[pg ]cent.
it also showed another interesting feature, bearing upon
the preceding remarks, namely, when the filament had been
kept incandescent some time, the narrow tube and the space inside
were brought to an elevated temperature, and as the gas in
the tube then became conducting, the electrostatic attraction between
the glass and the filament became very weak or ceased, and
the filament came to rest. when it came to rest it would glow
far more intensely. this was probably due to its assuming the
position in the centre of the tube where the molecular bombardment
was most intense, and also partly to the fact that the individual
impacts were more violent and that no part of the supplied
energy was converted into mechanical movement. since, in accordance
with accepted views, in this experiment the incandescence
must be attributed to the impacts of the particles, molecules or
atoms in the heated space, these particles must therefore, in order
to explain such action, be assumed to behave as independent carriers
of electric charges immersed in an insulating medium; yet
there is no attractive force between the glass tube and the filament
because the space in the tube is, as a whole, conducting.
it is of some interest to observe in this connection that whereas
the attraction between two electrified bodies may cease owing to
the impairing of the insulating power of the medium in which
they are immersed, the repulsion between the bodies may still be
observed. this may be explained in a plausible way. when the
bodies are placed at some distance in a poorly conducting medium,
such as slightly warmed or rarefied air, and are suddenly electrified,
opposite electric charges being imparted to them, these
charges equalize more or less by leakage through the air. but if
the bodies are similarly electrified, there is less opportunity afforded
for such dissipation, hence the repulsion observed in such
case is greater than the attraction. repulsive actions in a gaseous
medium are however, as prof. crookes has shown, enhanced
by molecular bombardment.
so far, i have considered principally effects produced by a
varying electrostatic force in an insulating medium, such as air.
when such a force is acting upon a conducting body of measurable
dimensions, it causes within the same, or on its surface,
displacements of the electricity and gives rise to electric currents,
and these produce another kind of phenomena, some of which i[pg ]
shall presently endeavor to illustrate. in presenting this second
class of electrical effects, i will avail myself principally of such
as are producible without any return circuit, hoping to interest
you the more by presenting these phenomena in a more or less
novel aspect.
it has been a long time customary, owing to the limited
experience with vibratory currents, to consider an electric current
as something circulating in a closed conducting path. it
was astonishing at first to realize that a current may flow through
the conducting path even if the latter be interrupted, and it
was still more surprising to learn, that sometimes it may be
even easier to make a current flow under such conditions
than through a closed path. but that old idea is gradually disappearing,
even among practical men, and will soon be entirely
forgotten.
fig. .
if i connect an insulated metal plate p, fig. , to one of the
terminals t of the induction coil by means of a wire, though this
plate be very well insulated, a current passes through the
wire when the coil is set to work. first i wish to give you
evidence that there is a current passing through the connecting
wire. an obvious way of demonstrating this is to insert between
the terminal of the coil and the insulated plate a very thin platinum
or german silver wire w and bring the latter to incandescence
or fusion by the current. this requires a rather large plate
or else current impulses of very high potential and frequency.
another way is to take a coil c, fig. , containing many turns of
thin insulated wire and to insert the same in the path of the current
to the plate. when i connect one of the ends of the coil to the
wire leading to another insulated plate p, and its other end to the
terminal t of the induction coil, and set the latter to work, a current
passes through the inserted coil c and the existence of the
current may be made manifest in various ways. for instance, i[pg ]
insert an iron core i within the coil. the current being one of
very high frequency, will, if it be of some strength, soon bring the
iron core to a noticeably higher temperature, as the hysteresis and
current losses are great with such high frequencies. one might
take a core of some size, laminated or not, it would matter little;
but ordinary iron wire /th or /th of an inch thick is suitable
for the purpose. while the induction coil is working, a current
traverses the inserted coil and only a few moments are sufficient
to bring the iron wire i to an elevated temperature sufficient to
soften the sealing-wax s, and cause a paper washer p fastened by
it to the iron wire to fall off. but with the apparatus such as i
have here, other, much more interesting, demonstrations of this
kind can be made. i have a secondary s, fig , of coarse wire,
wound upon a coil similar to the first. in the preceding experiment
the current through the coil c, fig. , was very small, but
there being many turns a strong heating effect was, nevertheless,
produced in the iron wire. had i passed that current through a
conductor in order to show the heating of the latter, the current
might have been too small to produce the effect desired. but with
this coil provided with a secondary winding, i can now transform
the feeble current of high tension which passes through the primary
p into a strong secondary current of low tension, and this
current will quite certainly do what i expect. in a small glass
tube (t, fig. ), i have enclosed a coiled platinum wire, w, this
merely in order to protect the wire. on each end of the glass
tube is sealed a terminal of stout wire to which one of the ends of
the platinum wire w, is connected. i join the terminals of the
secondary coil to these terminals and insert the primary p,
between the insulated plate p, and the terminal t, of the induction
coil as before. the latter being set to work, instantly the
platinum wire w is rendered incandescent and can be fused, even
if it be very thick.
fig. .
[pg ]
instead of the platinum wire i now take an ordinary -volt
 c. p. lamp. when i set the induction coil in operation the
lamp filament is brought to high incandescence. it is, however,
not necessary to use the insulated plate, for the lamp (l, fig. )
is rendered incandescent even if the plate p be disconnected.
the secondary may also be connected to the primary as indicated
by the dotted line in fig. , to do away more or less with the
electrostatic induction or to modify the action otherwise.
fig. .
i may here call attention to a number of interesting observations
with the lamp. first, i disconnect one of the terminals of
the lamp from the secondary s. when the induction coil plays,
a glow is noted which fills the whole bulb. this glow is due to
electrostatic induction. it increases when the bulb is grasped
with the hand, and the capacity of the experimenter's body thus
added to the secondary circuit. the secondary, in effect, is equivalent
to a metallic coating, which would be placed near the primary.
if the secondary, or its equivalent, the coating, were placed
symmetrically to the primary, the electrostatic induction would
be nil under ordinary conditions, that is, when a primary return
circuit is used, as both halves would neutralize each other. the
secondary is in fact placed symmetrically to the primary, but the
action of both halves of the latter, when only one of its ends is
connected to the induction coil, is not exactly equal; hence electrostatic
induction takes place, and hence the glow in the bulb. i
can nearly equalize the action of both halves of the primary by
connecting the other, free end of the same to the insulated plate,
as in the preceding experiment. when the plate is connected,
the glow disappears. with a smaller plate it would not entirely
disappear and then it would contribute to the brightness of the
filament when the secondary is closed, by warming the air in the
bulb.[pg ]
fig. a.   fig. b.
fig. a.   fig. b.
to demonstrate another interesting feature, i have adjusted
the coils used in a certain way. i first connect both the terminals
of the lamp to the secondary, one end of the primary being connected
to the terminal t of the induction coil and the other to
the insulated plate p as before. when the current is turned on,
the lamp glows brightly, as shown in fig. b, in which c is a fine
wire coil and s a coarse wire secondary wound upon it. if the
insulated plate p is disconnected, leaving one of the ends a of the
primary insulated, the filament becomes dark or generally it diminishes
in brightness (fig. a). connecting again the plate p
and raising the frequency of the current, i make the filament
quite dark or barely red (fig. b). once more i will disconnect
the plate. one will of course infer that when the plate is
disconnected, the current through the primary will be weakened,
that therefore the e. m. f. will fall in the secondary s, and that
the brightness of the lamp will diminish. this might be the
case and the result can be secured by an easy adjustment of the
[pg ]coils; also by varying the frequency and potential of the currents.
but it is perhaps of greater interest to note, that the lamp
increases in brightness when the plate is disconnected (fig. a).
in this case all the energy the primary receives is now sunk into
it, like the charge of a battery in an ocean cable, but most of that
energy is recovered through the secondary and used to light the
lamp. the current traversing the primary is strongest at the end
b which is connected to the terminal t of the induction coil, and
diminishes in strength towards the remote end a. but the dynamic
inductive effect exerted upon the secondary s is now greater
than before, when the suspended plate was connected to the
primary. these results might have been produced by a number
of causes. for instance, the plate p being connected, the reaction
from the coil c may be such as to diminish the potential at
the terminal t of the induction coil, and therefore weaken the
current through the primary of the coil c. or the disconnecting[pg ]
of the plate may diminish the capacity effect with relation to the
primary of the latter coil to such an extent that the current
through it is diminished, though the potential at the terminal t
of the induction coil may be the same or even higher. or the
result might have been produced by the change of phase of the
primary and secondary currents and consequent reaction. but
the chief determining factor is the relation of the self-induction
and capacity of coil c and plate p and the frequency of the currents.
the greater brightness of the filament in fig. a, is,
however, in part due to the heating of the rarefied gas in the
lamp by electrostatic induction, which, as before remarked, is
greater when the suspended plate is disconnected.
still another feature of some interest i may here bring to your
attention. when the insulated plate is disconnected and the secondary
of the coil opened, by approaching a small object to the
secondary, but very small sparks can be drawn from it, showing
that the electrostatic induction is small in this case. but upon
the secondary being closed upon itself or through the lamp, the
filament glowing brightly, strong sparks are obtained from the
secondary. the electrostatic induction is now much greater,
because the closed secondary determines a greater flow of current
through the primary and principally through that half of it which
is connected to the induction coil. if now the bulb be grasped
with the hand, the capacity of the secondary with reference to the
primary is augmented by the experimenter's body and the luminosity
of the filament is increased, the incandescence now being
due partly to the flow of current through the filament and
partly to the molecular bombardment of the rarefied gas in the
bulb.
the preceding experiments will have prepared one for the next
following results of interest, obtained in the course of these investigations.
since i can pass a current through an insulated
wire merely by connecting one of its ends to the source of electrical
energy, since i can induce by it another current, magnetize
an iron core, and, in short, perform all operations as though a return
circuit were used, clearly i can also drive a motor by the aid
of only one wire. on a former occasion i have described a simple
form of motor comprising a single exciting coil, an iron core
and disc. fig.  illustrates a modified way of operating such
an alternate current motor by currents induced in a transformer
connected to one lead, and several other arrangements of circuits[pg ]
for operating a certain class of alternating motors founded on the
action of currents of differing phase. in view of the present
state of the art it is thought sufficient to describe these arrangements
in a few words only. the diagram, fig.  ii., shows
a primary coil p, connected with one of its ends to the line l leading
from a high tension transformer terminal t. in inductive
relation to this primary p is a secondary s of coarse wire in the
circuit of which is a coil c. the currents induced in the secondary
energize the iron core i, which is preferably, but not necessarily,
subdivided, and set the metal disc d in rotation. such a
motor m as diagramatically shown in fig.  ii., has been
called a "magnetic lag motor," but this expression may be objected
to by those who attribute the rotation of the disc to eddy
currents circulating in minute paths when the core i is finally
subdivided. in order to operate such a motor effectively on the
plan indicated, the frequencies should not be too high, not more
than four or five thousand, though the rotation is produced even
with ten thousand per second, or more.
in fig.  i., a motor m having two energizing circuits, a and
b, is diagrammatically indicated. the circuit a is connected to
the line l and in series with it is a primary p, which may have its
free end connected to an insulated plate p, such connection
being indicated by the dotted lines. the other motor circuit b
is connected to the secondary s which is in inductive relation to
the primary p. when the transformer terminal t is alternately
electrified, currents traverse the open line l and also circuit a and
primary p. the currents through the latter induce secondary
currents in the circuit s, which pass through the energizing coil
b of the motor. the currents through the secondary s and those
through the primary p differ in phase  degrees, or nearly so, and
are capable of rotating an armature placed in inductive relation
to the circuits a and b.
in fig.  iii., a similar motor m with two energizing circuits
a and b is illustrated. a primary p, connected with one
of its ends to the line l has a secondary s, which is preferably
wound for a tolerably high e. m. f., and to which the two energizing
circuits of the motor are connected, one directly to the
ends of the secondary and the other through a condenser c, by the
action of which the currents traversing the circuit a and b are
made to differ in phase.[pg ]
fig. .
fig. .fig. .
in fig.  iv., still another arrangement is shown. in this
case two primaries p and p are connected to the line l, one
[pg ]
through a condenser c of small capacity, and the other directly.
the primaries are provided with secondaries s and s which are
in series with the energizing circuits, a and b and a motor m,
the condenser c again serving to produce the requisite difference
in the phase of the currents traversing the motor circuits. as
such phase motors with two or more circuits are now well known
in the art, they have been here illustrated diagrammatically. no
difficulty whatever is found in operating a motor in the manner
indicated, or in similar ways; and although such experiments up
to this day present only scientific interest, they may at a period
not far distant, be carried out with practical objects in view.
it is thought useful to devote here a few remarks to the subject
of operating devices of all kinds by means of only one leading
wire. it is quite obvious, that when high-frequency currents are
made use of, ground connections are—at least when the e. m. f.
of the currents is great—better than a return wire. such ground
connections are objectionable with steady or low frequency currents
on account of destructive chemical actions of the former
and disturbing influences exerted by both on the neighboring circuits;
but with high frequencies these actions practically do not
exist. still, even ground connections become superfluous when
the e. m. f. is very high, for soon a condition is reached, when the
current may be passed more economically through open, than
through closed, conductors. remote as might seem an industrial
application of such single wire transmission of energy to one not
experienced in such lines of experiment, it will not seem so to
anyone who for some time has carried on investigations of such
nature. indeed i cannot see why such a plan should not be
practicable. nor should it be thought that for carrying out such
a plan currents of very high frequency are expressly required,
for just as soon as potentials of say , volts are used, the
single wire transmission may be effected with low frequencies,
and experiments have been made by me from which these inferences
are made.
when the frequencies are very high it has been found in laboratory
practice quite easy to regulate the effects in the manner
shown in diagram fig. . here two primaries p and p are shown,
each connected with one of its ends to the line l and with the
other end to the condenser plates c and c, respectively. near
these are placed other condenser plates c and c, the former being
connected to the line l and the latter to an insulated larger[pg ]
plate p. on the primaries are wound secondaries s and s, of
coarse wire, connected to the devices d and l respectively. by
varying the distances of the condenser plates c and c, and c and
c the currents through the secondaries s and s are varied in
intensity. the curious feature is the great sensitiveness, the
slightest change in the distance of the plates producing considerable
variations in the intensity or strength of the currents. the
sensitiveness may be rendered extreme by making the frequency
such, that the primary itself, without any plate attached to its
free end, satisfies, in conjunction with the closed secondary, the
condition of resonance. in such condition an extremely small
change in the capacity of the free terminal produces great variations.
for instance, i have been able to adjust the conditions so
that the mere approach of a person to the coil produces a considerable
change in the brightness of the lamps attached to the
secondary. such observations and experiments possess, of course,
at present, chiefly scientific interest, but they may soon become
of practical importance.
very high frequencies are of course not practicable with
motors on account of the necessity of employing iron cores. but
one may use sudden discharges of low frequency and thus obtain
certain advantages of high-frequency currents without rendering
the iron core entirely incapable of following the changes and
without entailing a very great expenditure of energy in the core.
i have found it quite practicable to operate with such low frequency
disruptive discharges of condensers, alternating-current
motors. a certain class of such motors which i advanced a few
years ago, which contain closed secondary circuits, will rotate
quite vigorously when the discharges are directed through the
exciting coils. one reason that such a motor operates so well
with these discharges is that the difference of phase between the
primary and secondary currents is  degrees, which is generally
not the case with harmonically rising and falling currents of low
frequency. it might not be without interest to show an experiment
with a simple motor of this kind, inasmuch as it is commonly
thought that disruptive discharges are unsuitable for such
purposes. the motor is illustrated in fig. . it comprises a
rather large iron core i with slots on the top into which are embedded
thick copper washers c c. in proximity to the core is
a freely-movable metal disc d. the core is provided with a primary
[pg ]exciting coil c the ends a and b of which are connected to
the terminals of the secondary s of an ordinary transformer, the
primary p of the latter being connected to an alternating distribution
circuit or generator g of low or moderate frequency.
the terminals of the secondary s are attached to a condenser c
which discharges through an air gap d d which may be placed
in series or shunt to the coil c. when the conditions are
properly chosen the disc d rotates with considerable effort and the
iron core i does not get very perceptibly hot. with currents from
a high-frequency alternator, on the contrary, the core gets rapidly
hot and the disc rotates with a much smaller effort. to perform
the experiment properly it should be first ascertained that the
disc d is not set in rotation when the discharge is not occurring
at d d. it is preferable to use a large iron core and a condenser
of large capacity so as to bring the superimposed quicker oscillation
to a very low pitch or to do away with it entirely. by
observing certain elementary rules i have also found it practicable
to operate ordinary series or shunt direct-current motors
with such disruptive discharges, and this can be done with or
without a return wire.
among the various current phenomena observed, perhaps the
most interesting are those of impedance presented by conductors
to currents varying at a rapid rate. in my first paper before the
american institute of electrical engineers, i have described a
few striking observations of this kind. thus i showed that when
such currents or sudden discharges are passed through a thick
metal bar there may be points on the bar only a few inches apart,
which have a sufficient potential difference between them to
maintain at bright incandescence an ordinary filament lamp. i
have also described the curious behavior of rarefied gas surrounding
a conductor, due to such sudden rushes of current. these
phenomena have since been more carefully studied and one or
two novel experiments of this kind are deemed of sufficient interest
to be described here.
referring to fig. a, b and b are very stout copper bars
connected at their lower ends to plates c and c, respectively, of a
condenser, the opposite plates of the latter being connected to the
terminals of the secondary s of a high-tension transformer, the
primary p of which is supplied with alternating currents from an
ordinary low-frequency dynamo g or distribution circuit. the[pg ]
condenser discharges through an adjustable gap d d as usual. by
establishing a rapid vibration it was found quite easy to perform
the following curious experiment. the bars b and b were joined
at the top by a low-voltage lamp l; a little lower was placed by
means of clamps c c, a -volt lamp l; and still lower another -volt
lamp l; and finally, at a certain distance below the latter
lamp, an exhausted tube t. by carefully determining the positions
of these devices it was found practicable to maintain them
all at their proper illuminating power. yet they were all connected
in multiple arc to the two stout copper bars and required
widely different pressures. this experiment requires of course
some time for adjustment but is quite easily performed.
figs. a, b and c.
in figs. b and c, two other experiments are illustrated
which, unlike the previous experiment, do not require very careful
[pg ]adjustments. in fig. b, two lamps, l and l, the former a
-volt and the latter a -volt are placed in certain positions as
indicated, the -volt lamp being below the -volt lamp. when
the arc is playing at d d and the sudden discharges are passed
through the bars b b, the -volt lamp will, as a rule, burn brightly,
or at least this result is easily secured, while the -volt lamp
will burn very low or remain quite dark, fig. b. now the
bars b b may be joined at the top by a thick cross bar b and it
is quite easy to maintain the -volt lamp at full candle-power
while the -volt lamp remains dark, fig. c. these results,
as i have pointed out previously, should not be considered to be
due exactly to frequency but rather to the time rate of change
which may be great, even with low frequencies. a great many
other results of the same kind, equally interesting, especially to
those who are only used to manipulate steady currents, may be
obtained and they afford precious clues in investigating the nature
of electric currents.
in the preceding experiments i have already had occasion to
show some light phenomena and it would now be proper to study
these in particular; but to make this investigation more complete
i think it necessary to make first a few remarks on the
subject of electrical resonance which has to be always observed
in carrying out these experiments.
the effects of resonance are being more and more noted by engineers
and are becoming of great importance in the practical operation
of apparatus of all kinds with alternating currents. a few
general remarks may therefore be made concerning these effects.
it is clear, that if we succeed in employing the effects of resonance
practically in the operation of electric devices the return wire will,
as a matter of course, become unnecessary, for the electric vibration
may be conveyed with one wire just as well as, and sometimes
even better than, with two. the question first to answer is, then,
whether pure resonance effects are producible. theory and experiment
both show that such is impossible in nature, for as the
oscillation becomes more and more vigorous, the losses in the vibrating
bodies and environing media rapidly increase and necessarily
check the vibration which otherwise would go on increasing
forever. it is a fortunate circumstance that pure resonance is
not producible, for if it were there is no telling what dangers
might not lie in wait for the innocent experimenter. but to a[pg ]
certain degree resonance is producible, the magnitude of the
effects being limited by the imperfect conductivity and imperfect
elasticity of the media or, generally stated, by frictional losses. the
smaller these losses, the more striking are the effects. the same
is the case in mechanical vibration. a stout steel bar may be set
in vibration by drops of water falling upon it at proper intervals;
and with glass, which is more perfectly elastic, the resonance
effect is still more remarkable, for a goblet may be burst by
singing into it a note of the proper pitch. the electrical resonance
is the more perfectly attained, the smaller the resistance or the
impedance of the conducting path and the more perfect the dielectric.
in a leyden jar discharging through a short stranded cable
of thin wires these requirements are probably best fulfilled, and
the resonance effects are therefore very prominent. such is not
the case with dynamo machines, transformers and their circuits,
or with commercial apparatus in general in which the presence
of iron cores complicates the action or renders it impossible.
in regard to leyden jars with which resonance effects are
frequently demonstrated, i would say that the effects observed
are often attributed but are seldom due to true resonance, for
an error is quite easily made in this respect. this may be
undoubtedly demonstrated by the following experiment. take,
for instance, two large insulated metallic plates or spheres which
i shall designate a and b; place them at a certain small distance
apart and charge them from a frictional or influence
machine to a potential so high that just a slight increase of the
difference of potential between them will cause the small air or
insulating space to break down. this is easily reached by making
a few preliminary trials. if now another plate—fastened on
an insulating handle and connected by a wire to one of the terminals
of a high tension secondary of an induction coil, which
is maintained in action by an alternator (preferably high frequency)—is
approached to one of the charged bodies a or b, so as
to be nearer to either one of them, the discharge will invariably
occur between them; at least it will, if the potential of the coil
in connection with the plate is sufficiently high. but the explanation
of this will soon be found in the fact that the approached
plate acts inductively upon the bodies a and b and causes a spark
to pass between them. when this spark occurs, the charges which
were previously imparted to these bodies from the influence machine,
must needs be lost, since the bodies are brought in electri[pg ]cal
connection through the arc formed. now this arc is formed
whether there be resonance or not. but even if the spark would
not be produced, still there is an alternating e. m. f. set up between
the bodies when the plate is brought near one of them; therefore
the approach of the plate, if it does not always actually, will, at any
rate, tend to break down the air space by inductive action. instead
of the spheres or plates a and b we may take the coatings of a leyden
jar with the same result, and in place of the machine,—which
is a high frequency alternator preferably, because it is more suitable
for the experiment and also for the argument,—we may take
another leyden jar or battery of jars. when such jars are discharging
through a circuit of low resistance the same is traversed
by currents of very high frequency. the plate may now be connected
to one of the coatings of the second jar, and when it is
brought near to the first jar just previously charged to a high
potential from an influence machine, the result is the same as before,
and the first jar will discharge through a small air space
upon the second being caused to discharge. but both jars and
their circuits need not be tuned any closer than a basso profundo
is to the note produced by a mosquito, as small sparks will be produced
through the air space, or at least the latter will be considerably
more strained owing to the setting up of an alternating
e. m. f. by induction, which takes place when one of the jars begins
to discharge. again another error of a similar nature is quite
easily made. if the circuits of the two jars are run parallel and
close together, and the experiment has been performed of discharging
one by the other, and now a coil of wire be added to one
of the circuits whereupon the experiment does not succeed, the
conclusion that this is due to the fact that the circuits are now
not tuned, would be far from being safe. for the two circuits
act as condenser coatings and the addition of the coil to one of
them is equivalent to bridging them, at the point where the coil
is placed, by a small condenser, and the effect of the latter might
be to prevent the spark from jumping through the discharge space
by diminishing the alternating e. m. f. acting across the same.
all these remarks, and many more which might be added but for
fear of wandering too far from the subject, are made with the
pardonable intention of cautioning the unsuspecting student, who
might gain an entirely unwarranted opinion of his skill at seeing
every experiment succeed; but they are in no way thrust upon
the experienced as novel observations.[pg ]
in order to make reliable observations of electric resonance
effects it is very desirable, if not necessary, to employ an alternator
giving currents which rise and fall harmonically, as in
working with make and break currents the observations are not
always trustworthy, since many phenomena, which depend on
the rate of change, may be produced with widely different frequencies.
even when making such observations with an alternator
one is apt to be mistaken. when a circuit is connected to an
alternator there are an indefinite number of values for capacity and
self-induction which, in conjunction, will satisfy the condition of
resonance. so there are in mechanics an infinite number of tuning
forks which will respond to a note of a certain pitch, or loaded
springs which have a definite period of vibration. but the resonance
will be most perfectly attained in that case in which the motion
is effected with the greatest freedom. now in mechanics,
considering the vibration in the common medium—that is, air—it
is of comparatively little importance whether one tuning fork be
somewhat larger than another, because the losses in the air are
not very considerable. one may, of course, enclose a tuning fork
in an exhausted vessel and by thus reducing the air resistance to
a minimum obtain better resonant action. still the difference
would not be very great. but it would make a great difference if
the tuning fork were immersed in mercury. in the electrical
vibration it is of enormous importance to arrange the conditions
so that the vibration is effected with the greatest freedom. the
magnitude of the resonance effect depends, under otherwise equal
conditions, on the quantity of electricity set in motion or on the
strength of the current driven through the circuit. but the circuit
opposes the passage of the currents by reason of its impedance
and therefore, to secure the best action it is necessary to reduce
the impedance to a minimum. it is impossible to overcome
it entirely, but merely in part, for the ohmic resistance cannot be
overcome. but when the frequency of the impulses is very great,
the flow of the current is practically determined by self-induction.
now self-induction can be overcome by combining it with capacity.
if the relation between these is such, that at the frequency
used they annul each other, that is, have such values as to
satisfy the condition of resonance, and the greatest quantity of
electricity is made to flow through the external circuit, then the
best result is obtained. it is simpler and safer to join the condenser
in series with the self-induction. it is clear that in such[pg ]
combinations there will be, for a given frequency, and considering
only the fundamental vibration, values which will give the best
result, with the condenser in shunt to the self-induction coil; of
course more such values than with the condenser in series. but
practical conditions determine the selection. in the latter case
in performing the experiments one may take a small self-induction
and a large capacity or a small capacity and a large self-induction,
but the latter is preferable, because it is inconvenient to adjust
a large capacity by small steps. by taking a coil with a very
large self-induction the critical capacity is reduced to a very small
value, and the capacity of the coil itself may be sufficient. it is
easy, especially by observing certain artifices, to wind a coil
through which the impedance will be reduced to the value of the
ohmic resistance only; and for any coil there is, of course, a frequency
at which the maximum current will be made to pass
through the coil. the observation of the relation between self-induction,
capacity and frequency is becoming important in the
operation of alternate current apparatus, such as transformers or
motors, because by a judicious determination of the elements the
employment of an expensive condenser becomes unnecessary.
thus it is possible to pass through the coils of an alternating
current motor under the normal working conditions the required
current with a low e. m. f. and do away entirely with the false
current, and the larger the motor, the easier such a plan becomes
practicable; but it is necessary for this to employ currents of very
high potential or high frequency.
fig. .
in fig.  i. is shown a plan which has been followed in the
study of the resonance effects by means of a high frequency alternator.
c is a coil of many turns, which is divided into small
separate sections for the purpose of adjustment. the final adjustment
was made sometimes with a few thin iron wires (though
this is not always advisable) or with a closed secondary. the coil[pg ]
c is connected with one of its ends to the line l from the alternator
g and with the other end to one of the plates c of a condenser
c c, the plate (c) of the latter being connected to a much
larger plate p. in this manner both capacity and self-induction
were adjusted to suit the dynamo frequency.
as regards the rise of potential through resonant action, of
course, theoretically, it may amount to anything since it depends
on self-induction and resistance and since these may have any
value. but in practice one is limited in the selection of these
values and besides these, there are other limiting causes. one
may start with, say, , volts and raise the e. m. f. to  times
that value, but one cannot start with , and raise it to ten
times that value because of the losses in the media which are
great, especially if the frequency is high. it should be possible
to start with, for instance, two volts from a high or low frequency
circuit of a dynamo and raise the e. m. f. to many hundred
times that value. thus coils of the proper dimensions
might be connected each with only one of its ends to the
mains from a machine of low e. m. f., and though the circuit of
the machine would not be closed in the ordinary acceptance of the
term, yet the machine might be burned out if a proper resonance
effect would be obtained. i have not been able to produce, nor
have i observed with currents from a dynamo machine, such
great rises of potential. it is possible, if not probable, that with
currents obtained from apparatus containing iron the disturbing
influence of the latter is the cause that these theoretical possibilities
cannot be realized. but if such is the case i attribute
it solely to the hysteresis and foucault current losses in the core.
generally it was necessary to transform upward, when the e. m. f.
was very low, and usually an ordinary form of induction coil
was employed, but sometimes the arrangement illustrated in fig.
 ii., has been found to be convenient. in this case a coil c is
made in a great many sections, a few of these being used as a
primary. in this manner both primary and secondary are adjustable.
one end of the coil is connected to the line l from
the alternator, and the other line l is connected to the intermediate
point of the coil. such a coil with adjustable primary and
secondary will be found also convenient in experiments with the
disruptive discharge. when true resonance is obtained the top
of the wave must of course be on the free end of the coil as, for
instance, at the terminal of the phosphorescence bulb b. this is[pg ]
easily recognized by observing the potential of a point on the
wire w near to the coil.
in connection with resonance effects and the problem of transmission
of energy over a single conductor which was previously
considered, i would say a few words on a subject which constantly
fills my thoughts and which concerns the welfare of all. i mean
the transmission of intelligible signals or perhaps even power to
any distance without the use of wires. i am becoming daily
more convinced of the practicability of the scheme; and though
i know full well that the great majority of scientific men will
not believe that such results can be practically and immediately
realized, yet i think that all consider the developments in recent
years by a number of workers to have been such as to encourage
thought and experiment in this direction. my conviction has
grown so strong, that i no longer look upon this plan of energy
or intelligence transmission as a mere theoretical possibility, but as
a serious problem in electrical engineering, which must be carried
out some day. the idea of transmitting intelligence without
wires is the natural outcome of the most recent results of electrical
investigations. some enthusiasts have expressed their belief
that telephony to any distance by induction through the air
is possible. i cannot stretch my imagination so far, but i do
firmly believe that it is practicable to disturb by means of powerful
machines the electrostatic condition of the earth and thus
transmit intelligible signals and perhaps power. in fact, what is
there against the carrying out of such a scheme? we now know
that electric vibration may be transmitted through a single conductor.
why then not try to avail ourselves of the earth for
this purpose? we need not be frightened by the idea of distance.
to the weary wanderer counting the mile-posts the earth
may appear very large, but to that happiest of all men, the astronomer,
who gazes at the heavens and by their standard judges
the magnitude of our globe, it appears very small. and so i
think it must seem to the electrician, for when he considers the
speed with which an electric disturbance is propagated through
the earth all his ideas of distance must completely vanish.
a point of great importance would be first to know what is the
capacity of the earth? and what charge does it contain if electrified?
though we have no positive evidence of a charged body
existing in space without other oppositely electrified bodies being
near, there is a fair probability that the earth is such a body, for[pg ]
by whatever process it was separated from other bodies—and this
is the accepted view of its origin—it must have retained a charge,
as occurs in all processes of mechanical separation. if it be a
charged body insulated in space its capacity should be extremely
small, less than one-thousandth of a farad. but the upper strata
of the air are conducting, and so, perhaps, is the medium in free
space beyond the atmosphere, and these may contain an opposite
charge. then the capacity might be incomparably greater. in
any case it is of the greatest importance to get an idea of what
quantity of electricity the earth contains. it is difficult to say
whether we shall ever acquire this necessary knowledge, but there
is hope that we may, and that is, by means of electrical resonance.
if ever we can ascertain at what period the earth's charge, when
disturbed, oscillates with respect to an oppositely electrified system
or known circuit, we shall know a fact possibly of the greatest
importance to the welfare of the human race. i propose to seek
for the period by means of an electrical oscillator, or a source of
alternating electric currents. one of the terminals of the source
would be connected to earth as, for instance, to the city water
mains, the other to an insulated body of large surface. it is possible
that the outer conducting air strata, or free space, contain
an opposite charge and that, together with the earth, they form a
condenser of very large capacity. in such case the period of
vibration may be very low and an alternating dynamo machine
might serve for the purpose of the experiment. i would then
transform the current to a potential as high as it would be found
possible and connect the ends of the high tension secondary to the
ground and to the insulated body. by varying the frequency of the
currents and carefully observing the potential of the insulated body
and watching for the disturbance at various neighboring points of
the earth's surface resonance might be detected. should, as the
majority of scientific men in all probability believe, the period be
extremely small, then a dynamo machine would not do and a
proper electrical oscillator would have to be produced and perhaps
it might not be possible to obtain such rapid vibrations. but
whether this be possible or not, and whether the earth contains a
charge or not, and whatever may be its period of vibration, it certainly
is possible—for of this we have daily evidence—to produce
some electrical disturbance sufficiently powerful to be perceptible
by suitable instruments at any point of the earth's
surface.[pg ]
fig. .
assume that a source of alternating current s be connected, as
in fig. , with one of its terminals to earth (conveniently to the
water mains) and with the other to a body of large surface p.
when the electric oscillation is set up there will be
a movement of electricity in and out of p, and alternating
currents will pass through the earth, converging
to, or diverging from, the point c where
the ground connection is made. in this manner
neighboring points on the earth's surface within a
certain radius will be disturbed. but the disturbance
will diminish with the distance, and the distance
at which the effect will still be perceptible
will depend on the quantity of electricity set in
motion. since the body p is insulated, in order to
displace a considerable quantity, the potential of
the source must be excessive, since there would be
limitations as to the surface of p. the conditions
might be adjusted so that the generator or source
s will set up the same electrical movement as
though its circuit were closed. thus it is certainly
practicable to impress an electric vibration at least
of a certain low period upon the earth by means of
proper machinery. at what distance such a vibration
might be made perceptible can only be conjectured.
i have on another occasion considered the
question how the earth might behave to electric
disturbances. there is no doubt that, since in such
an experiment the electrical density at the surface
could be but extremely small considering the size
of the earth, the air would not act as a very disturbing
factor, and there would be not much energy
lost through the action of the air, which would be
the case if the density were great. theoretically,
then, it could not require a great amount of energy
to produce a disturbance perceptible at great distance,
or even all over the surface of the globe.
now, it is quite certain that at any point within a
certain radius of the source s a properly adjusted
self-induction and capacity device can be set in action
by resonance. but not only can this be done, but another source
[pg ]
s, fig. , similar to s, or any number of such sources, can be set
to work in synchronism with the latter, and the vibration thus
intensified and spread over a large area, or a flow of electricity
produced to or from the source s if the same be of
opposite phase to the source s. i think that beyond doubt
it is possible to operate electrical devices in a city through
the ground or pipe system by resonance from an electrical
oscillator located at a central point. but the practical solution
of this problem would be of incomparably smaller benefit to man
than the realization of the scheme of transmitting intelligence, or
perhaps power, to any distance through the earth or environing
medium. if this is at all possible, distance does not mean anything.
proper apparatus must first be produced by means of
which the problem can be attacked and i have devoted much
thought to this subject. i am firmly convinced that it can be
done and hope that we shall live to see it done.
returning now to the light effects which it has been the chief
object to investigate, it is thought proper to divide these effects
into four classes: . incandescence of a solid. . phosphorescence.
. incandescence or phosphorescence of a rarefied gas; and
. luminosity produced in a gas at ordinary pressure. the first
question is: how are these luminous effects produced? in order
to answer this question as satisfactorily as i am able to do in the
light of accepted views and with the experience acquired, and to
add some interest to this demonstration, i shall dwell here upon
a feature which i consider of great importance, inasmuch as it
promises, besides, to throw a better light upon the nature of most
of the phenomena produced by high-frequency electric currents.
i have on other occasions pointed out the great importance of the
presence of the rarefied gas, or atomic medium in general, around
the conductor through which alternate currents of high frequency
are passed, as regards the heating of the conductor by the currents.
my experiments, described some time ago, have shown
that, the higher the frequency and potential difference of the currents,
the more important becomes the rarefied gas in which the
conductor is immersed, as a factor of the heating. the potential
difference, however, is, as i then pointed out, a more im[pg ]portant
element than the frequency. when both of these are
sufficiently high, the heating may be almost entirely due to the
presence of the rarefied gas. the experiments to follow will
show the importance of the rarefied gas, or, generally, of gas at ordinary
or other pressure as regards the incandescence or other
luminous effects produced by currents of this kind.
i take two ordinary -volt  c. p. lamps which are in every
respect alike, with the exception, that one has been opened at the
top and the air has filled the bulb, while the other is at the ordinary
degree of exhaustion of commercial lamps. when i attach
the lamp which is exhausted to the terminal of the secondary of
the coil, which i have already used, as in experiments illustrated
in fig. a for instance, and turn on the current, the filament, as
you have before seen, comes to high incandescence. when i
attach the second lamp, which is filled with air, instead of the
former, the filament still glows, but much less brightly. this
experiment illustrates only in part the truth of the statements
before made. the importance of the filament's being immersed
in rarefied gas is plainly noticeable but not to such a degree as
might be desirable. the reason is that the secondary of this coil is
wound for low tension, having only  turns, and the potential
difference at the terminals of the lamp is therefore small. were
i to take another coil with many more turns in the secondary,
the effect would be increased, since it depends partially on the
potential difference, as before remarked. but since the effect
likewise depends on the frequency, it maybe properly stated that
it depends on the time rate of the variation of the potential difference.
the greater this variation, the more important becomes
the gas as an element of heating. i can produce a much greater
rate of variation in another way, which, besides, has the advantage
of doing away with the objections, which might be made in
the experiment just shown, even if both the lamps were connected
in series or multiple arc to the coil, namely, that in consequence
of the reactions existing between the primary and
secondary coil the conclusions are rendered uncertain. this result
i secure by charging, from an ordinary transformer which is
fed from the alternating current supply station, a battery of condensers,
and discharging the latter directly through a circuit of
small self-induction, as before illustrated in figs. a, b,
and c.
fig. a.fig. b.fig. c.
in figs. a, b and c, the heavy copper bars b b, are
[pg ]connected to the opposite coatings of a battery of condensers,
or generally in such way, that the high frequency or sudden
discharges are made to traverse them. i connect first an
ordinary -volt incandescent lamp to the bars by means of
the clamps c c. the discharges being passed through the lamp,
the filament is rendered incandescent, though the current
through it is very small, and would not be nearly sufficient to
produce a visible effect under the conditions of ordinary use of
the lamp. instead of this i now attach to the bars another
lamp exactly like the first, but with the seal broken off, the bulb
being therefore filled with air at ordinary pressure. when the
discharges are directed through the filament, as before, it does
not become incandescent. but the result might still be attributed
to one of the many possible reactions. i therefore connect
both the lamps in multiple arc as illustrated in fig. a. passing
the discharges through both the lamps, again the filament in the
exhausted lamp l glows very brightly while that in the non-exhausted
lamp l remains dark, as previously. but it should not
be thought that the latter lamp is taking only a small fraction of
the energy supplied to both the lamps; on the contrary, it may
consume a considerable portion of the energy and it may become
even hotter than the one which burns brightly. in this experiment
the potential difference at the terminals of the lamps varies
in sign theoretically three to four million times a second. the
ends of the filaments are correspondingly electrified, and the gas
in the bulbs is violently agitated and a large portion of the supplied
energy is thus converted into heat. in the non-exhausted
bulb, there being a few million times more gas molecules than in
the exhausted one, the bombardment, which is most violent at
the ends of the filament, in the neck of the bulb, consumes a[pg ]
large portion of the energy without producing any visible effect.
the reason is that, there being many molecules, the bombardment
is quantitatively considerable, but the individual impacts are
not very violent, as the speeds of the molecules are comparatively
small owing to the small free path. in the exhausted bulb, on
the contrary, the speeds are very great, and the individual impacts
are violent and therefore better adapted to produce a visible
effect. besides, the convection of heat is greater in the former
bulb. in both the bulbs the current traversing the filaments is
very small, incomparably smaller than that which they require on
an ordinary low-frequency circuit. the potential difference,
however, at the ends of the filaments is very great and might be
possibly , volts or more, if the filaments were straight and
their ends far apart. in the ordinary lamp a spark generally occurs
between the ends of the filament or between the platinum
wires outside, before such a difference of potential can be
reached.
it might be objected that in the experiment before shown the
lamps, being in multiple arc, the exhausted lamp might take a
much larger current and that the effect observed might not be
exactly attributable to the action of the gas in the bulbs. such
objections will lose much weight if i connect the lamps in series,
with the same result. when this is done and the discharges are
directed through the filaments, it is again noted that the filament
in the non-exhausted bulb l, remains dark, while that in the
exhausted one (l) glows even more intensely than under its
normal conditions of working, fig. b. according to general
ideas the current through the filaments should now be the same,
were it not modified by the presence of the gas around the
filaments.
at this juncture i may point out another interesting feature,
which illustrates the effect of the rate of change of potential
of the currents. i will leave the two lamps connected in series
to the bars b b, as in the previous experiment, fig. b, but will
presently reduce considerably the frequency of the currents,
which was excessive in the experiment just before shown. this
i may do by inserting a self-induction coil in the path of the discharges,
or by augmenting the capacity of the condensers. when
i now pass these low-frequency discharges through the lamps,
the exhausted lamp l again is as bright as before, but it is noted
[pg ]also that the non-exhausted lamp l glows, though not quite
as intensely as the other. reducing the current through the
lamps, i may bring the filament in the latter lamp to redness, and,
though the filament in the exhausted lamp l is bright, fig. c,
the degree of its incandescence is much smaller than in fig. b,
when the currents were of a much higher frequency.
in these experiments the gas acts in two opposite ways in determining
the degree of the incandescence of the filaments, that
is, by convection and bombardment. the higher the frequency and
potential of the currents, the more important becomes the bombardment.
the convection on the contrary should be the smaller,
the higher the frequency. when the currents are steady there is
practically no bombardment, and convection may therefore with
such currents also considerably modify the degree of incandescence
and produce results similar to those just before shown. thus, if
two lamps exactly alike, one exhausted and one not exhausted,
are connected in multiple arc or series to a direct-current machine,
the filament in the non-exhausted lamp will require a considerably
greater current to be rendered incandescent. this result is
entirely due to convection, and the effect is the more prominent
the thinner the filament. professor ayrton and mr. kilgour
some time ago published quantitative results concerning the
thermal emissivity by radiation and convection in which the effect
with thin wires was clearly shown. this effect may be strikingly
illustrated by preparing a number of small, short, glass tubes,
each containing through its axis the thinnest obtainable platinum
wire. if these tubes be highly exhausted, a number of them
may be connected in multiple arc to a direct-current machine and
all of the wires may be kept at incandescence with a smaller current
than that required to render incandescent a single one of the
wires if the tube be not exhausted. could the tubes be so highly
exhausted that convection would be nil, then the relative amounts
of heat given off by convection and radiation could be determined
without the difficulties attending thermal quantitative
measurements. if a source of electric impulses of high frequency
and very high potential is employed, a still greater number of
the tubes may be taken and the wires rendered incandescent by a
current not capable of warming perceptibly a wire of the same
size immersed in air at ordinary pressure, and conveying the
energy to all of them.
i may here describe a result which is still more interesting,
and to which i have been led by the observation of these phe[pg ]nomena.
i noted that small differences in the density of the air
produced a considerable difference in the degree of incandescence
of the wires, and i thought that, since in a tube, through which
a luminous discharge is passed, the gas is generally not of uniform
density, a very thin wire contained in the tube might be
rendered incandescent at certain places of smaller density of the
gas, while it would remain dark at the places of greater density,
where the convection would be greater and the bombardment less
intense. accordingly a tube t was prepared, as illustrated in fig.
, which contained through the middle a very fine platinum wire
w. the tube was exhausted to a moderate degree and it was found
that when it was attached to the terminal of a high-frequency coil
the platinum wire w would indeed, become incandescent in patches,
as illustrated in fig. . later a number of these tubes with one
or more wires were prepared, each showing this result. the effect
was best noted when the striated discharge occurred in the
tube, but was also produced when the striæ were not visible,
showing that, even then, the gas in the tube was not of uniform
density. the position of the striæ was generally such, that the
rarefactions corresponded to the places of incandescence or greater
brightness on the wire w. but in a few instances it was noted, that
the bright spots on the wire were covered by the dense parts of
the striated discharge as indicated by l in fig. , though the effect
was barely perceptible. this was explained in a plausible way
by assuming that the convection was not widely different in the
dense and rarefied places, and that the bombardment was greater
on the dense places of the striated discharge. it is, in fact, often
observed in bulbs, that under certain conditions a thin wire is
brought to higher incandescence when the air is not too highly
rarefied. this is the case when the potential of the coil is not
high enough for the vacuum, but the result may be attributed to
many different causes. in all cases this curious phenomenon of
incandescence disappears when the tube, or rather the wire,
acquires throughout a uniform temperature.
fig. .fig. .
disregarding now the modifying effect of convection there are
then two distinct causes which determine the incandescence of a
wire or filament with varying currents, that is, conduction current
and bombardment. with steady currents we have to deal
only with the former of these two causes, and the heating effect
is a minimum, since the resistance is least to steady flow. when
the current is a varying one the resistance is greater, and hence
[pg ]the heating effect is increased. thus if the rate of change of
the current is very great, the resistance may increase to such
an extent that the filament is brought to incandescence with inappreciable
currents, and we are able to take a short and thick
block of carbon or other material and bring it to bright incandescence
with a current incomparably smaller than that required
to bring to the same degree of incandescence an ordinary thin
lamp filament with a steady or low frequency current. this result
is important, and illustrates how rapidly our views on these subjects
are changing, and how quickly our field of knowledge is extending.
in the art of incandescent lighting, to view this result
in one aspect only, it has been commonly considered as an essential
requirement for practical success, that the lamp filament
should be thin and of high resistance. but now we know that
the resistance of the filament to the steady flow does not mean
anything; the filament might as well be short and thick; for if it
be immersed in rarefied gas it will become incandescent by the
passage of a small current. it all depends on the frequency and
potential of the currents. we may conclude from this, that it
[pg ]would be of advantage, so far as the lamp is considered, to employ
high frequencies for lighting, as they allow the use of short
and thick filaments and smaller currents.
if a wire or filament be immersed in a homogeneous medium, all
the heating is due to true conduction current, but if it be enclosed
in an exhausted vessel the conditions are entirely different. here
the gas begins to act and the heating effect of the conduction current,
as is shown in many experiments, may be very small compared
with that of the bombardment. this is especially the case if
the circuit is not closed and the potentials are of course very high.
suppose that a fine filament enclosed in an exhausted vessel be
connected with one of its ends to the terminal of a high tension
coil and with its other end to a large insulated plate. though
the circuit is not closed, the filament, as i have before shown, is
brought to incandescence. if the frequency and potential be
comparatively low, the filament is heated by the current passing
through it. if the frequency and potential, and principally the
latter, be increased, the insulated plate need be but very small, or
may be done away with entirely; still the filament will become
incandescent, practically all the heating being then due to the bombardment.
a practical way of combining both the effects of
conduction currents and bombardment is illustrated in fig. ,
in which an ordinary lamp is shown provided with a very thin
filament which has one of the ends of the latter connected to a
shade serving the purpose of the insulated plate, and the other
end to the terminal of a high tension source. it should not be
thought that only rarefied gas is an important factor in the heating
of a conductor by varying currents, but gas at ordinary pressure
may become important, if the potential difference and frequency
of the currents is excessive. on this subject i have already
stated, that when a conductor is fused by a stroke of
lightning, the current through it may be exceedingly small, not
even sufficient to heat the conductor perceptibly, were the latter
immersed in a homogeneous medium.
from the preceding it is clear that when a conductor of high
resistance is connected to the terminals of a source of high frequency
currents of high potential, there may occur considerable
dissipation of energy, principally at the ends of the conductor, in
consequence of the action of the gas surrounding the conductor.
owing to this, the current through a section of the conductor at
a point midway between its ends may be much smaller than
[pg ]through a section near the ends. furthermore, the current passes
principally through the outer portions of the conductor, but this
effect is to be distinguished from the skin effect as ordinarily interpreted,
for the latter would, or should, occur also in a continuous
incompressible medium. if a great many incandescent lamps
are connected in series to a source of such currents, the lamps at
the ends may burn brightly, whereas those in the middle may remain
entirely dark. this is due principally to bombardment, as
before stated. but even if the currents be steady, provided the
difference of potential is very great, the lamps at the end will
burn more brightly than those in the middle. in such case there
is no rhythmical bombardment, and the result is produced entirely
by leakage. this leakage or dissipation into space when
the tension is high, is considerable when incandescent lamps are
used, and still more considerable with arcs, for the latter act like
flames. generally, of course, the dissipation is much smaller
with steady, than with varying, currents.
i have contrived an experiment which illustrates in an interesting
manner the effect of lateral diffusion. if a very long tube
is attached to the terminal of a high frequency coil, the luminosity
is greatest near the terminal and falls off gradually towards
the remote end. this is more marked if the tube is narrow.
a small tube about one-half inch in diameter and twelve
inches long (fig. ), has one of its ends drawn out into a fine
fibre f nearly three feet long. the tube is placed in a brass socket
t which can be screwed on the terminal t of the induction coil.
the discharge passing through the tube first illuminates the bottom
of the same, which is of comparatively large section; but
through the long glass fibre the discharge cannot pass. but
gradually the rarefied gas inside becomes warmed and more conducting
and the discharge spreads into the glass fibre. this spreading
is so slow, that it may take half a minute or more until the
discharge has worked through up to the top of the glass fibre,
then presenting the appearance of a strongly luminous thin
thread. by adjusting the potential at the terminal the light may
be made to travel upwards at any speed. once, however, the
glass fibre is heated, the discharge breaks through its entire
length instantly. the interesting point to be noted is that, the
higher the frequency of the currents, or in other words, the
greater relatively the lateral dissipation, at a slower rate may the
light be made to propagate through the fibre. this experiment
[pg ]is best performed with a highly exhausted and freshly made tube.
when the tube has been used for some time the experiment
often fails. it is possible that the gradual and slow impairment
of the vacuum is the cause. this slow propagation of the discharge
through a very narrow glass tube corresponds exactly to
the propagation of heat through a bar warmed at one end. the
quicker the heat is carried away laterally the longer time it will
take for the heat to warm the remote end. when the current
of a low frequency coil is passed through the fibre from end to
end, then the lateral dissipation is small and the discharge instantly
breaks through almost without exception.
fig. .fig. .
after these experiments and observations which have shown
the importance of the discontinuity or atomic structure of the
medium and which will serve to explain, in a measure at least,
the nature of the four kinds of light effects producible with
these currents, i may now give you an illustration of these
effects. for the sake of interest i may do this in a manner
which to many of you might be novel. you have seen before
that we may now convey the electric vibration to a body by
means of a single wire or conductor of any kind. since the
[pg ]human frame is conducting i may convey the vibration through
my body.
first, as in some previous experiments, i connect my body with
one of the terminals of a high-tension transformer and take in my
hand an exhausted bulb which contains a small carbon button
mounted upon a platinum wire leading to the outside of the bulb,
and the button is rendered incandescent as soon as the transformer
is set to work (fig. ). i may place a conducting shade on the
bulb which serves to intensify the action, but is not necessary.
nor is it required that the button should be in conducting connection
with the hand through a wire leading through the glass,
for sufficient energy may be transmitted through the glass itself
by inductive action to render the button incandescent.
fig. .fig. .
next i take a highly exhausted bulb containing a strongly
phosphorescent body, above which is mounted a small plate of
aluminum on a platinum wire leading to the outside, and the currents
flowing through my body excite intense phosphorescence
in the bulb (fig. ). next again i take in my hand a simple
exhausted tube, and in the same manner the gas inside the tube
is rendered highly incandescent or phosphorescent (fig. ).
finally, i may take in my hand a wire, bare or covered with thick
insulation, it is quite immaterial; the electrical vibration is so
intense as to cover the wire with a luminous film (fig. ).[pg ]
fig. .fig. .fig. .
a few words must now be devoted to each of these phenomena.
in the first place, i will consider the incandescence of a button or of
a solid in general, and dwell upon some facts which apply equally
to all these phenomena. it was pointed out before that when a
thin conductor, such as a lamp filament, for instance, is connected
with one of its ends to the terminal of a transformer of high
tension the filament is brought to incandescence partly by a
conduction current and partly by bombardment. the shorter
and thicker the filament the more important becomes the latter,
and finally, reducing the filament to a mere button, all the heating
must practically be attributed to the bombardment. so in
the experiment before shown, the button is rendered incandescent
by the rhythmical impact of freely movable small bodies in the
bulb. these bodies may be the molecules of the residual gas,
particles of dust or lumps torn from the electrode; whatever they
are, it is certain that the heating of the button is essentially connected
with the pressure of such freely movable particles, or of
atomic matter in general in the bulb. the heating is the more
intense the greater the number of impacts per second and the
greater the energy of each impact. yet the button would
be heated also if it were connected to a source of a steady potential.
in such a case electricity would be carried away from
the button by the freely movable carriers or particles flying
about, and the quantity of electricity thus carried away might be
sufficient to bring the button to incandescence by its passage
through the latter. but the bombardment could not be of great
importance in such case. for this reason it would require a comparatively
very great supply of energy to the button to maintain
it at incandescence with a steady potential. the higher the frequency
of the electric impulses the more economically can the
button be maintained at incandescence. one of the chief reasons
why this is so, is, i believe, that with impulses of very high
frequency there is less exchange of the freely movable carriers
around the electrode and this means, that in the bulb the heated
matter is better confined to the neighborhood of the button. if
a double bulb, as illustrated in fig.  be made, comprising a
large globe b and a small one b, each containing as usual a filament
f mounted on a platinum wire w and w, it is found, that if
the filaments f f be exactly alike, it requires less energy to keep
the filament in the globe b at a certain degree of incandescence,
than that in the globe b. this is due to the confinement of the
[pg ]movable particles around the button. in this case it is also ascertained,
that the filament in the small globe b is less deteriorated
when maintained a certain length of time at incandescence. this
is a necessary consequence of the fact that the gas in the small
bulb becomes strongly heated and therefore a very good conductor,
and less work is then performed on the button, since the
bombardment becomes less intense as the conductivity of the gas
increases. in this construction, of course, the small bulb becomes
very hot and when it reaches an elevated temperature the convection
and radiation on the outside increase. on another occasion
i have shown bulbs in which this drawback was largely
avoided. in these instances a very small bulb, containing a refractory
button, was mounted in a large globe and the space between
the walls of both was highly exhausted. the outer large
globe remained comparatively cool in such constructions. when
the large globe was on the pump and the vacuum between the
walls maintained permanent by the continuous action of the
pump, the outer globe would remain quite cold, while the button
in the small bulb was kept at incandescence. but when the seal
was made, and the button in the small bulb maintained incandescent
some length of time, the large globe too would become
warmed. from this i conjecture that if vacuous space (as prof.
dewar finds) cannot convey heat, it is so merely in virtue of our
rapid motion through space or, generally speaking, by the motion
of the medium relatively to us, for a permanent condition could
[pg ]not be maintained without the medium being constantly renewed.
a vacuum cannot, according to all evidence, be permanently
maintained around a hot body.
in these constructions, before mentioned, the small bulb inside
would, at least in the first stages, prevent all bombardment
against the outer large globe. it occurred to me then to ascertain
how a metal sieve would behave in this respect, and several
bulbs, as illustrated in fig. , were prepared for this purpose.
in a globe b, was mounted a thin filament f (or button) upon a
platinum wire w passing through a glass stem and leading to the
outside of the globe. the filament f was surrounded by a metal
sieve s. it was found in experiments with such bulbs that a sieve
with wide meshes apparently did not in the slightest affect the
bombardment against the globe b. when the vacuum was high,
the shadow of the sieve was clearly projected against the globe
and the latter would get hot in a short while. in some bulbs the
sieve s was connected to a platinum wire sealed in the glass.
when this wire was connected to the other terminal of the induction
coil (the e. m. f. being kept low in this case), or to an insulated
plate, the bombardment against the outer globe b was
diminished. by taking a sieve with fine meshes the bombardment
against the globe b was always diminished, but even then
if the exhaustion was carried very far, and when the potential of
the transformer was very high, the globe b would be bombarded
and heated quickly, though no shadow of the sieve was visible,
owing to the smallness of the meshes. but a glass tube or other
continuous body mounted so as to surround the filament, did entirely
cut off the bombardment and for a while the outer globe b
would remain perfectly cold. of course when the glass tube
was sufficiently heated the bombardment against the outer globe
could be noted at once. the experiments with these bulbs
seemed to show that the speeds of the projected molecules or
particles must be considerable (though quite insignificant when
compared with that of light), otherwise it would be difficult to
understand how they could traverse a fine metal sieve without
being affected, unless it were found that such small particles or
atoms cannot be acted upon directly at measurable distances.
in regard to the speed of the projected atoms, lord kelvin has
recently estimated it at about one kilometre a second or thereabouts
in an ordinary crookes bulb. as the potentials obtainable
with a disruptive discharge coil are much higher than with or[pg ]dinary
coils, the speeds must, of course, be much greater when
the bulbs are lighted from such a coil. assuming the speed to
be as high as five kilometres and uniform through the whole
trajectory, as it should be in a very highly exhausted vessel, then
if the alternate electrifications of the electrode would be of a
frequency of five million, the greatest distance a particle could
get away from the electrode would be one millimetre, and if it
could be acted upon directly at that distance, the exchange of
electrode matter or of the atoms would be very slow and there
would be practically no bombardment against the bulb. this at
least should be so, if the action of an electrode upon the atoms
of the residual gas would be such as upon electrified bodies which
we can perceive. a hot body enclosed in an exhausted bulb
produces always atomic bombardment, but a hot body has no
definite rhythm, for its molecules perform vibrations of all kinds.
if a bulb containing a button or filament be exhausted as high
as is possible with the greatest care and by the use of the best artifices,
it is often observed that the discharge cannot, at first,
break through, but after some time, probably in consequence of
some changes within the bulb, the discharge finally passes through
and the button is rendered incandescent. in fact, it appears that
the higher the degree of exhaustion the easier is the incandescence
produced. there seem to be no other causes to which the incandescence
might be attributed in such case except to the bombardment
or similar action of the residual gas, or of particles of
matter in general. but if the bulb be exhausted with the greatest
care can these play an important part? assume the vacuum
in the bulb to be tolerably perfect, the great interest then centres
in the question: is the medium which pervades all space continuous
or atomic? if atomic, then the heating of a conducting
button or filament in an exhausted vessel might be due largely
to ether bombardment, and then the heating of a conductor in
general through which currents of high frequency or high potential
are passed must be modified by the behavior of such medium;
then also the skin effect, the apparent increase of the ohmic resistance,
etc., admit, partially at least, of a different explanation.
it is certainly more in accordance with many phenomena observed
with high-frequency currents to hold that all space is pervaded
with free atoms, rather than to assume that it is devoid of
these, and dark and cold, for so it must be, if filled with a continuous
medium, since in such there can be neither heat nor light.[pg ]
is then energy transmitted by independent carriers or by the
vibration of a continuous medium? this important question is
by no means as yet positively answered. but most of the effects
which are here considered, especially the light effects, incandescence,
or phosphorescence, involve the presence of free atoms and
would be impossible without these.
in regard to the incandescence of a refractory button (or filament)
in an exhausted receiver, which has been one of the subjects
of this investigation, the chief experiences, which may serve
as a guide in constructing such bulbs, may be summed up as follows:
. the button should be as small as possible, spherical,
of a smooth or polished surface, and of refractory material which
withstands evaporation best. . the support of the button
should be very thin and screened by an aluminum and mica sheet,
as i have described on another occasion. . the exhaustion of
the bulb should be as high as possible. . the frequency of the
currents should be as high as practicable. . the currents should
be of a harmonic rise and fall, without sudden interruptions. .
the heat should be confined to the button by inclosing the same
in a small bulb or otherwise. . the space between the walls of
the small bulb and the outer globe should be highly exhausted.
most of the considerations which apply to the incandescence
of a solid just considered may likewise be applied to phosphorescence.
indeed, in an exhausted vessel the phosphorescence is,
as a rule, primarily excited by the powerful beating of the electrode
stream of atoms against the phosphorescent body. even in
many cases, where there is no evidence of such a bombardment,
i think that phosphorescence is excited by violent impacts of
atoms, which are not necessarily thrown off from the electrode
but are acted upon from the same inductively through the
medium or through chains of other atoms. that mechanical
shocks play an important part in exciting phosphorescence in a
bulb may be seen from the following experiment. if a bulb,
constructed as that illustrated in fig. , be taken and exhausted
with the greatest care so that the discharge cannot pass, the filament
f acts by electrostatic induction upon the tube t and the
latter is set in vibration. if the tube o be rather wide, about an
inch or so, the filament may be so powerfully vibrated that whenever
it hits the glass tube it excites phosphorescence. but the
phosphorescence ceases when the filament comes to rest. the
vibration can be arrested and again started by varying the[pg ]
frequency of the currents. now the filament has its own
period of vibration, and if the frequency of the currents is such
that there is resonance, it is easily set vibrating, though the potential
of the currents be small. i have often observed that the
filament in the bulb is destroyed by such mechanical resonance.
the filament vibrates as a rule so rapidly that it cannot be seen
and the experimenter may at first be mystified. when such an
experiment as the one described is carefully performed, the potential
of the currents need be extremely small, and for this
reason i infer that the phosphorescence is then due to the
mechanical shock of the filament against the glass, just as it is
produced by striking a loaf of sugar with a knife. the mechanical
shock produced by the projected atoms is easily noted when
a bulb containing a button is grasped in the hand and the current
turned on suddenly. i believe that a bulb could be shattered
by observing the conditions of resonance.
in the experiment before cited it is, of course, open to say,
that the glass tube, upon coming in contact with the filament, retains
a charge of a certain sign upon the point of contact. if
now the filament again touches the glass at the same point while
it is oppositely charged, the charges equalize under evolution of
light. but nothing of importance would be gained by such an
explanation. it is unquestionable that the initial charges given
to the atoms or to the glass play some part in exciting phosphorescence.
so, for instance, if a phosphorescent bulb be first excited
by a high frequency coil by connecting it to one of the terminals
of the latter and the degree of luminosity be noted, and then
the bulb be highly charged from a holtz machine by attaching
it preferably to the positive terminal of the machine, it is found
that when the bulb is again connected to the terminal of the high
frequency coil, the phosphorescence is far more intense. on
another occasion i have considered the possibility of some phosphorescent
phenomena in bulbs being produced by the incandescence
of an infinitesimal layer on the surface of the phosphorescent
body. certainly the impact of the atoms is powerful enough
to produce intense incandescence by the collisions, since they bring
quickly to a high temperature a body of considerable bulk. if any
such effect exists, then the best appliance for producing phosphorescence
in a bulb, which we know so far, is a disruptive discharge
coil giving an enormous potential with but few fundamental discharges,
say - per second, just enough to produce a continu[pg ]ous
impression upon the eye. it is a fact that such a coil excites
phosphorescence under almost any condition and at all degrees
of exhaustion, and i have observed effects which appear to be due
to phosphorescence even at ordinary pressures of the atmosphere,
when the potentials are extremely high. but if phosphorescent
light is produced by the equalization of charges of electrified
atoms (whatever this may mean ultimately), then the higher the
frequency of the impulses or alternate electrifications, the
more economical will be the light production. it is a long
known and noteworthy fact that all the phosphorescent bodies
are poor conductors of electricity and heat, and that all bodies
cease to emit phosphorescent light when they are brought to a
certain temperature. conductors on the contrary do not possess
this quality. there are but few exceptions to the rule. carbon
is one of them. becquerel noted that carbon phosphoresces at
a certain elevated temperature preceding the dark red. this
phenomenon may be easily observed in bulbs provided with a
rather large carbon electrode (say, a sphere of six millimetres diameter).
if the current is turned on after a few seconds, a snow
white film covers the electrode, just before it gets dark red.
similar effects are noted with other conducting bodies, but many
scientific men will probably not attribute them to true phosphorescence.
whether true incandescence has anything to do with
phosphorescence excited by atomic impact or mechanical shocks
still remains to be decided, but it is a fact that all conditions,
which tend to localize and increase the heating effect at the point
of impact, are almost invariably the most favorable for the production
of phosphorescence. so, if the electrode be very small,
which is equivalent to saying in general, that the electric density
is great; if the potential be high, and if the gas be highly rarefied,
all of which things imply high speed of the projected atoms,
or matter, and consequently violent impacts—the phosphorescence
is very intense. if a bulb provided with a large and small
electrode be attached to the terminal of an induction coil, the
small electrode excites phosphorescence while the large one may
not do so, because of the smaller electric density and hence
smaller speed of the atoms. a bulb provided with a large electrode
may be grasped with the hand while the electrode is connected
to the terminal of the coil and it may not phosphoresce;
but if instead of grasping the bulb with the hand, the same be
touched with a pointed wire, the phosphorescence at once spreads[pg ]
through the bulb, because of the great density at the point of
contact. with low frequencies it seems that gases of great
atomic weight excite more intense phosphorescence than those
of smaller weight, as for instance, hydrogen. with high frequencies
the observations are not sufficiently reliable to draw a
conclusion. oxygen, as is well-known, produces exceptionally
strong effects, which may be in part due to chemical action. a
bulb with hydrogen residue seems to be most easily excited.
electrodes which are most easily deteriorated produce more
intense phosphorescence in bulbs, but the condition is not permanent
because of the impairment of the vacuum and the deposition
of the electrode matter upon the phosphorescent surfaces.
some liquids, as oils, for instance, produce magnificent effects of
phosphorescence (or fluorescence?), but they last only a few
seconds. so if a bulb has a trace of oil on the walls and the
current is turned on, the phosphorescence only persists for a few
moments until the oil is carried away. of all bodies so far tried,
sulphide of zinc seems to be the most susceptible to phosphorescence.
some samples, obtained through the kindness of prof.
henry in paris, were employed in many of these bulbs. one of
the defects of this sulphide is, that it loses its quality of emitting
light when brought to a temperature which is by no means high.
it can therefore, be used only for feeble intensities. an observation
which might deserve notice is, that when violently bombarded
from an aluminum electrode it assumes a black color, but
singularly enough, it returns to the original condition when it
cools down.
the most important fact arrived at in pursuing investigations
in this direction is, that in all cases it is necessary, in order to excite
phosphorescence with a minimum amount of energy, to observe
certain conditions. namely, there is always, no matter what
the frequency of the currents, degree of exhaustion and character
of the bodies in the bulb, a certain potential (assuming the bulb
excited from one terminal) or potential difference (assuming the
bulb to be excited with both terminals) which produces the most
economical result. if the potential be increased, considerable
energy may be wasted without producing any more light, and if
it be diminished, then again the light production is not as economical.
the exact condition under which the best result is obtained
seems to depend on many things of a different nature, and it is to
be yet investigated by other experimenters, but it will certainly[pg ]
have to be observed when such phosphorescent bulbs are operated,
if the best results are to be obtained.
coming now to the most interesting of these phenomena, the
incandescence or phosphorescence of gases, at low pressures or at
the ordinary pressure of the atmosphere, we must seek the explanation
of these phenomena in the same primary causes, that is,
in shocks or impacts of the atoms. just as molecules or atoms
beating upon a solid body excite phosphorescence in the same or
render it incandescent, so when colliding among themselves they
produce similar phenomena. but this is a very insufficient explanation
and concerns only the crude mechanism. light is produced
by vibrations which go on at a rate almost inconceivable.
if we compute, from the energy contained in the form of known
radiations in a definite space the force which is necessary to set
up such rapid vibrations, we find, that though the density of the
ether be incomparably smaller than that of any body we know,
even hydrogen, the force is something surpassing comprehension.
what is this force, which in mechanical measure may amount to
thousands of tons per square inch? it is electrostatic force in the
light of modern views. it is impossible to conceive how a body
of measurable dimensions could be charged to so high a potential
that the force would be sufficient to produce these vibrations.
long before any such charge could be imparted to the body it
would be shattered into atoms. the sun emits light and heat, and
so does an ordinary flame or incandescent filament, but in neither
of these can the force be accounted for if it be assumed that it is
associated with the body as a whole. only in one way may we
account for it, namely, by identifying it with the atom. an
atom is so small, that if it be charged by coming in contact with
an electrified body and the charge be assumed to follow the same
law as in the case of bodies of measurable dimensions, it must
retain a quantity of electricity which is fully capable of accounting
for these forces and tremendous rates of vibration. but the
atom behaves singularly in this respect—it always takes the same
"charge."
it is very likely that resonant vibration plays a most important
part in all manifestations of energy in nature. throughout space
all matter is vibrating, and all rates of vibration are represented,
from the lowest musical note to the highest pitch of the chemical
rays, hence an atom, or complex of atoms, no matter what its
period, must find a vibration with which it is in resonance.[pg ]
when we consider the enormous rapidity of the light vibrations,
we realize the impossibility of producing such vibrations directly
with any apparatus of measurable dimensions, and we are driven
to the only possible means of attaining the object of setting up
waves of light by electrical means and economically, that is, to
affect the molecules or atoms of a gas, to cause them to collide and
vibrate. we then must ask ourselves—how can free molecules
or atoms be affected?
fig. .fig. .
it is a fact that they can be affected by electrostatic force, as is
apparent in many of these experiments. by varying the electrostatic
force we can agitate the atoms, and cause them to collide
accompanied by evolution of heat and light. it is not demonstrated
beyond doubt that we can affect them otherwise. if a luminous
discharge is produced in a closed exhausted tube, do the atoms
arrange themselves in obedience to any other but to electrostatic
force acting in straight lines from atom to atom? only recently
i investigated the mutual action between two circuits with extreme
rates of vibration. when a battery of a few jars (c c c c, fig.
) is discharged through a primary p of low resistance (the connections
being as illustrated in figs. a, b and c), and the
frequency of vibration is many millions there are great differences
of potential between points on the primary not more than
a few inches apart. these differences may be , volts per
inch, if not more, taking the maximum value of the e. m. f. the
secondary s is therefore acted upon by electrostatic induction,
which is in such extreme cases of much greater importance than
the electro-dynamic. to such sudden impulses the primary as
well as the secondary are poor conductors, and therefore great
differences of potential may be produced by electrostatic induction
between adjacent points on the secondary. then sparks may
jump between the wires and streamers become visible in the dark
if the light of the discharge through the spark gap d d be carefully
excluded. if now we substitute a closed vacuum tube for the
metallic secondary s, the differences of potential produced in the
tube by electrostatic induction from the primary are fully sufficient
to excite portions of it; but as the points of certain differences
of potential on the primary are not fixed, but are generally
constantly changing in position, a luminous band is produced in
the tube, apparently not touching the glass, as it should, if the
points of maximum and minimum differences of potential were
fixed on the primary. i do not exclude the possibility of such a
[pg ]tube being excited only by electro-dynamic induction, for very
able physicists hold this view; but in my opinion, there is as yet
no positive proof given that atoms of a gas in a closed tube may
arrange themselves in chains under the action of an electromotive
impulse produced by electro-dynamic induction in the tube. i
have been unable so far to produce striæ in a tube, however long,
and at whatever degree of exhaustion, that is, striæ at right
angles to the supposed direction of the discharge or the axis of
the tube; but i have distinctly observed in a large bulb, in which
a wide luminous band was produced by passing a discharge of a
battery through a wire surrounding the bulb, a circle of feeble
luminosity between two luminous bands, one of which was more
intense than the other. furthermore, with my present experience
i do not think that such a gas discharge in a closed tube
can vibrate, that is, vibrate as a whole. i am convinced that no
discharge through a gas can vibrate. the atoms of a gas behave
very curiously in respect to sudden electric impulses. the
gas does not seem to possess any appreciable inertia to such
impulses, for it is a fact, that the higher the frequency of
the impulses, with the greater freedom does the discharge
pass through the gas. if the gas possesses no inertia then
it cannot vibrate, for some inertia is necessary for the free vibration.
i conclude from this that if a lightning discharge occurs
between two clouds, there can be no oscillation, such as would
be expected, considering the capacity of the clouds. but if
the lightning discharge strike the earth, there is always vibration—in
the earth, but not in the cloud. in a gas discharge each
atom vibrates at its own rate, but there is no vibration of the
conducting gaseous mass as a whole. this is an important
consideration in the great problem of producing light economi[pg ]cally,
for it teaches us that to reach this result we must use
impulses of very high frequency and necessarily also of high
potential. it is a fact that oxygen produces a more intense
light in a tube. is it because oxygen atoms possess some inertia
and the vibration does not die out instantly? but then nitrogen
should be as good, and chlorine and vapors of many other bodies
much better than oxygen, unless the magnetic properties of the
latter enter prominently into play. or, is the process in the tube
of an electrolytic nature? many observations certainly speak for
it, the most important being that matter is always carried away
from the electrodes and the vacuum in a bulb cannot be permanently
maintained. if such process takes place in reality, then
again must we take refuge in high frequencies, for, with such,
electrolytic action should be reduced to a minimum, if not rendered
entirely impossible. it is an undeniable fact that with very
high frequencies, provided the impulses be of harmonic nature,
like those obtained from an alternator, there is less deterioration
and the vacua are more permanent. with disruptive discharge
coils there are sudden rises of potential and the vacua are
more quickly impaired, for the electrodes are deteriorated in a
very short time. it was observed in some large tubes, which
were provided with heavy carbon blocks b b, connected to platinum
wires w w (as illustrated in fig. ), and which were employed
in experiments with the disruptive discharge instead of the
ordinary air gap, that the carbon particles under the action of the
powerful magnetic field in which the tube was placed, were deposited
in regular fine lines in the middle of the tube, as illustrated.
these lines were attributed to the deflection or distortion
of the discharge by the magnetic field, but why the deposit
occurred principally where the field was most intense did not
appear quite clear. a fact of interest, likewise noted, was
that the presence of a strong magnetic field increases the deterioration
of the electrodes, probably by reason of the rapid interruptions
it produces, whereby there is actually a higher e. m. f.
maintained between the electrodes.
much would remain to be said about the luminous effects produced
in gases at low or ordinary pressures. with the present
experiences before us we cannot say that the essential nature of
these charming phenomena is sufficiently known. but investigations
in this direction are being pushed with exceptional ardor.
every line of scientific pursuit has its fascinations, but electrical[pg ]
investigation appears to possess a peculiar attraction, for there is
no experiment or observation of any kind in the domain of this
wonderful science which would not forcibly appeal to us. yet
to me it seems, that of all the many marvelous things we observe,
a vacuum tube, excited by an electric impulse from a distant
source, bursting forth out of the darkness and illuminating the
room with its beautiful light, is as lovely a phenomenon as can
greet our eyes. more interesting still it appears when, reducing
the fundamental discharges across the gap to a very small number
and waving the tube about we produce all kinds of designs
in luminous lines. so by way of amusement i take a straight
long tube, or a square one, or a square attached to a straight tube,
and by whirling them about in the hand, i imitate the spokes of
a wheel, a gramme winding, a drum winding, an alternate current
motor winding, etc. (fig. ). viewed from a distance the
effect is weak and much of its beauty is lost, but being near or
holding the tube in the hand, one cannot resist its charm.
fig. .
[pg ]
in presenting these insignificant results i have not attempted
to arrange and co-ordinate them, as would be proper in a strictly
scientific investigation, in which every succeeding result should
be a logical sequence of the preceding, so that it might be guessed
in advance by the careful reader or attentive listener. i have
preferred to concentrate my energies chiefly upon advancing
novel facts or ideas which might serve as suggestions to others,
and this may serve as an excuse for the lack of harmony. the
explanations of the phenomena have been given in good faith
and in the spirit of a student prepared to find that they admit of
a better interpretation. there can be no great harm in a student
taking an erroneous view, but when great minds err, the world
must dearly pay for their mistakes.
[pg ]
tesla alternating current generators for high frequency,
in detail.
it has become a common practice to operate arc lamps by alternating
or pulsating, as distinguished from continuous, currents;
but an objection which has been raised to such systems exists in
the fact that the arcs emit a pronounced sound, varying with the
rate of the alternations or pulsations of current. this noise is
due to the rapidly alternating heating and cooling, and consequent
expansion and contraction, of the gaseous matter forming
the arc, which corresponds with the periods or impulses of the
current. another disadvantageous feature is found in the difficulty
of maintaining an alternating current arc in consequence of
the periodical increase in resistance corresponding to the periodical
working of the current. this feature entails a further disadvantage,
namely, that small arcs are impracticable.
theoretical considerations have led mr. tesla to the belief
that these disadvantageous features could be obviated by employing
currents of a sufficiently high number of alternations, and his
anticipations have been confirmed in practice. these rapidly
alternating currents render it possible to maintain small arcs
which, besides, possess the advantages of silence and persistency.
the latter quality is due to the necessarily rapid alternations, in
consequence of which the arc has no time to cool, and is always
maintained at a high temperature and low resistance.
at the outset of his experiments mr. tesla encountered great
difficulties in the construction of high frequency machines. a
generator of this kind is described here, which, though constructed
quite some time ago, is well worthy of a detailed description.
it may be mentioned, in passing, that dynamos of
this type have been used by mr. tesla in his lighting researches and
experiments with currents of high potential and high frequency,
and reference to them will be found in his lectures
elsewhere printed in this volume.[]
[pg ]
in the accompanying engravings, figs.  and  show the
machine, respectively, in side elevation and vertical cross-section;
figs. ,  and  showing enlarged details of construction.
as will be seen, a is an annular magnetic frame, the interior of
which is provided with a large number of pole-pieces d.
owing to the very large number and small size of the poles
and the spaces between them, the field coils are applied by winding
an insulated conductor f zigzag through the grooves, as shown
in fig. , carrying the wire around the annulus to form as
many layers as is desired. in this way the pole-pieces d will be
energized with alternately opposite polarity around the entire
ring.
for the armature, mr. tesla employs a spider carrying a ring
j, turned down, except at its edges, to form a trough-like receptacle
for a mass of fine annealed iron wires k, which are wound
in the groove to form the core proper for the armature-coils.
pins l are set in the sides of the ring j and the coils m are wound
over the periphery of the armature-structure and around the pins.
the coils m are connected together in series, and these terminals
n carried through the hollow shaft h to contact-rings p p, from
which the currents are taken off by brushes o.
fig. .
in this way a machine with a very large number of poles may
be constructed. it is easy, for instance, to obtain in this manner
three hundred and seventy-five to four hundred poles in a machine
that may be safely driven at a speed of fifteen hundred or sixteen
hundred revolutions per minute, which will produce ten[pg ]
thousand or eleven thousand alternations of current per second.
arc lamps r r are shown in the diagram as connected up in series
with the machine in fig. . if such a current be applied to
running arc lamps, the sound produced by or in the arc becomes
practically inaudible, for, by increasing the rate of change in the
current, and consequently the number of vibrations per unit of
time of the gaseous material of the arc up to, or beyond, ten
thousand or eleven thousand per second, or to what is regarded
as the limit of audition, the sound due to such vibrations will not
be audible. the exact number of changes or undulations necessary
to produce this result will vary somewhat according to the
size of the arc—that is to say, the smaller the arc, the greater the
number of changes that will be required to render it inaudible
within certain limits. it should also be stated that the arc should
not exceed a certain length.
figs. , ,  and .
the difficulties encountered in the construction of these
machines are of a mechanical as well as an electrical nature.
the machines may be designed on two plans: the field may be
formed either of alternating poles, or of polar projections of the
same polarity. up to about , alternations per second in an
experimental machine, the former plan may be followed, but a
more efficient machine is obtained on the second plan.
in the machine above described, which was capable of running
two arcs of normal candle power, the field was composed of a[pg ]
ring of wrought iron  inches outside diameter, and about 
inch thick. the inside diameter was  inches. there were 
polar projections. the wire was wound in zigzag form, but two
wires were wound so as to completely envelop the projections.
the distance between the projections is about / inch, and they
are a little over / inch thick. the field magnet was made relatively
small so as to adapt the machine for a constant current.
there are  coils connected in two series. it was found impracticable
to use any wire much thicker than no.  b. and s.
gauge on account of the local effects. in such a machine the
clearance should be as small as possible; for this reason the
machine was made only ¼ inch wide, so that the binding wires
might be obviated. the armature wires must be wound with
great care, as they are apt to fly off in consequence of the great
peripheral speed. in various experiments this machine has been
run as high as , revolutions per minute. owing to the great
speed it was possible to obtain as high as  amperes out of the
machine. the electromotive force was regulated by means of
an adjustable condenser within very wide limits, the limits
being the greater, the greater the speed. this machine was
frequently used to run mr. tesla's laboratory lights.
fig. .
the machine above described was only one of many such
types constructed. it serves well for an experimental machine,
but if still higher alternations are required and higher efficiency
is necessary, then a machine on a plan shown in figs.  to[pg ]
, is preferable. the principal advantage of this type of
machine is that there is not much magnetic leakage, and that a
field may be produced, varying greatly in intensity in places not
much distant from each other.
in these engravings, figs.  and  illustrate a machine in
which the armature conductor and field coils are stationary, while
the field magnet core revolves. fig.  shows a machine
embodying the same plan of construction, but having a stationary
field magnet and rotary armature.
the conductor in which the currents are induced may be
arranged in various ways; but mr. tesla prefers the following
method: he employs an annular plate of copper d, and by
means of a saw cuts in it radial slots from one edge nearly
through to the other, beginning alternately from opposite edges.
in this way a continuous zigzag conductor is formed. when the
polar projections are / inch wide, the width of the conductor
should not, under any circumstances, be more than / inch wide;
even then the eddy effect is considerable.
fig. .
to the inner edge of this plate are secured two rings of non-magnetic
metal e, which are insulated from the copper conductor,
but held firmly thereto by means of the bolts f. within the
rings e is then placed an annular coil g, which is the energizing
coil for the field magnet. the conductor d and the parts attached
thereto are supported by means of the cylindrical shell or[pg ]
casting a a, the two parts of which are brought together and
clamped to the outer edge of the conductor d.
fig. .
the core for the field magnet is built up of two circular parts
h h, formed with annular grooves i, which, when the two parts
are brought together, form a space for the reception of the energizing
coil g. the hubs of the cores are trued off, so as to fit
closely against one another, while the outer portions or flanges
which form the polar faces j j, are reduced somewhat in thickness
to make room for the conductor d, and are serrated on their
faces. the number of serrations in the polar faces is arbitrary;
but there must exist between them and the radial portions of
the conductor d certain relation, which will be understood by
reference to fig.  in which n n represent the projections or
points on one face of the core of the field, and s s the points of
the other face. the conductor d is shown in this figure in section
a a' designating the radial portions of the conductor, and b the
insulating divisions between them. the relative width of the
parts a a' and the space between any two adjacent points n n or
s s is such that when the radial portions a of the conductor are
passing between the opposite points n s where the field is strongest,
the intermediate radial portions a' are passing through the[pg ]
widest spaces midway between such points and where the field is
weakest. since the core on one side is of opposite polarity to
the part facing it, all the projections of one polar face will be of
opposite polarity to those of the other face. hence, although
the space between any two adjacent points on the same face may
be extremely small, there will be no leakage of the magnetic
lines between any two points of the same name, but the lines of
force will pass across from one set of points to the other. the
construction followed obviates to a great degree the distortion of
the magnetic lines by the action of the current in the conductor
d, in which it will be observed the current is flowing at any given
time from the centre toward the periphery in one set of radial
parts a and in the opposite direction in the adjacent parts a'.
in order to connect the energizing coil g, fig. , with a source
of continuous current, mr. tesla utilizes two adjacent radial portions
of the conductor d for connecting the terminals of the coil
g with two binding posts m. for this purpose the plate d is cut
entirely through, as shown, and the break thus made is bridged
over by a short conductor c. the plate d is cut through to form
two terminals d, which are connected to binding posts n. the
core h h, when rotated by the driving pulley, generates in the conductors
d an alternating current, which is taken off from the
binding posts n.
fig. .
when it is desired to rotate the conductor between the faces
of a stationary field magnet, the construction shown in fig.
, is adopted. the conductor d in this case is or may be
made in substantially the same manner as above described by
slotting an annular conducting-plate and supporting it between
two heads o, held together by bolts o and fixed to the driving-shaft
k. the inner edge of the plate or conductor d is preferably
flanged to secure a firmer union between it and the heads o. it
is insulated from the head. the field-magnet in this case consists
of two annular parts h h, provided with annular grooves i
for the reception of the coils. the flanges or faces surrounding[pg ]
the annular groove are brought together, while the inner flanges
are serrated, as in the previous case, and form the polar faces.
the two parts h h are formed with a base r, upon which the
machine rests. s s are non-magnetic bushings secured or set in
the central opening of the cores. the conductor d is cut entirely
through at one point to form terminals, from which insulated
conductors t are led through the shaft to collecting-rings v.
in one type of machine of this kind constructed by mr. tesla,
the field had  polar projections on each side, and from this
machine it was possible to obtain , alternations per second.
as the polar projections must necessarily be very narrow, very
thin wires or sheets must be used to avoid the eddy current
effects. mr. tesla has thus constructed machines with a stationary
armature and rotating field, in which case also the field-coil
was supported so that the revolving part consisted only of a
wrought iron body devoid of any wire and also machines with a
rotating armature and stationary field. the machines may be
either drum or disc, but mr. tesla's experience shows the latter
to be preferable.
in the course of a very interesting article contributed to the
electrical world in february, , mr. tesla makes some suggestive
remarks on these high frequency machines and his experiences
with them, as well as with other parts of the high
frequency apparatus. part of it is quoted here and is as
follows:—
the writer will incidentally mention that any one who attempts
for the first time to construct such a machine will have a
tale of woe to tell. he will first start out, as a matter of course,
by making an armature with the required number of polar projections.
he will then get the satisfaction of having produced
an apparatus which is fit to accompany a thoroughly wagnerian
opera. it may besides possess the virtue of converting mechanical
energy into heat in a nearly perfect manner. if there is a
reversal in the polarity of the projections, he will get heat out of
the machine; if there is no reversal, the heating will be less, but
the output will be next to nothing. he will then abandon the
iron in the armature, and he will get from the scylla to the
charybdis. he will look for one difficulty and will find another,
but, after a few trials, he may get nearly what he wanted.[pg ]
among the many experiments which may be performed with
such a machine, of not the least interest are those performed
with a high-tension induction coil. the character of the discharge
is completely changed. the arc is established at much
greater distances, and it is so easily affected by the slightest current
of air that it often wriggles around in the most singular
manner. it usually emits the rhythmical sound peculiar to the
alternate current arcs, but the curious point is that the sound
may be heard with a number of alternations far above ten thousand
per second, which by many is considered to be about the
limit of audition. in many respects the coil behaves like a static
machine. points impair considerably the sparking interval, electricity
escaping from them freely, and from a wire attached to
one of the terminals streams of light issue, as though it were
connected to a pole of a powerful toepler machine. all these
phenomena are, of course, mostly due to the enormous differences
of potential obtained. as a consequence of the self-induction
of the coil and the high frequency, the current is minute
while there is a corresponding rise of pressure. a current impulse
of some strength started in such a coil should persist to
flow no less than four ten-thousandths of a second. as this time
is greater than half the period, it occurs that an opposing electromotive
force begins to act while the current is still flowing. as
a consequence, the pressure rises as in a tube filled with liquid
and vibrated rapidly around its axis. the current is so small
that, in the opinion and involuntary experience of the writer, the
discharge of even a very large coil cannot produce seriously injurious
effects, whereas, if the same coil were operated with a
current of lower frequency, though the electromotive force would
be much smaller, the discharge would be most certainly injurious.
this result, however, is due in part to the high frequency.
the writer's experiences tend to show that the higher the frequency
the greater the amount of electrical energy which may
be passed through the body without serious discomfort; whence
it seems certain that human tissues act as condensers.
one is not quite prepared for the behavior of the coil when
connected to a leyden jar. one, of course, anticipates that since
the frequency is high the capacity of the jar should be small. he
therefore takes a very small jar, about the size of a small wine
glass, but he finds that even with this jar the coil is practically
short-circuited. he then reduces the capacity until he comes to[pg ]
about the capacity of two spheres, say, ten centimetres in diameter
and two to four centimetres apart. the discharge then assumes
the form of a serrated band exactly like a succession of
sparks viewed in a rapidly revolving mirror; the serrations, of
course, corresponding to the condenser discharges. in this case
one may observe a queer phenomenon. the discharge starts at
the nearest points, works gradually up, breaks somewhere near
the top of the spheres, begins again at the bottom, and so on.
this goes on so fast that several serrated bands are seen at once.
one may be puzzled for a few minutes, but the explanation is
simple enough. the discharge begins at the nearest points, the air
is heated and carries the arc upward until it breaks, when it is re-established
at the nearest points, etc. since the current passes
easily through a condenser of even small capacity, it will be found
quite natural that connecting only one terminal to a body of the
same size, no matter how well insulated, impairs considerably the
striking distance of the arc.
experiments with geissler tubes are of special interest. an
exhausted tube, devoid of electrodes of any kind, will light up at
some distance from the coil. if a tube from a vacuum pump is
near the coil the whole of the pump is brilliantly lighted. an
incandescent lamp approached to the coil lights up and gets perceptibly
hot. if a lamp have the terminals connected to one of
the binding posts of the coil and the hand is approached to the
bulb, a very curious and rather unpleasant discharge from the
glass to the hand takes place, and the filament may become incandescent.
the discharge resembles to some extent the stream
issuing from the plates of a powerful toepler machine, but is of
incomparably greater quantity. the lamp in this case acts as a
condenser, the rarefied gas being one coating, the operator's hand
the other. by taking the globe of a lamp in the hand, and by
bringing the metallic terminals near to or in contact with a conductor
connected to the coil, the carbon is brought to bright incandescence
and the glass is rapidly heated. with a -volt  c.
p. lamp one may without great discomfort stand as much current
as will bring the lamp to a considerable brilliancy; but it can be
held in the hand only for a few minutes, as the glass is heated in
an incredibly short time. when a tube is lighted by bringing it
near to the coil it may be made to go out by interposing a metal
plate on the hand between the coil and tube; but if the metal
plate be fastened to a glass rod or otherwise insulated, the tube[pg ]
may remain lighted if the plate be interposed, or may even increase
in luminosity. the effect depends on the position of the
plate and tube relatively to the coil, and may be always easily
foretold by assuming that conduction takes place from one terminal
of the coil to the other. according to the position of the
plate, it may either divert from or direct the current to the tube.
in another line of work the writer has in frequent experiments
maintained incandescent lamps of  or  volts burning at any
desired candle power with both the terminals of each lamp connected
to a stout copper wire of no more than a few feet in
length. these experiments seem interesting enough, but they
are not more so than the queer experiment of faraday, which
has been revived and made much of by recent investigators, and
in which a discharge is made to jump between two points of a
bent copper wire. an experiment may be cited here which may
seem equally interesting. if a geissler tube, the terminals of
which are joined by a copper wire, be approached to the coil, certainly
no one would be prepared to see the tube light up.
curiously enough, it does light up, and, what is more, the
wire does not seem to make much difference. now one is
apt to think in the first moment that the impedance of the
wire might have something to do with the phenomenon. but
this is of course immediately rejected, as for this an enormous
frequency would be required. this result, however, seems
puzzling only at first; for upon reflection it is quite clear that
the wire can make but little difference. it may be explained in
more than one way, but it agrees perhaps best with observation
to assume that conduction takes place from the terminals of the
coil through the space. on this assumption, if the tube with the
wire be held in any position, the wire can divert little more than
the current which passes through the space occupied by the wire
and the metallic terminals of the tube; through the adjacent
space the current passes practically undisturbed. for this reason,
if the tube be held in any position at right angles to the line
joining the binding posts of the coil, the wire makes hardly any
difference, but in a position more or less parallel with that line
it impairs to a certain extent the brilliancy of the tube and its
facility to light up. numerous other phenomena may be explained
on the same assumption. for instance, if the ends of the
tube be provided with washers of sufficient size and held in the
line joining the terminals of the coil, it will not light up, and
then nearly the whole of the current, which would otherwise[pg ]
pass uniformly through the space between the washers, is diverted
through the wire. but if the tube be inclined sufficiently
to that line, it will light up in spite of the washers. also, if a
metal plate be fastened upon a glass rod and held at right angles
to the line joining the binding posts, and nearer to one of them,
a tube held more or less parallel with the line will light up instantly
when one of the terminals touches the plate, and will go
out when separated from the plate. the greater the surface of
the plate, up to a certain limit, the easier the tube will light up.
when a tube is placed at right angles to the straight line joining
the binding posts, and then rotated, its luminosity steadily increases
until it is parallel with that line. the writer must state,
however, that he does not favor the idea of a leakage or current
through the space any more than as a suitable explanation, for he
is convinced that all these experiments could not be performed with
a static machine yielding a constant difference of potential, and
that condenser action is largely concerned in these phenomena.
it is well to take certain precautions when operating a ruhmkorff
coil with very rapidly alternating currents. the primary
current should not be turned on too long, else the core may get
so hot as to melt the gutta-percha or paraffin, or otherwise injure
the insulation, and this may occur in a surprisingly short time,
considering the current's strength. the primary current being
turned on, the fine wire terminals may be joined without great
risk, the impedance being so great that it is difficult to force
enough current through the fine wire so as to injure it, and in
fact the coil may be on the whole much safer when the terminals
of the fine wire are connected than when they are insulated;
but special care should be taken when the terminals are connected
to the coatings of a leyden jar, for with anywhere near
the critical capacity, which just counteracts the self-induction at
the existing frequency, the coil might meet the fate of st. polycarpus.
if an expensive vacuum pump is lighted up by being
near to the coil or touched with a wire connected to one of the
terminals, the current should be left on no more than a few
moments, else the glass will be cracked by the heating of the
rarefied gas in one of the narrow passages—in the writer's own
experience quod erat demonstrandum.[]
[pg ]
there are a good many other points of interest which may be
observed in connection with such a machine. experiments with
the telephone, a conductor in a strong field or with a condenser
or arc, seem to afford certain proof that sounds far above the
usual accepted limit of hearing would be perceived. a telephone
will emit notes of twelve to thirteen thousand vibrations per
second; then the inability of the core to follow such rapid alternations
begins to tell. if, however, the magnet and core be
replaced by a condenser and the terminals connected to the high-tension
secondary of a transformer, higher notes may still be
heard. if the current be sent around a finely laminated core
and a small piece of thin sheet iron be held gently against the
core, a sound may be still heard with thirteen to fourteen thousand
alternations per second, provided the current is sufficiently
strong. a small coil, however, tightly packed between the poles
of a powerful magnet, will emit a sound with the above number
of alternations, and arcs may be audible with a still higher frequency.
the limit of audition is variously estimated. in sir
william thomson's writings it is stated somewhere that ten
thousand per second, or nearly so, is the limit. other, but less
reliable, sources give it as high as twenty-four thousand per
second. the above experiments have convinced the writer that
notes of an incomparably higher number of vibrations per second
would be perceived provided they could be produced with sufficient
power. there is no reason why it should not be so. the
condensations and rarefactions of the air would necessarily set
the diaphragm in a corresponding vibration and some sensation
would be produced, whatever—within certain limits—the velocity
of transmission to their nerve centres, though it is probable that
for want of exercise the ear would not be able to distinguish any
such high note. with the eye it is different; if the sense of
vision is based upon some resonance effect, as many believe, no
amount of increase in the intensity of the ethereal vibration
could extend our range of vision on either side of the visible
spectrum.
the limit of audition of an arc depends on its size. the
greater the surface by a given heating effect in the arc, the higher
the limit of audition. the highest notes are emitted by the
high-tension discharges of an induction coil in which the arc is,
so to speak, all surface. if r be the resistance of an arc, and c
the current, and the linear dimensions be n times increased, then[pg ]
the resistance is r/n, and with the same current density the current
would be nc; hence the heating effect is n times greater,
while the surface is only n times as great. for this reason very
large arcs would not emit any rhythmical sound even with a very
low frequency. it must be observed, however, that the sound
emitted depends to some extent also on the composition of the
carbon. if the carbon contain highly refractory material, this,
when heated, tends to maintain the temperature of the arc uniform
and the sound is lessened; for this reason it would seem
that an alternating arc requires such carbons.
with currents of such high frequencies it is possible to obtain
noiseless arcs, but the regulation of the lamp is rendered extremely
difficult on account of the excessively small attractions
or repulsions between conductors conveying these currents.
an interesting feature of the arc produced by these rapidly
alternating currents is its persistency. there are two causes for
it, one of which is always present, the other sometimes only.
one is due to the character of the current and the other to a
property of the machine. the first cause is the more important
one, and is due directly to the rapidity of the alternations.
when an arc is formed by a periodically undulating current,
there is a corresponding undulation in the temperature of the
gaseous column, and, therefore, a corresponding undulation in
the resistance of the arc. but the resistance of the arc varies
enormously with the temperature of the gaseous column, being
practically infinite when the gas between the electrodes is cold.
the persistence of the arc, therefore, depends on the inability of
the column to cool. it is for this reason impossible to maintain
an arc with the current alternating only a few times a second.
on the other hand, with a practically continuous current, the arc
is easily maintained, the column being constantly kept at a high
temperature and low resistance. the higher the frequency the
smaller the time interval during which the arc may cool and increase
considerably in resistance. with a frequency of ,
per second or more in an arc of equal size excessively small variations
of temperature are superimposed upon a steady temperature,
like ripples on the surface of a deep sea. the heating effect is
practically continuous and the arc behaves like one produced by
a continuous current, with the exception, however, that it may
not be quite as easily started, and that the electrodes are equally[pg ]
consumed; though the writer has observed some irregularities in
this respect.
the second cause alluded to, which possibly may not be present,
is due to the tendency of a machine of such high frequency
to maintain a practically constant current. when the arc is
lengthened, the electromotive force rises in proportion and the
arc appears to be more persistent.
such a machine is eminently adapted to maintain a constant
current, but it is very unfit for a constant potential. as a matter
of fact, in certain types of such machines a nearly constant current
is an almost unavoidable result. as the number of poles or
polar projections is greatly increased, the clearance becomes of
great importance. one has really to do with a great number of
very small machines. then there is the impedance in the armature,
enormously augmented by the high frequency. then,
again, the magnetic leakage is facilitated. if there are three or
four hundred alternate poles, the leakage is so great that it is
virtually the same as connecting, in a two-pole machine, the poles
by a piece of iron. this disadvantage, it is true, may be obviated
more or less by using a field throughout of the same polarity,
but then one encounters difficulties of a different nature. all
these things tend to maintain a constant current in the armature
circuit.
in this connection it is interesting to notice that even to-day
engineers are astonished at the performance of a constant current
machine, just as, some years ago, they used to consider it an extraordinary
performance if a machine was capable of maintaining
a constant potential difference between the terminals. yet one
result is just as easily secured as the other. it must only be
remembered that in an inductive apparatus of any kind, if constant
potential is required, the inductive relation between the
primary or exciting and secondary or armature circuit must be
the closest possible; whereas, in an apparatus for constant current
just the opposite is required. furthermore, the opposition
to the current's flow in the induced circuit must be as small as
possible in the former and as great as possible in the latter case.
but opposition to a current's flow may be caused in more than
one way. it may be caused by ohmic resistance or self-induction.
one may make the induced circuit of a dynamo machine
or transformer of such high resistance that when operating devices
of considerably smaller resistance within very wide limits a[pg ]
nearly constant current is maintained. but such high resistance
involves a great loss in power, hence it is not practicable. not
so self-induction. self-induction does not necessarily mean loss
of power. the moral is, use self-induction instead of resistance.
there is, however, a circumstance which favors the adoption of
this plan, and this is, that a very high self-induction may be
obtained cheaply by surrounding a comparatively small length
of wire more or less completely with iron, and, furthermore, the
effect may be exalted at will by causing a rapid undulation of the
current. to sum up, the requirements for constant current
are: weak magnetic connection between the induced and
inducing circuits, greatest possible self-induction with the
least resistance, greatest practicable rate of change of the
current. constant potential, on the other hand, requires: closest
magnetic connection between the circuits, steady induced
current, and, if possible, no reaction. if the latter conditions
could be fully satisfied in a constant potential machine, its output
would surpass many times that of a machine primarily designed
to give constant current. unfortunately, the type of machine
in which these conditions may be satisfied is of little practical
value, owing to the small electromotive force obtainable and the
difficulties in taking off the current.
with their keen inventor's instinct, the now successful arc-light
men have early recognized the desiderata of a constant
current machine. their arc light machines have weak fields,
large armatures, with a great length of copper wire and few
commutator segments to produce great variations in the current's
strength and to bring self-induction into play. such machines
may maintain within considerable limits of variation in the resistance
of the circuit a practically constant current. their output
is of course correspondingly diminished, and, perhaps with
the object in view not to cut down the output too much, a simple
device compensating exceptional variations is employed.
the undulation of the current is almost essential to the commercial
success of an arc-light system. it introduces in the circuit a
steadying element taking the place of a large ohmic resistance,
without involving a great loss in power, and, what is more important,
it allows the use of simple clutch lamps, which with a
current of a certain number of impulses per second, best suitable
for each particular lamp, will, if properly attended to, regulate
even better than the finest clock-work lamps. this discovery
has been made by the writer—several years too late.[pg ]
it has been asserted by competent english electricians that in a
constant-current machine or transformer the regulation is effected
by varying the phase of the secondary current. that this view
is erroneous may be easily proved by using, instead of lamps, devices
each possessing self-induction and capacity or self-induction
and resistance—that is, retarding and accelerating components—in
such proportions as to not affect materially the phase of the
secondary current. any number of such devices may be inserted
or cut out, still it will be found that the regulation occurs, a constant
current being maintained, while the electromotive force is
varied with the number of the devices. the change of phase of
the secondary current is simply a result following from the
changes in resistance, and, though secondary reaction is always
of more or less importance, yet the real cause of the regulation
lies in the existence of the conditions above enumerated. it
should be stated, however, that in the case of a machine the above
remarks are to be restricted to the cases in which the machine is
independently excited. if the excitation be effected by commutating
the armature current, then the fixed position of the brushes
makes any shifting of the neutral line of the utmost importance,
and it may not be thought immodest of the writer to mention
that, as far as records go, he seems to have been the first who has
successfully regulated machines by providing a bridge connection
between a point of the external circuit and the commutator by
means of a third brush. the armature and field being properly
proportioned and the brushes placed in their determined positions,
a constant current or constant potential resulted from the
shifting of the diameter of commutation by the varying loads.
in connection with machines of such high frequencies, the
condenser affords an especially interesting study. it is easy to
raise the electromotive force of such a machine to four or five
times the value by simply connecting the condenser to the circuit,
and the writer has continually used the condenser for the
the purposes of regulation, as suggested by blakesley in his book
on alternate currents, in which he has treated the most frequently
occurring condenser problems with exquisite simplicity and clearness.
the high frequency allows the use of small capacities and
renders investigation easy. but, although in most of the experiments
the result may be foretold, some phenomena observed seem
at first curious. one experiment performed three or four months
ago with such a machine and a condenser may serve as an il[pg ]lustration.
a machine was used giving about , alternations
per second. two bare wires about twenty feet long and two
millimetres in diameter, in close proximity to each other, were
connected to the terminals of the machine at the one end, and
to a condenser at the other. a small transformer without an
iron core, of course, was used to bring the reading within range
of a cardew voltmeter by connecting the voltmeter to the
secondary. on the terminals of the condenser the electromotive
force was about  volts, and from there inch by inch it gradually
fell until at the terminals of the machine it was about 
volts. it was virtually as though the condenser were a generator,
and the line and armature circuit simply a resistance connected
to it. the writer looked for a case of resonance, but he
was unable to augment the effect by varying the capacity very
carefully and gradually or by changing the speed of the machine.
a case of pure resonance he was unable to obtain.
when a condenser was connected to the terminals of the machine—the
self-induction of the armature being first determined
in the maximum and minimum position and the mean value taken—the
capacity which gave the highest electromotive force corresponded
most nearly to that which just counteracted the self-induction
with the existing frequency. if the capacity was increased
or diminished, the electromotive force fell as expected.
with frequencies as high as the above mentioned, the condenser
effects are of enormous importance. the condenser
becomes a highly efficient apparatus capable of transferring
considerable energy.
in an appendix to this book will be found a description of the
tesla oscillator, which its inventor believes will among other great
advantages give him the necessary high frequency conditions,
while relieving him of the inconveniences that attach to generators
of the type described at the beginning of this chapter.
[pg ]
alternate current electrostatic induction apparatus.[]
about a year and a half ago while engaged in the study of
alternate currents of short period, it occurred to me that such
currents could be obtained by rotating charged surfaces in close
proximity to conductors. accordingly i devised various forms
of experimental apparatus of which two are illustrated in the
accompanying engravings.
fig. .
in the apparatus shown in fig. , a is a ring of dry shellacked
hard wood provided on its inside with two sets of tin-foil
coatings, a and b, all the a coatings and all the b coatings being
connected together, respectively, but independent from each
other. these two sets of coatings are connected to two termi[pg ]nals,
t. for the sake of clearness only a few coatings are shown.
inside of the ring a, and in close proximity to it there is arranged
to rotate a cylinder b, likewise of dry, shellacked hard wood, and
provided with two similar sets of coatings, a and b, all the coatings
a being connected to one ring and all the others, b, to
another marked + and −. these two sets, a and b are charged
to a high potential by a holtz or wimshurst machine, and may
be connected to a jar of some capacity. the inside of ring a is
coated with mica in order to increase the induction and also to
allow higher potentials to be used.
fig. .
when the cylinder b with the charged coatings is rotated, a
circuit connected to the terminals t is traversed by alternating
currents. another form of apparatus is illustrated in fig. .
in this apparatus the two sets of tin-foil coatings are glued on a
plate of ebonite, and a similar plate which is rotated, and the
coatings of which are charged as in fig. , is provided.
the output of such an apparatus is very small, but some of
the effects peculiar to alternating currents of short periods may
be observed. the effects, however, cannot be compared with
those obtainable with an induction coil which is operated by an
alternate current machine of high frequency, some of which
were described by me a short while ago.
[pg ]
"massage" with currents of high frequency.[]
i trust that the present brief communication will not be interpreted
as an effort on my part to put myself on record as a
"patent medicine" man, for a serious worker cannot despise
anything more than the misuse and abuse of electricity which we
have frequent occasion to witness. my remarks are elicited by
the lively interest which prominent medical practitioners evince
at every real advance in electrical investigation. the progress
in recent years has been so great that every electrician and electrical
engineer is confident that electricity will become the means
of accomplishing many things that have been heretofore, with
our existing knowledge, deemed impossible. no wonder then
that progressive physicians also should expect to find in it a
powerful tool and help in new curative processes. since i had
the honor to bring before the american institute of electrical
engineers some results in utilizing alternating currents of high
tension, i have received many letters from noted physicians inquiring
as to the physical effects of such currents of high frequency.
it may be remembered that i then demonstrated that
a body perfectly well insulated in air can be heated by simply
connecting it with a source of rapidly alternating high potential.
the heating in this case is due in all probability to the bombardment
of the body by air, or possibly by some other medium,
which is molecular or atomic in construction, and the presence
of which has so far escaped our analysis—for according to my
ideas, the true ether radiation with such frequencies as even a
few millions per second must be very small. this body may be
a good conductor or it may be a very poor conductor of electricity
with little change in the result. the human body is, in
such a case, a fine conductor, and if a person insulated in a room,
or no matter where, is brought into contact with such a source of
[pg ]rapidly alternating high potential, the skin is heated by bombardment.
it is a mere question of the dimensions and character
of the apparatus to produce any degree of heating desired.
it has occurred to me whether, with such apparatus properly
prepared, it would not be possible for a skilled physician to find
in it a means for the effective treatment of various types of disease.
the heating will, of course, be superficial, that is, on the
skin, and would result, whether the person operated on were in
bed or walking around a room, whether dressed in thick clothes or
whether reduced to nakedness. in fact, to put it broadly, it is
conceivable that a person entirely nude at the north pole might
keep himself comfortably warm in this manner.
without vouching for all the results, which must, of course, be
determined by experience and observation, i can at least warrant
the fact that heating would occur by the use of this method of
subjecting the human body to bombardment by alternating currents
of high potential and frequency such i have long worked
with. it is only reasonable to expect that some of the novel effects
will be wholly different from those obtainable with the old
familiar therapeutic methods generally used. whether they
would all be beneficial or not remains to be proved.
[pg ]
electric discharge in vacuum tubes.[]
in the electrical engineer of june  i have noted the description
of some experiments of prof. j. j. thomson, on the
"electric discharge in vacuum tubes," and in your issue of june
 prof. elihu thomson describes an experiment of the same
kind. the fundamental idea in these experiments is to set up
an electromotive force in a vacuum tube—-preferably devoid of
any electrodes—by means of electro-magnetic induction, and to
excite the tube in this manner.
as i view the subject i should, think that to any experimenter
who had carefully studied the problem confronting us and who
attempted to find a solution of it, this idea must present itself as
naturally as, for instance, the idea of replacing the tinfoil coatings
of a leyden jar by rarefied gas and exciting luminosity in
the condenser thus obtained by repeatedly charging and discharging
it. the idea being obvious, whatever merit there is in this
line of investigation must depend upon the completeness of the
study of the subject and the correctness of the observations. the
following lines are not penned with any desire on my part to put
myself on record as one who has performed similar experiments,
but with a desire to assist other experimenters by pointing out
certain peculiarities of the phenomena observed, which, to all appearances,
have not been noted by prof. j. j. thomson, who,
however, seems to have gone about systematically in his investigations,
and who has been the first to make his results known.
these peculiarities noted by me would seem to be at variance
with the views of prof. j. j. thomson, and present the phenomena
in a different light.
my investigations in this line occupied me principally during
the winter and spring of the past year. during this time many different
experiments were performed, and in my exchanges of ideas
[pg ]on this subject with mr. alfred s. brown, of the western union
telegraph company, various different dispositions were suggested
which were carried out by me in practice. fig.  may serve
as an example of one of the many forms of apparatus used. this
consisted of a large glass tube sealed at one end and projecting
into an ordinary incandescent lamp bulb. the primary, usually
consisting of a few turns of thick, well-insulated copper sheet was
inserted within the tube, the inside space of the bulb furnishing
the secondary. this form of apparatus was arrived at after some
experimenting, and was used principally with the view of enabling
me to place a polished reflecting surface on the inside of
the tube, and for this purpose the last turn of the primary was
covered with a thin silver sheet. in all forms of apparatus used
there was no special difficulty in exciting a luminous circle or
cylinder in proximity to the primary.
fig. .
as to the number of turns, i cannot quite understand why
prof. j. j. thomson should think that a few turns were "quite
sufficient," but lest i should impute to him an opinion he may
not have, i will add that i have gained this impression from the
reading of the published abstracts of his lecture. clearly, the
number of turns which gives the best result in any case, is dependent
on the dimensions of the apparatus, and, were it not for
various considerations, one turn would always give the best
result.
i have found that it is preferable to use in these experiments
an alternate current machine giving a moderate number of alter[pg ]nations
per second to excite the induction coil for charging the
leyden jar which discharges through the primary—shown diagrammatically
in fig. ,—as in such case, before the disruptive
discharge takes place, the tube or bulb is slightly excited and
the formation of the luminous circle is decidedly facilitated.
but i have also used a wimshurst machine in some experiments.
fig. .
prof. j. j. thomson's view of the phenomena under consideration
seems to be that they are wholly due to electro-magnetic
action. i was, at one time, of the same opinion, but upon carefully
investigating the subject i was led to the conviction that
they are more of an electrostatic nature. it must be remembered
that in these experiments we have to deal with primary
currents of an enormous frequency or rate of change and of high
potential, and that the secondary conductor consists of a rarefied
gas, and that under such conditions electrostatic effects must play
an important part.
fig. .
in support of my view i will describe a few experiments made
by me. to excite luminosity in the tube it is not absolutely
necessary that the conductor should be closed. for instance, if[pg ]
an ordinary exhausted tube (preferably of large diameter) be
surrounded by a spiral of thick copper wire serving as the primary,
a feebly luminous spiral may be induced in the tube, roughly
shown in fig. . in one of these experiments a curious phenomenon
was observed; namely, two intensely luminous circles,
each of them close to a turn of the primary spiral, were formed
inside of the tube, and i attributed this phenomenon to the existence
of nodes on the primary. the circles were connected by
a faint luminous spiral parallel to the primary and in close proximity
to it. to produce this effect i have found it necessary to
strain the jar to the utmost. the turns of the spiral tend to
close and form circles, but this, of course, would be expected,
and does not necessarily indicate an electro-magnetic effect;
whereas the fact that a glow can be produced along the primary
in the form of an open spiral argues for an electrostatic effect.
fig. .
in using dr. lodge's recoil circuit, the electrostatic action is
likewise apparent. the arrangement is illustrated in fig. .
in his experiment two hollow exhausted tubes h h were slipped
over the wires of the recoil circuit and upon discharging the jar
in the usual manner luminosity was excited in the tubes.
another experiment performed is illustrated in fig. . in
this case an ordinary lamp-bulb was surrounded by one or two
turns of thick copper wire p and the luminous circle l excited
in the bulb by discharging the jar through the primary. the
lamp-bulb was provided with a tinfoil coating on the side opposite
to the primary and each time the tinfoil coating was connected
to the ground or to a large object the luminosity of the
circle was considerably increased. this was evidently due to
electrostatic action.
in other experiments i have noted that when the primary
touches the glass the luminous circle is easier produced and is[pg ]
more sharply defined; but i have not noted that, generally speaking,
the circles induced were very sharply defined, as prof. j. j.
thomson has observed; on the contrary, in my experiments they
were broad and often the whole of the bulb or tube was illuminated;
and in one case i have observed an intensely purplish
glow, to which prof. j. j. thomson refers. but the circles were
always in close proximity to the primary and were considerably
easier produced when the latter was very close to the glass, much
more so than would be expected assuming the action to be electromagnetic
and considering the distance; and these facts speak
for an electrostatic effect.
fig. .
fig. .
furthermore i have observed that there is a molecular bombardment
in the plane of the luminous circle at right angles to
the glass—supposing the circle to be in the plane of the primary[pg ]—this
bombardment being evident from the rapid heating of the
glass near the primary. were the bombardment not at right
angles to the glass the heating could not be so rapid. if there
is a circumferential movement of the molecules constituting the
luminous circle, i have thought that it might be rendered manifest
by placing within the tube or bulb, radially to the circle, a
thin plate of mica coated with some phosphorescent material and
another such plate tangentially to the circle. if the molecules
would move circumferentially, the former plate would be rendered
more intensely phosphorescent. for want of time i have,
however, not been able to perform the experiment.
another observation made by me was that when the specific
inductive capacity of the medium between the primary and
secondary is increased, the inductive effect is augmented. this
is roughly illustrated in fig. . in this case luminosity was
excited in an exhausted tube or bulb b and a glass tube t slipped
between the primary and the bulb, when the effect pointed out
was noted. were the action wholly electromagnetic no change
could possibly have been observed.
i have likewise noted that when a bulb is surrounded by a
wire closed upon itself and in the plane of the primary, the formation
of the luminous circle within the bulb is not prevented.
but if instead of the wire a broad strip of tinfoil is glued upon
the bulb, the formation of the luminous band was prevented, because
then the action was distributed over a greater surface. the
effect of the closed tinfoil was no doubt of an electrostatic nature,
for it presented a much greater resistance than the closed wire
and produced therefore a much smaller electromagnetic effect.
some of the experiments of prof. j. j. thomson also would
seem to show some electrostatic action. for instance, in the experiment
with the bulb enclosed in a bell jar, i should think
that when the latter is exhausted so far that the gas enclosed
reaches the maximum conductivity, the formation of the circle
in the bulb and jar is prevented because of the space surrounding
the primary being highly conducting; when the jar is further
exhausted, the conductivity of the space around the primary
diminishes and the circles appear necessarily first in the bell jar,
as the rarefied gas is nearer to the primary. but were the inductive
effect very powerful, they would probably appear in the
bulb also. if, however, the bell jar were exhausted to the highest
degree they would very likely show themselves in the bulb[pg ]
only, that is, supposing the vacuous space to be non-conducting.
on the assumption that in these phenomena electrostatic actions
are concerned we find it easily explicable why the introduction
of mercury or the heating of the bulb prevents the formation of
the luminous band or shortens the after-glow; and also why in
some cases a platinum wire may prevent the excitation of the
tube. nevertheless some of the experiments of prof. j. j.
thomson would seem to indicate an electromagnetic effect. i
may add that in one of my experiments in which a vacuum was
produced by the torricellian method, i was unable to produce
the luminous band, but this may have been due to the weak exciting
current employed.
my principal argument is the following: i have experimentally
proved that if the same discharge which is barely sufficient
to excite a luminous band in the bulb when passed through the
primary circuit be so directed as to exalt the electrostatic inductive
effect—namely, by converting upwards—an exhausted tube,
devoid of electrodes, may be excited at a distance of several feet.
the phenomena of vacuum discharges were, prof. thomson said, greatly
simplified when their path was wholly gaseous, the complication of the dark
space surrounding the negative electrode, and the stratifications so commonly
observed in ordinary vacuum tubes, being absent. to produce discharges in
tubes devoid of electrodes was, however, not easy to accomplish, for the only
available means of producing an electromotive force in the discharge circuit
was by electro-magnetic induction. ordinary methods of producing variable
induction were valueless, and recourse was had to the oscillatory discharge of a
[pg ]leyden jar, which combines the two essentials of a current whose maximum
value is enormous, and whose rapidity of alternation is immensely great. the
discharge circuits, which may take the shape of bulbs, or of tubes bent in the
form of coils, were placed in close proximity to glass tubes filled with mercury,
which formed the path of the oscillatory discharge. the parts thus corresponded
to the windings of an induction coil, the vacuum tubes being the secondary,
and the tubes filled with mercury the primary. in such an apparatus
the leyden jar need not be large, and neither primary nor secondary need have
many turns, for this would increase the self-induction of the former, and
lengthen the discharge path in the latter. increasing the self-induction of the
primary reduces the e. m. f. induced in the secondary, whilst lengthening the
secondary does not increase the e. m. f. per unit length. the two or three
turns, as shown in fig. , in each, were found to be quite sufficient, and, on
discharging the leyden jar between two highly polished knobs in the primary
circuit, a plain uniform band of light was seen to pass round the secondary.
an exhausted bulb, fig. , containing traces of oxygen was placed within a
primary spiral of three turns, and, on passing the jar discharge, a circle of light
was seen within the bulb in close proximity to the primary circuit, accompanied
by a purplish glow, which lasted for a second or more. on heating the
bulb, the duration of the glow was greatly diminished, and it could be instantly
extinguished by the presence of an electro-magnet. another exhausted
bulb, fig. , surrounded by a primary spiral, was contained in a bell-jar,
and when the pressure of air in the jar was about that of the atmosphere, the
secondary discharge occurred in the bulb, as is ordinarily the case. on exhausting
the jar, however, the luminous discharge grew fainter, and a point
was reached at which no secondary discharge was visible. further exhaustion
of the jar caused the secondary discharge to appear outside of the bulb. the
fact of obtaining no luminous discharge, either in the bulb or jar, the author[pg ]
could only explain on two suppositions, viz.: that under the conditions then existing
the specific inductive capacity of the gas was very great, or that a discharge
could pass without being luminous. the author had also observed
that the conductivity of a vacuum tube without electrodes increased as the pressure
diminished, until a certain point was reached, and afterwards diminished
again, thus showing that the high resistance of a nearly perfect vacuum is in
no way due to the presence of the electrodes. one peculiarity of the discharges
was their local nature, the rings of light being much more sharply defined than
was to be expected. they were also found to be most easily produced when
the chain of molecules in the discharge were all of the same kind. for example,
a discharge could be easily sent through a tube many feet long, but the
introduction of a small pellet of mercury in the tube stopped the discharge,
although the conductivity of the mercury was much greater than that of the
vacuum. in some cases he had noticed that a very fine wire placed within a
tube, on the side remote from the primary circuit, would prevent a luminous
discharge in that tube.
fig.  shows an exhausted secondary coil of one loop containing bulbs;
the discharge passed along the inner side of the bulbs, the primary coils being
placed within the secondary.
fig. .fig. .
fig. .fig. .
[]in the electrical engineer of august , i find some remarks
of prof. j. j. thomson, which appeared originally in the
london electrician and which have a bearing upon some experiments
described by me in your issue of july .
i did not, as prof. j. j. thomson seems to believe, misunderstand
his position in regard to the cause of the phenomena
considered, but i thought that in his experiments, as well as in
my own, electrostatic effects were of great importance. it did
not appear, from the meagre description of his experiments, that
all possible precautions had been taken to exclude these effects.
i did not doubt that luminosity could be excited in a closed tube
when electrostatic action is completely excluded. in fact, at the
outset, i myself looked for a purely electrodynamic effect and
believed that i had obtained it. but many experiments performed
at that time proved to me that the electrostatic effects
were generally of far greater importance, and admitted of a more
satisfactory explanation of most of the phenomena observed.
in using the term electrostatic i had reference rather to the
nature of the action than to a stationary condition, which is the
usual acceptance of the term. to express myself more clearly,
i will suppose that near a closed exhausted tube be placed a small
sphere charged to a very high potential. the sphere would act
inductively upon the tube, and by distributing electricity over
[pg ]the same would undoubtedly produce luminosity (if the potential
be sufficiently high), until a permanent condition would be
reached. assuming the tube to be perfectly well insulated,
there would be only one instantaneous flash during the act of
distribution. this would be due to the electrostatic action
simply.
but now, suppose the charged sphere to be moved at short intervals
with great speed along the exhausted tube. the tube
would now be permanently excited, as the moving sphere would
cause a constant redistribution of electricity and collisions of the
molecules of the rarefied gas. we would still have to deal with
an electrostatic effect, and in addition an electrodynamic effect
would be observed. but if it were found that, for instance, the
effect produced depended more on the specific inductive capacity
than on the magnetic permeability of the medium—which
would certainly be the case for speeds incomparably lower than
that of light—then i believe i would be justified in saying that
the effect produced was more of an electrostatic nature. i do
not mean to say, however, that any similar condition prevails in
the case of the discharge of a leyden jar through the primary,
but i think that such an action would be desirable.
it is in the spirit of the above example that i used the terms
"more of an electrostatic nature," and have investigated the influence
of bodies of high specific inductive capacity, and observed,
for instance, the importance of the quality of glass of which the
tube is made. i also endeavored to ascertain the influence of a
medium of high permeability by using oxygen. it appeared
from rough estimation that an oxygen tube when excited under
similar conditions—that is, as far as could be determined—gives
more light; but this, of course, may be due to many causes.
without doubting in the least that, with the care and precautions
taken by prof. j. j. thomson, the luminosity excited was
due solely to electrodynamic action, i would say that in many
experiments i have observed curious instances of the ineffectiveness
of the screening, and i have also found that the electrification
through the air is often of very great importance, and may,
in some cases, determine the excitation of the tube.
in his original communication to the electrician, prof. j. j.
thomson refers to the fact that the luminosity in a tube near a
wire through which a leyden jar was discharged was noted by
hittorf. i think that the feeble luminous effect referred to has[pg ]
been noted by many experimenters, but in my experiments the
effects were much more powerful than those usually noted.
the following is the communication[] referred to:—
"mr. tesla seems to ascribe the effects he observed to electrostatic action,
and i have no doubt, from the description he gives of his method of conducting
his experiments, that in them electrostatic action plays a very important
part. he seems, however, to have misunderstood my position with respect to
the cause of these discharges, which is not, as he implies, that luminosity in
tubes without electrodes cannot be produced by electrostatic action, but that it
can also be produced when this action is excluded. as a matter of fact, it is
very much easier to get the luminosity when these electrostatic effects are
operative than when they are not. as an illustration of this i may mention
that the first experiment i tried with the discharge of a leyden jar produced
luminosity in the tube, but it was not until after six weeks' continuous experimenting
that i was able to get a discharge in the exhausted tube which i was
satisfied was due to what is ordinarily called electrodynamic action. it is advisable
to have a clear idea of what we mean by electrostatic action. if,
previous to the discharge of the jar, the primary coil is raised to a high potential,
it will induce over the glass of the tube a distribution of electricity.
when the potential of the primary suddenly falls, this electrification will redistribute
itself, and may pass through the rarefied gas and produce luminosity
in doing so. whilst the discharge of the jar is going on, it is difficult, and,
from a theoretical point of view, undesirable, to separate the effect into parts,
one of which is called electrostatic, the other electromagnetic; what we can
prove is that in this case the discharge is not such as would be produced by
electromotive forces derived from a potential function. in my experiments the
primary coil was connected to earth, and, as a further precaution, the primary
was separated from the discharge tube by a screen of blotting paper, moistened
with dilute sulphuric acid, and connected to earth. wet blotting paper is a
sufficiently good conductor to screen off a stationary electrostatic effect, though
it is not a good enough one to stop waves of alternating electromotive intensity.
when showing the experiments to the physical society i could not, of course,
keep the tubes covered up, but, unless my memory deceives me, i stated the
precautions which had been taken against the electrostatic effect. to correct
misapprehension i may state that i did not read a formal paper to the society,
my object being to exhibit a few of the most typical experiments. the account
of the experiments in the electrician was from a reporter's note, and was
not written, or even read, by me. i have now almost finished writing out, and
hope very shortly to publish, an account of these and a large number of allied
experiments, including some analogous to those mentioned by mr. tesla on the
effect of conductors placed near the discharge tube, which i find, in some
cases, to produce a diminution, in others an increase, in the brightness of the
discharge, as well as some on the effect of the presence of substances of large
specific inductive capacity. these seem to me to admit of a satisfactory explanation,
for which, however, i must refer to my paper."
[pg ]
[pg ]
[pg ]
method of obtaining driect from alternating currents.
this method consists in obtaining direct from alternating
currents, or in directing the waves of an alternating current so as
to produce direct or substantially direct currents by developing
or producing in the branches of a circuit including a source of alternating
currents, either permanently or periodically, and by
electric, electro-magnetic, or magnetic agencies, manifestations of
energy, or what may be termed active resistances of opposite
electrical character, whereby the currents or current waves of opposite
sign will be diverted through different circuits, those of
one sign passing over one branch and those of opposite sign over
the other.
we may consider herein only the case of a circuit divided into
two paths, inasmuch as any further subdivision involves merely
an extension of the general principle. selecting, then, any circuit
through which is flowing an alternating current, mr. tesla
divides such circuit at any desired point into two branches or
paths. in one of these paths he inserts some device to create
an electromotive force counter to the waves or impulses of current
of one sign and a similar device in the other branch which
opposes the waves of opposite sign. assume, for example, that
these devices are batteries, primary or secondary, or continuous
current dynamo machines. the waves or impulses of opposite
direction composing the main current have a natural tendency to
divide between the two branches; but by reason of the opposite
electrical character or effect of the two branches, one will offer
an easy passage to a current of a certain direction, while the other
will offer a relatively high resistance to the passage of the same
current. the result of this disposition is, that the waves of current
of one sign will, partly or wholly, pass over one of the paths
or branches, while those of the opposite sign pass over the other.
there may thus be obtained from an alternating current two or
more direct currents without the employment of any commutator[pg ]
such as it has been heretofore regarded as necessary to use. the
current in either branch may be used in the same way and for
the same purposes as any other direct current—that is, it may be
made to charge secondary batteries, energize electro-magnets, or
for any other analogous purpose.
fig.  represents a plan of directing the alternating currents
by means of devices purely electrical in character. figs. ,
, , , , and  are diagrams illustrative of other
ways of carrying out the invention.
fig. .
in fig. , a designates a generator of alternating currents,
and b b the main or line circuit therefrom. at any given point
in this circuit at or near which it is desired to obtain direct currents,
the circuit b is divided into two paths or branches c d. in
each of these branches is placed an electrical generator, which
for the present we will assume produces direct or continuous currents.
the direction of the current thus produced is opposite in
one branch to that of the current in the other branch, or, considering
the two branches as forming a closed circuit, the generators
e f are connected up in series therein, one generator in
each part or half of the circuit. the electromotive force of the
current sources e and f may be equal to or higher or lower than
the electromotive forces in the branches c d, or between the points
x and y of the circuit b b. if equal, it is evident that current
waves of one sign will be opposed in one branch and assisted in
the other to such an extent that all the waves of one sign will
pass over one branch and those of opposite sign over the other.
if, on the other hand, the electromotive force of the sources e f
be lower than that between x and y, the currents in both
branches will be alternating, but the waves of one sign will preponderate.
one of the generators or sources of current e or f
may be dispensed with; but it is preferable to employ both, if[pg ]
they offer an appreciable resistance, as the two branches will be
thereby better balanced. the translating or other devices to be
acted upon by the current are designated by the letters g, and
they are inserted in the branches c d in any desired manner; but
in order to better preserve an even balance between the branches
due regard should, of course, be had to the number and character
of the devices.
fig. .
figs. , , , and  illustrate what may termed "electro-magnetic"
devices for accomplishing a similar result—that is
to say, instead of producing directly by a generator an electromotive
force in each branch of the circuit, mr. tesla establishes
a field or fields of force and leads the branches through the same
in such manner that an active opposition of opposite effect or direction
will be developed therein by the passage, or tendency to
pass, of the alternations of current. in fig. , for example, a is
the generator of alternating currents, b b the line circuit, and c d
the branches over which the alternating currents are directed. in
each branch is included the secondary of a transformer or induction
coil, which, since they correspond in their functions to the
batteries of the previous figure, are designated by the letters e f.
the primaries h h' of the induction coils or transformers are
connected either in parallel or series with a source of direct or
continuous currents i, and the number of convolutions is so calculated
for the strength of the current from i that the cores j j' will be saturated. the connections are such that the conditions
in the two transformers are of opposite character—that is to say,
the arrangement is such that a current wave or impulse corresponding
in direction with that of the direct current in one primary,
as h, is of opposite direction to that in the other primary h'.
it thus results that while one secondary offers a resistance or op[pg ]position
to the passage through it of a wave of one sign, the other
secondary similarly opposes a wave of opposite sign. in consequence,
the waves of one sign will, to a greater or less extent, pass
by way of one branch, while those of opposite sign in like manner
pass over the other branch.
in lieu of saturating the primaries by a source of continuous
current, we may include the primaries in the branches c d, respectively,
and periodically short-circuit by any suitable mechanical
devices—such as an ordinary revolving commutator—their
secondaries. it will be understood, of course, that the rotation
and action of the commutator must be in synchronism or in
proper accord with the periods of the alternations in order to
secure the desired results. such a disposition is represented
diagrammatically in fig. . corresponding to the previous
figures, a is the generator of alternating currents, b b the line,
and c d the two branches for the direct currents. in branch c
are included two primary coils e e', and in branch d are two
similar primaries f f' the corresponding secondaries for these
coils and which are on the same subdivided cores j or j', are in
circuits the terminals of which connect to opposite segments
k k', and l l', respectively, of a commutator. brushes b b bear
upon the commutator and alternately short-circuit the plates k
and k', and l and l', through a connection c. it is obvious that
either the magnets and commutator, or the brushes, may revolve.
fig. .
the operation will be understood from a consideration of the
effects of closing or short-circuiting the secondaries. for example,
if at the instant when a given wave of current passes, one[pg ]
set of secondaries be short-circuited, nearly all the current flows
through the corresponding primaries; but the secondaries of the
other branch being open-circuited, the self-induction in the
primaries is highest, and hence little or no current will pass
through that branch. if, as the current alternates, the secondaries
of the two branches are alternately short-circuited, the
result will be that the currents of one sign pass over one branch
and those of the opposite sign over the other. the disadvantages
of this arrangement, which would seem to result from the
employment of sliding contacts, are in reality very slight, inasmuch
as the electromotive force of the secondaries may be made
exceedingly low, so that sparking at the brushes is avoided.
fig. .
fig.  is a diagram, partly in section, of another plan of
carrying out the invention. the circuit b in this case is divided,
as before, and each branch includes the coils of both the fields
and revolving armatures of two induction devices. the armatures
o p are preferably mounted on the same shaft, and are adjusted
relatively to one another in such manner that when the
self-induction in one branch, as c, is maximum, in the other branch
d it is minimum. the armatures are rotated in synchronism with
the alternations from the source a. the winding or position
of the armature coils is such that a current in a given direction
passed through both armatures would establish in one, poles similar
to those in the adjacent poles of the field, and in the other,
poles unlike the adjacent field poles, as indicated by n n s s in
the diagram. if the like poles are presented, as shown in circuit
d, the condition is that of a closed secondary upon a primary,
or the position of least inductive resistance; hence a given alternation
of current will pass mainly through d. a half revolution
of the armatures produces an opposite effect and the succeeding[pg ]
current impulse passes through c. using this figure as an illustration,
it is evident that the fields n m may be permanent magnets
or independently excited and the armatures o p driven, as in
the present case, so as to produce alternate currents, which will
set up alternately impulses of opposite direction in the two
branches d c, which in such case would include the armature circuits
and translating devices only.
in fig.  a plan alternative with that shown in fig.  is
illustrated. in the previous case illustrated, each branch c and d
contained one or more primary coils, the secondaries of which
were periodically short circuited in synchronism with the alternations
of current from the main source a, and for this purpose
a commutator was employed. the latter may, however, be dispensed
with and an armature with a closed coil substituted.
fig. .
referring to fig.  in one of the branches, as c, are two coils
m', wound on laminated cores, and in the other branches d are
similar coils n'. a subdivided or laminated armature o', carrying
a closed coil r', is rotatably supported between the coils m' n',
as shown. in the position shown—that is, with the coil r' parallel
with the convolutions of the primaries n' m'—practically the
whole current will pass through branch d, because the self-induction
in coils m' m' is maximum. if, therefore, the armature
and coil be rotated at a proper speed relatively to the periods or
alternations of the source a, the same results are obtained as in
the case of fig. .
fig.  is an instance of what may be called, in distinction to
the others, a "magnetic" means of securing the result. v and
w are two strong permanent magnets provided with armatures
v' w', respectively. the armatures are made of thin laminæ of
soft iron or steel, and the amount of magnetic metal which they[pg ]
contain is so calculated that they will be fully or nearly saturated
by the magnets. around the armatures are coils e f, contained,
respectively, in the circuits c and d. the connections and electrical
conditions in this case are similar to those in fig. ,
except that the current source of i, fig. , is dispensed with
and the saturation of the core of coils e f obtained from the permanent
magnets.
fig. .
the previous illustrations have all shown the two branches or
paths containing the translating or induction devices as in derivation
one to the other; but this is not always necessary. for
example, in fig. , a is an alternating-current generator; b b,
the line wires or circuit. at any given point in the circuit let
us form two paths, as d d', and at another point two paths, as c
c'. either pair or group of paths is similar to the previous dispositions
with the electrical source or induction device in one
branch only, while the two groups taken together form the
obvious equivalent of the cases in which an induction device or
generator is included in both branches. in one of the paths, as
d, are included the devices to be operated by the current. in
the other branch, as d', is an induction device that opposes the
current impulses of one direction and directs them through the
branch d. so, also, in branch c are translating devices g, and in
branch c' an induction device or its equivalent that diverts
through c impulses of opposite direction to those diverted by the
device in branch d'. the diagram shows a special form of induction
device for this purpose. j j' are the cores, formed with
pole-pieces, upon which are wound the coils m n. between these
pole-pieces are mounted at right angles to one another the magnetic
armatures o p, preferably mounted on the same shaft and[pg ]
designed to be rotated in synchronism with the alternations of
current. when one of the armatures is in line with the poles or
in the position occupied by armature p, the magnetic circuit of
the induction device is practically closed; hence there will be
the greatest opposition to the passage of a current through coils
n n. the alternation will therefore pass by way of branch d.
at the same time, the magnetic circuit of the other induction
device being broken by the position of the armature o, there will
be less opposition to the current in coils m, which will shunt the
current from branch c. a reversal of the current being attended
by a shifting of the armatures, the opposite effect is produced.
fig. .
other modifications of these methods are possible, but need
not be pointed out. in all these plans, it will be observed, there
is developed in one or all of these branches of a circuit from a
source of alternating currents, an active (as distinguished from a
dead) resistance or opposition to the currents of one sign, for the
purpose of diverting the currents of that sign through the other
or another path, but permitting the currents of opposite sign to
pass without substantial opposition.
whether the division of the currents or waves of current of
opposite sign be effected with absolute precision or not is immaterial,
since it will be sufficient if the waves are only partially
diverted or directed, for in such case the preponderating influence
in each branch of the circuit of the waves of one sign secures
the same practical results in many if not all respects as though
the current were direct and continuous.[pg ]
an alternating and a direct current have been combined so that
the waves of one direction or sign were partially or wholly overcome
by the direct current; but by this plan only one set of alternations
are utilized, whereas by the system just described the
entire current is rendered available. by obvious applications of
this discovery mr. tesla is enabled to produce a self-exciting alternating
dynamo, or to operate direct current meters on alternating-current
circuits or to run various devices—such as arc lamps—by
direct currents in the same circuit with incandescent lamps
or other devices operated by alternating currents.
it will be observed that if an intermittent counter or opposing
force be developed in the branches of the circuit and of higher
electromotive force than that of the generator, an alternating
current will result in each branch, with the waves of one sign
preponderating, while a constantly or uniformly acting opposition
in the branches of higher electromotive force than the
generator would produce a pulsating current, which conditions
would be, under some circumstances, the equivalent of those described.
[pg ]
condensers with plates in oil.
in experimenting with currents of high frequency and high
potential, mr. tesla has found that insulating materials such as
glass, mica, and in general those bodies which possess the highest
specific inductive capacity, are inferior as insulators in such devices
when currents of the kind described are employed compared
with those possessing high insulating power, together with a smaller
specific inductive capacity; and he has also found that it is very desirable
to exclude all gaseous matter from the apparatus, or any access
of the same to the electrified surfaces, in order to prevent heating
by molecular bombardment and the loss or injury consequent
thereon. he has therefore devised a method to accomplish these
results and produce highly efficient and reliable condensers, by
using oil as the dielectric[]. the plan admits of a particular
con[pg ]struction of condenser, in which the distance between the plates
is adjustable, and of which he takes advantage.
fig. .
fig. .
in the accompanying illustrations, fig.  is a section of a
condenser constructed in accordance with this principle and having
stationary plates; and fig.  is a similar view of a condenser
with adjustable plates.
any suitable box or receptacle a may be used to contain the
plates or armatures. these latter are designated by b and c and
are connected, respectively, to terminals d and e, which pass out
through the sides of the case. the plates ordinarily are separated
by strips of porous insulating material f, which are used merely
for the purpose of maintaining them in position. the space
within the can is filled with oil g. such a condenser will prove
highly efficient and will not become heated or permanently injured.
in many cases it is desirable to vary or adjust the capacity of
a condenser, and this is provided for by securing the plates to adjustable
supports—as, for example, to rods h—passing through
stuffing boxes k in the sides of case a and furnished with nuts l,
the ends of the rods being threaded for engagement with the
nuts.
it is well known that oils possess insulating properties, and it
has been a common practice to interpose a body of oil between
two conductors for purposes of insulation; but mr. tesla believes
he has discovered peculiar properties in oils which render
them very valuable in this particular form of device.
[pg ]
electrolytic registering meter.
an ingenious form of electrolytic meter attributable to mr.
tesla is one in which a conductor is immersed in a solution, so
arranged that metal may be deposited from the solution or taken
away in such a manner that the electrical resistance of the conductor
is varied in a definite proportion to the strength of the
current the energy of which is to be computed, whereby this
variation in resistance serves as a measure of the energy and also
may actuate registering mechanism, whenever the resistance
rises above or falls below certain limits.
in carrying out this idea mr. tesla employs an electrolytic
cell, through which extend two conductors parallel and
in close proximity to each other. these conductors he connects
in series through a resistance, but in such manner that there is
an equal difference of potential between them throughout their
entire extent. the free ends or terminals of the conductors are
connected either in series in the circuit supplying the current to
the lamps or other devices, or in parallel to a resistance in the
circuit and in series with the current consuming devices. under
such circumstances a current passing through the conductors
establishes a difference of potential between them which is proportional
to the strength of the current, in consequence of which
there is a leakage of current from one conductor to the other
across the solution. the strength of this leakage current is proportional
to the difference of potential, and, therefore, in proportion
to the strength of the current passing through the conductors.
moreover, as there is a constant difference of potential between
the two conductors throughout the entire extent that is exposed
to the solution, the current density through such solution is the
same at all corresponding points, and hence the deposit is uniform
along the whole of one of the conductors, while the metal
is taken away uniformly from the other. the resistance of one
conductor is by this means diminished, while that of the other is[pg ]
increased, both in proportion to the strength of the current passing
through the conductors. from such variation in the resistance
of either or both of the conductors forming the positive
and negative electrodes of the cell, the current energy expended
may be readily computed. figs.  and  illustrate two
forms of such a meter.
fig. .
in fig.  g designates a direct-current generator. l l are
the conductors of the circuit extending therefrom. a is a tube
of glass, the ends of which are sealed, as by means of insulating
plugs or caps b b. c c' are two conductors extending
through the tube a, their ends passing out through the plugs b to
terminals thereon. these conductors may be corrugated or
formed in other proper ways to offer the desired electrical resistance.
r is a resistance connected in series with the two conductors
c c', which by their free terminals are connected up in
circuit with one of the conductors l.
the method of using this device and computing by means
thereof the energy of the current will be readily understood.
first, the resistances of the two conductors c c', respectively, are
accurately measured and noted. then a known current is passed
through the instrument for a given time, and by a second measurement
the increase and diminution of the resistances of the two
conductors are respectively taken. from these data the constant is[pg ]
obtained—that is to say, for example, the increase of resistance of
one conductor or the diminution of the resistance of the other per
lamp hour. these two measurements evidently serve as a check,
since the gain of one conductor should equal the loss of the other.
a further check is afforded by measuring both wires in series with
the resistance, in which case the resistance of the whole should
remain constant.
fig. .
in fig.  the conductors c c' are connected in parallel, the
current device at x passing in one branch first through a resistance
r' and then through conductor c, while on the other branch
it passes first through conductor c', and then through resistance
r''. the resistances r' r'' are equal, as also are the resistances of
the conductors c c'. it is, moreover, preferable that the respective
resistances of the conductors c c' should be a known and convenient
fraction of the coils or resistances r' r''. it will be observed
that in the arrangement shown in fig.  there is a constant
potential difference between the two conductors c c' throughout
their entire length.
it will be seen that in both cases illustrated, the proportionality
of the increase or decrease of resistance to the current strength
will always be preserved, for what one conductor gains the other
loses, and the resistances of the conductors c c' being small as[pg ]
compared with the resistances in series with them. it will be
understood that after each measurement or registration of a given
variation of resistance in one or both conductors, the direction of
the current should be changed or the instrument reversed, so that
the deposit will be taken from the conductor which has gained
and added to that which has lost. this principle is capable of
many modifications. for instance, since there is a section of the
circuit—to wit, the conductor c or c'—that varies in resistance in
proportion to the current strength, such variation may be utilized,
as is done in many analogous cases, to effect the operation of
various automatic devices, such as registers. it is better, however,
for the sake of simplicity to compute the energy by measurements
of resistance.
the chief advantages of this arrangement are, first, that it is
possible to read off directly the amount of the energy expended
by means of a properly constructed ohm-meter and without resorting
to weighing the deposit; secondly it is not necessary to
employ shunts, for the whole of the current to be measured may
be passed through the instrument; third, the accuracy of the instrument
and correctness of the indications are but slightly affected
by changes in temperature. it is also said that such meters
have the merit of superior economy and compactness, as well as
of cheapness in construction. electrolytic meters seem to need
every auxiliary advantage to make them permanently popular and
successful, no matter how much ingenuity may be shown in their
design.
[pg ]
thermo-magnetic motors and pyro-magnetic generators.
no electrical inventor of the present day dealing with the
problems of light and power considers that he has done himself
or his opportunities justice until he has attacked the subject of
thermo-magnetism. as far back as the beginning of the seventeenth
century it was shown by dr. william gilbert, the father
of modern electricity, that a loadstone or iron bar when heated
to redness loses its magnetism; and since that time the influence
of heat on the magnetic metals has been investigated frequently,
though not with any material or practical result.
for a man of mr. tesla's inventive ability, the problems in
this field have naturally had no small fascination, and though he
has but glanced at them, it is to be hoped he may find time to
pursue the study deeper and further. for such as he, the investigation
must undoubtedly bear fruit. meanwhile he has
worked out one or two operative devices worthy of note.[] he
obtains mechanical power by a reciprocating action resulting
from the joint operations of heat, magnetism, and a spring or
weight or other force—that is to say he subjects a body magnetized
by induction or otherwise to the action of heat until the
magnetism is sufficiently neutralized to allow a weight or spring
to give motion to the body and lessen the action of the heat, so
that the magnetism may be sufficiently restored to move the
[pg ]body in the opposite direction, and again subject the same to the
demagnetizing power of the heat.
use is made of either an electro-magnet or a permanent magnet,
and the heat is directed against a body that is magnetized
by induction, rather than directly against a permanent magnet,
thereby avoiding the loss of magnetism that might result in the
permanent magnet by the action of heat. mr. tesla also provides
for lessening the volume of the heat or for intercepting the same
during that portion of the reciprocation in which the cooling
action takes place.
in the diagrams are shown some of the numerous arrangements
that may be made use of in carrying out this idea. in all
of these figures the magnet-poles are marked n s, the armature
a, the bunsen burner or other source of heat h, the axis of motion
m, and the spring or the equivalent thereof—namely, a
weight—is marked w.
fig. .fig. .fig. .
in fig.  the permanent magnet n is connected with a frame,
f, supporting the axis m, from which the arm p hangs, and at the
lower end of which the armature a is supported. the stops 
and  limit the extent of motion, and the spring w tends to draw
the armature a away from the magnet n. it will now be understood
that the magnetism of n is sufficient to overcome the
spring w and draw the armature a toward the magnet n. the
heat acting upon the armature a neutralizes its induced magnetism
sufficiently for the spring w to draw the armature a away
from the magnet n and also from the heat at h. the armature
now cools, and the attraction of the magnet n overcomes the
spring w and draws the armature a back again above the burner[pg ]
h, so that the same is again heated and the operations are repeated.
the reciprocating movements thus obtained are employed
as a source of mechanical power in any desired manner.
usually a connecting-rod to a crank upon a fly-wheel shaft would
be made use of, as indicated in fig. .
fig. .fig. .fig. .
fig.  represents the same parts as before described; but an
electro-magnet is illustrated in place of a permanent magnet.
the operations, however, are the same.
in fig.  are shown the same parts as in figs.  and ,
but they are differently arranged. the armature a, instead of
swinging, is stationary and held by arm p', and the core n s of
the electro-magnet is made to swing within the helix q, the
core being suspended by the arm p from the pivot m. a shield,
r, is connected with the magnet-core and swings with it, so
that after the heat has demagnetized the armature a to such an
extent that the spring w draws the core n s away from the armature
a, the shield r comes between the flame h and armature a,
thereby intercepting the action of the heat and allowing the armature
to cool, so that the magnetism, again preponderating,
causes the movement of the core n s toward the armature a and
the removal of the shield r from above the flame, so that the heat
again acts to lessen or neutralize the magnetism. a rotary or
other movement may be obtained from this reciprocation.
fig.  corresponds in every respect with fig. , except
that a permanent horseshoe-magnet, n s is represented as taking
the place of the electro-magnet in fig. .
in fig.  is shown a helix, q, with an armature adapted to
swing toward or from the helix. in this case there may be a soft[pg ]-iron
core in the helix, or the armature may assume the form of a
solenoid core, there being no permanent core within the helix.
fig. .fig. .fig. .
fig.  is an end view, and fig.  a plan view, illustrating
the method as applied to a swinging armature, a, and a stationary
permanent magnet, n s. in this instance mr. tesla applies the
heat to an auxiliary armature or keeper, t, which is adjacent to
and preferably in direct contact with the magnet. this armature
t, in the form of a plate of sheet-iron, extends across from
one pole to the other and is of sufficient section to practically
form a keeper for the magnet, so that when the armature t is
cool nearly all the lines of force pass over the same and very little
free magnetism is exhibited. then the armature a, which swings
freely on the pivots m in front of the poles n s, is very little attracted
and the spring w pulls the same way from the poles into
the position indicated in the diagram. the heat is directed upon
the iron plate t at some distance from the magnet, so as to allow
the magnet to keep comparatively cool. this heat is applied beneath
the plate by means of the burners h, and there is a connection
from the armature a or its pivot to the gas-cock , or
other device for regulating the heat. the heat acting upon the
middle portion of the plate t, the magnetic conductivity of the
heated portion is diminished or destroyed, and a great number of
the lines of force are deflected over the armature a, which is now
powerfully attracted and drawn into line, or nearly so, with the
poles n s. in so doing the cock  is nearly closed and the plate
t cools, the lines of force are again deflected over the same, the
attraction exerted upon the armature a is diminished, and the
spring w pulls the same away from the magnet into the position
shown by full lines, and the operations are repeated. the ar[pg ]rangement
shown in fig.  has the advantages that the magnet
and armature are kept cool and the strength of the permanent
magnet is better preserved, as the magnetic circuit is
constantly closed.
in the plan view, fig. , is shown a permanent magnet and
keeper plate, t, similar to those in figs.  and , with the
burners h for the gas beneath the same; but the armature is
pivoted at one end to one pole of the magnet and the other end
swings toward and from the other pole of the magnet. the spring
w acts against a lever arm that projects from the armature, and
the supply of heat has to be partly cut off by a connection to the
swinging armature, so as to lessen the heat acting upon the keeper
plate when the armature a has been attracted.
fig. .fig. .
fig.  is similar to fig. , except that the keeper t is not
made use of and the armature itself swings into and out of the
range of the intense action of the heat from the burner h. fig.
 is a diagram similar to fig. , except that in place of using a
spring and stops, the armature is shown as connected by a link,
to the crank of a fly-wheel, so that the fly-wheel will be revolved
as rapidly as the armature can be heated and cooled to the
necessary extent. a spring may be used in addition, as in fig.
. in fig.  the armatures a a are connected by a link, so
that one will be heating while the other is cooling, and the attraction
exerted to move the cooled armature is availed of to draw
away the heated armature instead of using a spring.[pg ]
mr. tesla has also devoted his attention to the development of
a pyromagnetic generator of electricity[] based upon the following
laws: first, that electricity or electrical energy is developed in
any conducting body by subjecting such body to a varying magnetic
influence; and second, that the magnetic properties of iron
or other magnetic substance may be partially or entirely destroyed
or caused to disappear by raising it to a certain temperature, but
restored and caused to reappear by again lowering its temperature
to a certain degree. these laws may be applied in the production
of electrical currents in many ways, the principle of
which is in all cases the same, viz., to subject a conductor to a
varying magnetic influence, producing such variations by the application
of heat, or, more strictly speaking, by the application or
action of a varying temperature upon the source of the magnetism.
this principle of operation may be illustrated by a simple
experiment: place end to end, and preferably in actual contact,
a permanently magnetized steel bar and a strip or bar of soft iron.
around the end of the iron bar or plate wind a coil of insulated wire.
then apply to the iron between the coil and the steel bar a flame
or other source of heat which will be capable of raising that portion
of the iron to an orange red, or a temperature of about °
centigrade. when this condition is reached, the iron somewhat
suddenly loses its magnetic properties, if it be very thin, and the
same effect is produced as though the iron had been moved away
from the magnet or the heated section had been removed. this
change of position, however, is accompanied by a shifting of the
magnetic lines, or, in other words, by a variation in the magnetic
influence to which the coil is exposed, and a current in the coil
is the result. then remove the flame or in any other way reduce
the temperature of the iron. the lowering of its temperature is
accompanied by a return of its magnetic properties, and another
change of magnetic conditions occurs, accompanied by a current
in an opposite direction in the coil. the same operation may be
[pg ]repeated indefinitely, the effect upon the coil being similar to
that which would follow from moving the magnetized bar to and
from the end of the iron bar or plate.
the device illustrated below is a means of obtaining this
result, the features of novelty in the invention being, first, the
employment of an artificial cooling device, and, second, inclosing
the source of heat and that portion of the magnetic circuit exposed
to the heat and artificially cooling the heated part.
these improvements are applicable generally to the generators
constructed on the plan above described—that is to say, we may
use an artificial cooling device in conjunction with a variable or
varied or uniform source of heat.
fig. .fig. .
fig.  is a central vertical longitudinal section of the complete
apparatus and fig.  is a cross-section of the magnetic
armature-core of the generator.
let a represent a magnetized core or permanent magnet the
poles of which are bridged by an armature-core composed of a
casing or shell b inclosing a number of hollow iron tubes c.
around this core are wound the conductors e e', to form the
coils in which the currents are developed. in the circuits of
these coils are current-consuming devices, as f f'.
d is a furnace or closed fire-box, through which the central
portion of the core b extends. above the fire is a boiler k, containing
water. the flue l from the fire-box may extend up
through the boiler.
g is a water-supply pipe, and h is the steam-exhaust pipe,
which communicates with all the tubes c in the armature b, so
that steam escaping from the boiler will pass through the tubes.[pg ]
in the steam-exhaust pipe h is a valve v, to which is connected
the lever i, by the movement of which the valve is opened
or closed. in such a case as this the heat of the fire may be
utilized for other purposes after as much of it as may be needed
has been applied to heating the core b. there are special advantages
in the employment of a cooling device, in that the
metal of the core b is not so quickly oxidized. moreover, the
difference between the temperature of the applied heat and of
the steam, air, or whatever gas or fluid be applied as the cooling
medium, may be increased or decreased at will, whereby the
rapidity of the magnetic changes or fluctuations may be regulated.
[pg ]
anti-sparking dynamo brush and commutator.
in direct current dynamos of great electromotive force—such,
for instance, as those used for arc lighting—when one commutator
bar or plate comes out of contact with the collecting-brush a
spark is apt to appear on the commutator. this spark may be
due to the break of the complete circuit, or to a shunt of low
resistance formed by the brush between two or more commutator-bars.
in the first case the spark is more apparent, as there is
at the moment when the circuit is broken a discharge of the
magnets through the field helices, producing a great spark or
flash which causes an unsteady current, rapid wear of the commutator
bars and brushes, and waste of power. the sparking
may be reduced by various devices, such as providing a path for
the current at the moment when the commutator segment or bar
leaves the brush, by short-circuiting the field-helices, by increasing
the number of the commutator-bars, or by other similar
means; but all these devices are expensive or not fully available,
and seldom attain the object desired.
to prevent this sparking in a simple manner, mr. tesla some
years ago employed with the commutator-bars and intervening
insulating material, mica, asbestos paper or other insulating and
incombustible material, arranged to bear on the surface of the
commutator, near to and behind the brush.
in the drawings, fig.  is a section of a commutator with
an asbestos insulating device; and fig.  is a similar view, representing
two plates of mica upon the back of the brush.
in , c represents the commutator and intervening
insulating material; b b, the brushes. d d are sheets of asbestos
paper or other suitable non-conducting material. f f are springs,
the pressure of which may be adjusted by means of the screws
g g.
in fig.  a simple arrangement is shown with two plates of
mica or other material. it will be seen that whenever one com[pg ]mutator
segment passes out of contact with the brush, the formation
of the arc will be prevented by the intervening insulating
material coming in contact with the insulating material on the
brush.
fig. .fig. .
asbestos paper or cloth impregnated with zinc-oxide, magnesia,
zirconia, or other suitable material, may be used, as the
paper and cloth are soft, and serve at the same time to wipe and
polish the commutator; but mica or any other suitable material
can be employed, provided the material be an insulator or a bad
conductor of electricity.
a few years later mr. tesla turned his attention again to the
same subject, as, perhaps, was very natural in view of the fact
that the commutator had always been prominent in his thoughts,
and that so much of his work was even aimed at dispensing with
it entirely as an objectionable and unnecessary part of dynamos
and motors. in these later efforts to remedy commutator troubles,
mr. tesla constructs a commutator and the collectors therefor in
two parts mutually adapted to one another, and, so far as the essential
features are concerned, alike in mechanical structure. selecting
as an illustration a commutator of two segments adapted
for use with an armature the coils or coil of which have but two
free ends, connected respectively to the segments, the bearing-surface
is the face of a disc, and is formed of two metallic quadrant
segments and two insulating segments of the same dimensions,
and the face of the disc is smoothed off, so that the metal
and insulating segments are flush. the part which takes the
place of the usual brushes, or the "collector," is a disc of the
same character as the commutator and has a surface similarly
formed with two insulating and two metallic segments. these
two parts are mounted with their faces in contact and in such
manner that the rotation of the armature causes the commutator
to turn upon the collector, whereby the currents induced in the[pg ]
coils are taken off by the collector segments and thence conveyed
off by suitable conductors leading from the collector segments.
this is the general plan of the construction adopted. aside from
certain adjuncts, the nature and functions of which are set forth
later, this means of commutation will be seen to possess many important
advantages. in the first place the short-circuiting and the
breaking of the armature coil connected to the commutator-segments
occur at the same instant, and from the nature of the construction
this will be done with the greatest precision; secondly, the
duration of both the break and of the short circuit will be reduced
to a minimum. the first results in a reduction which amounts
practically to a suppression of the spark, since the break and
the short circuit produce opposite effects in the armature-coil.
the second has the effect of diminishing the destructive effect
of a spark, since this would be in a measure proportional to the
duration of the spark; while lessening the duration of the short
circuit obviously increases the efficiency of the machine.
fig. .fig. .
the mechanical advantages will be better understood by referring
to the accompanying diagrams, in which fig.  is a
central longitudinal section of the end of a shaft with the improved
commutator carried thereon. fig.  is a view of the
inner or bearing face of the collector. fig.  is an end view
from the armature side of a modified form of commutator. figs.[pg ]
 and  are views of details of fig. . fig.  is a longitudinal
central section of another modification, and fig.  is a
sectional view of the same. a is the end of the armature-shaft
of a dynamo-electric machine or motor. a' is a sleeve of insulating
material around the shaft, secured in place by a screw, a'.
fig. .fig. .   fig. .
the commutator proper is in the form of a disc which is made
up of four segments d d' g g', similar to those shown in fig. .
two of these segments, as d d', are of metal and are in electrical
connection with the ends of the coils on the armature. the
other two segments are of insulating material. the segments are
held in place by a band, b, of insulating material. the disc is
held in place by friction or by screws, g' g', fig. , which
secure the disc firmly to the sleeve a'.
the collector is made in the same form as the commutator. it
is composed of the two metallic segments e e' and the two insulating
segments f f', bound together by a band, c. the metallic
segments e e' are of the same or practically the same width or
extent as the insulating segments or spaces of the commutator.
the collector is secured to a sleeve, b', by screws g g, and the sleeve
is arranged to turn freely on the shaft a. the end of the sleeve
b' is closed by a plate, f, upon which presses a pivot-pointed
screw, h, adjustable in a spring, h, which acts to maintain the
collector in close contact with the commutator and to compensate
for the play of the shaft. the collector is so fixed that it cannot
turn with the shaft. for example, the diagram shows a slotted
plate, k, which is designed to be attached to a stationary support,
and an arm extending from the collector and carrying a clamping
screw, l, by which the collector may be adjusted and set to the
desired position.
mr. tesla prefers the form shown in figs.  and  to fit[pg ]
the insulating segments of both commutator and collector loosely
and to provide some means—as, for example, light springs, e e,
secured to the bands a' b', respectively, and bearing against the
segments—to exert a light pressure upon them and keep them in
close contact and to compensate for wear. the metal segments
of the commutator may be moved forward by loosening the
screw a'.
the line wires are fed from the metal segments of the collector,
being secured thereto in any convenient manner, the plan of connections
being shown as applied to a modified form of the commutator
in fig. . the commutator and the collector in thus
presenting two flat and smooth bearing surfaces prevent most effectually
by mechanical action the occurrence of sparks.
the insulating segments are made of some hard material capable
of being polished and formed with sharp edges. such materials
as glass, marble, or soapstone may be advantageously used.
the metal segments are preferably of copper or brass; but they
may have a facing or edge of durable material—such as platinum
or the like—where the sparks are liable to occur.
fig. .fig. .
in fig.  a somewhat modified form of the invention is
shown, a form designed to facilitate the construction and replacing
of the parts. in this modification the commutator and collector
are made in substantially the same manner as previously
described, except that the bands b c are omitted. the four segments
of each part, however, are secured to their respective sleeves
by screws g' g', and one edge of each segment is cut away, so that
small plates a b may be slipped into the spaces thus formed. of[pg ]
these plates a a are of metal, and are in contact with the metal segments
d d', respectively. the other two, b b, are of glass or marble,
and they are all better square, as shown in figs.  and ,
so that they may be turned to present new edges should any edge
become worn by use. light springs d bear upon these plates
and press those in the commutator toward those in the collector,
and insulating strips c c are secured to the periphery of the discs
to prevent the blocks from being thrown out by centrifugal action.
these plates are, of course, useful at those edges of the segments
only where sparks are liable to occur, and, as they are easily replaced,
they are of great advantage. it is considered best to coat
them with platinum or silver.
in figs.  and  is shown a construction where, instead of
solid segments, a fluid is employed. in this case the commutator
and collector are made of two insulating discs, s t, and in
lieu of the metal segments a space is cut out of each part, as at
r r', corresponding in shape and size to a metal segment. the
two parts are fitted smoothly and the collector t held by the
screw h and spring h against the commutator s. as in the other
cases, the commutator revolves while the collector remains stationary.
the ends of the coils are connected to binding-posts
s s, which are in electrical connection with metal plates t t within
the recesses in the two parts s t. these chambers or recesses
are filled with mercury, and in the collector part are tubes w w,
with screws w w, carrying springs x and pistons x', which compensate
for the expansion and contraction of the mercury under
varying temperatures, but which are sufficiently strong not to
yield to the pressure of the fluid due to centrifugal action, and
which serve as binding-posts.
in all the above cases the commutators are adapted for a single
coil, and the device is particularly suited to such purposes. the
number of segments may be increased, however, or more than
one commutator used with a single armature. although the
bearing-surfaces are shown as planes at right angles to the shaft
or axis, it is evident that in this particular the construction may
be very greatly modified.
[pg ]
auxiliary brush regulation of direct current dynamos.
an interesting method devised by mr. tesla for the regulation
of direct current dynamos, is that which has come to be
known as the "third brush" method. in machines of this type,
devised by him as far back as , he makes use of two main
brushes to which the ends of the field magnet coils are connected,
an auxiliary brush, and a branch or shunt connection from an intermediate
point of the field wire to the auxiliary brush.[]
the relative positions of the respective brushes are varied,
either automatically or by hand, so that the shunt becomes inoperative
when the auxiliary brush has a certain position upon
the commutator; but when the auxiliary brush is moved in its
relation to the main brushes, or the latter are moved in their
relation to the auxiliary brush, the electric condition is disturbed
and more or less of the current through the field-helices is
diverted through the shunt or a current is passed over the shunt
to the field-helices. by varying the relative position upon the
commutator of the respective brushes automatically in proportion
to the varying electrical conditions of the working-circuit,
the current developed can be regulated in proportion to the demands
in the working-circuit.
fig.  is a diagram illustrating the invention, showing one
core of the field-magnets with one helix wound in the same direction
throughout. figs.  and  are diagrams showing one
core of the field-magnets with a portion of the helices wound in
opposite directions. figs.  and  are diagrams illustrating
[pg ]the electric devices that may be employed for automatically
adjusting the brushes, and fig.  is a diagram illustrating the
positions of the brushes when the machine is being energized at
the start.
a and b are the positive and negative brushes of the main or
working-circuit, and c the auxiliary brush. the working-circuit
d extends from the brushes a and b, as usual, and contains electric
lamps or other devices, d', either in series or in multiple
arc.
m m' represent the field-helices, the ends of which are connected
to the main brushes a and b. the branch or shunt wire
c' extends from the auxiliary brush c to the circuit of the field-helices,
and is connected to the same at an intermediate point, x.
fig. .
h represents the commutator, with the plates of ordinary construction.
when the auxiliary brush c occupies such a position
upon the commutator that the electro-motive force between the
brushes a and c is to the electro-motive force between the brushes
c and b as the resistance of the circuit a m c' c a is to the resistance
of the circuit b m' c' c b, the potentials of the points x and y will
be equal, and no current will flow over the auxiliary brush; but
when the brush c occupies a different position the potentials of
the points x and y will be different, and a current will flow over
the auxiliary brush to and from the commutator, according to the
relative position of the brushes. if, for instance, the commutator-space
between the brushes a and c, when the latter is at the
neutral point, is diminished, a current will flow from the point y
over the shunt c to the brush b, thus strengthening the current
in the part m', and partly neutralizing the current in part m; but
if the space between the brushes a and c is increased, the cur[pg ]rent
will flow over the auxiliary brush in an opposite direction,
and the current in m will be strengthened, and in m', partly neutralized.
by combining with the brushes a, b, and c any usual automatic
regulating mechanism, the current developed can be regulated in
proportion to the demands in the working circuit. the parts m
and m' of the field wire may be wound in the same direction.
in this case they are arranged as shown in fig. ; or the part
m may be wound in the opposite direction, as shown in figs.
 and .
fig. .
it will be apparent that the respective cores of the field-magnets
are subjected to neutralizing or intensifying effects of the
current in the shunt through c', and the magnetism of the cores
will be partially neutralized, or the points of greatest magnetism
shifted, so that it will be more or less remote from or approaching
to the armature, and hence the aggregate energizing actions
of the field magnets on the armature will be correspondingly
varied.
in the form indicated in fig.  the regulation is effected by
shifting the point of greatest magnetism, and in figs.  and
 the same effect is produced by the action of the current in
the shunt passing through the neutralizing helix.
the relative positions of the respective brushes may be varied
by moving the auxiliary brush, or the brush c may remain stationary
and the core p be connected to the main-brush holder a,
so as to adjust the brushes a b in their relation to the brush c.
if, however, an adjustment is applied to all the brushes, as seen
in fig. , the solenoid should be connected to both a and c, so
as to move them toward or away from each other.
there are several known devices for giving motion in propor[pg ]tion
to an electric current. in figs.  and  the moving
cores are shown as convenient devices for obtaining the required
extent of motion with very slight changes in the current passing
through the helices. it is understood that the adjustment of
the main brushes causes variations in the strength of the current
independently of the relative position of those brushes to the
auxiliary brush. in all cases the adjustment should be such that
no current flows over the auxiliary brush when the dynamo is
running with its normal load.
in figs.  and  a a indicate the main-brush holder,
carrying the main brushes, and c the auxiliary-brush holder,
carrying the auxiliary brush. these brush-holders are movable
in arcs concentric with the centre of the commutator-shaft. an
iron piston, p, of the solenoid s, fig. , is attached to the auxiliary-brush
holder c. the adjustment is effected by means of a
spring and screw or tightener.
in fig.  instead of a solenoid, an iron tube inclosing a coil
is shown. the piston of the coil is attached to both brush-holders
a a and c. when the brushes are moved directly by
electrical devices, as shown in figs.  and , these are so
constructed that the force exerted for adjusting is practically
uniform through the whole length of motion.
fig. .
it is true that auxiliary brushes have been used in connection
with the helices of the field-wire; but in these instances the
helices receive the entire current through the auxiliary brush or
brushes, and these brushes could not be taken off without breaking
the circuit through the field. these brushes cause, moreover,
heavy sparking at the commutator. in the present
case the auxiliary brush causes very little or no sparking, and
can be taken off without breaking the circuit through the field[pg ]-helices.
the arrangement has, besides, the advantage of facilitating
the self-excitation of the machine in all cases where the resistance
of the field-wire is very great comparatively to the resistance
of the main circuit at the start—for instance, on arc-light
machines. in this case the auxiliary brush c is placed near to, or
better still in contact with, the brush b, as shown in fig. .
in this manner the part m' is completely cut out, and as the part
m has a considerably smaller resistance than the whole length of
the field-wire the machine excites itself, whereupon the auxiliary
brush is shifted automatically to its normal position.
fig. .fig. .
in a further method devised by mr. tesla, one or more auxiliary
brushes are employed, by means of which a portion or the
whole of the field coils is shunted. according to the relative position
upon the commutator of the respective brushes more or
less current is caused to pass through the helices of the field, and
the current developed by the machine can be varied at will by
varying the relative positions of the brushes.
fig. .
in fig. , a and b are the positive and negative brushes of
the main circuit, and c an auxiliary brush. the main circuit d
extends from the brushes a and b, as usual, and contains the
helices m of the field wire and the electric lamps or other working
devices. the auxiliary brush c is connected to the point x
of the main circuit by means of the wire c'. h is a commutator[pg ]
of ordinary construction. it will have been seen from what was
said already that when the electro-motive force between the brushes
a and c is to the electromotive force between the brushes c
and b as the resistance of the circuit a m c' c a is to the resistance
of the circuit b c b c c' d, the potentials of the points x and y
will be equal, and no current will pass over the auxiliary brush
c; but if that brush occupies a different position relatively to the
main brushes the electric condition is disturbed, and current
will flow either from y to x or from x to y, according to the relative
position of the brushes. in the first case the current through
the field-helices will be partly neutralized and the magnetism of
the field magnets will be diminished. in the second case the
current will be increased and the magnets gain strength. by
combining with the brushes at a b c any automatic regulating
mechanism, the current developed can be regulated automatically
in proportion to the demands of the working circuit.
in figs.  and  some of the automatic means are represented
that maybe used for moving the brushes. the core p,
fig. , of the solenoid-helix s is connected with the brush a to
move the same, and in fig.  the core p is shown as within the
helix s, and connected with brushes a and c, so as to move the
same toward or from each other, according to the strength of the
current in the helix, the helix being within an iron tube, s', that
becomes magnetized and increases the action of the solenoid.
in practice it is sufficient to move only the auxiliary brush, as
shown in fig. , as the regulation is very sensitive to the
slightest changes; but the relative position of the auxiliary brush
to the main brushes may be varied by moving the main brushes,
or both main and auxiliary brushes may be moved, as illustrated
in fig. . in the latter two cases, it will be understood, the
motion of the main brushes relatively to the neutral line of the
machine causes variations in the strength of the current independently
of their relative position to the auxiliary brush. in
all cases the adjustment may be such that when the machine is
running with the ordinary load, no current flows over the auxiliary
brush.
the field helices may be connected, as shown in fig. , or a
part of the field helices may be in the outgoing and the other part
in the return circuit, and two auxiliary brushes may be employed
as shown in figs.  and . instead of shunting the whole
of the field helices, a portion only of such helices may be shunted,
as shown in figs.  and .[pg ]
the arrangement shown in fig.  is advantageous, as it diminishes
the sparking upon the commutator, the main circuit being
closed through the auxiliary brushes at the moment of the break
of the circuit at the main brushes.
fig. .
fig. .
fig. .
fig. .fig. .
the field helices may be wound in the same direction, or a part
may be wound in opposite directions.
the connection between the helices and the auxiliary brush or
brushes may be made by a wire of small resistance, or a resistance
may be interposed (r, fig. ,) between the point x and the[pg ]
auxiliary brush or brushes to divide the sensitiveness when the
brushes are adjusted.
fig. .fig. .
the accompanying sketches also illustrate improvements made
by mr. tesla in the mechanical devices used to effect the shifting
of the brushes, in the use of an auxiliary brush. fig.  is
an elevation of the regulator with the frame partly in section;
and fig.  is a section at the line x x, fig. . c is the commutator;
b and b', the brush-holders, b carrying the main
brushes a a', and b' the auxiliary or shunt brushes b b. the
axis of the brush-holder b is supported by two pivot-screws, p p.
the other brush-holder, b', has a sleeve, d, and is movable
around the axis of the brush-holder b. in this way both brush-holders
can turn very freely, the friction of the parts being
reduced to a minimum. over the brush-holders is mounted the
solenoid s, which rests upon a forked column, c. this column
also affords a support for the pivots p p, and is fastened upon a
solid bracket or projection, p, which extends from the base of
the machine, and is cast in one piece with the same. the
brush-holders b b' are connected by means of the links e e
and the cross-piece f to the iron core i, which slides freely in the
tube t of the solenoid. the iron core i has a screw, s, by means
of which it can be raised and adjusted in its position relatively
to the solenoid, so that the pull exerted upon it by the solenoid
is practically uniform through the whole length of motion which
is required to effect the regulation. in order to effect the
adjustment with greater precision, the core i is provided with a
small iron screw, s'. the core being first brought very nearly
in the required position relatively to the solenoid by means of
the screw s, the small screw s' is then adjusted until the magnetic
attraction upon the core is the same when the core is in any position.
a convenient stop, t, serves to limit the upward movement
of the iron core.[pg ]
to check somewhat the movement of the core i, a dash-pot, k,
is used. the piston l of the dash-pot is provided with a valve,
v, which opens by a downward pressure and allows an easy
downward movement of the iron core i, but closes and checks
the movement of the core when it is pulled up by the action
of the solenoid.
to balance the opposing forces, the weight of the moving
parts, and the pull exerted by the solenoid upon the iron core,
the weights w w may be used. the adjustment is such that
when the solenoid is traversed by the normal current it is just
strong enough to balance the downward pull of the parts.
fig. .fig. .
the electrical circuit-connections are substantially the same as
indicated in the previous diagrams, the solenoid being in series
with the circuit when the translating devices are in series, and in
shunt when the devices are in multiple arc. the operation of
the device is as follows: when upon a decrease of the resistance
of the circuit or for some other reason, the current is
increased, the solenoid s gains in strength and pulls up the iron
core i, thus shifting the main brushes in the direction of rotation
and the auxiliary brushes in the opposite way. this diminishes
the strength of the current until the opposing forces are balanced
and the solenoid is traversed by the normal current; but if from
any cause the current in the circuit is diminished, then the weight
of the moving parts overcomes the pull of the solenoid, the iron[pg ]
core i descends, thus shifting the brushes the opposite way and
increasing the current to the normal strength. the dash-pot
connected to the iron core i may be of ordinary construction;
but it is better, especially in machines for arc lights, to provide
the piston of the dash-pot with a valve, as indicated in the diagrams.
this valve permits a comparatively easy downward movement
of the iron core, but checks its movement when it is drawn
up by the solenoid. such an arrangement has the advantage
that a great number of lights may be put on without diminishing
the light-power of the lamps in the circuit, as the brushes assume
at once the proper position. when lights are cut out, the dash-pot
acts to retard the movement; but if the current is considerably
increased the solenoid gets abnormally strong and the brushes
are shifted instantly. the regulator being properly adjusted,
lights or other devices may be put on or out with scarcely any
perceptible difference. it is obvious that instead of the dash-pot
any other retarding device may be used.
[pg ]
improvement in the construction of dynamos and motors.
this invention of mr. tesla is an improvement in the construction
of dynamo or magneto electric machines or motors,
consisting in a novel form of frame and field magnet which renders
the machine more solid and compact as a structure, which
requires fewer parts, and which involves less trouble and expense
in its manufacture. it is applicable to generators and motors
generally, not only to those which have independent circuits
adapted for use in the tesla alternating current system, but to
other continuous or alternating current machines of the ordinary
type generally used.
fig.  shows the machine in side elevation. fig.  is a
vertical sectional view of the field magnets and frame and an end
view of the armature; and fig.  is a plan view of one of
the parts of the frame and the armature, a portion of the latter
being cut away.
the field magnets and frame are cast in two parts. these
parts are identical in size and shape, and each consists of the solid
plates or ends a b, from which project inwardly the cores c d and
the side bars or bridge pieces, e f. the precise shape of these
parts is largely a matter of choice—that is to say, each casting,
as shown, forms an approximately rectangular frame; but it might
obviously be more or less oval, round, or square, without departure
from the invention. it is also desirable to reduce the
width of the side bars, e f, at the center and to so proportion the
parts that when the frame is put together the spaces between the
pole pieces will be practically equal to the arcs which the surfaces
of the poles occupy.
the bearings g for the armature shaft are cast in the side bars
e f. the field coils are either wound on the pole pieces or on a
form and then slipped on over the ends of the pole pieces.
the lower part or casting is secured to the base after being
finished off. the armature k on its shaft is then mounted in[pg ]
the bearings of the lower casting and the other part of the frame
placed in position, dowel pins l or any other means being used to
secure the two parts in proper position.
fig. .
fig. .
fig. .
in order to secure an easier fit, the side bars e f, and end pieces,
a b, are so cast that slots m are formed when the two parts are
put together.[pg ]
this machine possesses several advantages. for example, if we
magnetize the cores alternately, as indicated by the characters n
s, it will be seen that the magnetic circuit between the poles of
each part of a casting is completed through the solid iron side
bars. the bearings for the shaft are located at the neutral points
of the field, so that the armature core is not affected by the magnetic
condition of the field.
the improvement is not restricted to the use of four pole pieces,
as it is evident that each pole piece could be divided or more than
four formed by the shape of the casting.
[pg ]
tesla direct current arc lighting system.
at one time, soon after his arrival in america, mr. tesla was
greatly interested in the subject of arc lighting, which then occupied
public attention and readily enlisted the support of capital.
he therefore worked out a system which was confided to a company
formed for its exploitation, and then proceeded to devote
his energies to the perfection of the details of his more celebrated
"rotary field" motor system. the tesla arc lighting apparatus
appeared at a time when a great many other lamps and machines
were in the market, but it commanded notice by its ingenuity.
its chief purpose was to lessen the manufacturing cost and simplify
the processes of operation.
we will take up the dynamo first. fig.  is a longitudinal
section, and fig.  a cross section of the machine. fig.  is
a top view, and fig.  a side view of the magnetic frame. fig.
 is an end view of the commutator bars, and fig.  is a
section of the shaft and commutator bars. fig.  is a diagram
illustrating the coils of the armature and the connections to the
commutator plates.
the cores c c c c of the field-magnets are tapering in both
directions, as shown, for the purposes of concentrating the magnetism
upon the middle of the pole-pieces.
the connecting-frame f f of the field-magnets is in the form
indicated in the side view, fig. , the lower part being provided
with the spreading curved cast legs e e, so that the machine
will rest firmly upon two base-bars, r r.
to the lower pole, s, of the field-magnet m is fastened, by
means of babbitt or other fusible diamagnetic material, the base
b, which is provided with bearings b for the armature-shaft h.
the base b has a projection, p, which supports the brush-holders
and the regulating devices, which are of a special character devised
by mr. tesla.
the armature is constructed with the view to reduce to a min[pg ]imum
the loss of power due to foucault currents and to the
change of polarity, and also to shorten as much as possible the
length of the inactive wire wound upon the armature core.
fig. .
it is well known that when the armature is revolved between
the poles of the field-magnets, currents are generated in the iron
body of the armature which develop heat, and consequently cause
a waste of power. owing to the mutual action of the lines of
force, the magnetic properties of iron, and the speed of the different
portions of the armature core, these currents are generated
principally on and near the surface of the armature core, diminishing
in strength gradually toward the centre of the core.
their quantity is under some conditions proportional to the
length of the iron body in the direction in which these currents
are generated. by subdividing the iron core electrically in this
direction, the generation of these currents can be reduced to a
great extent. for instance, if the length of the armature-core is
twelve inches, and by a suitable construction it is subdivided
electrically, so that there are in the generating direction six inches
of iron and six inches of intervening air-spaces or insulating material,
the waste currents will be reduced to fifty per cent.
as shown in the diagrams, the armature is constructed of thin
iron discs d d d, of various diameters, fastened upon the armature-shaft
in a suitable manner and arranged according to their
sizes, so that a series of iron bodies, i i i, is formed, each of which
diminishes in thickness from the centre toward the periphery.
at both ends of the armature the inwardly curved discs d d, of
cast iron, are fastened to the armature shaft.
the armature core being constructed as shown, it will be easily
seen that on those portions of the armature that are the most
remote from the axis, and where the currents are principally developed,
the length of iron in the generating direction is only a[pg ]
small fraction of the total length of the armature core, and besides
this the iron body is subdivided in the generating direction,
and therefore the foucault currents are greatly reduced. another
cause of heating is the shifting of the poles of the armature core.
in consequence of the subdivision of the iron in the armature
and the increased surface for radiation, the risk of heating is
lessened.
the iron discs d d d are insulated or coated with some insulating-paint,
a very careful insulation being unnecessary, as an
electrical contact between several discs can only occur at places
where the generated currents are comparatively weak. an
armature core constructed in the manner described may be revolved
between the poles of the field magnets without showing
the slightest increase of temperature.
fig. .fig. .
the end discs, d d, which are of sufficient thickness and, for
the sake of cheapness, of cast-iron, are curved inwardly, as indicated
in the drawings. the extent of the curve is dependent
on the amount of wire to be wound upon the armatures. in this
machine the wire is wound upon the armature in two superimposed
parts, and the curve of the end discs, d d, is so calculated
that the first part—that is, practically half of the wire—just fills
up the hollow space to the line x x; or, if the wire is wound in
any other manner, the curve is such that when the whole of the
wire is wound, the outside mass of wires, w, and the inside mass
