better-known and interesting observations on 'religio medici.' browne
reproached him for his review of a pirated edition. digby replied he had
never authorised its publication, written as it was in twenty-four hours,
which included his procuring and reading the book—a truly marvellous tour
de force; for the thing is still worth perusal. he was always the
improvisor—ready, brilliant, vivid, imperfect. he must give vent to the
ideas that came upon him in gusts. "the impressions which creatures make
upon me," he says, "are like boisterous winds." he fully recognised his own
limitations. "i pretend not to learning," he declares, with exaggerated
modesty. amateur and improviser of genius, let us praise him as such. the
spacious, generous minds that can find room for all the ideas and culture
of an epoch are never numerous enough. there is no one like such amateurs
for bridging two ages; and digby, with one hand in lilly's and the other in
bacon's, joins the mediæval to the modern world. nor is a universal amateur
a genius who has squandered his powers; but a man exercising his many
talents in the only way possible to himself, and generally with much
entertainment and stimulus to others. it was ben jonson, too great a man to
page xl
be one of his detractors on this score, who wrote of him:
"he is built like some imperial room
for that[] to dwell in, and be still at home.
his breast is a brave palace, a broad street,
where all heroic ample thoughts do meet;
where nature such a large survey hath ta'en
as other souls to his, dwelt in a lane."
[] all virtue.
there was nothing singular in his interest in astrology and alchemy. lilly
and booker, both of them among his acquaintances, were ordered to attend
the parliamentary army at the siege of colchester, "to encourage the
soldiers with predictions of speedy victory." still—though he believed in
greater absurdities—his attitude towards such matters was that of his
chosen motto, vacate et videte. "to rely too far upon that vaine art i
judge to be rather folly than impiety." as with regard to spirits and
witches, he says, "i only reserve my assent." that he was not altogether
absorbed in the transmutation of metals in his laboratory practice, and yet
that he dabbled in it, makes him historically interesting. in him better
than in newton do we realise the temper of the early members of the royal
society. in this tale of his other activities i have not forgotten the
closet opened. of all digby's many interests the most constant and
permanent was medicine. how to enlarge the span of man's life was a problem
much meditated on in his age. we
page xli
have seen how descartes's mind ran on it;
and in bacon's natural history there is reference to a 'book of the
prolongation of life.' in spite of what is written on his janssen hermit
portrait—saber morir la mayor hazanza—digby loved life. his whole
exuberant career is a pæan to life, for itself and its great chances, and
because "it giveth the leave to vent and boyle away the unquietnesses and
turbulences that follow our passions." to prolong life, fortify it, clarify
it, was a noble pursuit, and he set out on it as a youth under the tuition
of the 'good parson of lindford. his physick and chirurgery receipts,
published by hartman, are many of them incredible absurdities, not
unfrequently repulsive; but when we compare them with other like books of
the time, they fit into a natural and not too fantastic place. sir thomas
browne was laughing at digby, but not at digby alone, in the passage in
vulgar errors—"when for our warts we rub our hands before the moon, or
commit any maculated part unto the touch of the dead." sir kenelm gathered
his receipts on all his roads through europe, noted them down, made them up
with his own hands, and administered them to his friends. in hartman's
family physician is given "an experienced remedy against the falling
sicknes, wherewith sir k. digby cur'd a minister's son at franckfort in
germany, in the year ." it begins, "take the skull of a man that died
of a violent death." (hartman says he helped to prepare the ghastly
concoction.) i have already noted how he doctored his beautiful wife's
complexion; and how
page xlii
he was called in to cure howell's wound. in a poetic
tribute he is referred to as:
"hee, that all med'cines can exactly make,
and freely give them."
evelyn records how digby "advised me to try and digest a little better, and
gave me a water which he said was only raine water of the autumnal equinox
exceedingly rectified, and smelt like aqua fortis."
here, at last, we have come to the end of sir kenelm the amateur. if he was
an empiric, so were all the doctors of his time; and he may be described as
a professional unpaid physician who carried on a frequently interrupted
practice. that he did not publish his receipts himself does not reflect on
his own idea of their importance. they had a wide circulation among his
friends. and, as i have pointed out, he never showed great eagerness to
publish. such works as appeared in his lifetime were evidently printed at
the request of learned societies, or by friends to whom they were
dedicated, or by white.
the distance between the healer and the cook has grown to be immense in
recent times. the college of physicians and mary jane in the kitchen are
not on nodding terms—though one sees faint signs of an effort to bridge
the wide gap. but in the seventeenth century the gap can hardly be said to
have existed at all. at the back of the doctor is plainly seen the figure
of the herbalist and simpler, who appear again prominently in the
still-room and the kitchen, by the side of great ladies and great gentlemen,
page xliii
bent on making the best and the most of the pleasures of the
table no doubt, but quite as much on the maintenance of health as of
hospitality. simpler, herbalist, doctor, distiller, cook—digby was all of
them, and all of them with the utmost seriousness; nor in this was he in
the least singular. the great bacon was deeply concerned with such cares,
though in certain of his recommendations, such as: "to provide always an
apt break-fast," to take this every morning, not to forget to take that
twice a month, one may read more of the valetudinarian than in digby. the
closet opened is but one of an interesting series of books of the kind,
which have been too much neglected by students of seventeenth-century
manners and lore and language. did not w.j. issue the countess of kent's
choice manual of physic and chirurgey, with directions for preserving and
candying? patrick, lord ruthven's ladies' cabinet opened appeared in 
and . nor was it only the cuisine of the nobles that roused interest.
one of the curiosities of the time is the court and kitchen of elizabeth,
commonly called joan cromwell, the wife of the late usurper truly described
and represented and now made publick for general satisfaction, . the
preface is scurrilous beyond belief. compiled from the gossip of servants,
it is meant to cast ridicule on the housekeeping of the protector's
establishment. but the second part is a sober collection of by no means
very penurious recipes from joan's own kitchen books.
hartman, his steward, made an excellent thing out of digby's
receipts—though the publishing of the
page xliv
closet opened was not his doing,
i think. his choice and experimented receipts in physick and chirurgery
had already appeared in , which suggested to some other hanger-on of
the digby household that john digby's consent might be obtained for
printing sir kenelm's culinary as well as his medical note-books. hartman
followed up this new track with persistence and profit to himself. as a
mild example of the "choice and experimented," i transcribe "an approved
remedy for biting of a mad dog": "take a quart of ale, and a dram of
treacle, a handful of rue, a spoonful of shavings or filings of tin. boil
all these together, till half be consumed. take of this two spoonfuls in
the morning, and at night cold. it is excellent for man or beast." i need
not continue. the receipts are there for curious searchers. they were
applied to aristocratic patients; and they are no more absurd or loathsome
than those of other books of the time and kind. even bacon is fantastic
enough with his "grains of youth" and "methusalem water." in , george
hartman published, "for the publike good," the true preserver and restorer
of health. it is dedicated to the countess of sunderland, and is described
as "the collection for the most part (which i had hitherto reserved) of
your incomparable kinsman and my truly honourable master, sir kenelm digby,
whom i had the honour to serve for many years beyond the seas, as well as
in england; and so continued with him till his dying day, and of whose
generosity and bounty i have sufficiently tasted, and no less of your
illustrious fathers, both before and
page xlv
after my glorious masters decease."
of this book he says, "the world hath not yet seen such another piece."
commend me to the forthright methods of seventeenth century advertisement!
in the second part, "excellent directions for cookery," the closet opened
was largely drawn on. in  appeared the family physician, by george
hartman, phylo-chymist ... who liv'd and travell'd with the honourable sir
kenelm digby in several parts of europe, the space of seven years till he
died. this other choice compilation owes much to the "incomparable" one,
and is described as "the marrow of collections."
but hartman is not the only witness to digby's connoisseurship in the joint
mysteries. better to my mind than even hartman's are the style and the
spirit of master may. in  appeared the accomplisht cook, or the art
and mystery of cookery ... approved by the fifty years experience and
industry of robert may, in his attendance on several persons of honour. it
is dedicated to lord lumley, lord lovelace, sir wm. paston, sir kenelme
digby, and sir frederick cornwallis, "so well known to the nation for their
admired hospitalities," and generally to
"the race
of those that for the gusto stand,
whose tables a whole ark command
of nature's plentie."
"he is an alien, a meer stranger in england that hath not been acquainted
with your generous housekeeping; for my own part, my more particular tyes
page xlvi
of service to you, my honoured lords, have built me up to the height of
this experience." his preface is a heartrending cry of regret for the good
old times before usurping parliaments banished splendidly extravagant
gentlemen across the seas, "those golden days of peace and hospitality,
when you enjoy'd your own, so as to entertain and relieve others ... those
golden days wherein were practised the triumphs and trophies of cookery,
then was hospitality esteemed and neighbourhood preserved, the poor
cherished and god honoured; then was religion less talk't on and more
practis't, then was atheism and schisme less in fashion, and then did men
strive to be good rather than to seem so." high-souled were the chefs of
the seventeenth century!
the  edition of the closet opened is evidently the first. the
interleaved example mentioned in the catalogue of the digby library is of
the same date. whoever prepared it for the press and wrote the egregious
preface "to the reader"—hartman, or as i think, another—gave it the
title; but it was a borrowed one. some years earlier, in , had appeared
the queen's closet opened, incomparable secrets which were presented unto
the queen by the most experienced persons of the times, many wherof were
had in esteem when she pleased to descend to private recreation. the
queen, of course, is henrietta maria, and chief among the "experienced
persons" referred to was certainly her chancellor, digby. possibly he may
even have suggested the printing of the collection. like titles
page xlvii
are met
with again and again. nature's cabinet opened, a medical work, was
attributed to browne, though he repudiated it. ruthven's book i have
already alluded to. the queen-like closet, a rich cabinet, by hannah
wolly, came out in .
of the two books, the queen's and her chancellor's, digby's has afforded me
by far the most delight. though many of the receipts are evidently given as
sent in, the stamp of his personality is on the whole; and he is the poet
of all these culinary artists. but on the score of usefulness to the
housewife i forbear all judgment. the recipes may be thought extravagant in
these late hard times—though epicurism has changed rather than vanished.
lord bacon's receipt for making "manus christi for the stomach" begins,
"take of the best pearls very finely pulverised one drachm"; and a health
resolution runs, "to take once during supper wine in which gold is
quenched." costly ingredients such as pearls and leaf gold appear only once
among digby's receipts. the modern housewife may be aghast at the thought
of more than a hundred ways of making mead and metheglin. mead recalls to
her perhaps her first history-book, wherein she learnt of it as a drink of
the primitive anglo-saxons. if she doubt the usefulness of the collection
in her own kitchen, let her take the little volume to her boudoir, and read
it there as gossiping notes of the beau monde in the days when james i
and the charleses ruled the land. she will find herself in lofty company,
and o>n intimate terms with them. they come down to our level, without any show
page xlviii
of condescension. lords and ladies who were personages of a solemn
state pageant, are now human neighbourly creatures, owning to likes and
dislikes, and letting us into the secrets of their daily habits.
it pleases me to think of henrietta maria, in her exile, busying herself in
her still-room, and forgetting her dangers and sorrows in simpling and
stilling and kitchen messes; and of her devoted sir kenelm, in the moments
when he is neither abeting her royalist plots, nor diverting her mind to
matters of high science, or the mysteries of the faith, but bringing to her
such lowlier consolations as are hinted in "hydromel as i made it weak for
the queen mother." we are not waiting in a chill ante-chamber when we read,
"the queen's ordinary bouillon de santé in a morning was thus," or of the
pressis which she "used to take at nights—of great yet temperate
nourishment—instead of a supper." and who can hint at court scandals in
the face of such evidence of domesticity as "the queen useth to baste meat
with yolks of fresh eggs, &c." or "the way that the countess de penalva
makes the portuguese eggs for the queen is this"? we cannot help being
interested in the habits of lady hungerford, who "useth to make her mead at
the end of summer, when she takes up her honey, and begins to drink it in
lent." my lady gower and her husband were of independent tastes. each had
their own receipts. it must be remembered that dr. johnson said no woman
could write a cookery-book; and he threatened to write one himself. and sir
page xlix
kenelm had many serious rivals among his own sex.
in such an embarras de choix as given by all these drink receipts, we may
be in doubt whether to try "my lord gorge's meath," or "the countess of
newport's" cherry wine, or "the sweet drink of my lady stuart," or of lady
windebanke, or "sir paul neile's way of making cider," or "my lord
carlisle's sack posset"; but one is strongly influenced by such a note as
"sir edward bainton's receipt which my lord of portland (who gave it me)
saith, was the best he ever drank." i had thought of saint-evremond as
warrior and wit, delightful satirist and letter-writer. but here is a
streak of new light upon him: "monsieur st. euvremont makes thus his potage
de santé of boiled meat for dinner being very valetudinary.... when he is
in pretty good health, that he may venture upon more savoury hotter things,
&c." the most rigorous protestants will relax to hear how "to make a pan
cotto as the cardinals use in rome." and if "my lord lumley's pease
pottage" sounds homely, be it known, on the word of the eloquent robert
may, that his lordship "wanted no knowledge in the discerning this
mystery." what fastidious simplicity in the taste of the great is suggested
by "my lord d'aubigny eats red-herrings thus boiled"!
but if sir kenelm consorted only with the great, it was with the great of
all social ranks. it was not merely on high questions of science he
discoursed with the discoverer of the circulation of the blood
page l
—witness
"dr. harvey's pleasant water cider." then there was that "chief burgomaster
of antwerpe," with whom he must have been on pretty intimate terms, to
learn that he "used for many years to drink no other drink but this [mead];
at meals and all times, even for pledging of healths. and though he was an
old man, he was of an extraordinary vigor every way, and had every year a
child, had always a great appetite, and good digestion; and yet was not
fat." digby was too great a gentleman to be above exchanging receipts with
the professors of the "mystery," such as the muscovian ambassador's
steward; and when "master webbe who maketh the king's meath," on the st of
september, , came to his house to make some for him, sir kenelm stood
by, a little suspicious lest the other great artist was bamboozling him. he
had an eye for all—though it may have been one of his correspondents who
says of the remnants of a dish that it "will make good water-gruel for the
servants."
the seriousness of the business is tremendous; and to ignore the fine
shades in the  receipts for mead and metheglin would have been a
frivolity unknown in digby's circle. there is care; there is conscience;
there is rivalry. the ingredients are mingled with a nice discrimination
between the rights of the palate and the maintenance of health. "use only
morello cherries (i think) for pleasure, and black ones for health." you
may not wait your own convenience in such serious business. "it is best
made by taking all the canicular days into your
page li
fermentation." now and
again other methods of calculating than ours are used; but "whiles you can
say the miserere psalm very leisurely" is as easily computed as "while your
pulse beateth  stroaks." quantities are a more difficult affair. how is
one to know how much smallage was got for a penny in mid-seventeenth
century? the great connoisseur lord lumley is very lax, and owns that his
are "set down by guess."
it is a curious old world we get glimpses of, at once barbarous, simple,
and extravagant, when great ladies were expected to see to the milking of
their cows, as closely as joan cromwell supervised her milch-kine in st.
james's park, and to the cleanliness of their servants' arms and hands, and
when huntsmen rode at the bidding of the cook; for in order that venison be
in good condition, "before the deer be killed he ought to be hunted and
chased as much as possible." the perusal of the section, "to feed
chickens," will shock our poultry-breeders. "to make them prodigiously fat
in about twelve days," "my lady fanshawe gives them strong ale. they will
be very drunk and sleep; then eat again. let a candle stand all night over
the coop, and then they will eat much all the night."
"lord denbigh's almond marchpane," and the 'current wine' of which it is
said "you may drink safely long draughts of it," will appeal perhaps only
to the schoolboy of our weaker generation. yet there are receipts,
doubtless gathered in sir kenelm's later years, that have the cautious
invalid in view. of these are the "pleasant cordial tablets,
page lii
which are
very comforting and strengthen nature much," and the liquor which is called
"smoothing." "in health you may dash the potage with a little juyce of
orange" is in the same low key. the gruels are so many that we must wish
mr. woodhouse had known of the book. if the admixture of "wood-sorrel and
currens" had seemed to him fraught with peril, he could have fallen back on
the "oatmeal pap of sir john colladon."
where are all the old dishes vanished to? who has ever known "a smoothening
quiddany of quinces?" who can tell the composition of a tansy? these are
tame days when we have forgotten how to make cock-ale. they drank 'sack
with clove-gilly-flowers' at the "mermaid," i am sure. what is bragot? what
is stepony? and what slipp-coat cheese? ask the baker for a manchet. the
old names call for a ballade. où sont les mets d'antan? and, cooks, with
all your exactness about pounds and ounces and minutes of the clock, can
you better directions like these? watch for "a pale colour with an eye of
green." "let it stand till you may see your shadow in it"; or "till it
begin to blink." your liquid may boil "simpringly," or "in a great
ebullition, in great galloping waves." "make a liaison a moment, about an
ave maria while." and all the significance of the times and seasons we have
lost in our neglect to kill male hogs "in the wane of the moon!" for there
is a lingering of astrology in all this kitchen lore. the irascible
culpeper, digby's contemporary, poured scorn on such doctors as knew not
the high science,
page liii
"physick without astronomy being like a lamp without
oil."
as for the poetry i promised—well, i have been quoting it, have i not? but
there is more, and better. surely it was a romantic folk that kept in its
store-rooms the "best blew raisins of the sun," or "plumpsome raisins of
the sun," and made its mead with dew, and eagerly exchanged with each other
recipes for "conserve of red roses." and now we come to an essential
feature of the whole. it is a cuisine that does not reek of shops and
co-operative stores, but of the wood, the garden, the field and meadow.
like culpeper's pharmacopeia, it is made for the most part of "such things
only as grow in england, they being most fit for english bodies." is it any
wonder that the metheglin should be called the "liquor of life," which has
these among its ingredients: bugloss, borage, hyssop, organ,
sweet-marjoram, rosemary, french cowslip, coltsfoot, thyme, burnet,
self-heal, sanicle, betony, blew-button, harts-tongue, meadowsweet,
liverwort, bistort, st. john's wort, yellow saunders, balm, bugle,
agrimony, tormentilla, comfrey, fennel, clown's allheal, maidenhair,
wall-rue, spleen-wort, sweet oak, paul's betony, and mouse-ear?
the housewife of to-day buys unrecognisable dried herbs in packets or
bottles. in those days she gathered them in their season out of doors. the
companions to the closet opened should be the hasty and entertaining
culpeper, the genial gerard, and coles of the delightful adam in eden,
all the old herbals that were on digby's bookshelves, so
page liv
full of
absurdities, so full of pretty wisdom. they will tell you how to mix in
your liquor eglantine for coolness, borage, rosemary, and sweet-marjoram
for vigour, and by which planet each herb or flower is governed. has our
sentiment for the flowers of the field increased now we no longer drink
their essence, or use them in our dishes? i doubt it. it is surely a
pardonable grossness that we should desire the sweet fresh things to become
part of us—like children, who do indeed love flowers, and eat them. in the
appendix i have transcribed a list of the plants referred to. most cooks
would be unable to tell one from another; and even modern herbalists have
let many fall out of use, while only a few are on the lists of the english
pharmacopeia. to go simpling once more by field and wood and hedgerow would
be a pleasant duty for country housewives to impose upon themselves; and as
to the herbalists' observations on their virtues, we may say with old
coles, "most of them i am confident are true, and if there be any that are
not so, yet they are pleasant."
there is an air of flippancy about that reflexion of coles you will never
find in sir kenelm. of the virtues of each plant and flower he used he was
fully convinced; and when he tells of their powers, as in his "aqua
mirabilis," the tale is like a solemn litany, and we are reminded of
clarendon's testimony to "the gravity of his motion." and so, his closet
once more open, he stands at the door, his majesty not greatly lessened;
for the book contains a reminiscence of his rolling eloquence,
page lv
something of his romance, and not a little of his poetry.
chelsea, .
page 
[facsimile of the original title-page.]
page 
page 
this collection full of pleasing variety, and of such usefulness in the
generality of it, to the publique, coming to my hands, i should, had i
forborn the publication thereof, have trespassed in a very considerable
concern upon my countrey-men, the like having not in every particular
appeared in print in the english tongue. there needs no rhetoricating
floscules to set it off. the authour, as is well known, having been a
person of eminency for his learning, and of exquisite curiosity in his
researches, even that incomparable sir kenelme digbie knight, fellow of the
royal society and chancellour to the queen mother, (et omen in nomine) his
name does sufficiently auspicate the work. i shall only therefore add, that
there is herein (as by the table hereunto affix'd will evidently to thee
appear) a sufficiency of solids as well as liquids for the sating the
curiosities of each or the nicest palate; and according to that old saw in
the regiment of hepage alth, incipe cum liquido, &c. the liquids premitted to
the solids. these being so excellent in their kinde, so beneficial and so
well ordered, i think it unhandsome, if not injurious, by the trouble of
any further discourse, to detain thee any longer from falling to; fall to
therefore, and much good may it do thee,
page 
take one measure of honey, and three measures of water, and let it boil
till one measure be boiled away, so that there be left three measures in
all; as for example, take to one pot of honey, three pots of water, and let
it boil so long, till it come to three pots. during which time you must
skim it very well as soon as any scum riseth; which you are to continue
till there rise no scum more. you may, if you please, put to it some spice,
to wit, cloves and ginger; the quantity of which is to be proportioned
according as you will have your meath, strong or weak. but this you do
before it begin to boil. there are some that put either yeast of beer, or
leaven of bread into it, to make it work. but this is not necessary at all;
and much less to set it into the sun. mr. masillon doth neither the one nor
the other. afterwards for to tun it, you must let it grow luke-warm, for to
advance it. and if you do intend to keep your meathe a long time, you may
put into it some hopps on this fashion. take to every barrel of meathe a
pound of hops without leaves, that is, of ordinary hops used for beer, but
well cleansed, taking only the flowers, without the green-leaves and
stalks. boil this pound of hops in a pot and half of fair water, till it
come to one pot, and this quantity ispage  sufficient for a barrel of meathe. a
barrel at liege holdeth ninety pots, and a pot is as much as a wine quart
in england. (i have since been informed from liege, that a pot of that
countrey holdeth  ounces of apothecary's measure; which i judge to be a
pottle according to london measure, or two wine-quarts.) when you tun your
meath, you must not fill your barrel by half a foot, that so it may have
room to work. then let it stand six weeks slightly stopped; which being
expired, if the meath do not work, stop it up very close. yet must you not
fill up the barrel to the very brim. after six months you draw off the
clear into another barrel, or strong bottles, leaving the dregs, and
filling up your new barrel, or bottels, and stopping it or them very close.
the meath that is made this way, (viz. in the spring, in the month of
april or may, which is the proper time for making of it,) will keep many a
year.
take your honey, and mix it with fair water, until the honey be quite
dissolved. if it will bear an egge to be above the liquor, the breadth of a
groat, it is strong enough; if not, put more honey to it, till it be so
strong; then boil it, till it be clearly and well skimmed; then put in one
good handful of strawberry-leaves, and half a handful of violet leaves; and
half as much sorrel: a douzen tops of rosepage mary; four or five tops of
baulme-leaves: a handful of harts-tongue, and a handful of liver-worth; a
little thyme, and a little red-sage; let it boil about an hour; then put it
into a woodden vessel, where let it stand, till it be quite cold; then put
it into the barrel; then take half an ounce of cloves, as much nutmeg; four
or five races of ginger; bruise it, and put it into a fine bag, with a
stone to make it sink, that it may hang below the middle: then stop it very
close.
the herbs and spices are in proportion for six gallons.
since my lady hungerford sent me this receipt, she sent me word, that she
now useth (and liketh better) to make the decoction of herbs before you put
the honey to it, this proportion of herbs is to make six gallons of
decoction, so that you may take eight or nine gallons of water. when you
have drawn out into your water, all the vertue of the herbs, throw them
away, and take the clear decoction (leaving the settlings) and when it is
lukewarm, dissolve your proportion of honey in it. after it is well
dissolved and laved with strong arms or woodden instruments, like
battle-doors or scoops, boil it gently; till you have taken away all the
scum; then make an end of well boyling it, about an hour in all. then pour
it into a wooden vessel, and let it stand till it be cold. then pour the
clear through a sieve of hair, ceasing pouring when you come to the foul
thick settling. tun the clear into your vepage ssel (without barm) and stop it
up close, with the spices in it, till you perceive by the hissing that it
begins to work. then give it some little vent, else the barrel would break.
when it is at the end of the working, stop it up close. she useth to make
it at the end of summer, when she takes up her honey, and begins to drink
it in lent. but it will be better if you defer piercing it till next
winter. when part of the barrel is drunk, she botteleth the rest, which
maketh it quicker and better. you clear the decoction from the herbs by a
hair-sieve.
the honey of dry open countries, where there is much wild-thyme, rosemary,
and flowers, is best. it is of three sorts, virgin-honey, life-honey, and
stock-honey. the first is the best. the life-honey next. the virgin-honey
is of bees, that swarmed the spring before, and are taken up in autumn; and
is made best by chusing the whitest combs of the hive, and then letting the
honey run out of them lying upon a sieve without pressing it, or breaking
of the combs. the life-honey is of the same combs broken after the
virgin-honey is run from it; the merchants of honey do use to mingle all
the sorts together. the first of a swarm is called virgin-honey. that of
the next year, after the swarm was hatched, is life-honey. and ever after,
it is honey of old-stocks. honey that is forced out of the combs, will
always taste of wax. hampshire honey is most esteemed at london. about
bisleter there is excellent good. some account norfolk honey the best.
page 
to make good meath, good white and thick marsilian or provence-honey is
best; and of that, to four holland pints (the holland pint is very little
bigger then the english wine-pint:) of water, you must put two pound of
honey; the honey must be stirred in water, till it be all melted; if it be
stirred about in warm water, it will melt so much the sooner.
when all is dissolved, it must be so strong that an egge may swim in it
with the end upwards. and if it be too sweet or too strong, because there
is too much honey; then you must put more water to it; yet so, that, as
above, an hens egge may swim with the point upwards: and then that newly
added water must be likewise well stirred about, so that it may be mingled
all alike. if the eggs sink (which is a token that there is not honey
enough) then you must put more honey to it, and stir about, till it be all
dissolved, and the eggs swim, as abovesaid. this being done, it must be
hanged over the fire, and as it beginneth to seeth, the scum, that doth
arise upon it, both before and after, must be clean skimed off. when it is
first set upon the fire, you must measure it first with a stick, how deep
the kettel is, or how much liquor there be in it; and then it must boil so
long, till one third part of it be boiled away. when it is thus boiled, it
must be poured out into a cooler, or open vessel, before it be tunned in
the barrel; but the bung-hole must be left open, that it may have vent. a
vessel, which hath served for sack is best.
page 
to every quart of honey, take four quarts of water. put your water in a
clean kettle over the fire, and with a stick take the just measure, how
high the water cometh, making a notch, where the superficies toucheth the
stick. as soon as the water is warm, put in your honey, and let it boil,
skiming it always, till it be very clean; then put to every gallon of
water, one pound of the best blew-raisins of the sun, first clean picked
from the stalks, and clean washed. let them remain in the boiling liquor,
till they be throughly swollen and soft; then take them out, and put them
into a hair-bag, and strain all the juice and pulp and substance from them
in an apothecaries press; which put back into your liquor, and let it boil,
till it be consumed just to the notch you took at first, for the measure of
your water alone. then let your liquor run through a hair-strainer into an
empty woodden-fat, which must stand endwise, with the head of the upper-end
out; and there let it remain till the next day, that the liquor be quite
cold. then tun it up into a good barrel, not filled quite full, but within
three or four fingers breadth; (where sack hath been, is the best) and let
the bung remain open for six weeks with a double bolter-cloth lying upon
it, to keep out any foulness from falling in. then stop it up close, and
drink not of it till after nine months.
this meathe is singularly page good for a consumption, stone, gravel,
weak-sight, and many more things. a chief burgomaster of antwerpe, used
for many years to drink no other drink but this; at meals and all times,
even for pledging of healths. and though he were an old man, he was of an
extraordinary vigor every way, and had every year a child, had always a
great appetite, and good digestion; and yet was not fat.
to every quart of honey take six of water; boil it till / be consumed,
skiming it well all the while. then pour it into an open fat, and let it
cool. when the heat is well slakened, break into a bowl-full of this warm
liquor, a new-laid-egge, beating the yolk and white well with it; then put
it into the fat to all the rest of the liquor, and stir it well together,
and it will become very clear. then pour it into a fit very clean barrel,
and put to it some mother of wine, that is in it's best fermentation or
working, and this will make the liquor work also. this will be ready to
drink in three or four months, or sooner.
take one gallon of honey, and four of water; boil and scum them till there
rise no more scum; then put in your spice a little bruised, which is most
of cinnamon, a little ginger, a little mace, and a very little cloves. boil
it with the spice in it, till it bear an egge. then take it from the fire,
and let it cool ipage n a woodden vessel, till it be but lukewarm; which this
quantity will be in four or five or six hours. then put into it a hot tost
of white-bread, spread over on both sides, pretty thick with fresh barm;
that will make it presently work. let it work twelve hours, close covered
with cloves. then tun it into a runlet wherein sack hath been, that is
somewhat too big for that quantity of liquor; for example, that it fill it
not by a gallon; you may then put a little limon-pill in with it. after it
hath remained in the vessel a week or ten days, draw it into bottles. you
may begin to drink it after two or three months: but it will be better
after a year. it will be very spritely and quick and pleasant and pure
white.
take two handfuls of dock (alias wild carrot) a reasonable burthen of
saxifrage, wild-sage, blew-button, scabious, bettony, agrimony,
wild-marjoram, of each a reasonable burthen; wild-thyme a peck, roots and
all. all these are to be gathered in the fields, between the two lady days
in harvest. the garden-herbs are these; bay-leaves, and rosemary, of each
two handfuls; a sieveful of avens, and as much violet-leaves: a handful of
sage; three handfuls of sweet-marjoram, three roots of young borrage,
leaves and all, that hath not born seed; two handfuls of parsley-roots, and
all that hath not born seed. two roots of elecampane that have not seeded:
two handfuls ofpage  fennel that hath not seeded: a peck of thyme; wash and pick
all your herbs from filth and grass: then put your field herbs first into
the bottom of a clean furnace, and lay all your garden-herbs thereon; then
fill your furnace with clean water, letting your herbs seeth, till they be
so tender, that you may easily slip off the skin of your field-herbs, and
that you may break the roots of your garden-herbs between your fingers.
then lade forth your liquor, and set it a cooling. then fill your furnace
again with clear water to these herbs, and let them boil a quarter of an
hour. then put it to your first liquor, filling the furnace, until you have
sufficient to fill your tun. then as your liquor begins to cool, and is
almost cold, set your servants to temper honey and wax in it, combs and
all, and let them temper it well together, breaking the combes very small;
let their hands and nails be very clean; and when you have tempered it very
well together, cleanse it through a cleansing sieve into another clean
vessel; the more honey you have in your liquor, the stronger it will be.
therefore to know, when it is strong enough, take two new-laid eggs, when
you begin to cleanse, and put them in whole into the bottome of your
cleansed liquor; and if it be strong enough, it will cause the egge to
ascend upward, and to be on the top as broad as sixpence; if they do not
swim on the top; put more.
page 
take eight gallons of conduit-water, and boil it very well; then put as
much honey in it, as will bear an egge, and stir it well together. then set
it upon the fire, and put in the whites of four eggs to clarifie it; and as
the scum riseth, take it off clean: then put in a pretty quantity of
rosemary, and let it boil, till it tasteth a little of it: then with a
scummer take out the rosemary, as fast as you can, and let it boil half a
quarter of an hour; put it into earthen pans to cool; next morning put it
into a barrel, and put into it a little barm, and an ounce of ginger
scraped and sliced; and let it stand a month or six weeks. then bottle it
up close; you must be sure not to let it stand at all in brass.
master webbe, who maketh the kings meathe, ordereth it thus. take as much
of hyde-park water as will make a hogshead of meathe: boil in it about two
ounces of the best hopp's for about half an hour. by that time, the water
will have drawn out the strength of the hopp's. then skim them clean off,
and all the froth, or whatever riseth of the water. then dissolve in it
warm, about one part of honey to six of water: lave and beat it, till all
the honey be perfectly dissolved; then boil it, beginning gently, till all
the scum be risen, and scummed away. it must boil in all about two hours.
half an hour, before you end your boiling, put into it some rosemary-tops,
thyme, sweet-marjorame, one sprig of minth, in all about halfpage  a handful,
and as much sweet-bryar-leaves as all these; in all, about a handful of
herbs, and two ounces of sliced ginger, and one ounce of bruised cinamon.
he did use to put in a few cloves and mace; but the king did not care for
them. let all these boil about half an hour, then scum them clean away; and
presently let the liquor run through a strainer-cloth into a kiver of wood,
to cool and settle. when you see it is very clear and settled, lade out the
liquor into another kiver, carefully, not to raise the settlings from the
bottom. as soon as you see any dregs begin to rise, stay your hand, and let
it remain unstirred, till all be settled down. then lade out the liquor
again, as before; and if need be, change it again into another kiver: all
which is done to the end no dregs may go along with the liquor in tunning
it into the vessel. when it is cold and perfect clear, tun it into a cask,
that hath been used for sack, and stop it up close, having an eye to give
it a little vent, if it should work. if it cast out any foul liquor in
working, fill it up always presently with some of the same liquor, that you
have kept in bottles for that end. when it hath wrought, and is well
settled (which may be in about two months or ten weeks) draw it into
glass-bottles, as long as it comes clear; and it will be ready to drink in
a month or two: but will keep much longer, if you have occasion: and no
dregs will be in the bottom of the bottle.
he since told me, that to this proportion of honey and water, to page make a
hogshead of meathe, you should boil half a pound of hopps in the water,
and two good handfuls of herbs; and six ounces of spice of all sorts: all
which will be mellowed and rotted away quite, (as well as the lushiousness
of the honey) in the space of a year or two. for this is to be kept so long
before it be drunk.
if you would have it sooner ready to drink, you may work it with a little
yeast, when it is almost cold in the kiver: and tun it up as soon as it
begins to work, doing afterwards as is said before; but leaving a little
vent to purge by, till it have done working. or in stead of yeast, you may
take the yolks of four new-laid-eggs, and almost half a pint of fine
wheat-flower, and some of the liquor you have made: beat them well
together, then put them to the liquor in the cask, and stop it up close,
till you see it needful, to give it a little vent.
note, that yeast of good beer, is better then that of ale.
the first of septemb. . mr. webb came to my house to make some for me.
he took fourty three gallons of water, and fourty two pounds of norfolk
honey. as soon as the water boiled, he put into it a slight handful of
hops; which after it had boiled a little above a quarter of an hour, he
skimed off; then put in the honey to the boyling water, and presently a
white scum rose, which he skimed off still as it rose; which skiming was
ended in little above a quarter of an hour more. then he put in his herbs
page and spices, which were these: rose-mary, thyme, winter-savory,
sweet-marjoram, sweet-bryar-leaves, seven or eight little parsley-roots:
there was most of the savoury, and least of the eglantine, three ounces of
ginger, one ounce and a half of cinnamon, five nutmegs (half an ounce of
cloves he would have added, but did not,) and these boiled an hour and a
quarter longer; in all from the first beginning to boil, somewhat less then
two hours: then he presently laded it out of the copper into coolers,
letting it run through a hair-sieve: and set the coolers shelving (tilted
up) that the liquor might afterwards run the more quietly out of them.
after the liquor had stood so about two hours, he poured or laded out of
some of the coolers very gently, that the dregs might not rise, into other
coolers. and about a pint of very thick dregs remained last in the bottom
of every cooler. that which ran out, was very clear: after two hours more
settling, (in a shelving situation,) he poured it out again into other
coolers; and then very little dregs (or scarce any in some of the coolers)
did remain. when the liquor was even almost cold, he took the yolks of
three new-laid-eggs, a spoonful of fine white flower, and about half a pint
of new fresh barm of good strong beer (you must have care that your barm be
very white and clean, not sullied and foul, as is usual among slovenly
brewers in london). beat this very well together, with a little of the
liquor in a skiming dish, till you see it well incorporated, and that it
beginneth to work. then ppage ut it to a pailful (of about two gallons and a
half) of the liquor, and mingle it well therewith. then leave the skiming
dish reversed floating in the middle of the liquor, and so the yest will
work up into and under the hollow of the dish, and grow out round about the
sides without. he left this well and thick covered all night, from about
eleven a clock at night; and the next morning, finding it had wrought very
well, he mingled what was in the pail with the whole proportion of the
liquor, and so tunned it up into a sack-cask. i am not satisfied, whether
he did not put a spoonful of fine white good mustard into his barm, before
he brought it hither, (for he took a pretext to look out some pure clean
white barm) but he protested, there was nothing mingled with the barm, yet
i am in doubt. he confessed to me that in making of sider, he put's in half
as much mustard as barm; but never in meathe. the fourth of september in
the morning, he bottled up into quart-bottles the two lesser rundlets of
this meathe (for he did tun the whole quantity into one large rundlet, and
two little ones) whereof the one contained thirty bottles; and the other,
twenty two. there remained but little settling or dregs in the bottom's of
the barrels, but some there was. the bottles were set into a cool cellar,
and he said they would be ready to drink in three weeks. the proportion of
herbs and spices is this; that there be so much as to drown the luscious
sweetness of the honey; but not so much as to taste of herbs or spice, when
page you drink the meathe. but that the sweetnes of the honey may kill their
taste: and so the meathe have a pleasant taste, but not of herbs, nor
spice, nor honey. and therefore you put more or less according to the time
you will drink it in. for a great deal will be mellowed away in a year,
that would be ungratefully strong in three months. and the honey that will
make it keep a year or two, will require a triple proportion of spice and
herbs. he commends parsley roots to be in greatest quantity, boiled whole,
if young; but quarterred and pithed, if great and old.
boil what quantity of spring-water you please, three or four walms, and
then let it set the twenty four hours, and pour the clear from the
settling. take sixteen gallons of the clear, and boil in it ten handfuls of
eglantine-leaves, five of liverwort, five of scabious, four of baulm, four
of rosemary; two of bay-leaves; one of thyme, and one of sweet-marjoram,
and five eringo-roots splitted. when the water hath drawn out the vertue of
the herbs (which it will do in half an hours boiling,) let it run through a
strainer or sieve, and let it settle so, that you may pour the clear from
the dregs. to every three gallons of the clear, take one of honey, and with
clean arms stripped up, lade it for two or three hours, to dissolve the
honey in the water; lade it twice or thrice that day. the next day boil it
very gently to make the scum rise, and scum it all the while, and nowpage  and
then pour to it a ladle full of cold water, which will make the scum rise
more: when it is very clear from scum, you may boil it the more strongly,
till it bear an egge very high, that the breadth of a groat be out of the
water, and that it boil high with great walms in the middle of the kettle:
which boiling with great bubbles in the middle is a sign it is boiled to
it's height. then let it cool till it be lukewarm, at which time put some
ale yest into it, to make it work, as you would do ale. and then put it up
into a fit barrel first seasoned with some good sweet white-wine (as
canary-sack) and keep the bung open, till it have done working, filling it
up with some such honey-drink warmed, as you find it sink down by working
over. when it hath almost done working, put into it a bag of thin stuff
(such as bakers use to bolt in) fastened by a cord at the bung, containing
two parts of ginger-sliced, and one apiece of cinamon, cloves and nutmegs,
with a pebble-stone in it to make it sink; and stop it up close for six
months or a year, and then you may draw it into bottles. if you like
cardamon-seeds, you may adde some of them to the spices. some do like mint
exceedingly to be added to the other herbs. where no yeast is to be had,
the liquor will work if you set it some days in the hot sun (with a cover,
like the roof of a house over it, to keep wet out, if it chance to rain)
but then you must have great care, to fill it up, as it consumeth, and to
stop it close a little before it hath done working, and to set it then
presently in a cool cellar. i am told that the leapage ven of bread will make it
work as well as yest, but i have not tryed it. if you will not have it so
strong, it will be much sooner ready to drink; as if you take six parts of
water to one of honey. some do like the drink better without either herbs
or spices, and it will be much the whiter. if you will have it stronger,
put but four gallons and a half of water to one of honey.
you may use what herbs or roots you please, either for their tast or
vertue, after the manner here set down.
if you make it work with yeast, you must have great care, to draw it into
bottles soon after it hath done working, as after a fortnight or three
weeks. for that will make it soon grow stale, and it will thence grow sower
and dead before you are aware. but if it work singly of itself, and by help
of the sun without admixtion of either leaven or yeast, it may be kept long
in the barrel, so it be filled up to the top, and kept very close stopp'd.
i conceive it will be exceeding good thus: when you have a strong
honey-liquor of three parts of water to one of honey, well-boiled and
scummed, put into it lukewarm, or better (as soon as you take it from the
fire) some clove-gilly-flowers, first wiped, and all the whites clipped
off, one good handful or two to every gallon of liquor. let these infuse 
or  hours. then strain it from the flowers, and either work it with
yeast, or set it in the sun to work; when it hath almost done working, put
into it a bag of like gilly-flowers (and if they are duly dried, i thipage nk
they are the better) hanging it in at the bung. and if you will put into
it some spirit of wine, that hath drawn a high tincture from
clove-gilly-flowers (dried i conceive is best) and some other that hath
done the like from flowers and tops of rosemary, and some that hath done
the like from cinnamon and ginger, i believe it will be much the nobler,
and last the longer.
i conceive, that bitter and strong herbs, as rosemary, bayes,
sweet-marjoram, thyme, and the like, do conserve meathe the better and
longer, being as it were in stead of hops. but neither must they, no more
than clove-gilly-flowers, be too much boiled: for the volatil pure spirit
flies away very quickly. therefore rather infuse them. beware of infusing
gillyflower in any vessel of metal, (excepting silver:) for all metals will
spoil and dead their colour. glased earth is best.
if you will make a cordial liquor of sack with clove-gilly-flowers, you
must do thus. prepare your gilly-flowers, as is said before, and put them
into great double glass-bottles, that hold two gallons a piece, or more;
and put to every gallon of sack, a good half pound of the wiped and cut
flowers, putting in the flowers first, and then the sack upon them. stop
the glasses exceeding close, and set them in a temperate cellar. let them
stand so, till you see that the sack hath drawn out all the principal
tincture from them, and that the flowers begin to look palish; (with an eye
of pale, or faint in colour) then pour thepage  sack from them, and throw away
the exhausted flowers, or distil a spirit from them; for if you let them
remain longer in the sack, they will give an earthy tast to them. you may
then put the tincted sack into fit bottles for your use, stopping them very
close. but if the season of the flowers be not yet past, your sack will be
better, if you put it upon new flowers, which i conceive will not be the
worse, but peradventure the better, if they be a little dried in the shade.
if you drink a glass or two of this sack at a meal, you will find it a
great cordial.
upon better consideration; i conceive the best way of making hydromel with
clove-gilly-flowers, is thus: boil your simple liquor to its full height
(with three parts of water to one of honey), take a small parcel out, to
make a strong infusion of flowers, pouring it boyling hot upon the flowers
in earthen vessels. if you have great quantity, as six to one, of liquor,
you will easily draw out the tincture in fourteen or sixteen hours
infusion; otherwise you may quicken your liquor with a parcel of sack. in
the mean time make the great quantity of liquor work with yest. when it
hath almost done fermenting, but not quite, put the infusion to it warm,
and let it ferment more if it will. when that is almost done, put to it a
bag with flowers to hang in the bung.
i conceive that hydromel made with juniper-berries (first broken and
bruised) boiled in it, is very good. adde also to it rosemary and
bay-leaves.
upon tryal of several waypage s, i conclude (as things yet appear to me) that to
keep meath long, it must not be fermented with yest (unless you put hops
to it) but put it in the barrel, and let it ferment of it self, keeping a
thick plate of lead upon the bung, to lie close upon it, yet so that the
working of the liquor may raise it, to purge out the foulness, and have
always some new made plain liquor, to fill it up as it sinks, warm whiles
it works: but cold during three or four month's after. then stop the bung
exceeding close. and when you will make your mead with cherries or
morello-cherries, or raspes, or bilberries, or black-cherries, put their
juyce to the liquor when you tun it, without ever boiling it therein; about
one quart of juyce to every three or four gallons of liquor. you may
squeese out the clear juyce, and mingle it with the liquor, and hang the
magma in a bag in the bung. i think it is best to break the stones of the
cherries, before you put their magma into the bag.
since i conceive, that clove-gilly-flowers must never be boiled in the
liquor: that evaporateth their spirits, which are very volatile: but make a
strong infusion of them, and besides hang a bag of them in the bung. i
conceive that it is good to make the liquor pretty strong (not too much,
but so as the taste may be gratefull) of some strong herbs, as rosemary,
bay-leaves, sweet-marjoram, thyme, broad-thyme, and the like. for they
preserve the drink, and make it better for the stomack and head. standing
in the sun is the best way of fermepage ntation, when the drink is strong. the
root of angelica or elecampane, or eringo, or orris, may be good and
pleasant, to be boiled in the liquor. raspes and cherries and bilberies are
never to be boiled, but their juyce put into the liquor, when it is
tunning. use onely morello-cherries (i think) for pleasure, and black ones
for health. i conceive it best to use very little spice of any kind in
meathes.
in sixty gallons of water, boil ten handfuls of sweet-bryar-leaves;
eye-bright, liverwort, agrimony, scabious, balme, wood-bettony,
strawberry-leaves, burnet, of each four handfuls; of rosemary, three
handfuls; of minth, angelica, bayes and wild-thyme, sweet-marjoram, of each
two handfuls: six eringo-roots. when the water hath taken out the vertue of
the herbs and roots, let it settle, and the next day pour off the clear,
and in every three gallons of it boil one of honey, scumming it well, and
putting in a little cold water now and then to make the scum rise, as also
some whites of eggs. when it is clear scummed, take it off, and let it
cool; then work it with ale-yest; tun it up, and hang it in a bag, with
ginger, cinamom, cloves and cardamom. and as it worketh over, put in some
strong honey-drink warmed. when it works no more, stop it up close.
in twenty gallons of water boil sweet-bryar-leaves, eye-bright, rosemary,
bayes, clove-gilly-flowers of each fipage ve handfuls, and four eringo-roots. to
every two gallons and a half of this decoction, put one gallon of honey;
boil it, &c. when it is tunned up, hang in it a bag containing five
handfuls of clove-gilly-flowers, and sufficient quantity of the spices
above.
in both these receipts, the quantity of the herbs is too great. the strong
herbs preserve the drink, and make it nobler. use marjoram and thyme in
little quantity in all.
take to four gallons of water, one gallon of virgin-honey; let the water be
warm before you put in the honey; and then put in the whites of  or  eggs
well beaten, to make the scum rise. when the honey is throughly melted and
ready to boil, put in an egge with the shell softly; and when the egge
riseth above the water, to the bigness of a groat in sight, it is strong
enough of the honey. the egge will quickly be hard, and so will not rise;
therefore you must put in another, if the first do not rise to your sight;
you must put in more water and honey proportionable to the first, because
of wasting away in the boiling. it must boil near an hour. you may, if you
please, boil in it, a little bundle of rosemary, sweet-marjoram, and thyme;
and when it tasteth to your liking, take it forth again. many do put
sweet-bryar berries in it, which is held very good. when your meath is
boiled enough take it off the fire, and put it into a kiver; when it is
blood-warm, put inpage  some ale-barm, to make it work, and cover it close with
a blancket in the working. the next morning tun it up, and if you please
put in a bag with a little ginger and a little nutmeg bruised; and when it
hath done working, stop it up close for a moneth, and then bottle it.
first boil the water and scum it; then to  gallons put  handfuls of
sweet-bryar-leaves, of sweet-marjoram, rosemary, thyme, of each one a
handful: flowers of marigold, borrage, bugloss, sage, each two handfuls.
boil all together very gently, till a third waste. to eight gallons of this
put two gallons of pure honey, and boil them till the liquor bear an egge,
the breadth of threepence or a groat, together with such spices as you like
(bruised, but not beaten) an ounce of all is sufficient.
you must observe carefully. . before you set the liquor to boil, to cause
a lusty servant (his arms well washed) to mix the honey and water together,
labouring it with his hands at least an hour without intermission. . that
when it begins to boil fast, you take away part of the fire, so as it may
boil slowly, and the scum and dross go all to one side, the other remaining
clear. when you take it off, let none of the liquor go away with the dross.
. when you take it from the fire, let it settle well, before it be tunned
into the vessel, wherein you mean to keep it: and when it comes near the
bottom, let it be taken carefully from the sediment, with a thin dish, so
page as nothing be put into the vessel, but what is clear. . stop it very
close (when it is set in the place, where it must remain) cover it with a
cloth, upon which some handfuls of bay-salt and salpeter is laid, and over
that lay clay, and a turf. . put into it, when you stop it, some
new-laid-eggs in number proportionable to the bigness of the vessel,
shell's unbroken. six eggs to about sixteen gallons. the whole egg-shell
and all will be entirely consumed.
must be boiled as the other, if you intend to keep it above half a year;
but less according to the time, wherein you mean to use it. you must put in
no herbs, to avoid bitterness and discolouring; and the proportion of water
and honey more or less, as you would drink it sooner or later; (as a gallon
of honey to , , or  of water.) if to be weak, and to be soon drunk, you
must when it is tunned, put in a tost of bread (hard tosted) upon which
half a score drops of spirit of yest or barm is dropped; for want of it,
spread it with purest barm beaten with a few drops of oyl of cinnamon. if
you intend to give it the taste of raspes, then adde more barm, to make it
work well, and during that time of working, put in your raspes (or their
syrup) but the fruit gives a delicate colour, and syrup a duller tincture.
drink not that made after the first manner, till six moneths, and it will
endure drawing better then wine; but bottleled, it is more spirited then
any drink.
the spirit of barm is made page by putting store of water to the barm; then
distill the spirit, as you do other spirits; at last an oyl will come,
which is not for this use.
sir thomas gower maketh his ordinary drink thus: make very small well
brewed ale. to eight gallons of this put one gallon of honey; when it is
well dissolved and clarified, tun up the liquor, making it work in due
manner with barm. when it hath done working, stop it up close, and in three
months it will be fit to drink.
he makes metheglin thus. make a good decoct of eglantine-leaves, cowslip
flowers, a little sweet-marjoram, and some rosemary and bay-leaves, betony,
and scabious, and a little thyme. after the sediment hath settled, put /
or / or / or / part of honey, (according as you would have it strong,
and soon ready) to the clear severed from the settlement, and stir it
exceeding well with stripped arms  or  hours, till it be perfectly
incorporated. then boil and scum it; let it then cool and tun it up, &c.
after it hath cooled, lade the clean from the settlement, so that it may
not trouble it, and run up the clear thus severed from the settlings. much
of the perfection consisteth in stirring it long with stripped arms before
you boil it. then to boil it very leisurely till all the scum be off. and
order your fire so, that the scum may rise and drive all to one side. this
will be exceeding pale clear and pleasant metheglin. he useth to every
gallon of water, a good handful of eglantine-leaves, and as much cowslip
flowers; but onely a pugil of thyme or marjoram.
page 
take of sweet-bryar berries, of rosemary, broad thyme, of each a handful.
boil them in a quantity of fair water for half an hour; then cleanse the
water from the herbs, and let it stand  hours, until it be thorough cold.
then put your hony into it (hony which floweth from the combs of it self in
a warm place is best) make it so strong of the honey that it bear an egge
(if you will have it strong) the breadth of a groat above the liquor. this
being done, lave and bounce it very well and often, that the honey and
water may incorporate and work well together. after this boil it softly
over a gentle fire, and scum it. then beat the whites of eggs with their
shells, and put into it to clarifie it. after this, put some of it into a
vessel, and take the whites of two eggs, and a little barm, and a small
quantity of fine flower; beat them well together, and put it into the
vessel close covered, that it may work. then pour the rest into it by
degrees, as you do beer. at last take a quantity of cinamon,  or  races
of ginger, and two nutmegs (for more will alter the colour of it.) hang
these in a little bag in the vessel. thus made, it will be as white as any
white-wine.
to three gallons of spring-water take three quarts of honey, and set it
over the fire, till the scum rises pretty thick. then tpage ake off the scum,
and put in thyme, rosemary, hyssop and maiden-hair, of each one handful;
and two handfuls of eglantine leaves, and half a handful of organ. the
spices, ginger, nutmegs, cinamon and a little mace, and boil all these
together near half an hour. then take it from the fire, and let it stand
till it be cold, and then strain it, and so tun it up, and stop it close.
the longer you keep it, the better it will be.
take two gallons of water; one gallon of honey: parietary one handful;
sage, thyme, one pugil; of hyssop half a pugil. six parsley-roots; one
fennel-root, the pith taken out: red-nettles one pugil. six leaves of
hearts-tongue. boil this together one hour. then put in the honey, and
nutmegs, cloves, mace, cinamon of each one ounce; of ginger three ounces.
boil all these together, till the scum be boiled in, not scumming it. then
take it off, and set it to cool. when it is cold, put in it six spoonfuls
of barm, and when it is ripe, it will hiss in the pail. you must take out
the herbs, when you put in the honey. if you put in these herbs following,
it will be far better; sanicle, bugloss, avens, and ladies-mantle, of each
one handful.
take of sweet-bryar a great handful: of violet-flowers, sweet-marjoram,
strawberry-leaves, violet-leaves, ana, one handful, agrimony, bugloss,
borrage, ana, half a handful. rosemary four branches, gilly-flowers, no.
 (the yellow-wall-flowers, with great tops) anniseeds, fennpage el, and
caraway, of each a spoonful, two large mace. boil all these in twelve
gallons of water for the space of an hour; then strain it, and let it stand
until it be milk-warm then put in as much honey, as will carry an egge to
the breadth of sixpence, at least. then boil it again, and scum it clean;
then let it stand, until it be cold; then put a pint of ale-barm into it,
and ripen it as you do beer, and tun it. then hang in the midst of the
vessel a little bag with a nutmeg quartered, a race of ginger sliced, a
little cinamon, and mace whole, and three grains of musk in a cloth put
into the bag amongst the rest of the spices. put a stone in the bag, to
keep it in the midst of the liquor. this quantity took up three gallons of
honey; therefore be sure to have four in readiness.
take one measure of honey, and dissolve it in four of water, beating it
long up and down with clean woodden ladels. the next day boil it gently,
scumming it all the while till no more scum riseth; and if you will
clarifie the liquor with a few beaten whites of eggs, it will be the
clearer. the rule of it's being boiled enough is, when it yieldeth no more
scum, and beareth an egge, so that the breadth of a groat is out of the
water. then pour it out of the kettle into woodden vessels, and let it
remain there till it be almost cold. then tun it into a vessel, where sack
hath been.
take a quart of honey, and mix it with a gallon of fountain-water, and work
page it well four days together, four times a day; the fifth day put it over
the fire, and let it boil an hour, and scum it well. then take the whites
of two eggs, and beat them to a froth, and put it into the liquor; stirring
it well, till the whites of eggs have raised a froth of scum; then take it
off, scumming the liquor clean. then take a handful of strawberry-leaves
and violet-leaves together, with a little sprig of rosemary and two or
three little sprigs of spike; and so boil it again (with these herbs in it)
a quarter of an hour. then take it off the fire, and when it is cold, put
it into a little barrel, and put into it half a spoonful of ale-yest, and
let it work; which done, take one nutmeg sliced, and twice as much ginger
sliced, six cloves bruised, and a little stick of cinamon, and sow these
spices in a little bag, and stop it well; and it will be fit for use within
a fortnight, and will last half a year. if you will have your metheglin
stronger, put into it a greater quantity of honey.
in four parts of springwater dissolve one part of honey, or so much as the
liquor will bear an egge to the breadth of a groat. then boil it very well,
and that all the scum be taken away. he addeth nothing to it but a small
proportion of ginger sliced: of which he putteth half to boil in the
liquor, after all the scum is gone; and the other half he putteth into a
bag, and hangeth in the bung, when it is tunned. the ginger must be very
little, not so much as to make the liquor taste spage trongly of it, but to
quicken it. i should like to adde a little proportion of rosemary, and a
greater of sweet-bryar leaves, in the boiling. as also, to put into the
barrel a tost of white bread with mustard, to make it work. he puts nothing
to it; but his own strength in time makes it work of it self. it is good to
drink after a year.
take to every quart of honey, , , or , quarts of water; boil it on a
good quick fire as long as any scum riseth; as it boils, put about half a
pint of water at a time very often, and scum it very well as it riseth; and
be sure to keep it up to the same height and quantity as at the first: put
into it a little rosemary, according to the quantity that you make, and
boil it half a quarter of an hour; scum it very well. you may put a little
ginger into it, onely to give it a taste thereof, and let it have a little
walm of heat after it. then take and put it into a woodden vessel, (which
must be well scalded, least it taste of any thing) let it stand all night,
and the next morning strain it through a sieve of hair.
then if you please, you may boil up your grounds that are in the bottome of
the vessel with three or four quarts of water; and when it is cold, strain
it, to the rest, and put to it a little good light barm. that which you
make in the winter, you must let it stand three days and three nights
covered up, before you bottle it up; and two nights in summer, and then
bottle it up. but be sure, you scum off the barm before the bottling up.
page 
your vessel, which you intend to boil your meath in, must stand in
scalding water, whilst you boil your meath; it will drink up the less of
your meath. four spoonfuls of good new ale-barm will serve for five quarts
of honey. as you desire your metheglin in strength, so take at the first
either of the quantities of water. five quarts is reasonable.
take  quarts of spring-water, and one quart of honey; when the water is
warm, put the honey into it. when it boileth up, skim it very well, and
continue skimming it, as long as any scum will rise. then put in one race
of ginger (sliced in thin slices,) four cloves, and a little sprig of green
rosemary. let these boil in the liquor so long, till in all it have boiled
one hour. then set it to cool, till it be blood-warm; and then put to it a
spoonful of ale-yest. when it is worked up, put it into a vessel of a fit
size; and after two or three days, bottle it up. you may drink it after six
weeks, or two moneths.
thus was the hydromel made that i gave the queen, which was exceedingly
liked by everybody.
take such quantity as you judge convenient of spring, or pure rain water,
and make it boil well half an hour. then pour it out into a woodden fat,
and let it settlpage e  hours. then power off the clear, leaving the sediment
in the bottome. let such water be the liquor for all the several
honey-drinks, you will make.
. warm sixteen gallons of this water (lukewarm) and put two gallons of
honey to it, in a half tub or other fit woodden vessel. lave it very well
with a clean arm, or woodden battle-door for two or three hours, dissolving
the honey very well in the water. let it stand thus two or three days in
wood, laving it thrice a day, a pretty while each time. then put it back
into your copper and boil it gently, till you have scummed away all the
foulness that will rise; and clarifie it with whites of eggs: then put into
it a little handful of cleansed and sliced white ginger, and a little mace;
when they have boiled enough, put in a few cloves bruised, and a stick of
cinamon, and a little limmon-peel, and after a walm or two, pour the liquor
into a woodden half tub, with the spices in it. cover it close with a cloth
and blanquet, and let it stand so two days. then let the liquor run through
a bolter, to sever the spice, stopping before any settlings come. then pour
this clear liquor into pottle-bottles of glass, not filling them by a
fingers breadth or more. stop them close with cork tied in, and set them in
a cool place for ,  or  weeks.
. in fourty gallons of the first boiled and settled water, boil five
handfuls of sweet-bryar tops, as much of cowslip-flowers, as much of
primrose-flowers, as much of rosemary-flowers, as much of sage-flowers, as
page many of borage-flowers, as many of bugloss-flowers; two handfuls of the
tops of betony, four handfuls of agrimony, and as many of scabious, one
handful of thyme, as much of sweet-marjoram, and two ounces of mustard-seed
bruised. when this hath boiled so long, that you judge the water hath drawn
out all the vertue of the herbs (which may be in half an hour) pour out all
into a vatte to cool and settle. scum away the herbs, and pour the clear
from the sediment, and to every four gallons of liquor (luke-warm) put one
gallon of honey, and lave it to dissolve the honey, letting it stand two or
three days, laving it well thrice every day. then boil it till it will bear
an egge high, then clarifie it with whites and shells of eggs, and pour it
into a vatte to cool, which it will do in a days space or better. whilst it
is yet luke-warm, put ale-yest to it, (no more then is necessary) to make
it work, and then tun it into a rundlet of a fit size, that hath been
seasoned with sack; and hang in it a boulter bag containing half a pound of
white ginger cleansed and sliced, three ounces of cloves and as much of
cinamon bruised, as much coriander seed prepared, and as much
elder-flowers. as it purgeth and consumeth by running over the bung, put in
fresh honey-liquor warmed, that you keep or make on purpose for that end.
when the working is even almost at an end, stop it up close with clay and
sand, and have great care to keep it always close stopped. after a year
draw in into pottle glass-bottles stopped with ground stoppels of glass,
and keep them in a cool place, till they are ready to drink, if they as yet
be not so.
page 
have a care, that never any liquor stay in copper longer then whilst it is
to boil.
. in  gallons of the first boiled and settled water, boil six handfuls
of sweet-bryar-leaves, as many of cowslip flowers, as many of
primrose-flowers, and as many of rosemary-flowers; and half a handful of
wild thyme, during the space of a quarter or half an hour. then take the
clear, and dissolve in it a sixth part of honey, doing as above for the
boiling and clarifying it. but boil it not to bear an egge, but onely till
it be well scummed and clarified. then pour it into a woodden tub, and tun
it with ale-yest, when it is in due temper of coolness, as you would do
ale-wort; and let it work (close covered) sufficiently. then tun it up into
a seasoned firkin, and put into it a tost of white-bread spread with quick
mustard, and hang it in a boulter bag containing loosly some ginger, cloves
and cinamon bruised, and a little limon-peel and elder-flowers, with a
pebble-stone at the bottome, to make it sink towards the bottom, and
fastned by a string coming out of the bung to hinder it from falling quite
to the bottome. stop the bung very close, and after six weeks or two
moneths draw it into bottles.
. in  gallons of boiled and settled water, boil a quarter of an hour ten
handfuls of sweet bryar-leaves, and as many of cowslips. then let it cool
and settle in wood, and take the clear; and to every four gallons of
liquor, put one of honey, dissolving it as the others formerlypage  set down.
boil it, till no more scum rise, and that a fourth part be consumed. then
clarifie it with whites of eggs and their shells, and make it work with
yest. after sufficient working tun it up, hanging it in a bag with ginger,
cloves, cinamon and limon-peel. stop it very close, and after two or three
moneths, draw it into bottles.
boil first your water with your herbs. those she likes best, are, angelica,
balm, borage, and a little rosemary (not half so much as of any of the
rest) a handful of all together, to two or  gallons of water. after about
half an hours boiling, let the water run through a strainer (to sever the
herbs from it) into woodden or earthen vessels, and let it cool and settle.
to three parts of the clear, put one or more of honey, and boil it till it
bear an egge, leaving as broad as a shilling out of the water, skiming it
very well. then power it out into vessels, as before; and next day, when it
is almost quite cold, power it into a sack-cask, wherein you have first put
a little fresh ale-yest, about two spoonfuls to ten gallons. hang it in a
bag with a little sliced ginger, but almost a porengerfull of cloves. cover
the bung lightly, till it have done working; then stop it up close. you may
tap and draw it a year or two after. it is excellent good.
dissolve your honey in the water till it bear an egge higher or lower,
according to the strength you will have it of. then putpage  into it some
sea-wormwood and a little rosemary, and a little sage; about too good
handfuls of all together, to ten gallons. when it hath boiled enough to
take the vertue of the herbs, skim them out, and strew a handful or two of
fine wheat-flower upon the boyling liquor.
this will draw all the dregs to it, and swim at the top, so that you may
skim all off together. and this she holdeth the best way of clarifying the
liquor, and making it look pale. then pour it into vessels as above to
cool. let it stand three days; then tun it up into a sack cask without yest
or spice, and keep it stopped till it work. then let it be open, till it
have done working, filling it up still with other honey-drink. then stop it
up close for a year or two. you may at first stop it so, that the strong
working may throw out the stopple, and yet keep it close, till it work
strongly. she saith, that such a small proportion of wormwood giveth it a
fine quick tast, and a pale colour with an eye of green. the wormwood must
not be so much, as to discern any the least bitterness in the taste; but
that the composition of it with the honey may give a quickness. the
rosemary and sage must be a great deal less then the wormwood. sometimes
she stoppeth it up close as soon as she hath tunned it, and lets it remain
so for three moneths. then pierce it and draw it into bottles, which stop
well, and tie down the stoppels. this will keep so a long time. she useth
this way most. it makes the mead drink exceeding quick and pleasant. when
you pierce the cask, it will flie out with exceeding force, and be ready to
throw out the stopper and spigot.
page 
take rosemary, thyme, sweet-bryar, penyroyal, bayes, of each one handful;
steep them  hours in a bowl of fair cold water covered close; next day
boil them very well in another water, till the colour be very high; then
take another water, and boil the same herbs in it, till it look green; and
so boil them in several waters, till they do but just change the colour of
the water. the first waters are thrown away. the last water must stand 
hours with the herbs in it. the liquor being strained from them, you must
put in as much fine honey till it will bear an egge; you must work and
labour the honey with the liquor a whole day, till the honey be consumed;
then let it stand a night a clearing. in the morning put your liquor a
boiling for a quarter of an hour, with the whites and shells of six eggs.
so strain it through a bag, and let it stand a day a cooling; so tun it up,
and put into the vessel in a linnen bag, cloves, mace, cinamon and nutmegs
bruised altogether. if you will have it to drink presently, take the whites
of two or three eggs, of barm a spoonful, and as much of wheaten-flower.
then let it work before you stop it, afterwards stop it well with clay and
salt. a quart of honey to a gallon of liquor, and so proportionably for
these herbs.
take ten gallons of spring-water, and put therein ten pints of the best
honey. let this boil half an hour, and scum it very wpage ell; then put in one
handful of rosemary, and as much of bay-leaves; with a little limon-peel.
boil this half an hour longer, then take it off the fire, and put it into a
clean tub; and when it is cool, work it up with yest, as you do beer. when
it is wrought, put it into your vessel, and stop it very close. within
three days you may bottle it, and in ten days after it will be fit to
drink.
to a gallon of water put a quart of honey, about ten sprigs of
sweet-majoram; half so many tops of bays. boil these very well together,
and when it is cold, bottle it up. it will be ten days before it be ready
to drink.
boil sweet bryar, sweet marjoram, cloves and mace in spring-water, till the
water taste of them. to four gallons of water put one gallon of honey, and
boil it a little to skim and clarifie it. when you are ready to take it
from the fire, put in a little limon-peel, and pour it into a woodden
vessel, and let it stand till it is almost cold. then put in some ale-yest,
and stir it altogether. so let it stand till next day. then put a few
stoned raisins of the sun into every bottle, and pour the meath upon them.
stop the bottles close, and in a week the meath will be ready to drink.
take four quarts of honey, good measure; put to it four gallons of water,
let it stand all night, but stir it well, when you putpage  it together. the
next day boil it, and put to it nutmegs, cloves, mace and ginger, of each
half an ounce. let these boil with the honey and water till it will bear an
egge at the top without sinking; and then it is enough, if you see the egge
the breadth of a sixpence. the next day put it in your vessel, and put
thereto two or three spoonfuls of barm; and when it hath done working, you
may (if you like it) put in a little ambergreece in a clout with a stone to
it to make it sink. this should be kept a whole year before it be drunk; it
will drink much the better, free from any tast of the honey, and then it
will look as clear as sack. make it not till michaelmas, and set it in a
cool place. you may drink it a quarter old, but it will not taste so
pleasant then, as when it is old.
take a gallon of honey; put to it four gallons of water; stir them well
together, and boil them in a kettle, till a gallon be wasted with boiling
and scumming. then put it into a vessel to cool. when it is almost as cold
as ale-wort, then clear it out into another vessel: then put barm upon it,
as you do to your ale, and so let it work. and then tun it up into a
vessel, and put into it a bag with ginger, cloves, and cinamon bruised a
little, and so hang the bag in the vessel, and stop it up very close; and
when it hath stood a month or six weeks, bottle it up and so drink it. you
may put in a little limmon-peel into some of your metheglin, for those that
like that taste; which most persons do very much.
mistress hebden tellpage eth me, that the way of making honey-drink in russia,
is thus; take for example,  gallons of spring water, boil it a little;
then let it stand  hours to cool, and much sediment will fall to the
bottom; from which pour the clear, and warm it, and put  or  gallons of
pure honey to it, and lade it a long time with a great woodden battle-dore,
till it be well dissolved. the next day boil it gently, till you have
skimed off all the scum that will rise, and that it beareth an egge boyant.
and in this liquor you must put, in the due time, a little quantity of
hops, about two handfuls, which must boil sufficiently in the liquor. put
this into the cooling fat to cool two or three days. when it is about
milk-warm, take white-bread and cut it into tosts, upon which, (when they
are hot) spread moderately thick some fresh sweet ale-yest; and cover the
superficies of the liquor with such tosts; then cover the tub or fat with a
double course sheet, and a blancket or two, which tye fast about it. this
will make your liquor work up highly. when you find it is near it's height
of working, and that the liquor is risen to the top of the tub (of which it
wanted  or  inches at first,) skim off the tosts and yest, and tun it up
in a hogshead: which stop close; but after  hours draw it into another
barrel: for it will leave a great deal of sediment. it will work again in
this second barrel. after other  hours draw it into another barrel, and
then it will be clear and pale like white-wine. stop it up close, hanging a
bag of bruised spice in the bung; and after five or six months, it will be
fit to drink. if youpage  would have your meath taste of raspes, or cherries
(morello, sharp cherries, are the best) prepare the water first with them;
by putting five or six gallons of either of these fruits, or more, into
this proportion of water; in which bruise them to have all their juyce: but
strain the liquor from the grains or seeds, or stones. and then proceed
with this tincted water, as is said above. you may make your liquor as
strong, as you like, of the fruit. cardamon-seeds mingled with the
suspended spices, adde much to the pleasantness of the drink. limon-peel,
as also elder-flowers.
the way of making is thus. she boileth the honey with spring-water, as i
do, till it be cleer scumed; then to every gallon of honey, put in a pound
or two of good raisins of the sun; boil them well, and till the liquor bear
an egge. then pour it into a cowl or tub to cool. in about  hours it will
be cool enough to put the yest to it, being onely lukewarm: which do thus:
spread yest upon a large hot tost, and lay it upon the top of the liquor,
and cover the tub well, first with a sheet, then with coverlets, that it
may work well. when it is wrought up to it's height, before it begin to
sink, put it into your barrel, letting it run through a loose open
strainer, to sever the raisins and dregs from it. stop it up close, and
after it hath been thus eight or ten days, draw it into bottles, and into
every bottle put a cod of cardamoms, having first a little bruised them as
they lie in the cod; and opening the cod a little, that the liquor may
searpage ch into it. stop your bottles close, and after three or four moneths
you may drink, and it will be very pleasant and quick, and look like white
wine.
in every three gallons of water, boil rosemary, liverwort, balm, ana,
half a handful, and cowslips two handfuls. when the water hath sufficiently
drawn out the vertue of the herbs, pour all into a tub, and let it stand
all night. then strain it. and to every three gallons of the clear liquor
(or -/, if you will have your drink stronger) put one gallon of honey,
and boil it, till it bear an egge, scuming it till no more scum will rise:
which to make rise the better, put in now and then a porrenger full of cold
water. then pour it into a tub, and let it stand to cool, till it be blood
warm, and then put by degrees a pint of ale-yest to it, to make it work. so
let it stand three days very close covered. then skim off the yest, and put
it into a seasoned barrel; but stop it not up close, till it have done
hissing. then either stop it very close, if you will keep it in the barrel,
or draw it into bottles. put into this proportion, ginger sliced, nutmegs
broken, ana, one ounce, cinamon bruised half an ounce in a bag, which
hang in the bung with a stone in it to make it sink. you may add, if you
please, to this proportion of water, or one gallon more, two handfuls of
sweet-bryar-leaves, and one of betony.
in a copper, that holdeth convpage eniently three hogsheads, or near so much,
boil the best water, (as full as is fitting). as soon as it boileth well
and high, put to it four handfuls of sweet-bryar-leaves, as much of
eye-bright: two handfuls of rosemary, as much of sweet-marjoram, and one of
broad-thyme. let them boil a quarter of an hour (he letteth them boil no
longer, to preserve the colour of the metheglin pale) then scum away the
herbs, scuming also the water clear. then lade out the water, (letting it
run through a ranch-sieve) into a wide open vessel, or large vat to cool,
leaving the settlement and dregs. (he often leaves out the eye-bright and
thyme, when he provideth chiefly for the pure tast; though the eye-bright
hurts it but little.) when it is blood-warm, put the honey to it, about one
part, to four of water; but because this doth not determine the proportions
exactly (for some honey will make it stronger then other) you must do that
by bearing up an egge. but first, lave and scoop your mixture exceedingly,
(at least an hour) that the honey be not onely perfectly dissolved, but
uniformly mixed throughout the water. then take out some of it in a great
woodden bowl or pail, and put a good number, (ten or twelve) new-laid-eggs
into it, and as round ones as may be; for long ones will deceive you in the
swiming; and stale ones, being lighter then new, will emerge out of the
liquor, the breadth of a sixpence, when new ones will not a groats-breadth.
therefore you take many, that you make a medium of their several emergings;
unless you be certain, that they which you use, are immediately then laid
page and very round. the rule is, that a groats-breadth (or rather but a
threepence) of the egg-shel must swim above the liquor; which then put
again into your copper to boil. it will be some while, before it boil,
(peradventure a goodquarter of an hour) but all that while scum will rise,
which skim away still as it riseth; and it should be clear scummed by then
it boileth: which as soon as it doth, turn up an hour glass, and let it
boil well a good hour. a good quarter before the hour is out, put to it a
pound of white-ginger beaten exceedingly small and searsed (which will
sever all the skins and course parts from the fine) which having boiled a
quarter of an hour, so to make up the whole hour of boiling, pour out the
liquor into wide open vats to cool. when it is quite cold, put a pottle of
new-ale-barm into a pipe or butt, standing endwise with his head out, and
pour upon it a pail-full of your cool liquor out of one of the vats; which
falling from high upon it with force, will break and dissipate the barm
into atoms, and mix it with the liquor. pour immediately another pail-ful
to that, continuing to do so, till all the liquor be in. which by this time
and this course will be uniformly mixed with the barm, and begin to work.
yet scoop and lade it well a while, to make the mixtion more perfect, and
set the working well on foot. then cover your but-head with a sheet onely
in summer, but blankets in winter; and let your liquor work about  hours
or more. the measure of that is, till the barm (which is raised to a great
head) beginneth a little to fall. then presently scum of the thipage ck head of
the barm, but take not all away so scrupulously, but that there may remain
a little white froth upon the face of the liquor. which scoop and lade
strongly, mingling all to the bottom, that this little remaining barm may
by this agitation be mixed a new with the whole. then immediately tun this
liquor into two hogsheads that have served for spanish-wine (be sure to
fill them quite full) and there let it work two or three days; that is to
say, till you see that all the feculent substance is wrought out, and that
what runneth out, beginneth to be clear, though a little whitish or frothy
on the upperside of the stream that runs down along the outside of the
hogshead. (if there should be a little more then to fill two hogsheads, put
it in a rundlet by it self.) then take some very strong firm paper, and wet
it on one side with some of the barm that works out, and lay that side over
the bung to cover it close. the barm will make it stick fast to the
hogshead. this covering will serve for a moneth or two. then stop it close
with strong cork fitted to the hole, with a linnen about it, to press it
fast in: but let a little vent with a peg in it be made in hogshead, in
some fit place above. this may be fit to broach in five or six moneths; but
three weeks or a moneth before you do so, put into each hogshead half an
ounce of cinnamon; and two ounces of cloves beaten into most subtile
powder. (sometimes he leaves out the cloves) which will give it a most
pleasant flavor; and they (as the ginger did) sink down to the bottome and
never trouble the liquor. if they be put in long before (much more if page they
be boiled) they loose all their taste and spirits entirely. this will last
very well half a year drawing. but if you stay broaching it a year, and
then draw it into bottles, it will keep admirable good three or four years,
growing to be much better, then when broached at six months end. it will be
purer, if you first boil the water by it self, then let it settle  hours;
and pour the clear from the earthy sediment, which will be great, and
dissolve your honey in that. you may aromatise it with ambergreece or musk,
or both (if you like them) by dissolving a very few pastils in a runlet of
this liquor, when you draw it into little vessels, (as he useth to do after
five or six moneths) or with a few drops of the extract of them. this
metheglin is a great balsom and strengthener of the viscera; is excellent
in colds and coughs and consumptions. for which last they use to burn it
(like wine) or rather onely heat it. then dissolve the yolk of an egge or
two in a pint of it, and some fresh butter, and drink it warm in the
morning fasting. as it comes from the barrel or bottle, it is used to be
drunk a large draught (without any alteration or admixtion, with a toste
early in the morning (eating the toste) when they intend to dine late.
consider of making metheglin thus with purified rain water (of the
æquinoxe) or dew.
the handfuls of herbs, are natural large handfuls (as much as you can take
up in your hand) not apothecaries handfuls, which are much less. if a
pottle of barm do not make it work enough to your mind, you may put in a
little more. discretion and experience must regulate that.
page 
you may make small meathe the same way, putting but half the proportion of
honey or less. but then after three weeks or a months barrelling, you must
bottle it.
take bugloss, borage, hyssop, organ, sweet-marjoram, rosemary,
french-cowslip, coltsfoot, thyme, burnet, self-heal, sanicle a little,
betony, blew-buttons, harts-tongue, meadssweet, liverwort, coriander two
ounces, bistort, saint john's wort, liquorish, two ounces of carraways, two
ounces of yellow-saunders, balm, bugle, half a pound of ginger, and one
ounce of cloves, agrimony, tormentil-roots, cumfrey, fennel-root's,
clowns-all-heal, maiden-hair, wall-rew, spleen-wort, sweet-oak,
pauls-betony, mouse ear.
for two hogsheads of metheglin, you take two handfuls a piece of each herb,
excepting sanicle; of which you take but half a handful. you make it in all
things as the white meathe of mr. pierce's is made, excepting as followeth.
for in that you boil the herbs but a quarter of an hour, that the colour
may be pale: but in this, where the deepness of the colour is not regarded,
you boil them a good hour, that you may get all the vertue out of them.
next for the strength of it; whereas in that, an egge is to emerge out of
the liquor but the breadth of a three pence; in this itpage  is to emerge a
large groats-breadth. then in this you take but half a pound of ginger,
and one ounce of cloves. whereas the white hath one pound of ginger, and
two ounces of cloves. to this you use three quarts, or rather more of
ale-yest (fresh and new) and when all your liquor is in a high slender tall
pipe with the narrowest circumference that may be (which makes it work
better then a broad one, where the spirits loose themselves) you have the
yest in a large noggin with a handle, or pail, and put some of the liquor
to it, and make that work; then pour it from pretty high unto the whole
quantity in the pipe, and lade it strongly with that noggin five or six, or
eight times, pouring it every time from high, and working it well together,
that so every atome of the yest maybe mingled with every atome of the
liquor. and this course (in this particular) you may also use in the white.
it is best not to broach this, till a year be over after the making it.
take to every gallon of honey, three gallons of water, and put them both
together, and set them over so soft a fire, that you may endure to melt and
break the honey with your hands. when the honey is all melted, put in an
egge, and let it fall gently to the bottome, and if the egge rise up to the
top again of the liquor, then is it strong enough of the honey; but if it
lie at the bottome, you must put in more honey, stirring of it till it do
rise. if your honey be very good, it will bear half a gallon of water more
to a gallon of honey. then take sweet-bryar, rose-mary, bayes, thyme,
page marjoram, savory, of each a good handful, which must be tyed up all
together in a bundle. this proportion of herbs will be sufficient for 
gallons of metheglin; and according to the quantity you make of metheglin,
you must add of your herbs or take away. when you have put these things
together set it upon a quick fire, and let it boil as fast as you can for
half an hour, or better, skiming of it very clean, which you must clarifie
with two or three whites of eggs. then take it off from the fire, and put
it presently into some clean covers, and let it stand till the next
morning; then pour the clear from the bottom and tun it up; putting in a
little bag of such spice as you like, whereof ginger must be the most.
after it hath stood some three or four days, you may put in some two or
three spoonfuls of good-ale-yest; it will make it ready the sooner to
drink, if you let it work together, before you stop it up.
the older the honey is, the whiter coloured the metheglin will be.
take twelve gallons of water, one handful of each of these herbs,
eglantine, rosemary, parsley, strawberry-leaves, wild-thyme, balm,
liver-wort, betony, scabious; when your water begins to boil, cast in your
herbs, and let them boil a quarter of an hour. then strain it from the
herbs. when it is almost cold, then put in as much of the best honey, as
will make it bear an egge, to the breadth of two pence; and stir it till
all the honey be melted. then boil it well half an hour at the lepage ast, and
put into it the whites of six eggs beaten to a froth to clarifie it; and
when it hath drawn all the scum to the top, strain it into woodden vessels.
when it is almost cold, put barm to it, and when it worketh well, tun it
into a well-seasoned vessel, where neither ale nor beer hath been, for
marring the colour; and when it hath done working, take a good quantity of
nutmegs, mace, cinnamon, cloves and ginger bruised, and put it into a
boulter bag, and hang it in the barrel.
if you will have it taste much of the spice, let it boil  or  walms in
it, after you have put in the honey. but that will make it have a deep
colour.
to seven quarts of water, take two quarts of honey, and mix it well
together; then set it on the fire to boil, and take three or four
parsley-roots, and as many fennel-roots, and shave them clean, and slice
them, and put them into the liquor, and boil altogether, and skim it very
well all the while it is a boyling; and when there will no more scum rise,
then is it boiled enough: but be careful that none of the scum do boil into
it. then take it off, and let it cool till the next day. then put it up in
a close vessel, and put thereto half a pint of new good barm, and a very
few cloves pounded and put in a linnen-cloth, and tie it in the vessel, and
stop it up close; and within a fortnight, it will be ready to drink: but if
it stay longer, it will be the better.
take a sufficient quantity of page rain-water, and boil in it the tops of
rose-mary, eglantine, betony, strawberry-leaves, wall-flowers, borage and
bugloss, of each one handful; one sprig of bays; and two or three of sage.
then take it off the fire, and put a whole raw egge into it, and pour so
much honey to it, till the egge rise up to the top; then boil it again,
skiming it very well, and so let it cool. then tun it up, and put barm to
it, that it may ferment well. then stop it up, and hang in it such spices,
as you like best. it will not be right to drink under three or four
moneths.
take three gallons of water (rain water is best) boil in it broad thyme,
rose-mary, peny-royal, of each three handfuls. then put it into a stone pan
to cool, and strain away the herbs; and when it is cold, put in one quart
of honey, and mix it very well; then put to it one nutmeg, a little
cinnamon; cloves and ginger; some orange and limon-peels. then boil and
scum it very well, while any scum will rise. then put in your spices, and
try with a new-laid-egg; and the stronger it is, the longer you may keep
it; and if you will drink it presently, put it up in bottles, and rub the
corks with yest, that it may touch it, and it will be ready in three or
four days to drink. and if you make it in the spring put no spices, but
cloves and cinnamon, and add violets, cowslips, marigolds, and
gilly-flowers; and be sure to stop your vessel close with cork; and to this
put no yest, for the clove-gilly-flowers will set it to work.
page 
. small. take ten gallons of water, and five quarts of honey, with a
little rosemary, more sweet-bryar, some balme, burnet, cloves, less ginger,
limon peel. tun it with a little barm; let it remain a week in the barrel
with a bag of elder-flowers; then bottle it.
. small. take ten quarts of water, and one of honey, balm a little;
minth, cloves, limon-peel, elder-flowers, a little ginger; wrought with a
little yest, bottle it after a night working.
. strong. take ten gallons of water; thirteen quarts of honey, with
angelica, borrage and bugloss, rosemary, balm and sweet-bryar; pour it into
a barrel, upon three spoonfuls of yest; hang in a bag cloves,
elder-flowers, and a little ginger.
. very strong. take ten gallons of water, and four of honey, with
sea-worm-wood, a little sage, rosemary; put it in a barrel, after three
days cooling. put no yest to it. stop it close, and bottle it after three
or four months.
. very strong. to ten gallons of water take four of honey. clarifie it
with flower; and put into it angelica, rosemary, bay-leaves, balm. barrel
it without yest. hang in a bag cloves, elder-flowers, a little ginger.
. very strong. take ten gallons of water, and four of honey. boil
nothing in it. barrel it when cold, without yest. hang in it a bag with
cloves, elder-flowers, a littlepage  ginger and limon peel; which throw away,
when it hath done working, and stop it close. you may make also strong and
small by putting into it orris-roots; or with rose-mary, betony, eye-bright
and wood-sorrel; or adding to it the tops of hypericon with the flowers of
it; sweet-bryar, lilly of the valley.
take three gallons of water, a quart of honey; if it be not strong enough,
you may adde more. boil it apace an hour, and scum it very clean. then take
it off, and set it a working at such heat as you set beer, with good yest.
then put it in a runlet, and at three days end, draw it out in
stone-bottles; into everyone put a piece of limon-peel and two cloves. it
is only put into the runlet, whilest it worketh, to avoid the breaking of
the bottles.
take three gallons of honey, and twelve gallons of water: mix the honey and
water very well together, till the honey is dissolved; so let it stand
twelve hours. then put in a new-laid-egg; if the liquor beareth the egg,
that you see the breadth of a groat upon the egg dry, you may set it over
the fire: if it doth not bear the egg, then you must adde a quart or three
pints more to the rest; and then set it over the fire, and let it boil
gently, till you have skimed it very clean, and clarified it, as you would
do suggar, with the whites of three new-laid-eggs. when it is thus made
clear from all scum, let it boil a full hour or more, till the fourth part
of it is wasted; then take it off the fire; and let it stand till the next
day. then putpage  it into a vessel. when it hath been in the barrel five or six
days, make a white tost, and dip it into new yeast, and put the tost into
the barrel, and let it work. when it hath done working, stop it up very
close. this keep three quarters of a year. you may drink it within half a
year, if you please. you may adde in the boiling, of what herbs you like
the taste, or what is physical.
take eight gallons of water, and set it over a clear fire in a kettle; and
when it is warm, put into it sixteen pounds of very good honey; stir it
well together, till it be all mixed; and when it boileth, take off the
scum, and put in two large nutmegs cut into quarters, and so let it boil at
least an hour. then take it off, and put into it two good handfuls of
grinded malt, and with a white staff keep beating it together, till it be
almost cold; then strain it through a hair sieve into a tub, and put to it
a wine pint of ale-yest, and stir it very well together; and when it is
cold, you may, if you please, tun it up presently in a vessel fit for it,
or else let it stand, and work a day: and when it hath done working in your
vessel, stop it up very close. it will be three weeks or a month, before it
will be ready to drink.
take six gallons of water, and put in six quarts of honey, stirring it till
the honey be throughly melted; then set it over the fire, and when it is
ready to boil, skim it very clean. then put in a quarter of ounce of mace,
so much ginger, half an ounce of nutmegs, sweet-marjoram, broad-thyme, and
sweet-bryar, of altogetherpage  a handful; and boil them well therein; then set
it by, till it be through cold, and then barrel it up, and keep it till it
be ripe.
take of the roots of coltsfoot, fennel and fearn each four ounces. of
succory-roots, sorrel-roots, strawberry-roots, bitter-sweet-roots, each two
ounces, of scabious-roots and elecampane-roots, each an ounce and a half.
ground-ivy, hore-hound, oak of jerusalem, lung-wort, liver-wort,
maiden-hair, harts-tongue of each two good-handfulls. licorish four ounces.
jujubes, raisins of the sun and currents, of each two ounces; let the roots
be sliced, and the herbs be broken a little with your hands; and boil all
these in twenty quarts of fair running water, or, if you have it, in rain
water, with five pints of good white honey, until one third part be boiled
away; then pour the liquor through a jelly bag often upon a little
coriander-seeds, and cinnamon; and when it runneth very clear, put it into
bottles well stopped, and set it cool for your use, and drink every morning
a good draught of it, and at five in the afternoone.
put to three gallons of spring-water, one of honey. first let it gently
melt; then boil for an hour, continually skiming it; then put it into an
earthen or a woodden vessel, and when it is a little more than blood-warm,
set it with ale-yest, and so let it stand twelve hours. then take off the
yest, and bottle it up. put into it limon-peelpage  and cloves, or what best
pleaseth your taste of spice or herbs. eringo-roots put into it, when it
is boiling, maketh it much better.
note, that if you make hydromel by fermentation in the hot sun (which will
last about fourty days, and requireth the greater heat) you must take it
thence, before it be quite ended working; and stop it up very close, and
set it in a cold cellar, and not pierce it in two months, at the soonest.
it will be very good this way, if you make it so strong, as to bear an egge
very boyant. it is best made by taking all the canicular days into your
fermentation.
put three parts of water to one of honey. when the honey is dissolved, it
is to bear an egge boyant. boil it and skim it perfectly clear. you may
boil in it pellitory of the wall, agrimony, or what herbs you please. to
every ten gallons of water, take ginger, cinnamon, ana, one ounce,
nutmegs half an ounce. divide this quantity (sliced and bruised) into two
parts. boil the one in the meath, severing it from the liquor, when it is
boiled, by running through a strainer; and hang the other parcel in the
barrel by the bung in a bag with a bullet in it. when it is cold, tun it.
and then you may work it with barm if you please; but it is most commended
without.
take the honey-combs, that the honey is run out from them, and lay them in
water over night; next day strain them, and put the liqpage uor a boiling; then
take the whites of two or three eggs, and clarifie the liquor. when you
have so done, skim it clean. then take a handful of peny-royal; four
handfuls of angelica; a handful of rosemary; a handful of borrage; a
handful of maidenhair, a handful of harts-tongue; of liverwort, of
water-cresses, of scurvy-grass, ana, a handful; of the roots of
marshmallows, parsley, fennel, ana, one ounce. let all these boil
together in the liquor, the space of a quarter of an hour. then strain the
liquor from them, and let it cool, till it be blood-warm. put in so much
honey, until an egge swim on it; and when your honey is melted, then put it
into the barrel. when it is almost cold, put a little ale barm to it; and
when it hath done working, put into your barrel a bag of spice of nutmegs,
ginger, cloves and mace, and grains good store; and if you will, put into a
lawn-bag two grains of ambergreece and two grains of musk, and fasten it in
the mouth of your barrel, and so let it hang in the liquor.
take one part of honey, to eight parts of rain or river-water; let it boil
gently together, in a fit vessel, till a third part be wasted, skiming it
very well. the sign of being boiled enough is, when a new-laid-egg swims
upon it. cleanse it afterwards by letting it run through a clean
linnen-cloth, and put it into a woodden runlet, where there hath been wine
in, and hang in it a bag with mustard-seeds by the bung, that so you may
take it out, when you please. this being done, put your runlet into the hot
sun, especially during the dog-days, (page which is the onely time to prepare
it) and your metheglin will boil like must; after which boiling take out
your mustard-seeds, and put your vessel well stopped into a cellar. if you
will have it the taste of wine, put to thirty measures of hydromel, one
measure of the juyce of hops, and it will begin to boil without any heat.
then fill up your vessel, and presently after this ebullition you will have
a very strong metheglin.
take rosemary, thyme, sweet-bryar, peny-royal, bays, water-cresses,
agrimony, marshmallow leaves, liver-wort, maiden-hair, betony, eye-bright,
scabious, the bark of the ash-tree, eringo-roots, green-wild-angelica,
ribwort, sanicle, roman-worm-wood, tamarisk, mother-thyme, sassafras,
philipendula, of each of these herbs a like proportion; or of as many of
them as you please to put in. but you must put in all but four handfuls of
herbs, which you must steep one night, and one day, in a little bowl of
water, being close covered; the next day take another quantity of fresh
water, and boil the same herbs in it, till the colour be very high; then
take another quantity of water, and boil the same herbs in it, until they
look green; and so let it boil three or four times in several waters, as
long as the liquor looketh any thing green. then let it stand with these
herbs in it a day and night. remember the last water you boil it in to this
proportion of herbs, must be twelve gallons of water, and when it hath
stood a day and a night, with these herbs in it, after the last boilipage ng,
then strain the liquor from the herbs, and put as much of the finest and
best honey into the liquor, as will make it bear an egg. you must work and
labour the honey and liquor together one whole day, until the honey be
consumed. then let it stand a whole night, and then let it be well laboured
again, and let it stand again a clearing, and so boil it again a quarter of
an hour, with the whites of six new-laid-eggs with the shells, the yolks
being taken out; so scum it very clean, and let it stand a day a cooling.
then put it into a barrel, and take cloves, mace, cinamon, and nutmegs, as
much as will please your taste, and beat them altogether; put them into a
linnen bag, and hang it with a thread in the barrel. take heed you put not
too much spice in; a little will serve. take the whites of two or three
new-laid-eggs, a spoonful of barm, and a spoonful of wheat-flower, and beat
them altogether, and put it into your liquor into the barrel, and let it
work, before you stop it. then afterwards stop it well, and close it well
with clay and salt tempered together, and let it be set in a close place;
and when it hath been settled some six weeks, draw it into bottles, and
stop it very close, and drink it not a month after: but it will keep well
half a year, and more.
take ten gallons of water; then take six handfuls of sweet-bryar; as much
of sweet-marjoram; and as much of muscovy. three handfuls of the best
broad-thyme. boil these together half an hour; then strain them. then page take
two gallons of english-honey, and dissolve it in this hot liquor, and brew
it well together; then set it over the fire to boil again, and skim it very
clean; then take the whites of thirty eggs wel beaten, and put them into
the liquor, and let it boil an hour; then strain it through a jelly bag,
and let it stand  hours cooling: then put it up in a vessel. then take
six nutmegs, six fair races of ginger, a quarter of an ounce of cloves,
half an ounce of cinamon; bruise all these together, and put them into a
linnen-bag, with a little pebble-stone to make it sink. then hang it in the
vessel. you may adde to it, if you please, two grains of ambergreece, and
one grain of musk. stop the vessel with a cork, but not too close, for six
days; then taste it: and if it taste enough of the spice, then take out the
bag; if not, let the bag hang in it, and stop it very close, and meddle
with it no more. it will be ready to drink in nine or ten weeks.
take as many gallons of water, as you intend to make of meath; and to every
gallon put a quart of honey, and let it boil till it bear an egg. to every
gallon you allow the white of an egg, which white you must remove and break
with your hands, and put into the kettle, before you put it over the fire.
before it boileth, there will arise a skum, which must be taken off very
clean, as it riseth. put to every gallon two nutmegs sliced, and when it
hath boiled enough, take it off, and set it a cooling in clean
wort-vessels: and when it is as cold as wort, put in a little barm, and
work it like beer, and when it hath done working, stop it up, and let it
stand two months.
page 
to every quart of honey allow six wine-quarts of water; half an ounce of
nutmegs, and the peel of a limon, and the meat of two or three, as you make
the quantity. boil these together, till the scum rise no more; it must
stand till it be quite cold, and when you tun it, you squeese into it the
juyce of some limons, and this will make it ripen quickly. it will be ready
in less then a month.
take twelve gallons of water, a handful of muscovy (which is an herb, that
smelleth like musk), a handful of sweet-marjoram, and as much of
sweet-bryar. boil all these in the water, till all the strength be out.
then take it off and strain it out, and being almost cold, sweeten it with
honey very strong, more then to bear an egg, (the meaning of this is, that
when there is honey enough to bear an egg, which will be done by one part
of honey to three or four quarts of water: then you add to it a pretty deal
of honey more, at least / or / of what you did put in at first to make
it bear an egg: then it is to be boiled and scummed: when it is thus
strong, you may keep it four years before you drink it. but at the end of
two years you may draw it out into bottles) just above it, else it will not
keep very long: for the more honey the better. then set it over the fire
till it boils, and scum it very clean. then take it from the fire, and let
it stand, till it be cold: then put it into your vessel. take mace, cpage loves,
nutmegs, ginger, of each a quarter of an ounce: beat them small, and hang
them in your vessel (being stopped close) in a little bag.
note, when any meath or metheglin grows hard or sower with keeping too
long, dissolve in it a good quantity of fresh honey, to make it pleasantly
sweet; (but boil it no more, after it hath once fermented, as it did at the
first tunning) and with that it will ferment again, and become very good
and pleasant and quick.
take of rosemary three handfuls, of winter-savory a peck by measure, organ
and thyme, as much, white-wort two handfuls, blood-wort half a peck, hyssop
two handfuls, marygolds, borage, fennil, of each two handfuls;
straw-berries and violet-leaves, of each one handful; of harts-tongue,
liverwort a peck; ribwort half a peck, of eglantine with the roots, a good
quantity; wormwood as much as you can gripe in two hands; and of sorrel,
mead-sutt bettony with the roots, blew-bottles with the roots, the like
quantity; of eye-bright two handfuls, wood-bind one handful. take all these
herbs, and order them so, as that the hot herbs may be mastered with the
cool. then take the small herbs, and put them into the furnace, and lay the
long herbs upon them. then take a weight or stone of lead, having a ring,
whereunto fasten a stick to keep down the herbs into the furnace; then boil
your water and herbs three or four hours, and as the water doth boil away,
adde more. then take the water out page of the furnace seething hot, and strain
it through a range-sieve; then put in the honey, and mash it well
together: then take your sweet-wort, and strain it through a range. then
try it with a new-laid-egg. it must be so strong as to bear an egg the
breadth of a groat above the liquor: and if it doth not, then put in more
honey, till it will bear the egg. then take the liquor, and boil it again;
and as soon as it doth boil, skim the froth very clean from it: then set it
a cooling, and when it is cold, then put it into a kive, and put barm
thereto, and let it work the space of a week; then tun it up: but be
careful when it is tunned, that the vessels be not stopp'd up, till it hath
done hissing.
take to one part of honey, three parts of water: and put them into clean
vessels, mixing them very well together, and breaking the honey with
stripped arms, till it be well dissolved. then pour out your liquor into a
large kettle, and let it boil for two hours and a half, over a good fire,
skiming it all the while very carefully as long as any scum riseth. when it
is boiled enough, pour out your liquor into clean vessels, and set it to
cool for  hours. afterwards put it into some runlets, and cover the bung
with a piece of lead: have a care to fill it up always with the same boiled
liquor for three or four months and during the time of working. this meath
the older it is, the better it is. but if you will have your meath red,
then take twenty pound of black currants, and put them into a vessel, and
pour your liquor on them. of this honey-liquor you cannot drink till after
nine months, or a year.
page 
take ten gallons of water; and to every gallon of water a quart of honey, a
handful and a half of rosemary, one ounce of mace, one ounce and a half of
nutmegs, as much cinamon, half an ounce of cloves, a quarter of a pound of
ginger scraped and cut in pieces. put all these into the water, and let it
boil half an hour, then take it off the fire, and let it stand, till you
may see your shadow in it. then put in the honey, and set it upon the fire
again. then take the shells and whites of a dozen of eggs, and beat them
both very well together: and when it is ready to boil up, put in your eggs,
and stir it; then skim it clean, and take it off the fire, and put it into
vessels to cool, as you do wort. when it is cold, set it together with some
barm, as you do beer. when it is put together leave the settlings behind in
the bottom; as soon as it is white over, tun it up in a vessel, and when it
hath done working, stop it up as you do beer. when it is three weeks old,
it will be fit to bottle or drink.
take three pound of white-honey, or the best hampshire-honey, and dissolve
it in a gallon of water, and then boil it; and when it beginneth first to
boil, put into it half a quarter of an ounce of ginger a little bruised;
and a very little cloves and mace bruised, and a small quantity of
agrimony. let all this boil together a full hour, and keep it constantly
skimmed, as long as any scum will rise upon it. then strain it forthpage  into
some clean kiver or other vessel, and let stand a cooling; and when it is
cold, let it stand, till it be all creamed over with a blackish cream, and
that it make a kind of hissing noise; then put it up into your vessel, and
in two or three months time it will be fit to drink.
look how much you intend to make, the same quantities must be allowed to
every gallon of water.
take fair water, and the best honey; beat them well together, but not in a
woodden vessel, for wood drinketh up the honey, put it together in a
kettle, and try it with a new-laid-egg, which will swim at top, if it be
very strong; but if it bob up and sink again, it will be too weak. boil it
an hour, and put into it a bundle of herbs, what sort you like best; and a
little bag of spice, nutmegs, ginger, cloves, mace and cinamon; and skim it
well all the while it boileth: when it hath boiled an hour, take it off,
and put it into earthen pans, and so let it stand till next day. then pour
off all the clear into a good vessel, that hath had sack in it, or
white-wine. hang the bag of spice in it, and so let it stand very close
stopp'd and well filled for a month, or longer. then if you desire to drink
it quickly, you may bottle it up. if it be strong of the honey, you may
keep it a year or two. if weak, drink it in two or three months. one quart
of honey, will make one gallon of water very strong. a sprig or two of
rose-mary, thyme and sweet-marjoram, are the herbs that should go into it.
take to every quart of white-page honey, six quarts of fair-water. let it boil,
until a third part be boiled away; skiming it as it riseth: then put into
it a small quantity of ginger largely sliced; then put it out into earthen
pans, till it be luke-warm, and so put it up into an earthen stand, with a
tap in it. then put to it about half a porenger-ful of the best ale-yest,
so beat it well together; then cover it with a cloth, and it will be twelve
hours before it work; and afterwards let it stand two days, and then draw
it out into stone bottles, and it will be ready to drink in five or six
days after. this proportion of yest (which is about six good spoonfuls) is
enough for three or four gallons of liquor. the yest must be of good ale,
and very new. you may mingle the yest first with a little of the
luke-warm-liquor; then beat it, till it be well incorporated, and begins to
work; then adde a little more liquor to it, and beat that. continue so
adding the liquor by little and little, till a good deal of it be
incorporated with the yest; then put that to all the rest of the quantity,
and beat it altogether very well; then cover it close, and keep it warm for
two or three days. before you bottle it, scum away all the barm and ginger
(whereof a spoonful or two is enough for three or four gallons) then bottle
up the clear, leaving the dregs. if you will, you may tun it into a barrel,
(if you make a greater quantity) when the barm is well incorporated with
the liquor, in the same manner as you do beer or ale, and so let it work in
the barrel as long as it will; then stop it up close for a few days more,
that so it may clear it self well, and separate and precipitate the dregs.
then drpage aw the clear into bottles. this will make it less windy, but also a
little less quick, though more wholesome. you may also boil a little
handful of tops of rosemary in the liquor, which giveth it a fine taste:
but all other herbs, and particularly sweet-marjoram and thyme, give it a
physical taste. a little limon-peel giveth it a very fine taste. if you tun
it in a barrel, to work there, you may hang the ginger and limon-peel in it
in a bag, till you bottle it, or till it have done working. then you may
put two or three stoned and sliced raisins, and a lump of fine sugar into
every bottle to make it quick.
take five gallons of water, and one gallon of good white-honey; set it on
the fire together, and boil it very well, and skim it very clean; then take
it off the fire, and set it by. take six ounces of good ginger, and two
ounces of cinamon, one ounce of nutmegs; bruise all these grosly, and put
them into your hot liquor, and cover it close, and so let it stand, till it
be cold. then put as much ale-barm to it, as will make it work; then keep
it in a warm place, as you do ale; and when it hath wrought well, tun it
up, as you do ale or beer: and when it is a week old, drink of it at your
pleasure.
take spring-water, and boil it with rose-mary, sage, sweet-marjoram, balm
and sassafras, until it hath boiled three or four hours: the quantity of
the herbs is a handful of them all, of each a like proportion, to a gallon
of water. and when it is boiled, set it to cool and to sepage ttle until the
next day: then strain your water, and mix it with honey, until it will
bear an egg the breadth of a groat. then set it over the fire to boil. take
the whites of twenty or thirty eggs, and beat them mightily, and when it
boileth, pour them in at twice; stir it well together, and then let it
stand, until it boileth a pace before you scum it, and then scum it well.
then take it off the fire, and pour it in earthen things to cool: and when
it is cold, put to it five or six spoonfuls of the best yest of ale you can
get: stir it together, and then every day scum it with a bundle of feathers
till it hath done working: then tun it up in a sack-cask and to every six
gallons of metheglin put one pint of aquavitæ, or a quart of sack; and a
quarter of a pound of ginger sliced, with the pills of two or three limons
and orenges in a bag to hang in it.
the whites of eggs above named, is a fit proportion for  or  gallons of
the liquor.
take six gallons of water, and put in six quarts of honey, stirring it till
the honey be throughly melted; then set it over the fire, and when it is
ready to boil, skim it clean; then put in a quarter of an ounce of mace; so
much ginger; half an ounce of nutmegs; sweet-marjoram, broad-thyme and
sweet-bryar, of all together a handful, and boil them well therein. then
set it by, till it be throughly cold, and barrel it up, and keep it till it
be ripe.
to every gallon of water, take a quart of honey, to every five gallons, a
hanpage dful of sweet-marjoram, half a handful of sliced-ginger; boil all these
moderately three quarters of an hour; then let it stand and cool: and
being lukewarm, put to every five gallons, about three quarts of yest, and
let it work a night and a day. then take off the yest and strain it into a
runlet; and when it hath done working: then stop it up, and so let it
remain a month: then drawing out into bottles, put into every bottle two or
three stoned raisins, and a lump of loaf-sugar. it may be drunk in two
months.
take to every gallon of water a quart of honey: boil in it a little
rose-mary and sweet-marjoram: but a large quantity of sweet-bryar-leaves,
and a reasonable proportion of ginger: boil these in the liquor, when it is
skimed; and work it in due time with a little barm. then tun it in a
vessel; and draw it into bottles, after it is sufficiently settled. whites
of eggs with the shells beaten together, do clarifie meath best. if you
will have your meath cooling, use violet and straw-berry-leaves, agrimony,
eglantine and the like: adding borage and bugloss, and a little rosemary
and sweet-marjoram to give it vigor.
tartar makes it work well.
take to three gallons of spring-water, one of honey; first let it gently
melt, then boil for an hour, continually skiming it; then put it into an
earthen or woodden vessel, and when it is little more then blood-warm, set
it with ale-yest, and so let it stand twelve hours; then take off the yest,
and bottle it. put in it limon-pepage el and cloves, or what best pleaseth your
taste of herbs or spices. eringo-roots put into it, when it is a boiling,
maketh it much better. so do clove-gilly-flowers; a quantity of which make
the meath look like claret-wine. i observe that meath requireth some strong
herbs to make it quick and smart upon the palate; as rose-mary, bay-leaves,
sage, thyme, marjoram, winter-savory, and such like, which would be too
strong and bitter in ale or beer.
take rose-mary, thyme, sweet-bryar, peny-royal, and bays, water-cresses,
agrimony, marsh-mallows, leaves and flowers: liver-wort, wood-betony,
eye-bright, scabious, of each alike quantity; of the bark of ash-tree, of
eringo-roots-green, of each a proportion to the herbs; of wild angelica,
ribwort, sanicle, roman-worm-wood, of each a proportion, which is, to every
handful of the herbs above named, a sixteenth part of a handful of these
latter; steep them a night and a day, in a woodden boul of water covered;
the next day boil them very well in another water, till the colour be very
high; then take another quantity of water, and boil the herbs in it, till
it look green, and so let it boil three or four times, or as long as the
liquor looketh any thing green; then let it stand with these herbs in it a
day and a night.
to every gallon of this water, put a quart of pure clear honey, the liquor
being first strained from the herbs. your liquor if it be strong enough
will bear an egg, the breadth of a three pence above water. when you have
page put the honey into the liquor, you must work and labour it together a
whole day, until the honey be consumed. then let it stand a whole night
again a clearing. then put it into a kettle, and let it boil a quarter of
an hour, with the whites and shells of six eggs; then strain it clean, and
so let it stand a cooling. then put it into a barrel, and take cloves,
mace, cinamon, nutmegs, and beat them together: put them into a linnen bag,
hang it with a thread into the barrel. if you would have it work, that you
may drink of it presently, take the whites of two or three eggs, a spoonful
of barm, a spoonful of wheat-flower; beat all these together: let it work,
before you stop it up. then afterwards stop it well with clay and salt
tempered together, to keep it moist.
if your honey be tryed, take six gallons of milk-warm-water, to one of
honey, and stir it well together ever and anon, and so let it stand for a
day and night, or half a day may serve; then boil it with a gentle fire,
for the space of half an hour or thereabouts, and skim it, still as the
skum ariseth. after it is scummed once or twice, you may put in your herbs,
and spice grosly beaten, one half loose; the other in a bag, which
afterwards may be fastned with a string to the tap-hole, as pepper, cloves,
mace, ginger and the like; when it is thus boiled, let it stand in the
vessel until it be cooled; then tun it up into your barrel, and let it work
two or three days, or more before you stop the bung-hole; but in putting up
the boiled liquor into the barrel, reserve the thick grounds back, which
will be settled in the pan or kettle.
page 
if you would have it to drink within two or three months, let it be no
stronger then to bear an egg to the top of the water. if you would have it
keep six months, or longer, before you drink it, let it bear up the egg the
breadth of two pence above the water. this is the surer way to proportion
your honey then by measure. and the time of the tryal of the strength is,
when you incorporate the honey and water together, before the boiling of
it.
take thirty six gallons of fountain water (first boiled, &c.) and dissolve
twelve gallons of honey in it. keep them boiling an hour and a half after
they begin to boil, skimming well all the while. it will be an hour upon
the fire before it boil. when it is clear and enough boiled, pour it out
into woodden vessels to cool. when you are ready to tun it, have four
gallons of black-currants, bruise them in a stone mortar, that they may the
more easily part with their juyce to the liquor. put them and their juyce
into the barrel, and pour the cool liquor upon them, so as the vessel be
quite full. cover the bung with a plate of lead lying loose on, that the
working of the liquor may lift it up, as it needeth to cast out the filth.
and still as it worketh over, fill it up with fresh liquor, made in the
same proportion of honey and water. a moneth after it works no longer, stop
up the bung very close.
take of all sorts of herbs, that you think are good and wholesomepage , as balm,
minth, fennel, rosemary, angelica, wild-thyme, hyssop, agrimony, burnet,
and such other as you may like; as also some field herbs; but you must not
put in too many, especially rose-mary or any strong herb. less then half a
handfull will serve of every sort. boil your herbs, and strain them out,
and let the liquor stand till the morrow, and settle; then take of the
clearest of the liquor two gallons and a half to one gallon of honey; and
in that proportion take as much of them as you will make, and let it boil
an hour, and in the boiling scum it very clean. then set it a cooling as
you do beer; and when it is cold, take some very good ale-barm, and put it
into the bottom of the tub you mean the metheglin shall work in, which pour
into the tub by little and little, as they do beer, keeping back the thick
settling, which lieth in the bottome of the vessels, wherein it is cooled.
and when all is put together, cover it with a cloth, and let it work very
near three days. and when you mean to put it up, scum off all the barm
clean, and put it up into your barrel or firkin, which you must not stop
very close in four or five days, but let it have a little vent, for it will
work; and when it is close stopped, you must look to it very often, and
have a peg in the top, to give it vent, when you hear it make a noise (as
it will do) or else it will break the barrel. you may also, if you please,
make a bag, and put in good store of sliced ginger, and some cloves and
cinnamon, and boil it in, or put it into the barrel and never boil it. both
ways are good.
if you will make small mpage etheglin, you may put five or six gallons of water
to one of honey. put in a little cinnamon and cloves and boil it well. and
when it is cold, put it up in bottles very close stopped, and the stopples
well tyed on. this will not keep above five or six weeks, but it is very
fine drink.
make your metheglin as soon as ever you take your bees; for if you wash
your combs in the water you boil your herbs in, when it is cold, it will
sweeten much. but you must afterwards strain it through a cloth, or else
there will be much wax.
if you will have it to keep a year or two, take six parts of water, and one
of honey; but if you will have it to keep longer, take but four parts of
water to one of honey. dissolve the honey very well in the water, then boil
it gently, skimming it all the while as the scum riseth, till no more scum
riseth. then pour it out of the copper into a fit vessel or vessels to
cool. then tun it up in a strong and sweet cask, and let it stand in some
place, where there is some little warmth; (it will do as well without
warmth, but be longer growing ripe) this will make it work. at first a
course foul matter will work over; to which purpose it must be kept always
full with fresh liquor of the same, as it worketh over. when it begins to
work more gently, and that which riseth at the top, is no more foul, but is
a white froth; then fill and stop it up close, and set it in a cool cellar,
where it is to stand continually.
after half a year or a year, you may draw it off from the lees into a clean
vessel, or let it remain untouched. it is not fit to be drunpage k for it's
perfection till the sweetness be quite worn off, yet not to be sower, but
vinous. you may drink it at meals instead of wine, and is wholesomer and
better then wine.
to small meath, that is to be drunk presently, you may put a little ginger
to give it life, and work it with a little barm. if the meath work not at
all, it will nevertheless be good, and peradventure better than that which
worketh; but it will be longer first, and the dregs will fall down to the
bottom, though it work not.
small meath of eight or nine parts of water to one of honey, will be very
good, though it never work, but be barrell'd up as soon as it is cold, and
stopped close: and after two or three months drunk from the barrel without
botteling. this is good for meals.
take to every three gallons of water, one gallon of honey and set the water
over the fire, and let the honey melt, before the water be too hot; then
put in a new-laid-egg, and feel with your hand; if it comes half way the
water, it is strong enough; then put into it these herbs, thyme,
sweet-marjoram, winter-savoury, sweet-bryar, and bay-leaves, in all a good
great handful; which a proportion for ten gallons; then with a quick-fire
boil it very fast half an hour, and no longer; and then take it from the
fire, and let it cool in two or three woodden vessels; and let it stand
without stirring twenty four hours. then softly drain it out, leaving all
the dregs behind. put the clear into your vpage essel; and if you like any
spice, take ginger, nutmeg, cinnamon, mace and cloves, and bruise them a
little, and put them in a bag, and let them hang in your vessel. before you
put your meath into the vessel, try if it will bear an egg as broad as a
peny; if it do, then it is very well; and if it be made with the best
white-honey, it usually is just so. but if it should prove too strong, that
it bears the egge broader; then boil a little more honey and water very
small, and put to it, when it is cold: and then put it into the vessel. it
is best to be made at michaelmas, and not drunk of till lent.
take of the best white honey six quarts; of springwater sixteen gallons;
set it on a gentle fire at first, tell it is melted, and clean skimmed;
then make it boil apace, until the third part be consumed. then take it
from the fire, and put it in a cooler, and when it is cold, tun it up, and
let it stand eight months, before you drink it. when you take it from the
fire, slice in three orris-roots, and let it remain in the liquor, when you
tun it up.
take four gallons of water, two quarts of honey, two ounces of ginger, one
ounce of nutmegs, a good handful of rose-mary tops, and as much of
bay-leaves, two ounces of dried orange-peel. boil all these till it be so
strong as will bear an egg, and not sink; when it is milk warm, work it up
with barm, during twenty four hours, and then barrel it up. and after three
months you may bottle it up at your pleasure.
page 
as you desire a greater quantity of the drink, you must augment the
ingredients, according to the proportions above recited.
take four gallons of water and one of honey; boil and skim it: then put
into it, liverwort, harts-tongue, wild-carrot, and yarrow, a little
rosemary and bays, one parsly-root, and a fennel-root; let them boil an
hour altogether. you may, if you please, hang a little bag of spice in it.
when it is cold, put a little barm to it, and let it work like beer. the
roots must be scraped, and the pith taken out.
take three times as much water as honey; then let the tubs, that the honey
must be wrought in, be cleansed very clean with scalding water, so that it
may not prove sowre; also when you mix them together, take half-warm-water,
and half cold, and squeese them well together; afterwards when you think
the honey is well melted, then let it run through a sieve; and see your
kettle of copper or iron (but copper is better than iron) be very clean;
then put in your spice, as, nutmegs, ginger, cloves, cardamome, anisseeds,
orange peel; put these in according to the quantity you make, and let them
all be bruised, except the orange peel, which leave whole. the meath must
boil an hour by the clock; after put it into tubs to cool, and when it is
cold, take three or four slices of white-bread, tost them very hard, and
spread very good yest on both sides of the tosts; then put them inpage to the
tubs. if it be warm weather, let the tubs be uncovered; but if it be cold,
cover them. this being done, you will find it worked enough by the black
that cometh up by the sides of the tubs; then take a sieve and take off the
yest and bread. afterwards draw it off at a tap in the tub into the cask
you intend to keep it in; then take a quantity of spice as before,
well-bruised, and put it into a bag, and make it fast at the bung, with a
string, and if it begins to work, after it is in the cask, be sure to give
it vent, or else you will loose all.
to every quart of honey put four quarts of springwater; temper the honey in
the water, being a little warmed; then put it on the fire again, with
fennel, rose-mary, thyme, agrimony, parsley or the like. let them boil half
an hour, and upwards; and as it boileth, scum the froth; then take it off,
and strain it, and let it cool as you do your wort. then put a little barm
into it, then take off the froath again, and stir it well together. then
take two quarts of ale, boiled with cloves. mace, cinnamon, ginger and
liquorice; and put it to the meath and tun it up.
take rose-mary, thyme, sweet-bryar, peny-royal, bays, water-cresses,
agrimony, marsh-mallow-leaves and flowers, liver-wort, maiden-hair, betony,
eye-bright, scabious, the bark of an ash-tree, young eringo-roots,
wild-angelica, ribwort, sinacle, roman-worm-wood, tamarisk, mother-thyme,
saxafrage, philipendula, of each of these herbs a like proportion; or of as
many as you please to put in. you must put in all bupage t four handfuls of
herbs, which you must steep a night and a day, in a little bowl of water,
being close covered. the next day take another fresh quantity of water, and
boil the same herbs in it, till the colour be very high; then take another
quantity of water, and boil the same herbs in it, untill it look green; and
so let them boil three or four times in several waters, as long as the
liquor looketh anything green. then let it stand with these herbs in it a
day and a night. remember the last water you boil it in, to this proportion
of herbs, must be eighteen gallons. and when it hath stood a day and a
night with these herbs in it after the last boiling, then strain the liquor
from the herbs; and put as much of the finest and best honey into the
liquor, as will bear an egg; you must work the honey and liquor together a
whole day, until the honey be consumed; then let it stand one whole night;
then let it be well laboured again, and set it a clearing; and so boil it
again with the whites of six new-laid-eggs with the shells; skim it very
clean; and let it stand a day a cooling; then put it into a barrel, and
take cloves, mace, cinnamon and nutmegs as much as will please your taste,
and beat them all together, and put them in a linnen bag, and hang it with
a thread into the barrel. then take the whites of two or three
new-laid-eggs, a spoonful of barm, a spoonful of wheat-flower, and beat
them all together, and put it into your liquor in the barrel, and let it
work before you stop it; then afterwards stop it well, and set it in a cold
place, and when it hath been settled some six weeks: draw it into bottles,
and stop it very close, and drink not of it in a month after.
page 
take eight gallons of water, set it over a clear fire in a kettle; and when
it is warm, put it to sixteen pounds of very good honey, and stir it well
together; take off the scum, and put two large nutmegs cut in quarters, and
so let it boil at least an hour; then take it off the fire, and put to it
two good handfulls of grinded malt, and with a white staff keep beating it
together till it be almost cold; then strain it through a hair-sieve into a
tub, and put to it a wine-pint of ale-yest, and stir it very well together;
and when it is cold, you may if you please, tun it up presently into a
vessel fit for it, or else let it stand, and work a day, and when it hath
done working in your vessel, stop it up very close. it will be three weeks
or a month before it be ready to drink.
to two quarts of water take one pound of honey. when it boileth, skim it
clean as long as any scum ariseth; boil it a pretty while; then take it off
the fire, and put it in an earthen pot, and let it stand till the next day;
then put it into clean bottles, that are throughly dry, rinsing first every
bottle with a little of the liquor; fill them not too full, and put into
every bottle four or five cloves, and four or five slices of ginger: and
stop it very close, and set it in sand; and within ten or twelve days it
will be ready to drink.
some, when they take their bees, put the honey-combs into fair-water, and
make it so strong of the honey that it will bear page an egg; and then boil it
with some spice, and put it into a barrel: but i think it not so good, as
that which is made of pure honey.
take twenty gallons of spring-water; boil it a quarter of an hour, and let
it stand, until it be all most cold; then beat in so much honey, as will
make it so strong as to bear an egg, so that on the top, you may see the
breadth of a hasel-nut swimming above; the next day boil it up with six
small handfuls of rosemary; a pound and a half of ginger, being scraped and
bruised; then take the whites of twenty eggs shells and all; beat them very
well, and put them in to clarifie it; skim it very clean, then take it off
the fire and strain: but put the rosemary and ginger in again: then let it
remain till it be all most cold: then tun it up, and take some
new-ale-yest; the whites of two eggs, a spoonful of flower, and beat them
well together, and put them into the barrel; when it hath wrought very
well, stop it very close for three weeks or a month: then bottle it, and a
week after you may drink it.
take to every gallon of water, a quart of honey, and set it over a clear
fire, and when it is ready to boil, skim it very clear. then take two
handfulls of sweet-marjoram, as much rose-mary, and as much baulm: and two
handful of fennel-roots, as much of parsley-roots, and as many
esparages-roots: slice them in the middle, and take out the pith, wash and
scrape them very clean, and put them with your herbs into your liqpage uor. then
take two ounces of ginger, one ounce of nutmegs, half an ounce of mace:
bruise them and put them in: and let it boil till it be so strong that it
will bear an egg: then let it cool: and being cold, put in  or  spoon
fulls of new-ale yest: and so skim it well, and put it into a runlet, and
it will work like ale: and having done working, stop it up close, as you do
new-beer: and lay salt upon it.
take four gallons of running water, and boil it a quarter of an hour, and
put it in an earthen vessel, and let it stand all night. the next day take
only the water, and leave the settling at the bottom: so put the honey in a
thin bag, and work it in the water, till all the honey is dissolved. take
to four gallons of water, one gallon of honey: then put in an egg, if it be
strong enough of the honey, the egg will part of it appear on the top of
the liquor: if it do not, put more honey to it, till it do. then take out
the egg, and let the liquor stand till next morning. then take two ounces
of ginger, and slice it and pare it: some rose-mary washed and stripped
from the stalk: dry it very well. the next day put the rose-mary and ginger
into the drink, and so set it on the fire: when it is all most ready to
boil, take the whites of three eggs well beaten with the shells, and put
all into the liquor: and stir it about, and skim it well till it be clear.
be sure you skim not off the rose-mary and ginger: then take it off the
fire, and let it run through a hair sieve: and when you have strained it,
pick out the rose-mary and ginger out of the strainer, and pupage t it into the
drink, and throw away the eggshells, and so let it stand all night. the
next day tun it up in a barrel: be sure the barrel be not too big: then
take a little flower and a little bran, and the white of an egg, and beat
them well together, and put them into the barrel on the top of the
metheglin, after it is tunned up, and so let it stand till it hath done
working; then stop it up as close as is possible: and so let it stand six
or seven weeks: then draw it out and bottle it. you must tye down the
corks, and set the bottles in sand five or six weeks, and then drink it.
take twenty gallons of fair spring-water. boil it a quarter of an hour,
then let it stand till the next day. then beat into it so much honey, as
will make it so strong as to bear an egg the breadth of a two pence above
the water. the next day boil it up with six small handfulls of rosemary, a
pound and a half of ginger, (being scraped and bruised) and the whites of
twenty eggs together with their shells beaten together, and well mingled
with the liquor. clarifie it and skim it very clean, still as the scum
riseth, leaving the ginger and rosemary in it. let it stand till the next
day, then tun it up, and take some new-ale-yest, the whites of two eggs, a
spoonful of flower, beat all these together, and put it on the top of the
barrel, when the barrel is full. let it work, and when it hath done
working, stop it up close for three weeks, or a month. then you may bottle
it, and a few days after, you may drink it.
take three gallons of water, apage nd boil in it a handful of rose-mary (or
rather the flowers) cowslips, sage-flowers, agrimony, betony, and thyme,
ana, one handful. when it hath taken the strength of the herbs, strain it
through a hair-sieve, and let it cool twenty hours. then to three gallons
of the clear part of this decoction, put one gallon of honey, and mingle it
very well with your hand, till it bear an egg the breadth of a groat. then
boil it and skim it as long as any scum will rise. afterwards let it cool
twenty four hours. then put to it a small quantity of ale-barm, and skim
the thin-barm that doth rise on it, morning and evening, with a feather,
during four days. and so put it up into your vessel, and hang in it a thin
linnen bag with two ounces of good white-ginger bruised therein: and stop
it up close for a quarter of a year. then you may drink it.
take a quart of honey to a gallon of water; set the kettle over the fire,
and stir it now and then, that the honey may melt; let it boil an hour; you
must boil in it, a sprig or two of winter-savory, as much of
sweet-marjoram; put it into tubs ready scalded, till the next day towards
evening. then tun it up into your vessel, let it work for three days; after
which hang a bag in the barrel with what quantity of mace and sliced nutmeg
you please. to make it stronger then this, 'tis but adding more hony, to
make it bear an egg the breadth of a six pence, or something more. you may
bottle it out after a month, when you please. this is the way, which is
used in sussex by those who are accounted to make it best.
page 
take to every gallon of fountain-water a good quart of honey. set the water
on the fire, till it be pretty warm; then take it off, and put it in your
honey, and stir it till it be dissolved. then put into every three gallons,
two handfuls of thyme: two good handfuls of strawberry-leaves, one handful
of organ; one handful of fennel-roots, the heart being taken out, and one
handful of parsley-roots the heart taken out: but as for the herbs, it must
be according to the constitution of them, for whom the mead is intended.
then set the herbs in it on the fire, to boil for half an hour, still
skimming it, as the scum riseth; it must boil but half an hour; then take
it off the fire, and presently strain it from the herbs, and let it stand
till it be fully cold; then pour it softly off the bottom, and put it in a
vessel fit for it, and put a small quantity of barm in it, and mingle it
with it, and when it hath wrought up, which will be in three or four days,
skim off that barm, and set on fresh: but the second barm must not be
mingled with the meath, but onely poured on the top of it. take an ounce of
nutmeg sliced: one ounce of ginger sliced: one ounce of cinnamon cut in
pieces, and boil them a pretty while in a quart of white-wine or sack: when
this is very cold, strain it, and put the spices in a canvas-bag to hang in
your meath, and pour in the wine it was boiled in.
this meath will be drinkable, when it is a fortnight or three weeks old.
page 
take to twelve gallons of water, a handful of each of these herbs: parsley,
eglantine, rosemary, strawberry-leaves, wild-thyme, baulme, liverwort,
betony, scabious: when the water begins to boil, cast in the herbs: let
them boil a quarter of an hour: then strain out the herbs; and when it is
almost cold, then put in as much of the best honey, you can get, as will
bear an egg to the breadth of two pence; that is, till you can see no more
of the egge above the water, then a two pence will cover: lave it and stir
it till you see all the honey be melted; then boil it well half an hour, at
the least: skim it well, and put in the whites of six eggs beaten, to
clarifie it: then strain it into some woodden vessels; and when it is
almost cold, put some ale-barm into it. and when it worketh well, tun it
into some well seasoned vessel, where neither ale nor beer hath been, for
marring the colour of it. when it hath done working, if you like it, take a
quantity of cloves, nutmegs, mace, cinnamon, ginger, or any of these that
you like best, and bruise them, and put them in a boulter bag, and hang it
in the vessel. put not too much of the spice, because many do not like the
taste of much spice. if you make it at michaelmas, you may tap it at
christmas: but if you keep it longer, it will be the better. it will look
pure, and drink with as much spirit as can be, and very pleasant.
take sweet-marjoram, spage weet-bryar-buds, violet-leaves, strawberry-leaves, of
each one handful, and a good handful of violet flowers (the dubble ones
are the best) broad thyme, borrage, agrimony, of each half a handful, and
two or three branches of rosemary, the seeds of carvi, coriander, and
fennel, of each two spoonfuls, and three or four blades of large-mace. boil
all these in eight gallons of running-water, three quarters of an hour.
then strain it, and when it is but blood-warm, put in as much of the best
honey, as will make the liquor bear an egg the breadth of six pence above
the water. then boil it again as long as any scum will rise. then set it
abroad a cooling; and when it is almost cold, put in half a pint of good
ale-barm; and when it hath wrought, till you perceive the barm to fall,
then tun it, and let it work in the barrel, till the barm leaveth rising,
filling it up every day with some of the same liquor. when you stop it up,
put in a bag with one nutmeg sliced, a little whole cloves and mace, a
stick of cinnamon broken in pieces, and a grain of good musk. you may make
this a little before michaelmas, and it will be fit to drink at lent.
this is sir edward bainton's receipt, which my lord of portland (who gave
it me) saith, was the best he ever drunk.
take four gallons of water, and set it over the fire. put into it, when it
is warm, eight pounds of honey; as the scum riseth, take it clean off. when
it is clear, put into it three nutmegs quartered; three or four races of
ginger sliced; then let it boil a whole hour, then take it off the fire,
page and put to it two handfuls of ground malt; stir it about with a round
stick, till it be as cold as wort, when you put yest to it. then strain it
out into a pot or tub, that hath a spiggot and faucet, and put to it a pint
of very good ale-yest; so let it work for two days; then cover it close for
about four or five days, and so draw it out into bottles. it will be ready
to drink within three weeks.
take to six quarts of water, a quart of the best honey, and put it on the
fire, and stir it, till the honey is melted: and boil it well as long as
any scum riseth: and now and then put in a little cold water, for this will
make the scum rise: keep your kettle up as full as you did put it on; when
it is boiled enough, about half an hour before you take it off, then take a
quantity of ginger sliced and well scraped first, and a good quantity of
rosemary, and boil both together. of the rosemary and ginger you may put in
more or less, for to please your taste: and when you take it off the fire,
strain it into your vessel, either a well seasoned-tub, or a great cream
pot, and the next morning when it is cold, pour off softly the top from the
settlings into another vessel; and then put some little quantity of the
best ale-barm to it and cover it with a thin cloth over it, if it be in
summer, but in the winter it will be longer a ripening, and therefore must
be the warmer covered in a close place, and when you go to bottle it, take
with a feather all the barm off, and put it into your bottles, and stop it
up close. in ten days you may drink it.
page 
if you think six quarts of water be too much, and would have it stronger,
then put in a greater quantity of honey.
take as much water as will fill your firkin: of rosemary, bays,
sweet-bryar, broad-thyme, sweet-majoram, of each a handful; set it over the
fire, until the herbs have a little coloured the water; then take it off,
and when it is cold, put in as much honey, till it will bear an egg; then
lave it three days morning and evening. after that boil it again, and skim
it very clean, and in the boiling clarifie it with the whites of six eggs,
shells and all, well beaten together. then take it off, and put it to cool;
and when it is cold, put it into your vessel, and put to it three spoonfuls
of yest; stop it close, and keep it, till it be old at least three months.
take one gallon of honey to seven gallons of water; boil it together, and
skim it well; then take pelitory of the wall, saxifrage, betony, parsley,
groundsel, of each a handful, of the seeds of parsley, of nettles, fennel
and carraway-seeds, anisseeds and grumelseeds, of each two ounces. the
roots of parsley, of alexander, of fennel and mallows of each two ounces,
being small cut; let all boil, till near three gallons of the liquor is
wasted: then take it off the fire, and let it stand till it be cold; then
cleanse it from the drugs, and let it be put into a clean vessel welpage l
stopped, taking four nutmegs, one ounce and half of ginger, half an ounce
of cinnamon, twelve cloves; cut all these small, and hang them in a bag
into the vessel, when you stop it up. when it is a fortnight old, you may
begin to drink of it; every morning a good draught.
take four gallons of water; add to it, these herbs and spices following.
pellitory of the wall, sage, thyme, of each a quarter of a handful, as much
clove gilly-flowers, with half as much borage and bugloss flowers, a little
hyssop, five or six eringo-roots, three or four parsley-roots: one
fennel-root, the pith taken out, a few red-nettle-roots, and a little
harts-tongue. boil these roots and herbs half an hour; then take out the
roots and herbs, and put in the spices grosly beaten in a canvass-bag,
viz. cloves, mace, of each half an ounce, and as much cinnamon, of nutmeg
an ounce, with two ounces of ginger, and a gallon of honey: boil all these
together half an hour longer, but do not skim it at all: let it boil in,
and set it a cooling after you have taken it off the fire. when it is cold,
put six spoonfuls of barm to it, and let it work twelve hours at least;
then tun it, and put a little limon-peel into it: and then you may bottle
it, if you please.
to four gallons of water put one gallon of honey; warm the water luke-warm
before you put in your honey; when it is dissolved, set it over the fire,
and let it boil half an hour page with these spices grosly beaten and put in a
canvass-bag: namely, half an ounce of ginger, two nutmegs, a few cloves
and a little mace; and in the boiling put in a quart of cold water to raise
the scum, which you must take clean off in the boiling. if you love herbs,
put in a little bundle of rosemary, bays, sweet-marjoram and eglantine. let
it stand till it is cold, then put into it half a pint of ale-barm, and let
it work twelve hours; then tun it, but take out the bundle of herbs first.
take to every gallon of honey, three gallons of water, and put them
together and set them over so gentle a fire, as you might endure to break
it in the water with your hand. when the honey is all melted, put in an
egg, and let it fall gently to the bottom; and if your egg rise up again to
the top of the liquor, then it is strong enough of the honey. but if it lie
at the bottom, you must put in more honey, and stir it, till it doth rise.
if your honey be very good, it will bear half a gallon of water more to a
gallon of honey. then take sweet-bryar, bays, rosemary, thyme, marjoram,
savoury, of each a good handfull, which you must tye up all together in a
bundle. this proportion of herbs will be sufficient for twelve gallons of
metheglin; and according to the quantity of metheglin you make, you must
add or diminish your herbs. when you have put these things together, set it
over a quick fire, and let it boil as fast as you can for half an hour or
better, skiming of it very clean and clarifying it with the whites of two
or threpage e eggs. then take it from the fire, and put it into some clean
vessel or other, and let it stand till the next morning; then pour the
clear from the dregs, and tun it up, putting in a little bag of such spice
as you like, whereof ginger must be the most. after it hath stood three or
four days, you may put in two or three spoon-fulls of good ale-yest, it
will make it the sooner ready to drink. it must work before you stop it up.
the older your honey is, the whiter your metheglin will be.
put forty gallons of water into your caldron, and with a stick take the
height of the water, making a notch, where the superficies of the water
cometh. then put to the water ten gallons of honey, which dissolve with
much laving it; then presently boil it gently, skimming it all the while,
till it be free from scum. then put into it a thin bag of boulter-cloth
containing forty pound weight of the best blew raisins of the sun, well
picked and washed and wiped dry; and let the bag be so large, that the
raisins may lie at ease and loosly in it. when you perceive that the
raisins are boiled enough to be very soft, that you may strain out all
their substance, take out the bag, and strain out all the liquor by a
strong press. put it back to the honey-liquor, and boil all together
(having thrown away the husks of the raisins with the bag) till your liquor
be sunk down to the notch of your stick, which is the sign of due strength.
then let it cool in a woodden vessel, and let it run through a strainer to
sever it from the settlings, and put it into a strpage ong vessel, that hath had
sack or muscadine in it, not filling it to within three fingers breadth of
the top (for otherwise it will break the vessel with working) and leave the
bung open whiles it worketh, which will be six weeks very strongly, though
it be put into a cold cellar. and after nine moneths, you may begin to
drink it.
to half an aume of white wine, take twenty pounds of morello cherries, the
stalks being first plucked off. bruise the cherries and break the stones.
pour into the wine the juyce that comes out from the cherries; but put all
the solid substance of them into a long bag of boulter-cloth, and hang it
in the wine at the bung, so that it lie not in the bottom, but only reach
to touch it, and therefore nail it down at the mouth of the bung. then stop
it close. for variety, you may put some clear juyce of cherries alone (but
drawn from a larger proportion of cherries) into another parcel of wine. to
either of them, if you will aromatise the drink, take to this quantity two
ounces of cinnamon grosly broken and bruised, and put it in a little bag at
the spiggot, that all the wine you draw may run through the cinnamon.
you must be careful in bruising the cherries, and breaking the stones. for
if you do all at once, the liquor will sparkle about. but you must first
bruise the cherries gently in a mortar, and rub through a sieve all that
will pass, and strain the residue hard through your hands. then beat the
remaining hard so strongly, as may break all the stones. then put all
together, and strain the clean through a subtil strainer, and put the
solider substance into the bag to hang in the wine.
page 
take a pound of the best currants clean picked, and pour upon them in a
deep straight mouthed earthen vessel six pounds or pints of hot water, in
which you have dissolved three spoonfuls of the purest and newest ale-yest.
stop it very close till it ferment, then give such vent as is necessary,
and keep it warm for about three days, it will work and ferment. taste it
after two days, to see if it be grown to your liking. as soon as you find
it so, let it run through a strainer, to leave behind all the exhausted
currants and the yest, and so bottle it up. it will be exceeding quick and
pleasant, and is admirable good to cool the liver, and cleanse the blood.
it will be ready to drink in five or six days after it is bottled; and you
may drink safely large draughts of it.
the excellent scotch ale is made thus. heat spring-water; it must not boil,
but be ready to boil, which you will know by leaping up in bubbles. then
pour it to the malt; but by little and little, stirring them strongly
together all the while they are mingling. when all the water is in, it must
be so proportioned that it be very thick. then cover the vessel well with a
thick mat made on purpose with a hole for the stick, and that with
coverlets and blankets to keep in all the heat. after three or four hours,
let it run out by the stick (putting new heated water upon the malt, if you
please, for small ale or beer) into apage  hogshead with the head out. there let
it stand till it begin to blink, and grow long like thin syrup. if you let
it stay too long, and grow too thick, it will be sowre. then put it again
into the caldron, and boil it an hour or an hour and a half. then put it
into a woodden-vessel to cool, which will require near forty hours for a
hogshead. then pour it off gently from the settling. this quantity (of a
hogshead) will require better then a quart of the best ale-barm, which you
must put to it thus. put it to about three quarts of wort, and stir it, to
make it work well. when the barm is risen quick scum it off to put to the
rest of the wort by degrees. the remaining liquor (that is the three
quarts) will have drawn into it all the heavy dregs of the barm, and you
may put it to the ale of the second running, but not to this. put the barm,
you have scummed off (which will be at least a quart) to about two gallons
of the wort, and stir it to make that rise and work. then put two gallons
more to it. doing thus at several times, till all be mingled, which will
require a whole day to do. cover it close, and let it work, till it be at
it's height, and begin to fall, which may require ten or twelve hours, or
more. watch this well, least it sink too much, for then it will be dead.
then scum off the thickest part of the barm, and run your ale into the
hogshead, leaving all the bung open a day or two. then lay a strong paper
upon it, to keep the clay from falling in, that you must then lay upon it,
in which you must make a little hole to let it work out. you must have some
of the same liquor to fill it up, as it works over. when itpage  hath done
working, stop it up very close, and keep it in a very cold cellar. it will
be fit to broach after a year; and be very clear and sweet and pleasant,
and will continue a year longer drawing; and the last glass full be as pure
and as quick as the first. you begin to broach it high. let your cask have
served for sweet-wine.
when small ale hath wrought sufficiently, draw into bottles; but first put
into every bottle twelve good raisins of the sun split and stoned; then
stop up the bottle close, and set it in sand (gravel) or a cold dry cellar.
after a while this will drink exceeding quick and pleasant. likewise take
six wheat-corns, and bruise them, and put into a bottle of ale; it will
make it exceeding quick and stronger.
take a peck of apples, and slice them, and boil them in a barrel of water,
till the third part be wasted; then cool your water as you do for wort, and
when it is cold, you must pour the water upon three measures of grown
apples. then draw forth the water at a tap three or four times a day, for
three days together. then press out the liquor, and tun it up; when it hath
done working, then stop it up close.
take about fifty pippins; quarter and core them, without paring them: for
the paring is the cordialest part of them. therefore onely wipe or wash
them well, and pick away the black excrescence at the top; and be sure to
leave out all the seeds, which are hot. you may cut them (after all the
superfluities are taken away) into thinpage ner slices, if you please. put three
gallons of fountain water to them in a great pipkin, and let them boil,
till the apples become clear and transparent; which is a sign, they are
perfectly tender, and will be in a good half hour, or a little more. then
with your ladle break them into mash and pulpe, incorporated with the
water; letting all boil half an hour longer, that the water may draw into
it self all the vertue of the apples. then put to them a pound and a half
of pure dubble refined sugar in powder, which will soon dissolve in that
hot liquor. then pour it into an hippocras bag, and let it run through it
two or three times, to be very clear. then put it up into bottles; and
after a little time, it will be a most pleasant, quick, cooling, smoothing
drink. excellent in sharp gonorrhœas.
the best apples make the best cider, as pearmains, pippins, golden-pippins,
and the like. codlings make the finest cider of all. they must be ripe,
when you make cider of them: and is in prime in the summer season, when no
other cider is good. but lasteth not long, not beyond autumn. the
foundation of making perfect cyder consisteth in not having it work much,
scarce ever at all; but at least, no second time; which ordinary cider doth
often, upon change of weather, and upon motion: and upon every working it
grows harder. do then thus:
choose good apples. red streaks are the best for cider to keep; ginet-moils
the next, then pippins. let them lie about threepage  weeks, after they are
gathered; then stamp and strain them in the ordinary way, into a woodden
fat that hath a spigot three or four fingers breadth above the bottom.
cover the fat with some hair or sackcloth, to secure it from any thing to
fall in, and to keep in some of the spirits, so to preserve it from dying;
but not so much as to make it ferment. when the juyce hath been there
twelve hours, draw it by the spigot (the fat inclining that way, as if it
were a little tilted) into a barrel; which must not be full by about two
fingers. leave the bung open for the air to come in, upon a superficies,
all along the barrel, to hinder it from fermenting; but not so large a
superficies as to endanger dying, by the airs depredating too many spirits
from it.
the drift in both these settlings is, that the grosser parts consisting of
the substance of the apple, may settle to the bottom, and be severed from
the liquor; for it is that, which maketh it work again (upon motion or
change of weather) and spoils it. after twenty four hours draw of it, to
see if it be clear, by the settling of all dregs, above which your spigot
must be. if it be not clear enough, draw it from the thick dregs into
another vessel, and let it settle there twenty four hours. this vessel must
be less then the first, because you draw not all out of the first. if then
it should not be clear enough, draw it into a third, yet lesser than the
second; but usually it is at the first. when it is clear enough draw it
into bottles, filling them within two fingers, which stop close. after two
or three days visit them; that if there be a danger of tpage heir working (which
would break the bottles) you may take out the stopples, and let them stand
open for half a quarter of an hour. then stop them close, and they are
secure for ever after. in cold freesing weather, set them upon hay, and
cover them over with hay or straw. in open weather in winter transpose them
to another part of the cellar to stand upon the bare ground or pavement. in
hot weather set them in sand. the cider of the apples of the last season,
as pippins, not peermains, nor codlings, will last till the summer grow
hot. though this never work, 'tis not of the nature of strummed wine;
because the naughty dregs are not left in it.
take one bushel of pippins, cut them into slices with the parings and
cores; boil them in twelve gallons of water, till the goodness of them be
in the water; and that consumed about three gallons. then put it into an
hypocras-bag, made of cotton; and when it is clear run out, and almost
cold, sweeten it with five pound of brown-sugar, and put a pint of ale-yest
to it, and set it a working two nights and days: then skim off the yest
clean, and put it into bottles, and let it stand two or three days, till
the yest fall dead at the top: then take it off clean with a knife, and
fill it up a little within the neck (that is to say, that a little about a
fingers breadth of the neck be empty, between the superficies of the
liquor, and the page bottom of the stopple) and then stop them up and tye them,
or else it will drive out the corks. within a fortnight you may drink of
it. it will keep five or six weeks.
sir thomas gower makes his pleasant and wholesom drink of ale and honey
thus. take fourty gallons of small ale, and five gallons of honey. when the
ale is ready to tun, and is still warm, take out ten gallons of it; which,
whiles it is hot, mingle with it the five gallons of honey, stirring it
exceeding well with a clean arm till they be perfectly incorporated. then
cover it, and let it cool and stand still. at the same time you begin to
dissolve the honey in this parcel, you take the other of thirty gallons
also warm, and tun it up with barm, and put it into a vessel capable to
hold all the whole quantity of ale and honey, and let it work there; and
because the vessel will be so far from being full, that the gross foulness
of the ale cannot work over, make holes in the sides of the barrel even
with the superficies of the liquor in it, out of which the gross feculence
may purge; and these holes must be fast shut, when you put in the rest of
the ale with the honey: which you must do, when you see the strong working
of the other is over; and that it works but gently, which may be after two
or three or four days, according to the warmth of the season. you must warm
your solution of honey, when you put it in, to be as warm as ale, when you
tun it; and then it will set the whole a working a fresh, and casting out
more foulness; which it would do too violently, if you put it in at the
first of page the tunning it. it is not amiss that some feculence lie thick upon
the ale, and work not all out; for that will keep in the spirits. after
you have dissolved the honey in the ale, you must boil it a little to skim
it; but skim it not, till it have stood a while from the fire to cool; else
you will skim away much of the honey, which will still rise as long as it
boileth. if you will not make so great a quantity at a time, do it in less
in the same proportions. he makes it about michaelmas for lent.
when strong beer groweth too hard, and flat for want of spirits, take four
or five gallons of it out of a hogshead, and boil five pounds of honey in
it, and skim it, and put it warm into the beer; and after it hath done
working, stop it up close. this will make it quick, pleasant and stronger.
the ale, that i used to drink constantly of, was made in these proportions.
take fourteen gallons of water, and half an ounce of hops; boil them near
an hour together. then pour it upon a peck of malt. have a care the malt be
not too small ground; for then it will never make clear ale. let it soak so
near two hours. then let it run from the malt, and boil it only one walm or
two. let it stand cooling till it be cool enough to work with barm, which
let be of beer rather than ale, about half a pint.
after it hath wrought some hours, when you see it come to it's height, and
is near beginning to fall in working, tun it into a barrel of eight
gallons; and in four or five days it will be fit to broach to drink. since
i have caused the wopage rt to be boiled a good half hour; since again i boil it
a good hour, and it is much the better; because the former ale tasted a
little raw. now because it consumes in boiling, and would be too strong, if
this malt made a less proportion of ale; i have added a gallon of water at
the first, taking fifteen gallons instead of fourteen. since i have added
half a peck of malt to the former proportions, to make it a little stronger
in winter.
apple drink with sugar, honey, &c
a very pleasant drink is made of apples, thus; boil sliced apples in water,
to make the water strong of apples, as when you make to drink it for
coolness and pleasure. sweeten it with sugar to your tast, such a quantity
of sliced apples, as would make so much water strong enough of apples; and
then bottle it up close for three or four months. there will come a thick
mother at the top, which being taken off, all the rest will be very clear,
and quick and pleasant to the taste, beyond any cider. it will be the
better to most taste, if you put a very little rosemary into the liquor,
when you boil it, and a little limon-peel into each bottle, when you bottle
it up.
take a gallon of conduit-water, one pound of blew raisins of the sun
stoned, and half a pound of sugar. squeese the juyce of two limons upon the
raisins and sugar, and slice the rindes upon them. boil the water, and pour
it so hot upon the ingredients in an earthen pot, and stir them well
together. so let it stand twenty four hours. then put it into bottles
(having first let it run through a strainer) and set them in a cellar or
other cool place.
page 
take nine pints of warm fountain water, and dissolve in it one pint of pure
white-honey, by laving it therein, till it be dissolved. then boil it
gently, skimming it all the while, till all the scum be perfectly scummed
off; and after that boil it a little longer, peradventure a quarter of an
hour. in all it will require two or three hours boiling, so that at last
one third part may be consumed. about a quarter of an hour before you cease
boiling, and take it from the fire, put to it a little spoonful of cleansed
and sliced ginger; and almost half as much of the thin yellow rinde of
orange, when you are even ready to take it from the fire, so as the orange
boil only one walm in it. then pour it into a well-glased strong deep great
gally-pot, and let it stand so, till it be almost cold, that it be scarce
luke-warm. then put to it a little silver-spoonful of pure ale-yest, and
work it together with a ladle to make it ferment: as soon as it beginneth
to do so, cover it close with a fit cover, and put a thick dubbled woollen
cloth about it. cast all things so that this may be done when you are going
to bed. next morning when you rise, you will find the barm gathered all
together in the middle; scum it clean off with a silver-spoon and a
feather, and bottle up the liquor, stopping it very close. it will be ready
to drink in two or three days; but it will keep well a month or two. it
will be from the first very quick and pleasant.
five bushels of maltpage  will make two hogsheads. the first running makes one
very good hogshead, but not very strong; the second is very weak. to this
proportion boil a quarter of a pound of hops in all the water that is to
make the two hogsheads; that is, two ounces to each hogshead. you put your
water to the malt in the ordinary way. boil it well, when you come to work
it with yest, take very good beer-yest, not ale-yest.
to make bragot, he takes the first running of such ale, and boils a less
proportion of honey in it, then when he makes his ordinary meath; but
dubble or triple as much spice and herbs. as for example to twenty gallons
of the strong-wort, he puts eight or ten pound, (according as your taste
liketh more or less honey) of honey; but at least triple as much herbs, and
triple as much spice as would serve such a quantity of small mead as he
made me (for to a stronger mead you put a greater proportion of herbs and
spice, then to a small; by reason that you must keep it a longer time
before you drink it; and the length of time mellows and tames the taste of
the herbs and spice). and when it is tunned in the vessel (after working
with the barm) you hang in it a bag with bruised spices (rather more then
you boiled in it) which is to hang in the barrel all the while you draw it.
he makes also mead with the second weak running of the ale; and to this he
useth the same proportions of honey, herbs and spice, as for his small mead
of pure water; and useth the same manner of boiling, working with yest, and
other circumstances, as in making of that.
page 
pick the best cherries free from rotten, and pick the stalk from them; put
them into an earthen pan. bruise them, by griping and straining them in
your hands, and let them stand all night; on the next day strain them out
(through a napkin; which if it be a course and thin one, let the juyce run
through a hippocras or gelly bag, upon a pound of fine pure sugar in
powder, to every gallon of juyce) and to every gallon put a pound of sugar,
and put it into a vessel. be sure your vessel be full, or your wine will be
spoiled; you must let it stand a month before you bottle it; and in every
bottle you must put a lump (a piece as big as a nutmeg) of sugar. the
vessel must not be stopt until it hath done working.
bruise the strawberries, and put them into a linnen-bag which hath been a
little used, that so the liquor may run through more easily. you hang in
the bag at the bung into the vessel, before you do put in your
strawberries. the quantity of the fruit is left to your discretion; for you
will judge to be there enough of them, when the colour of the wine is high
enough. during the working, you leave the bung open. the working being
over, you stop your vessel. cherry-wine is made after the same fashion. but
it is a little more troublesome to break the cherry-stones. but it is
necessary, that if your cherries be of the black soure cherries, you put to
it a little cinnamon, and a few cloves.
page 
take one hundred pounds weight, or what quantity you please, of ripe, but
sound, pure, dry and well gathered cherries. bruise and mash them with your
hands to press out all their juyce, which strain through a boulter cloth,
into a deep narrow woodden tub, and cover it close with clothes. it will
begin to work and ferment within three or four hours, and a thick foul scum
will rise to the top. skim it off as it riseth to any good head, and
presently cover it again. do this till no more great quantity of scum
arise, which will be four or five times, or more. and by this means the
liquor will become clear, all the gross muddy parts rising up in scum to
the top. when you find that the height of the working is past, and that it
begins to go less, tun it into a barrel, letting it run again through a
boulter, to keep out all the gross feculent substance. if you should let it
stay before you tun it up, till the working were too much deaded, the wine
would prove dead. let it remain in the barrel close stopped, a month or
five weeks. then draw it into bottles, into each of which put a lump of
fine sugar, before you draw the wine into it, and stop them very close, and
set them in a cold cellar. you may drink them after three or four months.
this wine is exceeding pleasant, strong, spiritful and comfortable.
page 
boil two wine-quarts of sweet-cream in a possnet; when it hath boiled a
little, take it from the fire, and beat the yolks of nine or ten fresh
eggs, and the whites of four with it, beginning with two or three
spoonfuls, and adding more till all be incorporated; then set it over the
fire, to recover a good degree of heat, but not so much as to boil; and
always stir it one way, least you break the consistence. in the mean time,
let half a pint of sack or white muscadin boil a very little in a bason,
upon a chafing-dish of coals, with three quarters of a pound of sugar, and
three or four quartered nutmegs, and as many pretty big pieces of sticks of
cinnamon. when this is well scummed, and still very hot, take it from the
fire, and immediately pour into it the cream, beginning to pour neer it,
but raising by degrees your hand so that it may fall down from a good
height; and without anymore to be done, it will then be fit to eat. it is
very good kept cold as well as eaten hot. it doth very well with it, to put
into the sack (immediately before you put in the cream) some ambergreece,
or ambered-sugar, or pastils. when it is made, you may put powder of
cinnamon and sugar upon it, if you like it.
to two quarts of creampage , if it be in the summer, when the cream is thick and
best, take but two or three yolks of eggs. but in the winter when it is
thin and hungry, take six or seven; but never no whites. and of sack or
muscadin, take a good third (scarce half) of a pint; and three quarters of
a pound of fine sugar. let the sugar and sack boil well together, that it
be almost like a syrup; and just as you take it from the fire, put in your
ground amber or pastils, and constantly pour in the cream with which the
eggs are incorporated; and do all the rest as is said in the foregoing
process.
ambered-sugar is made by grinding very well, four grains of ambergreece,
and one of musk, with a little fine sugar; or grinding two or three spanish
pastils very small.
put a pint of good milk to boil; as soon as it doth so, take it from the
fire, to let the great heat of it cool a little; for doing so, the curd
will be the tenderer, and the whole of a more uniform consistence. when it
is prettily cooled, pour it into your pot, wherein is about two spoonfuls
of sack, and about four of ale, with sufficient sugar dissolved in them. so
let it stand a while near the fire, till you eat it.
take three pints of cream; boil in it a little cinnamon, a nutmeg
quartered, and two spoonfuls of grated bread; then beat the yolks of twelve
eggs very well with a little cold cream, and a spoonful of sack. when your
cream hath boiled about a quarter of an hour, thicken it up with the eggs,
and sweeten it with sugar; and takpage e half a pint of sack and six spoonfuls
of ale, and put into the basin or dish, you intend to make it in, with a
little ambergreece, if you please. then pour your cream and eggs into it,
holding your hand as high as conveniently you can, gently stirring in the
basin with the spoon as you pour it; so serve it up. if you please you may
strew sugar upon it.
you may strew ambred sugar upon it, as you eat it; or sugar-beaten with
cinnamon, if you like it.
take half a pound or more of french barley, (not perle-barley) and pour
scalding water upon it, and wash it well therein, and strain it from the
water, & put it into the corner of a linnen-cloth and tie it up fast there,
and strike it a dozen or twenty blows against a firm table or block, to
make it tender by such bruising it, as in the countrey is used with wheat
to make frumenty. then put it into a large skillet with three pints of good
milk. boil this till at least half be consumed, and that it become as thick
as hasty pudding, which will require at least two hours; and it must be
carefully stirred all the while, least it burn too: which if by some little
inadvertence it should do, and that some black burned substance sticketh to
the bottom of the skillet, pour all the good matter from it into a fresh
skillet (or into a basin whiles you scoure this) and renew boiling till it
be very thick; all which is to make the barley very tender and pulpy, and
will at least require two or near three hours. then pour to it three pints
of good cream, and boil thepage m together a little while, stirring them always.
it will be sometime before the cold cream boil, which when it doth, a
little will suffice. then take it from the fire, and season it well with
sugar. then take a quarter of a pint of sack, and as much rhenish-wine (or
more of each) and a little verjuyce, or sharp cider, or juyce of orange,
and season it well with sugar (at least half a pound to both) and set it
over coals to boil. which when it doth, and the sugar is well melted, pour
the cream into it; in which cream the barley will be settled to the bottom
by standing still unmoved, after the sugar is well stirred and melted in
it, or pour it through a hair-sieve; and you may boil it again, that it be
very hot, when you mingle them together; else it may chance not curdle.
some of the barley (but little) will go over with it, and will do no hurt.
after you have thus made your posset, let it stand warm a while that the
curd may thicken: but take heed it boil not, for that would dissolve it
again into the consistence of cream. when you serve it up, strew it over
with powder of cinnamon and sugar. it will be much the better, if you strew
upon it some ambergreece ground with sugar. you may boil bruised sticks of
cinnamon in the cream, and in the sack, before you mingle them. you must
use clear char-coal-fire under your vessels. the remaining barley will make
good barley cream, being boiled with fresh cream and a little cinnamon and
mace; to which you may add a little rosemary and sugar, when it is taken
from the fire: or butter it as you do wheat. or make a pudding of it,
putting to page it a pint of cream, which boil; then add four or five yolks, and
two whites of eggs, and the marrow of two bones cut small, and of one in
lumps: sufficient sugar, and one nutmeg grated. put this either to bake
raw, or with puff-past beneath and above it in the dish. a pretty smart
heat, as for white manchet, and three quarters of an hour in the oven. you
may make the like with great oat-meal scalded (not boiled) in cream, and
soaked a night; then made up as the other.
take a pottle of cream, and boil in it a little whole cinnamon, and three
or four flakes of mace. to this proportion of cream put in eighteen yolks
of eggs, and eight of the whites; a pint of sack; beat your eggs very well,
and then mingle them with your sack. put in three quarters of a pound of
sugar into the wine and eggs with a nutmeg grated, and a little beaten
cinnamon; set the basin on the fire with the wine and eggs, and let it be
hot. then put in the cream boyling from the fire, pour it on high, but stir
it not; cover it with a dish, and when it is settled, strew on the top a
little fine sugar mingled with three grains of ambergreece, and one grain
of musk, and serve it up.
my lady middlesex makes syllabubs for little glasses with spouts, thus.
take  pints of sweet cream, one of quick white wine (or rhenish), and a
good wine glassful (better the / of a pint) of sack: mingle with them
about three quarters of a pound of fine sugar in powpage der. beat all these
together with a whisk, till all appeareth converted into froth. then pour
it into your little syllabub-glasses, and let them stand all night. the
next day the curd will be thick and firm above, and the drink clear under
it. i conceive it may do well, to put into each glass (when you pour the
liquor into it) a sprig of rosemary a little bruised, or a little
limon-peel, or some such thing to quicken the taste; or use amber-sugar, or
spirit of cinnamon, or of lignum-cassiæ; or nutmegs, or mace, or cloves, a
very little.
boil a quart of good cream with sticks of cinnamon and quartered nutmeg and
sugar to your taste. when it is boiled enough to have acquired the taste of
the spice, take the whites of six new laid eggs, and beat them very well
with a little fresh-cream, then pour them to your boyling cream, and let
them boil a walm or two. then let it run through a boulter, and put a
little orange flower-water to it, and sliced bread; and so serve it up
cold.
take two quarts (you must not exceed this proportion in one vessel) of
perfectly sweet-cream, that hath not been jogged with carriage; and in a
possnet set it upon a clear lighted char-coal-fire, not too hot. when it
beginneth to boil, cast into it a piece of double refined hard sugar about
as much as two walnuts, and with a spoon stir the cream all one way. after
two or three rounds, you will perceive a thick cream rise at the top. scum
it off with your spoon, and lay it in anotherpage  dish. and always stir it the
same way, and more cream will rise; which as it doth rise, you put it into
your dish, one lare upon an other. and thus almost all the cream will turn
into this thick cream, to within two or three spoonfuls. if you would have
it sweeter, you may strew some sugar upon the top of it. you must be
careful not to have the heat too much; for then it will turn to oyl; as
also if the cream have been carried. if you would have it warm, set the
dish you lay it in, upon a chafing-dish of coals.
milk your cows in the evening about the ordinary hour, and fill with it a
little kettle about three quarters full, so that there may be happily two
or three gallons of milk. let this stand thus five or six hours. about
twelve a clock at night kindle a good fire of charcoal, and set a large
trivet over it. when the fire is very clear and quick, and free from all
smoak, set your kettle of milk over it upon the trivet, and have in a pot
by a quart of good cream ready to put in at the due time; which must be,
when you see the milk begin to boil simpringly. then pour in the cream in a
little stream and low, upon a place, where you see the milk simper: this
will presently deaden the boiling, and then you must pour in no more cream
there, but in a fresh place, where it simpreth and bubbeleth a little.
continue this pouring in, in new places where the milk boileth, till all
your cream is in, watching it carefully to that end. then let it continue
upon the fire to boil, till you see all the milk rise up together to the
top, and not in lipage ttle parcels here and there, so that it would run over,
if it should stay longer upon the fire. then let two persons take it
steadily off, and set it by in a cool-room to stand unmoved, uncovered; but
so as no motes may fall in, for the rest of that night, and all the next
day and night, and more, if you would have it thicker. then an hour or two
before dinner cut the thick cream at the top with a knife into squares as
broad as your hand, which will be the thicker the longer it hath stood.
then have a thin slice or skimmer of latton, and with that raise up the
thick cream, putting your slice under it so nicely, that you take up no
milk with it; and have a ladle or spoon in the other hand to help the cream
upon the slice, which thereby will become mingled: and lay these parcels of
cream in a dish, into which you have first put a little raw cream, or of
that (between cream and milk) that is immediately under the clouts. to take
the clouts the more conveniently, you hold a back of a ladle or
skimming-dish against the further side of the clout, that it may not slide
away when the latton slice shuffeth it on the other side to get under it,
and so the clout will mingle together or dubble up, which makes it the
thicker, and the more graceful. when you have laid a good laire of clouts
in the dish, put upon it a little more fresh raw or boiled cream, and then
fill it up with the rest of the clouts. and when it is ready to serve in,
you may strew a little sugar upon it, if you will you may sprinkle in a
little sugar between every flake or clout of cream. if you keep the dish
thus laid a day longer before you page eat it, the cream will grow the thicker
and firmer. but if you keep it, i think it is best to be without sugar or
raw cream in it, and put them in, when you are to serve it up. there will
be a thin cream swimming upon the milk of the kettle after the clouts are
taken away, which is very sweet and pleasant to drink. if you should let
your clouts lie longer upon the milk, then i have said, before you skim it
off, the milk underneath would grow soure, and spoil the cream above. if
you put these clouts into a churn with other cream, it will make very good
butter, so as no sugar have been put with it.
put as much as you please to make, of sweet thick cream into a dish, and
whip it with a bundle of white hard rushes, (of such as they make whisks to
brush cloaks) tyed together, till it come to be very thick, and near a
buttery substance. if you whip it too long, it will become butter. about a
good hour will serve in winter. in summer it will require an hour and a
half. do not put in the dish, you will serve it up in, till it be almost
time to set it upon the table. then strew some poudered fine sugar in the
bottom of the dish it is to go in, and with a broad spatule lay your cream
upon it: when half is laid in, strew some more fine sugar upon it, and then
lay in the rest of the cream (leaving behinde some whey that will be in the
bottom) and strew more sugar upon that. you should have the sugar-box by
you, to strew on sugar from time to time, as you eat off the superficies,
that is strepage wed over with sugar. if you would have your whipped cream light
and frothy, that hath but little substance in the eating, make it of onely
plain milk; and if you would have it of a consistence between both, mingle
cream and milk.
strain your whey, and set it on the fire; make a clear and gentle fire
under your kettle; as they rise, put in whey, so continuing till they are
ready to skim. then take your skimmer, and put them on the bottom of a hair
sieve, so let them drain till they are cold; then take them off, and put
them into a basin, and beat them with two or three spoonfuls of cream and
sugar.
take two gallons more or less of new milk, set it upon a clear fire; when
it is ready to boil, put in a quart of sweet cream, and take it off the
fire, and strain it through a hair sieve into earthen pans; let it stand
two days and two nights; then take it off with a skimmer; strew sugar on
the cream, and serve it to the table.
take the whites of two eggs, and a pint of cream, six spoonfuls of sack, as
much sugar as will sweeten it; then take a birchen rod and whip it; as it
riseth with froth, skim it, and put it into the syllabub pot; so continue
it with whipping and skimming, till your syllabub pot be full.
take a pint of verjuyce in a bowl; milk the cow to the verjuyce; take off
the page curd; and take sweet-cream and beat them together with a little sack
and sugar; put it into your syllabub pot; then strew sugar on it, and so
send it to the table.
the ground or body of potages must always be very good broth of mutton,
veal and volaille. now to give good taste, you vary every month of the
year, according to the herbs and roots that are in season. in spring and
summer you use cersevil, oseille, borage, bugloss, pourpier, lettice,
chicoree and cowcombers quartered, etc. the manner of using them is to boil
store of them about half an hour or a quarter, in a pot by it self, with
some bouillon taken out off the great pot; half an hour before dinner, take
light bread well dryed from all moisture before the fire; then cut in
slices, laid in a dish over coals, pour upon it a ladleful of broath, no
more then the bread can presently drink up; which when it hath done, put on
another ladleful, and stew that, till it be drunk up; repeat this three or
four times, a good quarter of an hour in all, till the bread is swelled
like a gelly (if it be too long, it will grow glewy and stick to the dish)
and strong of broth; then fill it up near full with the same strong broth,
which having stewed a while, put on the broth and herbs, and your capon or
other meat upon that, and so let it stew a quarter of an hour longer, then
turn it up.
in winter, boil half an hour a pretty bundle of parsley, and half as much
of sives, and a very little thyme, and sweet-marjoram; when they have given
their taste to the herbs, throw the bundle away, and do as abovesaid with
thpage e bread. deeper in the winter, parsley-roots, and white-chicoree, or
navets, or cabbage, which last must be put in at first, as soon as the pot
is skimmed; and to colour the bouillon it is good to put into it (sooner or
later, according to the coursness or fineness of what you put in)
partridges or wild-duck, or a fleshy piece of beef half rosted. green-pease
may some of them be boiled a pretty while in the great pot; but others in a
pot by themselves, with some bouillon no longer then as if they were to eat
buttered, and put upon the dish, containing the whole stock a quarter of an
hour after the other hath stewed a quarter of an hour upon the bread.
sometimes old-pease boiled in the broth from the first, to thicken it, but
no pease to be served in with it. sometimes a piece of the bottom of a
venison pasty, put in from the first. also venison bones.
make it of beef, mutton and veal; at last adding a capon, or pigeons. put
in at first a quartered onion or two, some oat-meal, or french barley, some
bottome of a venison-pasty-crust, twenty whole grains of pepper: four or
five cloves at last, and a little bundle of sweet-herbs, store of
marigold-flowers. you may put in parsley or other herbs.
or make it with beef, mutton and veal, putting in some oat-meal, and good
pot-herbs, as parsley, sorrel, violet-leaves, etc. and a very little thyme
and sweet-marjoram, scarce to be tasted: and some marigold leaves, at last.
you may begin to boil it overnight, and let itpage  stand warm all night; then
make an end of boiling it next morning. it is well to put into the pot, at
first, twenty or thirty corns of whole pepper.
make first a very good bouillon, seasoned as you like. put some of it upon
the white flesh of a capon or hen a little more than half-rosted. beat them
well in a mortar, and strain out all the juyce that will come. you may put
more broth upon what remains in the strainer, and beat again, and strain it
to the former. whiles this is doing, put some of your first plain broth
upon some dryed bread to mittonner well. let there be no more broth, then
just to do that. none to swim thin over. when you will serve the potage in,
pour the white liquor upon the swelled and gellied-bread, and let them stew
together a little upon the coals. when it is through hot, take it off, and
squeese some limon or orange into it, and so send it in presently. it
mendeth a bouillon much, to boil in it some half-rosted volaille, or other
good meat.
take strong broth, and boil a neck of mutton, and a marrow-bone in it, and
skim it very well; then put in half a pound of french barley, and a bundle
of sweet herbs, and two or three blades of large-mace. let these boil very
well. then mince half a peck of spinage, and two great onions very small,
and let it boil one hour or more; season it with salt as you please, and
send the mutton and the marrow-bone in a dish with french bread or manchet
to the table.
page 
take the fleshy and sinewy part of a leg of beef, crag-ends of necks of
veal and mutton. put them in a ten quarts pot, and fill it up with water.
begin to boil about six a clock in the morning, to have your potage ready
by noon. when it is well skimmed, put in two or three large onions in
quarters, and half a loaf (in one lump) of light french bread, or so much
of the bottom crust of a venison pasty; all which will be at length clean
dissolved in the broth. in due time season it with salt, a little pepper,
and a very few cloves. likewise at a fit distance, before it be ended
boiling, put in store of good herbs, as in summer, borrage, bugloss,
purslain, sorel, lettice, endive, and what else you like; in winter,
beetes, endive, parsley-roots, cabbage, carrots, whole onions, leeks, and
what you can get or like, with a little sweet-marjoram and exceeding little
thyme. order it so that the broth be very strong and good. to which end you
may after four hours (or three) boil a hen or capon in it; light
french-bread sliced, must be taken about noon, and tosted a little before
the fire, or crusts of crisp new french-bread; lay it in a dish, and pour
some of the broth upon it, and let it stew a while upon a chafing-dish.
then pour in more broth, and if you have a fowl, lay it upon the bread in
the broth, and fill it up with broth, and lay the herbs and roots all over
and about it, and let it stew a little longer, and so serve it up covered,
after you have squeesed some juyce of orangepage  or limon, or put some verjuyce
into it. or you may beat two or three eggs, with part of the broth, and
some verjuyce, or juyce of orange, and then mingle it with the rest of the
broth.
take half a pound of french-barley, and wash it in three or four
hot-waters; then tye it up in a course linnen-cloth and strike it five or
six blows against the table; for this will make it very tender. put it into
such a pot full of meat and water, as is said in the ordinary potage, after
it is skimmed; and season this with salt, spice, marjoram and thyme, as you
did the other. an hour before you take it from the fire, put into it a
pound of the best raisins of the sun well washed; at such a distance of
time, that they may be well plumped and tender, but not boiled to mash.
when the broth is enough boiled and consumed, and very strong, pour some of
it upon sliced dry bread in a deep potage-dish, or upon crusts, and let it
stew a while. then pour on all the rest of the broth, with the barley and
raisins, upon a capon or hen, or piece of mutton or veal; and let it
mittonner awhile upon the chafing-dish, then serve it in.
take a like quantity of water and flesh, as in the others, adding two
marrow bones: which tie at the ends with pieces of linnen, that the marrow
may not melt out, and make the broth too fat. a while after it is skimmed,
put into it a loaf of french bread very thin sliced, (which is better than
grated) and this will be all dissolved in thpage e broth. season it in due time
with salt, four or five flakes of mace, and five or six cloves; as also
with sweet herbs: and an hour, or better, before you take it off, put in
raisins of the sun, prunes, and currants, of each one pound, well picked
and washed. when it is boiled enough, pour the broth into a bason, that if
it be too fat, you may take it off. there season it with a little sugar,
and four or five spoonfuls of white-wine or sack. then pour it upon
sliced-bread, and stew it a while. then squeese an orange or limon (or
both) upon it, and serve it up with the marrow-bones in it.
make a good strong broth of veal and mutton; then take out the meat, and
put in a good capon or pullet: but first, if it be very fat, parboil it a
little to take away the oyleness of it, and then put it into the broth; and
when it hath boiled a little therein, put in some grated bread, a bundle of
sweet herbs, two or three blades of mace, and a peeled onion. when it is
ready to be dished up take the yolks of six eggs, beat them very well with
two or three spoonfuls of white-wine. then take the capon out of the broth,
and thicken it up with the eggs, and so dish it up with the capon, and
tostes of white-bread or slices, which you please; and have ready boiled
the marrow of two or three bones with some tender boiled white endive, and
strew it over the capon.
a good potage for dinner is thus made: boil beef, mutton, veal, volaille,
and page a little piece of the lean of a gammon of the best bacon, with some
quartered onions, (and a little garlick, if you like it) you need no salt,
if you have bacon, but put in a little pepper and cloves. if it be in the
winter, put in a bouquet of sweet-herbs, or whole onions, or roots, or
cabbage. if season of herbs, boil in a little of the broth apart, some
lettice, sorrel, borage, and bugloss, &c. till they be only well mortified.
if you put in any gravy, let it boil or stew a while with the broth; put it
in due time upon the tosted-bread to mittoner, &c. if you boil some half
rosted meat with your broth, it will be the better.
make very good broth with some lean of veal, beef and mutton, and with a
brawny hen or young cock. after it is scummed, put in an onion quartered,
(and, if you like it, a clove of garlick,) a little parsley, a sprig of
thyme, as much minth, a little balm; some coriander-seeds bruised, and a
very little saffron; a little salt, pepper and a clove. when all the
substance is boiled out of the meat, and the broth very good, you may drink
it so, or, pour a little of it upon tosted sliced-bread, and stew it, till
the bread have drunk up all that broth, then add a little more, and stew;
so adding by little and little, that the bread may imbibe it and swell:
whereas if you drown it at once, the bread will not swell, and grow like
gelly: and thus you will have a good potage. you may add parsley-roots or
leeks, cabbage or endive in the due time before the broth is ended boiling,
and time page enough for them to become tender. in the summer you may put in
lettice, sorrel, purslane, borage and bugloss, or what other pot-herbs you
like. but green herbs do rob the strength and vigor and cream of the
potage.
the queen's ordinary bouillon de santé in a morning was thus. a hen, a
handful of parsley, a sprig of thyme, three of spear-minth, a little balm,
half a great onion, a little pepper and salt, and a clove, as much water as
would cover the hen; and this boiled to less then a pint, for one good
porrenger full.
fill a large earthen pot with water, and make it boil; then take out half
the water, and put in beef and mutton (fit pieces) and boil and skim: and
as soon as it boils, season it with salt and pepper. after an hour and
half, or two hours, put in a capon, and four or five cloves; when it is
within a good half hour of being boiled enough, put in such herbs, as you
intend, as sorrel, lettice, purslane, borage and bugloss, or green-pease;
and in the winter, parsley-roots and white-endive, or navets, &c. so pour
the broth upon tosted light bread, and let it stew a while in the dish
covered. you should never put in fresh water. and if you should through the
consuming of the water by long boiling, it must be boiling hot. the less
broth remains, the better is the potage, were it but a porrenger full, so
that it would be stiff gelly when it is cold. it is good to put into the
water, at the first, a whole onion or two; and if you will, a spoonful of
well-beaten orge mondé or bottom crust of bread, or some of the bottom of
a venison pasty.
page 
make strong broth with a piece of beef, mutton and veal, adding a piece of
the sinews of the leg of beef, seasoning it with two great onions
quartered, some cloves, and white-pepper. in due time put in a capon, or
take some broth out to boil it in. but before you put in the capon, take
out some of the broth, in which boil and stew turneps first prepared thus.
fry them in scalding butter, till they be tender; then take them out with a
holed skimmer, and lay them in a holed dish warmed, set in another whole
dish. when all the butter is quite drained out, stew them in a pipkin in
the broth, as is said above. when you will make up your potage, put some
ladlefuls of the broth of the great pot (driving away the fat with the
ladle) upon slices of scorched bread in a deep dish. let this mittonner a
while. then lay the capon upon it, and pour the turneps and broth of them
over all. a duck in lieu of a capon will make very good potage. but then it
is best, to fry that first, as the turneps, then boil it.
make a good and well-seasoned bouillon with lean beef, mutton and veal, in
which boil a capon. boil with it either cabbage, or turneps, or whole
onions. the first two you put into the broth all over the dish; but the
onions you lay all round about the brim, when you serve it in. whiles the
meat is boiling to make the bouillon, you rost a fleshy piece of beef
(withoutpage  fat) of two or three pound; and when it is half rosted, squeese
out all the juyce, and put the flesh into the pot with the rest of the
meat to boil, which will both colour and strengthen it. when you find your
bouillon good, pour it into the dish, where your bread lieth sliced (which
must be very light and spungy, and dryed first, after it is sliced) and let
it mittonner a little. then pour your gravy of beef upon it, (or of mutton)
and lay your capon upon it, and lay in your roots round about it. it is
best to boil by themselves in some of the bouillon in a pot a part, the
roots or onions.
mounsieur de s. euremont makes thus his potage de santé and boiled meat for
dinner, being very valetudinary. put a knuckle of veal and a hen into an
earthen pipkin with a gallon of water (about nine of the clock forenoon)
and boil it gently till you have skimmed it well. when no more scum riseth
(which will be in about a quarter of an hour), take out the hen (which else
would be too much boiled,) and continue boiling gently till about half an
hour past ten. then put in the hen again, and a handful of white endive
uncut at length, which requireth more boiling then tenderer herbs. near
half hour after eleven, put in two good handfuls of tender sorrel, borage,
bugloss, lettice, purslane (these two come later then the others, therefore
are not to be had all the winter) a handful a piece, a little cersevil, and
a little beet-leaves. when he is in pretty good health, that he may venture
upon more savoury hotter thingspage , he puts in a large onion stuck round with
cloves, and sometimes a little bundle of thyme and other hot savoury
herbs; which let boil a good half hour or better, and take them out, and
throw them away, when you put in the tender herbs. about three quarters
after eleven, have your slice dried bread ready in a dish, and pour a
ladleful of the broth upon it. let it stew covered upon a chafing-dish.
when that is soaked in, put on more. so continue till it be well
mittonée, and the bread grown spungy, and like a gelly. then fill up the
dish with broth, and put the hen and veal upon it, and cover them over with
herbs, and so serve it in. he keeps of this broth to drink at night, or
make a pan-cotto, as also for next morning. i like to adde to this, a
rand of tender brisket beef, and the cragg-end of a neck of mutton. but the
beef must have six hours boiling. so put it on with all the rest at six a
clock. when it is well scummed, take out all the rest. at nine, put in the
veal and mutton, and thenceforwards, as is said above. but to so much meat,
and for so long boiling, you must have at least three gallons of water.
either way you must boil always but leisurely, and the pot covered as much
as is convenient, and season it in due time with a little salt, as also
with pepper, if you like it; and if you be in vigorous health, you may put
a greater store of onions quartered. the beets have no very good taste,
peradventure it were best leave them out. in health you may season the
potage with a little juyce of orange. in season green pease are good, also
cucumbers. in winter, roots, cabbage, page poix chiches, vermicelli at any time.
you may use yolks of eggs beaten with some of the broth and juyce of
oranges or verjuyce, then poured upon the whole quantity.
the jesuite that came from china, ann. , told mr. waller, that there
they use sometimes in this manner. to near a pint of the infusion, take two
yolks of new laid-eggs, and beat them very well with as much fine sugar as
is sufficient for this quantity of liquor; when they are very well
incorporated, pour your tea upon the eggs and sugar, and stir them well
together. so drink it hot. this is when you come home from attending
business abroad, and are very hungry, and yet have not conveniency to eat
presently a competent meal. this presently discusseth and satisfieth all
rawness and indigence of the stomack, flyeth suddainly over the whole body
and into the veins, and strengthneth exceedingly, and preserves one a good
while from necessity of eating. mr. waller findeth all those effects of it
thus with eggs. in these parts, he saith, we let the hot water remain too
long soaking upon the tea, which makes it extract into it self the earthy
parts of the herb. the water is to remain upon it, no longer that whiles
you can say the miserere psalm very leisurely. then pour it upon the
sugar, or sugar and eggs. thus you have only the spiritual parts of the
tea, which is much more active, penetrative and friendly to nature. you may
from this regard take a little more of the herb; about one dragm of tea,
will serve for a pint of water; which makes three ordinary draughts.
page 
make a very good gelly-broth of mutton, veal, joynt-bones of each, a hen,
and some bones (with a little meat upon them) of rosted veal or mutton,
breaking the bones that the marrow may boil out. put to boil with these
some barley (first boiled in water, that you throw away) some harts-horn
rasped, and some stoned raisins of the sun. when the broth is thoroughly
well boiled, pour it from the ingredients, and let it cool and harden into
a gelly: then take from it the fat on the top, and the dregs in the bottom.
to a porrenger full of this melted, put the yolk of a new-laid egg beaten
with the juyce of an orange (or less if you like it not so sharp) and a
little sugar; and let this stew gently a little while altogether, and so
drink it. some flesh of rosted veal or mutton, or capon, besides the
rosted-bones, that have marrow in them, doth much amend the broth.
the joynts i have mentioned above, are those, which the butchers cut off,
and throw to their dogs, from the ends of shoulders, legs, and other bare
long parts, and have the sinews sticking to them.
take any bones of rosted or boiled beef, from which the meat is never so
clean eaten and picked; as the ribs, the chine-bones, the buckler
plate-bone, marrow-bones, or any other, that you would think never so dry
and insipid. break them into such convenient pieces, as may lie in your
pipkin or pot; also you may bruise them. put wpage ith them a good piece of the
bloody piece of the throat of the beef, where he is sticked, and store of
water to these. boil and scum them, till the first foul scum is risen and
taken away; afterwards scum no more, but let the blood boil into the broth.
you may put a quartered onion or two to them, if you like them. after four
or five hours boyling, put in a good knuckle with some of the leg of veal;
and, if you please, a crag-end or two of necks of mutton. let these boil
very well with the rest. you may put in what herbs you please, in due time,
as lettice, sorrel, borage and bugloss, spinage and endive, purslane, &c.
and a bundle of sweet herbs: in winter, cabbage, or turneps, or
parsley-roots, or endive, &c. it will be done in two or three hours after
the veal and mutton are in. pour out the broth, and boil it a little by it
self over a chafing-dish, in some deep vessel, to scum off the superfluous
fat. then pour it upon tosted bread (by degrees, if you will, stewing it,
to gelly it) to serve it in (after it hath stewed a little,) you must
remember to season it with salt, pepper and cloves, in the due time. you
will do well to quicken it with some verjuyce, or juyce of orange; or with
some yolks of eggs and the juyces, if the broth be not over-strong.
green-pease in the season do well with the potage. you may put in, near the
beginning, some bottom of a peppered pasty, or of a loaf of bread.
in the west-country, they make a kind of flomery of wheat flower, which
they judge to be more harty and pleasant thepage n that of oat-meal, thus; take
half, or a quarter of a bushel of good bran of the best wheat (which
containeth the purest flower of it, though little, and is used to make
starch,) and in a great woodden bowl or pail, let it soak with cold water
upon it three or four days. then strain out the milky water from it, and
boil it up to a gelly or like starch. which you may season with sugar and
rose or orange-flower-water, and let it stand till it be cold, and gellied.
then eat it with white or rhenish-wine, or cream, or milk, or ale.
beat oat-meal small; put a little of it to milk, and let it boil stewingly,
till you see that the milk begins to thicken with it. then strain the milk
from the oat-meal (this is as when you soak or boil out the substance of
oatmeal with water, to make flomery,) then boil up that milk to the height
of pap, which sweeten with a little sugar, and put to it some yolks of eggs
dissolved in rose or orange-flower-water, and let it mittonner a while upon
the chafing-dish, and a little butter, if you like it. you may boil a
little mace in the milk.
beat a couple of new-laid-eggs in good clear broth; heat this a little,
stirring it all the while. then pour this upon a panado made thick of the
same broth; and keep them a little upon a chafing-dish to incorporate,
stirring them all the while.
boil barley in water usq. ad putrilaginem, with a flake or two of mace or
a quartered nutmeg; and when it is in a manner dissolvpage ed in water with long
boiling, strain out all the cream or pap, leaving the husks behind. at the
same time beat (for one mess) two ounces of blanched almonds with
rose-water; and when they are throughly beaten, strain out their milk, (or
you may put this to the barley before it is strained, and strain them
together) and put it to the barley pap, and let them stew a while together;
then sweeten it with sugar to your taste. or when you have boiled the
barley in water very tender as above, you may put milk to it, and boil
again to fitting thickness; then strain it, adding almonds as above. or if
you will, and your stomack will bear it, you may eat it without straining
the barley (but the almonds must be strained) and you may put butter to it
if you please.
you may do the like with oat-meal or rice; or put pine kernels (first well
watered) with the almonds.
put beaten oat-meal to soak an hour or two in milk, as you do in water,
when you make flomery. then strain it out into a possnet through a fitting
strainer; and if you judge it too thick of the oat-meal for sufficient
boiling, add more milk to it. set this to boil, putting then into it a lump
of sugar, (about as big as a little wall nut) and stir it well all the
while, that it burn not too. about an hours boiling is sufficient, by which
time it should be grown pretty thick. put then a good lump of fresh-butter
to it, which being well melted and stirred into the pap and incorporated
with it, take it from the fire, and put it intopage  a dish, and strew some fine
sugar upon it, or mingle some sugar with it to sweeten the whole quantity.
you may season it also with rose-water or orange flower-water, or
ambergreece, or some yolks of new-laid-eggs. you may put in a very little
salt at the first.
boil a quart of milk in a large pipkin; as soon as it boileth, take it from
the fire, and instantly put into it five or six good spoonfuls of picked
rice, and cover it close, and so let it stand soaking in the chimney-corner
two hours. then set in on the fire again, to make it stew or boil
simpringly for an hour, or an hour and half more, till it be enough. then
put sugar to it, and so serve it in.
orge mondé is done in the same manner; only, you let that stand covered
and warm all the while, during three, four or five hours, and then you boil
it simpringly three or four hours more. the quantity must be more or less,
as you desire it thicker or thinner, which after once tryal, you will
easily know how to proportion out. the chief care must be, that the rice or
barley be well homogeneated with the milk.
in a marble mortar beat great oat-meal to meal (which requireth long
beating) then boil it three or four hours in spring water. to a possnet
full of two or three quarts of water put about half a porrenger full of
oat-meal, before it is beaten; for after beating it appeareth more. to this
quantity put as much smallage as you buy for a peny, which maketh it strong
of the herpage b, and very green. chop the smallage exceeding small, and put it
in a good half hour before you are to take your possnet from the fire. you
are to season your gruel with a little salt, at the due time; and you may
put in a little nutmeg and mace to it. when you have taken it from the
fire, put into it a good proportion of butter, which stir well, to
incorporate with the gruel, when it is melted.
when you set to the fire a big pot of oat-meal, (which must be but once
cut, that is, every corn cut once a two) and water, to make water-gruel;
let it boil long, till it be almost boiled enough, then make it rise in a
great ebullition, in great galloping waves, and skim of all the top, that
riseth; which may be a third part of the whole, and is the cream, and hath
no gross-visible oat-meal in it. boil that a while longer by it self, with
a little mace and nutmeg, and season it with salt. when it is enough, take
it off, and put sugar, butter, and a little red rose-water to it, and an
egg with a little white-wine, if you like it, and would have it more
nourishing. this is by much better, then the part which remaineth below
with the body of the oat-meal. yet that will make good water-gruel for the
servants.
if you boil it more leisurely you must skim off the cream, as it riseth in
boiling; else it will quickly sink down again to the rest of the gross
oat-meal. and thus you may have a finer cream then with hasty boiling.
page 
into a possnet of two quarts of water, besides the due proportion of beaten
oat-meal, put two handfuls of wood-sorrel a little-chopped and bruised, and
a good quantity of picked and washed currants, tyed loosly in a thin stuff
bag (as a bolter cloth). boil these very well together, seasoning the
composition in due time, with salt, nutmeg, mace, or what else you please,
as rosemary &c. when it is sufficiently boiled, strain the oat-meal, and
press out all the juyce and humidity of the currants and herbs, throwing
away the insipid husks; and season it with sugar and butter; and to each
porrenger-ful two spoonfuls of rhenish-wine and the yolk of an egg.
you must make a good barley-water, throwing away the three first waters as
soon as they boil; which will take up about three quarters of an hour. then
you boil a large quantity of water with the barley (which thus prepared
makes the water no more red or russet) during an hours space or more; (that
it may be strong of the barley; perle-barley is best,) towards the latter
end put in the pullet flead, and the legs cut off; if it should boil too
long, the emulsion would taste too fleshy. when it is enough, let the broth
run clear from the barley and pullet, and beat the almonds with the broth,
and strain them from it. then sweeten page it with sugar. this is to make at
least two english quarts of emulsion. i should like to put some pulp of
barley, boiled by it self, to strain with the almond-milk, and, if you
will, some melon seeds. you may put some juyce of limon or orange to it.
also season it with cinnamon, and make the broth stronger of the flesh.
the queens white potage is made only of the white flesh of capon beaten
with good broth and strained, and a little juyce of limon or orange; but no
almonds.
the queen mothers pressis was thus made. take un gigot of mutton, a
piece of veal, and a capon (or half the quantity of each of these) and put
them to rost with convenient fire, till they are above half rosted, or
rather, till they be two thirds rosted. then take them off, and squeese out
all their juyce in a press with screws, and scum all the fat from it, and
put it between two dishes upon a chafing-dish of coals to boil a very
little, or rather but to heat well; for by then it is through hot, the
juyce will be ripened enough to drink, whereas before it was raw and
bloody; then if you perceive any fat to remain and swim upon it, clense it
away with a feather. squeese the juyce of an orange (through a holed spoon)
into half a porrenger full of this, and add a little salt, and drink it.
the queen used this at nights in stead of a supper; for when she took this,
she did eat nothing else. it is of great, yet temperate nourishment. if you
take a couple of partridges in stead of a capon, it will be of more
nourishment, but hotter. great wepage aknesses and consumptions have been
recovered with long use of this, and strength and long life continued
notably. it is good to take two or three spoonfuls of it in a good ordinary
bouillon. i should like better the boiling the same things in a close
flagon in bulliente balneo, as my lady kent, and my mother used.
mounsieur de bourdeaux used to take a mornings a broth, thus made. make a
very good broth (so as to gelly, when it is cold), a lean piece of a leg of
veal, the crag-end of a neck of mutton, and a pullet, seasoning it with a
little salt, cloves and pepper to your mind. beat some of it with a handful
of blanched almonds and twenty husked-seeds of citron and strain it to the
whole; put sugar to it, and so drink it as an emulsion.
otherwhiles he would make a potage of the broth, (made without fruit),
boiling and stewing it with some light-bread.
to make a pan cotto, as the cardinals use in rome, take much thinner
broth, made of the fleshes as above (or of mutton alone) and boil it three
hours, gently and close covered in una pignata, with lumps of fine
light-bread tosted or dried. un pan grattato is made the same way with
fine light-bread grated. season the broth of either lightly with salt, and
put in the spice at the last, when the bread is almost boiled or stewed
enough. you may use juyce of oranges to any of these. a wholesom course of
diet is, to eat one of these, or panada, or cream of oat-meal, or barley,
page or two new-laid-eggs for break-fast; and dine at four or five a clock, with
capon or pullet or partridg, &c. beginning your meal with a little good
nourishing potage. two poched eggs with a few fine dry-fryed collops of
pure bacon, are not bad for break-fast, or to begin a meal.
take two quarts of pease, and put them into an ordinary quantity of water,
and when they are almost boiled, take out a pint of the pease whole, and
strain all the rest. a little before you take out the pint of pease, when
they are all boiling together, put in almost an ounce of coriander-seed
beaten very small, one onion, some mint, parsley, winter-savoury,
sweet-marjoram, all minced very small; when you have strained the pease,
put in the whole pease and the strained again into the pot, and let them
boil again, and a little before you take them up, put in half a pound of
sweet-butter. you must season them in due time, and in the ordinary
proportion with pepper and salt.
this is a proportion to make about a gallon of pease-porage. the quantities
are set down by guess. the coriander-seeds are as much as you can
conveniently take in the hollow of your hand. you may put in a great good
onion or two. a pretty deal of parsley, and if you will, and the season
afford them, you may add what you like of other porage herbs, such as they
use for their porages in france. but if you take the savoury herbs dry, you
must crumble or beat them to smpage all powder (as you do the coriander-seed)
and if any part of them be too big to pass through the strainer, after
they have given their taste to the quantity, in boiling a sufficient while
therein, you put them away with the husks of the pease. the pint of pease
that you reserve whole, is only to show that it is pease-porage. they must
be of the thickness of ordinary pease-porage. for which these proportions
will make about a gallon.
put a crag-end of a neck of mutton, a knuckle of veal, and a pullet into a
pipkin of water, with a spoonful or two of french-barley first scalded in a
water or two. the pullet is put in after the other meat is well skimmed,
and hath boiled an hour. a good hour after that, put in a large quantity of
sorrel, lettice, purslane, borage and bugloss, and boil an hour more at
least three hours in all. before you put in the herbs, season the broth
with salt, a little pepper and cloves, strain out the broth and drink it.
but for potage, put at first a good piece of fleshy young beef with the
rest of the meat. and put not in your herbs till half an hour before you
take off the pot. when you use not herbs, but carrots and turneps, put in a
little peny-royal and a sprig of thyme. vary in the season with
green-pease, or cucumber quartered longwise, or green sower verjuyce
grapes; always well-seasoned with pepper and salt and cloves. you pour some
of the broth upon the sliced-bread by little and little, stewing it, before
you put the herbs upon the potage.
page 
the best way of ordering your bread in potages, is thus. take light spungy
fine white french-bread, cut only the crusts into tosts. tost them
exceeding dry before the fire, so that they be yellow. then put them hot
into a hot dish, and pour upon them some very good strong broth, boiling
hot. cover this, and let them stew together gently, not boil; and feed it
with fresh-broth, still as it needeth; this will make the bread swell much,
and become like gelly.
take half a pint of sack, and as much rhenish wine, sweeten them to your
taste with sugar. beat ten yolks of eggs, and eight of whites exceeding
well, first taking out the cocks-tread, and if you will the skins of the
yolks; sweeten these also, and pour them to the wine, add a stick or two of
cinnamon bruised, set this upon a chafing-dish to heat strongly, but not to
boil; but it must begin to thicken. in the mean time boil for a quarter of
an hour three pints of cream seasoned duly with sugar and some cinnamon in
it. then take it off from boiling, but let it stand near the fire, that it
may continue scalding-hot whiles the wine is heating. when both are as
scalding-hot as they can be without boiling, pour the cream into the wine
from as high as you can. when all is in, set it upon the fire to stew for
/ of an hour. then sprinkle all about the top of it the juyce of a /
part of a limon; and if you will, you may strew powder of cinnamon and
sugar, or ambergreece upon it.
page 
in the spring (about the beginning of may) the flowry-leaves of tulips do
fall away, and there remains within them the end of the stalk, which in
time will turn to seed. take that seedy end (then very tender) and pick
from it the little excrescencies about it, and cut it into short pieces,
and boil them and dress them as you would do pease; and they will taste
like pease, and be very savoury.
the manner of boiling rice to eat with butter, is this. in a pipkin pour
upon it as much water, as will swim a good fingers breadth over it. boil it
gently, till it be tender, and all the water drunk into the rice; which may
be in a quarter of an hour or less. stir it often with a woodden spatule or
spoon, that it burn not to the bottom: but break it not. when it is enough,
pour it into a dish, and stew it with some butter, and season it with sugar
and cinnamon. this rice is to appear dry, excepting for the butter, that is
melted in it.
make thin tosts or slices of light french bread, which dry well, or toste a
little by the fire, then soak them in canary or old malaga-wine, or fine
muscat, and lay a row of them in a deep dish or bason; then a row of lumps
of marrow upon that; then strew a little fine sugar mingled with some
powder of cinnamon and ambergreece (and nutmeg, if you like it) upon that.
then another row of sops, &c. repeating this, till the dish bpage e full: and
more sugar, cinnamon and amber at the top, then on the other rows. if you
will, you may put a row of stoned raisins of the sun upon every row of
marrow. then cover the dish, and put it in an oven to bake for half-an
hour; or till the marrow be sufficiently baked.
my lady of monmouth boileth a capon with white broth thus. make reasonable
good broth, with the crag-ends of necks of mutton and veal (of which you
must have so much as to be at least three quarts of white-broth in the dish
with the capon, when all is done, else it will not come high enough upon
the capon). beat a quarter of a pound of blanched almonds with three or
four spoonfuls of cream, and, if you will, a little rose water; then add
some of your broth to it, so to draw out all their substance, mingling it
with the rest of your broth. boil your capon in fair-water by it self; and
a marrow-bone or two by themselves in other water. likewise some chess-nuts
(in stead of which you may use pistaccios, or macerated pine kernels) and
in other water some skirrits or endive, or parsley-roots, according to the
season. also plumpsome raisins of the sun, and stew some sliced dates with
sugar and water. when all is ready to joyn, beat two or three new-laid-eggs
(whites and all) with some of the white-broth, that must then be boiling,
and mingle it with the rest, and let it boil on: and mingle the other
prepared things with it, as also a little sliced oringiado (from which the
hard candy-sugar hath been soaked off with wapage rm-water) or a little peel of
orange (or some limon pickled with sugar and vinegar, such as serves for
salets) which you throw away, after it hath been a while boiled in it: and
put a little sack to your broth, and some ambergreece, if you will, and a
small portion of sugar; and last of all, put in the marrow in lumps that
you have knocked out of the boiled bones. then lay your capon taken hot
from the liquor, he is boiled in, upon sippets and slices of tosted light
bread, and pour your broth and mixture upon it, and cover it with another
dish, and let all stew together a while: then serve it up. you must
remember to season your broth in due time with salt and such spices as you
like.
take to a dozen of eggs a pint of cream; beat them well together, and put
three quarters of a pound of butter to them, and so set them on the fire to
harden, and stir them, till they are as hard, as you would have them.
take eight gallons of ale; take a cock and boil him well; then take four
pounds of raisins of the sun well stoned, two or three nutmegs, three or
four flakes of mace, half a pound of dates; beat these all in a mortar, and
put to them two quarts of the best sack; and when the ale hath done
working, put these in, and stop it close six or seven days, and then bottle
it, and a month after you may drink it.
take a pound of rue, page of rosemary, sage, sorrel, celandine, mugwort, of the
tops of red brambles of pimpernel, wild-dragons, agrimony, balm, angelica
of each a pound. put these compounds in a pot, fill it with white-wine
above the herbs, so let it stand four days. then still it for your use in a
limbeck.
take rue, agrimony, wormwood, celandine, sage, balm, mugwort, dragons,
pimpernel, marygold, fetherfew, burnet, sorrel, and elicampane-roots
scraped and sliced small. scabious, wood-betony, brown-mayweed, mints,
avence, tormentil, carduus benedictus, and rosemary as much as of
anything else, and angelica if you will. you must have like weight of all
them, except rosemary aforesaid, which you must have twice as much of as of
any of the rest; then mingle them altogether and shred them very small;
then steep them in the best white-wine you can get, three days and three
nights, stirring them once or twice a day, putting no more wine then will
cover the herbs well; then still it in a common-still; and take not too
much of the first-water, and but a little of the second, according as you
feel the strength, else it will be sower. there must be but half so much
elicampane as of the rest.
take four gallons of deal wine, put it into an earthen jugg; put to it four
gallons of rasberries; let them stand so infusing seven days; then press it
out gently; then infuse as many more rasberries seven days longer, anpage d so
three times if you please; put to it as much fine sugar as will make it
pleasant; put it into a runlet close stopped, let it stand till it is fine;
and then draw it into bottles, and keep it till it be fine.
take all your least and worst quinces, that are found, and cut them in
pieces, with all the corings and parings you make; boil them more then an
hour; then put the quinces into this boiling liquor, and take them forth
presently, not letting them boil, and lay them to cool one by one a part;
then take the liquor and strain it; and put for every gallon of liquor half
a pint of honey; then boil it and scum it clean; let it be cold; and then
put your quinces into a pot or tub, that they be covered with the liquor,
and stop it very close with your paste.
take three quarts of cream, and put into it the yolks of twelve eggs; the
whites of four, being first very well beaten between three quarters of a
pound of sugar, two nutmegs grated, a little salt; half a pound of raisins
first plump'd. these being sliced together, cut some thin slices of a stale
manchet; dry them in a dish against the fire, and lay them on the top of
the cream, and some marrow again upon the bread, and so bake it.
take a piece of brisket-beef; a piece of mutton; a knuckle of veal; a good
colander of pot-herbs; half minced carrots, onions and cabbage a little
broken. boil all these together until they be very thick.
page 
take a pot of two gallons or more; and take a brisket rand of beef; any
piece of mutton, and a piece of veal; put this with sufficient water into
the pot, and after it hath boiled, and been skimmed, put in a great
colander full of ordinary pot-herbs; a piece of cabbage, all half cut; a
good quantity of onions whole, six carrots cut and sliced, and two or three
pippins quartered. let this boil three hours until it be almost a gelly,
and stir it often, least it burn.
take good fat beef, slice it very thin into small pieces, and beat it well
with the back of a chopping knife. then put it into a pipkin, and cover it
with wine and water, and put unto it a handful of good herbs, and an onion,
with an anchoves. let it boil two hours; a little before you take it up,
put in a few marygold-flowers; and so season it with what spice you please,
and serve them up both with sippets.
take very good beef, and slice it very thin; and beat it with the back of a
knife; put it to the gravy of some meat, and some wine or strong broth,
sweet-herbs a quantity, let it stew till it be very tender; season it to
your liking; and varnish your dish with marygold-flowers or barberries.
take a breast of veal half rosted, and put it a stewing with some wine and
gravy; three or four yolks of eggs minced small; a pretpage ty quantity of
sweet-herbs with an onion, anchoves or limon; stick it either with thyme
or limon-peels, and season it to your liking.
take roots of horse-radish scraped clean, and lay them to soak in
fair-water for an hour. then rasp them upon a grater, and you shall have
them all in a tender spungy pap. put vinegar to it, and a very little
sugar, not so much as to be tasted, but to quicken (by contrariety) the
taste of the other.
the queen mothers hotchpot of mutton, is thus made. it is exceeding good of
fresh beef also, for those whose stomacks can digest it. cut a neck of
mutton, crag-end and all into steaks (which you may beat, if you will; but
they will be very tender without beating) and in the mean time prepare your
water to boil in a possnet, (which must be of a convenient bigness to have
water enough, to cover the meat, and serve all the stewing it, without
needing to add any more to it; and yet no superfluous water at last.) put
your meat into the boiling water, and when you have scummed it clean, put
into it a good handful of parsley, and as much of sibboulets (young onions
or sives) chopped small, if you like to eat them in substance; otherwise
tied up in a bouquet, to throw them away, when they have communicated to
the water all their taste; some pepper; three or four cloves, and a little
salt, and half a limon firstpage  pared. these must stew or boil simpringly,
(covered) at least three or four hours (a good deal more, if beef)
stirring it often, that it burn not too. a good hour before you intend to
take it off, put some quartered turneps to it, or, if you like them, some
carrots. a while after, take a good lump of houshold-bread, bigger than
your fist, crust and crum, broil it upon a gridiron, that it be throughly
rosted; scrape off the black burning on the on side; then soak it throughly
in vinegar, and put this lump of tost into your possnet to stew with it;
which you take out and throw away after a while. about a quarter of an hour
before you serve it up melt a good lump of butter (as much as a great egg)
till it grow red; then take it from the fire, and put to it a little fine
flower to thicken it (about a couple of spoonfuls) like thick pap. stir
them very well together; then set them on the fire again, till it grow-red,
stirring it all the while; then put to it a ladleful of the liquor of the
pot, and let them stew a while together to incorporate, stirring it always.
then pour this to the whole substance in the possnet, to incorporate with
all the liquor, and so let them stew a while together. then pour it out of
the possnet into your dish, meat and all: for it will be so tender, it will
not endure taking up piece by piece with your hand. if you find the taste
not quick enough, put into it the juyce of the half limon, you reserved.
for i should have said, that when you put in the herbs, you squeese in also
the juyce of half a limon (pared from the yellow rinde, which else would
make it bitter) and throw the paredpage  and squeesed half (the substance) into
it afterwards. the last things (of butter, bread, flower) cause the
liaison and thickening of the liquor. if this should not be enough, you may
also put a little gravy of mutton into it; stirring it well when it is in,
least it curdle in stewing, or you may put the yolk of an egg or two to
your liaison of butter, flower, and ladleful of broth. for gravy of mutton.
rost a juycy leg of mutton three quarters. then gash it in several places,
and press out the juyce by a screw-press.
take a fat and fleshy capon, or a like hen; dress it in the ordinary
manner, and cleanse it within from the guts, &c. then put in the fat again
into the belly, and split the bones of the legs and wings (as far as you
may, not to deface the fowl) so as the marrow may distil out of them. add a
little fresh butter and marrow to it; season it with salt, pepper, and,
what other spice you like, as also savoury herbs. put the capon with all
these condiments into a large strong sound bladder of an ox (first well
washed and scoured with red-wine) and tie it very close and fast to the
top, that nothing may ouse out, nor any water get in (and there must be
void space in the bladder, that the flesh may have room to swell and
ferment in; therefore it must be a large one). put this to boil for a
couple of hours in a kettle of water, or till you find by touching the
bladder, that the capon is tender and boiled enough. then serve it up in a
dish, in the bladderpage  (dry wiped) which when you cut, you will find a
precious and nourishing liquor to eat with bread, and the capon will be
short, tender, most savoury and full of juyce, and very nourishing.
i conceive, that if you put enough ox-marrow, you need no butter; and that
it may do well to add ambergreece, dates-sliced and pithed, raisins,
currants, and a little sugar.
peradventure this might be done well in a silver-flagon close luted, set in
balneo bulliente, as i make the nourishing broth or gelly of mutton or
chickens, &c.
slice thin two peny-roles, or one, of french-bread, the tender part. lay it
in a dish or pan. pour upon it a quart of cream, that hath been well
boiled. let it stand almost half an hour, till it be almost cold. then stir
the bread and cream very well together, till the bread be well broken and
incorporated. (if you have no french bread, take stale kingston bread,
grated) add to this two spoonfuls of fine wheat-flower, the yolks of four
eggs, and the whites of two; a nutmeg—grated small; sugar to your tast; a
little salt, and the marrow of two bones a little shreded. stir all these
together; then pour it into a dish greased over with butter, and set it
uncovered in the oven to bake. about half an hour will serve, and give the
top a yellow crispiness. before you put in the marrow, put in a quarter of
a pound and a half of raisins of the sun, and as much of currants; ordering
them so, that they may not fall to the bottom, but be all about the
pudding.
page 
take four pounds of beef, veal or neats-tongues, and eight pounds of suet;
and mince both the meat and suet very small, befor you put them together.
then mingle them well together and mince it very small, and put to it six
pounds of currants washed and picked very clean. then take the peel of two
limons, and half a score of pippins, and mince them very small. then take
above an ounce of nutmegs, and a quarter of an ounce of mace, some cloves
and cinnamon, and put them together, and sweeten them with rose-water and
sugar. and when you are ready to put them into your paste, take citron and
orangiadoe, and slice them very thin, and lay them upon the meat. if you
please, put dates upon the top of them. and put amongst the meat an ounce
of caraway seeds. be sure you have very fine paste.
my lady of portland told me since, that she finds neats-tongues to be the
best flesh for pies. parboil them first. for the proportion of the
ingredients she likes best to take equal parts of flesh, of suet, of
currants and of raisins of the sun. the other things in proportion as is
said above. you may either put the raisins in whole, or stone the greatest
part, and mince them with the meat. keep some whole ones, to lay a bed of
them at the top of the pye, when all is in. you will do well to stick the
candid orange-peel, and green citron-peel into the meat. you may put a
page little sack or greek muscadine into each pye. a little amber-sugar doth
well here. a pound of flesh, and proportionably of all things else, is
enough for once in a large family.
parboil neats-tongues. then peel and hash them with as much as they weigh
of beef-suet, and stoned raisins and picked currants. chop all exceeding
small, that it be like pap. employ therein at least an hour more, then
ordinarily is used. then mingle a very little sugar with them, and a little
wine, and thrust in up and down some thin slices of green candyed
citron-peel. and put this into coffins of fine light well reared crust.
half an hour baking will be enough. if you strew a few carvi comfits on the
top, it will not be amiss.
my lady lasson makes her finest minced pyes of neats-tongues; but she
holdeth the most savoury ones to be of veal and mutton equal parts very
small minced. her finest crust is made by sprinkling the flower (as much as
it needeth) with cold water, and then working the past with little pieces
of raw butter in good quantity. so that she useth neither hot water, nor
melted butter in them; and this makes the crust short and light. after all
the meat and seasoning, and plums and citron peel, &c. is in the coffin,
she puts a little ambered-sugar upon it, thus; grind much two grains of
ambergreece and half a one of musk, with a little piece of hard loaf sugar.
this will serve six or eight pyes, strewed all over the top. then cover it
with the liddle, and set it in the oven.
page 
when the capon, chickens, or fowl, have been long enough before the fire,
to be through hot, and that it is time to begin to baste them: baste them
once all over very well with fresh butter; then presently powder it all
over very thin with flower. this by continuing turning before the fire,
will make a thin crust, which will keep in all the juyce of the meat.
therefore baste no more, nor do any thing to it, till the meat be enough
rosted. then baste it well with butter as before, which will make the crust
relent and fall away; which being done, and that the meat is growing brown
on the out-side, besprinkle it over with a little ordinary white salt in
gross-grains; and continue turning, till the outside be brown enough.
the queen useth to baste such meat with yolks of fresh eggs beaten thin,
which continue to do all the while it is rosting.
cut a leg of veal into thin collops, and beat them well with the back of a
knife. then lay them in soak a good half hour in the yolks of four eggs,
and the whites of two very well beaten, and a little small shreded thyme
mingled with it; then lay them in the frying-pan, wherein is boiling
butter, and pour upon them the rest of the eggs, that the collops have not
imbibed, and carry with them, and fry them very well, turning them in due
time. then pour away all the butter, and make them a sauce of gravy
seasoned with salt and spice, and juyce of orange at last squeesed upon
them.
page 
boil the meat in little pieces (if chicken, flead and beaten) in the pan
with a pint of fair-water, with due seasoning. when it is very tender, put
some butter to it, and pour upon it a liquor made of four yolks of eggs
beaten with a little white wine and some verjuyce; and keep this in motion
over the fire, till it be sufficiently thickened. then pour it into a warm
dish, and squeese some juyce of orange upon it, and so serve it up. if you
would have the meat first made brown and rissolé, fry it first with
butter, till it be brown on the outside; then pour out all the butter, and
put water to it, in which boil it, and do all as before. if you like onions
or garlike, you may put some to the water. fresh broth may be used (both
ways) instead of water, and maketh it more savoury.
take good gravy of mutton or veal, or of both, with the fat clean skimmed
off. break into it a couple of new-laid eggs, and stir them in it over a
chafing-dish of coals; in the mean time, mingle some small cut juycy hashy
of rabet, capon or mutton with another parcel of like gravy as above, till
it be pretty thin. then put this to the other upon the fire, and stir them
well with a spoon, whiles they heat. when all is heated through, it will
quicken of a sudden. you may put in at first a little chipping of crusty
bread, if you will. season this with white pepper, salt, juyce of orange or
verjuyce, of berberies, or onion, or what you like best.
page 
a pint of gravy (or less) four or five spoonfulls of hashy, and two eggs,
is a convenient proportion for a light supper.
such gravy, with an onion split in two, lying in it, whiles it is heating,
and a little pepper and salt, and juyce of limon or orange, and a few
chippings of light-bread, is very good sauce for partridges or cocks.
take spinage, and chop it a little; then boil it, till it be tender. in the
mean time make the best rich light crust you can, and roul it out, and put
a little of your spinage into it, and currants and sugar, and store of
lumps of marrow; clap the past over this to make little pasties deep
within, and fry them with clarified butter.
take two large fleshy capons, not too fat; when you have draw'd and trussed
them, lay them upon a chafing-dish of charcoal to singe them, turning them
on all sides, till the hair and down be clean singed off. then take three
pounds of good lard, and cut it into larding pieces, about the thickness of
a two-peny cord, and lard it well, but first season your bits of lard, with
half an ounce of pepper, and a handful of salt, then bind each of them well
over with pack-thread, and have ready over the fire about two gallons of
beef-broth, and put them in a little before it boileth; when page they boil, and
are clean skimmed, then put in some six bay-leaves; a little bunch of
thyme; two ordinary onions stuck full of cloves, and salt, if it be not
salt enough already for pickle; when it hath boiled about half an hour, put
in another half ounce of beaten white-pepper, and a little after, put in a
quart of white-wine; so let it boil, until it hath boiled in all an hour;
and so let it lie in the pickle till you use it; which you may do the next
day, or any time within a fortnight; in stead of broth you may use water,
which is better; in case you do four or six, which of themselves will make
the pickle strong enough. if you will keep them above four days, you must
make the pickle sharp with vinegar.
to ordinary sauce of sliced or grated-bread soaked in good bouillon, with
butter melted in it, put gravy of mutton, and a cloven-onion or two, to
stew with it whiles you put it upon the fire to heat anew. then take out
the onion, and put in some limon sliced, or juyce of limon, and some white
pepper. you put in his proportion of salt before.
take two neats-tongues, and boil them. shred them with beef-suet, and put
in cloves and mace, beaten very small, with raisins, currants and sugar;
you must mingle them before you put in your suet. fat double tripes boiled
tender, then minced, make very good pyes.
take two quarts of milk to hpage alf a pound of french-barley; boil it, until it
is enough; when the milk is almost boiled away, put to it three pintes of
good cream. let it boil together a quarter of an hour; then sweeten it; and
put in mace, cinnamon in the beginning, when you first put in your cream.
when you have done so, take white-wine a pint, or sack and white-wine
together, of each half a pint; sweeten it, as you love it, with sugar; pour
in all the cream, but leave your barley behind in the skillet. this will
make an excellent posset; nothing else but a tender curd to the bottom; let
it stand on the coals half a quarter of an hour.
take a gill of cold-water; two whites of eggs, and one yolk; to a quart of
flower one pound of butter; so rowl it up, but keep out of the flower so
much as will rowl it up.
take a new french peny-loaf, and slice it very thin, and lay it in a dish;
and take three pints of cream, and boil it with a little mace and nutmeg
grated; sweeten it with a little sugar, and add to it a little salt. then
let it stand till it be cold. then take ten yolks of eggs; and beat them
very well with two or three spoonfuls of the cream; then put it into the
cream, and stir them well together: take the marrow of three bones; lay
half the marrow upon the bread in good big lumps, and some citron, and
candid limon, and what other sweet meats you like. then pour it all upon
the bread; then put the rest of your marrow on thepage  top with citron and
candid limon. i forgat to tell you, that you must lay a puff-paste at the
bottom of the dish, before you put in the bread, and cover it with the
same.
take a cold turky, capon or cold veal. shred it very small; and put almost
as much beef-suet as your meat, and mince it very small. then put salt and
nutmeg grated, half a pound of currants; a little grated-bread, and a
little flower. then put in three yolks of eggs, and one of the whites,
beaten very well. then take so much cream, as will wet them, and make them
up as big as a bon-christian pear; and as you make them up, take a little
flower in your hand, that they may not cling. then put in little sticks at
the bottom like the stems of pears; or make them up in balls. butter the
dish very well, and send them up in the same dish you bake them in. they
will be baked in about half an hour: i think the dish needeth not to be
covered, whiles it baketh. you may make minced pyes thus: and bake them
with puff-past in a dish like a florenden, and use marrow instead of suet.
take the pith of beeves; a good spoonful of almonds very small beaten with
rose-water: beat the pith, when the skin is taken off very well with a
spoon; then mingle it with the almonds, and put in it six yolks of eggs
well beaten, and four spoonfuls of cream boiled and cold, it must be very
thick; put in a little ambergreece, and as much sugar, as will sweeten
them; a little salt, and the marrow of two good bones, cut in little
pieces. when your beefs-guts are seasoned, fit them up and boil them.
page 
take a piece of the buttock of beef, the leanest of it, and beat it with a
rowling-pin the space of an hour, till you think you have broken the grain
of it, and have made it very open both to receive the sowsing-drink, and
also to make it tender. then take a pint of vinegar, and a pint of
claret-wine and let it lie therein two nights, and two days. then beat a
couple of nutmegs, and put them into the sowsing-drink; then lard it. your
lard must be as big as your greatest finger for consuming. then take
pepper, cloves, mace and nutmegs, and season it very well in every place,
and so bake it in pye-paste, and let it stand in the oven six or seven
hours. and when it hath stood three hours in your oven, then put it in your
sowsing-drink as is aforesaid; and you may keep it a quarter of a year, if
it be kept close.
save the blood of your sheep, and strain it. take grated bread almost the
quantity of a peny loaf, pepper, thyme, chopp'd small; mingle these
ingredients with a little of the blood, and stuff the mutton. then wrap up
your shoulder of mutton, and lay it in the blood twenty four hours; prick
the shoulder with your knife, to let the blood into the flesh, and so serve
it with venison sawce.
take a rump of beef, and season it with nutmegs grated, and some pepper and
page salt mingled together, and season the beef on the bony-side; lay it in a
pipkin with the flat-side downward. take three pints of
elder-wine-vinegar, and as much water, and three great onions, and a bunch
of rosemary tyed up together. put them all into a pipkin, and stew them
three or four hours together with a soft fire being covered close. then
dish it up upon sippets, blowing off the fat from the gravy; and some of
the gravy put into the beef, and serve it up.
mounsieur overbec doth tell me, that when he boileth a gambon of bacon, or
any salted flesh and hanged in the smoak (as neats-tongues, hung-beef, and
hogs-cheeks, &c.), he putteth into the kettle of water to boil with them
three or four handfuls of fleur de foin, (more or less according to the
quantity of flesh and water,) tyed loosly in a bag of course-cloth. this
maketh it much tenderer, shorter, mellower, and of a finer colour.
take a rump of beef, or some of brisket or buttock cut into pieces, a loin
of mutton, with the superfluous fat taken off, and a fleshy piece of the
leg of veal or a knuckle, a piece of enterlarded bacon, three or  onions
(or some garlike) and if you will, a capon or two, or three great tame
pigeons. first, put into the water the beef and the bacon; after a while,
the mutton and veal and onions. but not the capon or pigeons till only so
much time remain, as will serve barely to boil them enough. if you have
garavanzas, put them in at the first, after they have bepage en soaked with
ashes all night in heat, and well washed with warm water, after they are
taken out; or if you will have cabbage, or roots, or leeks, or whole
onions, put them in time enough to be sufficiently boiled. you may at first
put in some crusts of bread, or venison pye crust. it must boil in all five
or six hours gently, like stewing after it is well boiled. a quarter or
half an hour before you intend to take it off, take out a porrenger full of
broth, and put to it some pepper and five or six cloves and a nutmeg, and
some saffran, and mingle them well in it. then put that into the pot, and
let it boil or stew with the rest a while. you may put in a bundle of
sweet-herbs. salt must be put in as soon as the water is skimmed.
take a quart of good, but fine broth; beat with it very well eight new
laid-eggs (whites and all) and put in a little sugar, and if you will a
little amber, or some mace, or nutmeg. put all this into a fit pipkin, and
set this in a great one, or a kettle of boiling water, till it be stiffened
like a custard.
when some broth is boiling in a pipkin, pour into it some eggs well beaten,
and they will curdle in a lump, when they are enough; take them out with a
holed ladle, and lay them upon the bread in the minestra.
take a quart of sheeps blood, and a quart of cream; ten eggs, the yolks and
the whites beaten well together; stir all this liquor very wepage ll, then
thicken it with grated bread, and oat-meal finely beaten, of each a like
quantity; beef-suet finely shred and marrow in little lumps: season it with
a little nutmeg and cloves and mace mingled with salt, a little
sweet-marjoram, thyme and peny-royal shred very well together, and mingle
them with the other things: some put in a few currants; then fill them in
cleansed guts, and boil them carefully.
take a fillet of veal, and a good fleshy capon; then half rost them both,
and take off their skins: which being done, take only the wings and brawns
with an equal proportion of veal, which must be shred very small as is done
for sassages. to this shred half a pound of the belly part of interlarded
bacon, and half a pound of the finest leaf (la panne) of hog cleared from
the skin; then take the yolks of eighteen or twenty eggs, and the whites of
six well beaten with as much milk and cream, as will make it of convenient
thickness; and then season it with salt, cloves, nutmeg, mace, pepper, and
ginger, if you please. the puddings must be boiled in half milk and half
water. you are to use small-guts, such as for white-marrow-puddings, and
they are to be cleansed in the ordinary manner; and filled very lankley;
for they will swell much in the boiling, and break if they be too full.
take of the tripes of veal the whitest and finest you can find; wash them
well, and let them lie in fair fountain or river water, till they do not
smell like tripes. this done, cupage t them so small as is necessary to pass
through a funnel. take also one or two pounds of pork, that hath not been
salted, and cut it as small as the tripes, and mingle them altogether;
which season with salt, white-pepper, anis-seeds beaten and
coriander-seeds; then make a liaison with a little milk and yolks of eggs;
and after all is well mingled and thickned, as it ought to be, you must
fill with it the greatest guts of a hog, that may be had, with a funnel of
white iron, having first tyed the end of the gut below. do not fill it too
full, for fear they should break in the boiling, but leave room enough for
the flesh to swell. when you are going to boil them, put them into a kettle
with as much milk as will cover and boil them, being boiled, let them lie
in the liquor till they are almost cold, then take them out and lay them in
a basket upon a clean linnen cloth to cool. if they are well seasoned, they
will keep twelve or fifteen days; provided you keep them in a good place,
not moist, nor of any bad smell. you must still turn them and remove them
from one place to another.
my lord of bristol's scotch collops are thus made: take a leg of fine
sweet-mutton, that, to make it tender, is kept as long as possible may be
without stinking. in winter seven or eight days. cut it into slices with a
sharp knife as thin as possibly you can. then beat it with the back of a
heavy knife, as long as you can, not breaking it in pieces. then sprinkle
them with salt, and lay them upon the gridiron over a small charpage coal-fire,
to broil, till you perceive that side is enough, and before any moisture
run out of them upon the fire. then lay the collops into a warm dish close
covered, till the gravy be run out of them. then lay their other side upon
the gridiron, and make an end of broiling them, and put them again into the
dish, where the former gravy run out. add to this more gravy of mutton,
heightened with garlike or onions, or eschalots; and let them stew a while
together, then serve them in very hot.
they are also very good of a rump of tender beef.
at franckfort, when they rost wild-boar (or robuck or other venison) they
lay it to soak, six or eight or ten days (according to the thickness and
firmness of the piece and penetrability of it) in good vinegar, wherein is
salt and juniper-berries bruised (if you will, you may add bruised garlick
or what other haut-goust you like) the vinegar coming up half way the
flesh, and turn it twice a day. then if you will, you may lard it.
when it is rosted, it will be very mellow and tender. they do the like with
a leg or other part of fresh-pork.
i made good pyes there with two hares, a good goose and (as much as the
goose is) the lean of fresh good pork, all well hashed and seasoned; then
larded with great lardons well seasoned (first sprinkled with vinegar and
wine) and covered with bay-leaves, and sheets of lard; then laid inpast,
and baked.
page 
i made also good pyes of red-deer, larding well the lean, then laying
under it a thick plastron (or cake of a finger thick) of beef-suet, first
chapped small, and seasoned well with pepper and salt, then beaten into a
cake fit for the meat. and another such cake upon the deers-flesh, and so
well baked in strong crust, and soaked two or three hours in the oven after
it was baked enough, which required six good hours. if you use no suet, put
in butter enough; as also, put in enough to fill the paste, after it is
baked and half cold, by a hole made in the top, when it is near half baked.
my lady of newport bakes her venison in a dish thus; a side or a hanch
serves for two dishes. season it as for a pasty. line the dish with a thin
crust, of good pure past, but make it pretty thick upwards towards the
brim, that it may be there pudding crust. lay then the venison in a round
piece upon the paste in the dish, that must not fill it up to touch the
pudding, but lie at ease; put over it a cover, and let it over-reach upon
the brim with some carved pasty work to grace it, which must go up with a
border like a lace growing a little way upwards upon the cover, which is a
little arched up, and hath a little hole in the top to pour in unto the
meat the strong well seasoned broth that is made of the broken bones, and
remaining lean flesh of the venison. put a little pure butter or beef-suet
to the venison, before you put the cover on, unless it be exceeding fat.
this muspage t bake five or six hours or more as an ordinary pasty. an hour, or
an hour and half before you take it out to serve it up, open the oven, and
draw out the dish far enough to pour in at the little hole of the cover the
strong decoction (in stead of decoction in water, you may boil it by it
self in balneo in duplici vase; or bake it in a pot with broth and gravy
of mutton) of the broken bones and flesh. then set it in again, to make an
end of his baking and soaking. the meat within (even the lean) will be
exceeding tender and like a gelly; so that you may cut all of it with a
spoon. if you bake a side at once in two dishes, the one will be very good
to keep cold; and when it is so, you may, if you please, bake it again, to
have it hot; not so long as at first, but enough to have it all perfectly
heated through. she bakes thus in pewter-dishes of a large cise.
mutton or veal may be thus baked with their due seasoning; as with onions,
or onions and apples, or larding, or a cawdle, &c. sweetbreads, beatilles,
champignons, treuffles, &c.
cut a rack of mutton into tender steaks, rib by rib, and beat the flesh
well with the back of a knife. then have a composition ready, made of
crumbs of stale manchet grated small, and a little salt (a fit proportion
to salt the meat) and a less quantity of white-pepper. cover over on both
sides all the flesh with this, pretty thick, pressing it on with your
fingers and flat knife, to make it lie on. then lay the steaks upon apage 
gridiron over a very quick fire (for herein consisteth the well doing) and
when the fire hath pierced in a little on the one side, turn the other,
before any juyce drop down through the powder. this turning the steaks will
make the juyce run back the other way; and before it run through, and drop
through this side, you must turn again the other side; doing so till the
steaks be broiled enough. thus you keep all the juyce in them, so that when
you go to eat them (which must be presently, as they are taken from the
fire) abundance of juyce runneth out as soon as your knife entereth into
the flesh. the same person, that doth this, rosteth a capon so as to keep
all its juyce in it. the mystery of it is in turning it so quick, that
nothing can drop down. this maketh it the longer in rosting. but when you
cut it up, the juyce runneth out, as out of a juycie leg of mutton; and it
is excellent meat.
take two legs of fleshy juycie tender young mutton, cut them into as thin
slices as may be. beat them with the back of a thick knife, with smart, but
gentle blows, for a long time, on both sides. and the stroaks crossing one
another every way, so that the collops be so short, that they scarce hang
together. this quantity is near two hours beating. then lay them in a clean
frying-pan, and hold them over a smart fire: and it is best to have a fit
cover for the pan, with a handle at the top of it, to take it off when you
will. let them fry so covered, till the side next the pan be done enough;
then turn the other side, and let that page fry, till it be enough. then pour
them with all the gravy (which will be much) into a hot dish, which cover
with another hot one, and so serve it in to eat presently. you must season
the collops with salt sprinkled upon them, either at the latter end of
beating them, or whiles they fry. and if you love the taste of onions, you
may rub the pan well over with one, before you lay in the steaks or
collops; or when they are in the dish, you may beat some onion-water
amongst the gravy. you may also put a little fresh-butter into the pan to
melt, and line it all over before you put in the collops, that you may be
sure, they burn not to the pan. you must put no more collops into one pan,
at once, then meerly to cover it with one lare; that the collops may not
lye one upon another.
take three pints of cream, and boil it with a nutmeg quartered, three or
four leaves of large mace, and a stick of cinnamon. then take half a pound
of almonds, beat them and strain them with the cream. then take a few fine
herbs, beat them and strain them to the cream, which came from the almonds.
then take two or three spoonfuls (or more) of chickens blood; and two or
three spoonfuls of grated-bread, and the marrow of six or seven bones, with
sugar and salt, and a little rose-water. mix all together, and fill your
puddings. you may put in eight or ten eggs, with the whites of two
well-beaten. put in some musk or ambergreece.
take a good quantity of the pithpage  of oxen, and let it lie all night in water
to soak out the blood. the next morning, strip it out of the skin, and so
beat it with the back of a spoon, till it be as fine as pap: you must beat
a little rose-water with it. then take three pints of good thick cream, and
boil it with a nutmeg quartered, three or four leaves of large mace; and a
stick of cinnamon. then take half a pound of the best jordan almonds.
blanch them in cold water all night; then beat them in a mortar with some
of your cream; and as they grow dry, still put in more cream; and when they
be well beaten, strain the cream from the almonds into the pith. then beat
them still, until the cream be done, and strain it still to the pith. then
take the yolks of ten eggs, with the whites of two; beat them well, and put
them to your former ingredients. then take a spoonful of grated-bread.
mingle all these together, with half a pound of fine-sugar, the marrow of
six or seven bones, and some salt, and so fill your puddings.
they will be much the better, if you put in some ambergreece.
my lord d'aubigny eats red-herrings thus broiled. after they are opened and
prepared for the gridiron, soak them (both sides) in oyl and vinegar beaten
together in pretty quantity in a little dish. then broil them, till they
are hot through, but not dry. then soak them again in the same liquor as
before, and broil them a second time. you may soak and broil them again a
third time; but twice may serve. they will bpage e then very short and crisp and
savoury. lay them upon your sallet, and you may also put upon it, the oyl
and vinegar, you soaked the herrings in.
take a pint of milk; and put to it a pint of large or midling oat-meal; let
it stand upon the fire, until it be scalding hot: then let it stand by and
soak about half an hour: then pick a few sweet herbs and shred them, and
put in half a pound of currants, and half a pound of suet, and about two
spoonfuls of sugar, and three or four eggs. these put into a bag, and
boiled, do make a very good pudding.
take a cold capon, or half-rosted, which is much better; then take suet,
shred very small the meat and suet together; then half as much grated
bread, two spoonfuls of flower, nutmegs, clove and mace; sugar as much as
you please; half a pound of currants; the yolks of two eggs, and the white
of one; and as much cream, as will make it up in a stiff paste. then make
it up in fashion of a pear, a stick of cinnamon for the stalk, and the head
a clove.
take three marrow-bones, slice them; water the marrow over night, to take
away the blood. then take the smallest of the marrow, and put it into the
puddings, with a peny-loaf grated, a spoonful of flower, and spice as
before; a quarter of a pound of currants; sugar as much as you please, four
eggs, two of the whites taken away. cream as much as will make it as stiff
as otpage her puddings. stuff the call of veal cut into the bigness of little
hogs-puddings; you must sow them all to one end; and so fill them; then
sow up the other end, and when they are boiled, take hold of the thred, and
they will all come out. you must boil them in half white wine and half
water; with one large mace, a few currants, a spoonful of the pudding
stuff, the marrow in whole lumps; all this first boiled up, then put in
your puddings, and when half boiled, put in your marrow. one hour will boil
them. serve them up with sippets, and no more liquor, then will serve them
up; you must put salt in all the puddings.
take two ounces of barley pick'd and washed; boil it in milk, till it is
tender; then let your milk run from it; then take half a pint of cream, and
six spoonfuls of the boiled barley; eight spoonfuls of grated bread, four
eggs, two whites taken away. spice as you please, and sugar and salt as you
think fit, one marrow-bone, put in the lumps as whole as you can; then make
puff-paste, and rowl a thin sheet of it, and lay it in a dish. then take a
piece of green-citron sliced thin, lay it all over the dish. then take
cream, grated bread, your spice, sugar, eggs and salt; beat all these very
well together half a quarter of an hour, pour it on your dish where citron
is, then cover it over with puff-paste, and let it bake in a quick oven
three quarters of an hour. scrape sugar on it, and serve it up.
take pippins and pare, andpage  cut off the tops of them pretty deep. then take
out as much of your apple as you can take without breaking your apple,
then fill your apple with pudding-stuff, made with cream, a little sack,
marrow, grated bread, eggs, sugar, spice and salt; make it pretty stiff.
put it into the pippins; lay the tops of the pippins upon the pippins
again, stick it through with a stick of cinnamon. set as many upright in
your dish as you can: and so fill it up with cream, and sweeten it with
sugar and mace; and stew them between two dishes.
take middle oat-meal, pick it very clean, steep it all night in cream, half
a pint of oat-meal, to a quart of cream, make your cream scalding hot,
before you put in your oat-meal, so cover it close. take a good handful of
penny-royal, shred it very small, with a pound of beef-suet. put it to your
cream with half a pound of raisins of the sun, sugar, spice, four or five
eggs, two whites away. so bake it three quarters of an hour; and then serve
it up.
take about three pints of new morning milk, and six or seven new laid eggs,
putting away half the whites, and two spoonfuls of fine-flower, about a
quarter of a nutmeg grated, and about a quarter of a pound of sugar (more
or less, according to your taste,) after all these are perfectly mingled
and incorporated together, put the matter into a fit bag, and so put it
into boiling water, and boil it up with a quick fire. if you boil it too
long, the milk will turn to whay in the body or substance of the pudding,
and there will be a slimy page gelly all about the outside. but in about half an
hour, it will be tenderly firm, and of an uniform consistence all over.
you need not put in any butter or marrow or suet, or other spice, but the
small proportion of nutmeg set down, not grated bread. for the sauce, you
pour upon it thickened melted butter, beaten with a little sack, or
orange-flower water, and sugar; or compounded in what manner you please, as
in other such like puddings.
set a quart of good morning milk upon the fire, having seasoned it with
salt, and sliced or grated nutmeg. when it beginneth to boil, take it from
the fire, and put into it four peny manchets of light french-bread sliced
very thin (if it were kingstone-bread, which is firmer, it must be grated)
and a lump of sweet-butter as big as a wall-nut, and enough sugar to season
it; and cover the possnet with a plate to keep the heat in, that the bread
may soak perfectly. whiles this standeth thus, take ten yolks of
new-laid-eggs, with one white, and beat them very well with a spoonful or
two of milk; and when the milk is cooled enough, pour it (with the bread in
it,) into the bason, where the beaten eggs are, (which likewise should
first be sweetned with sugar to their proportion,) and put about three
spoonfuls of fine flower into the composition, and knead them well
together. if you will, you may put in a spoonful of sack or muscadine, and
ambared sugar, working all well together; as also, some lumps of marrow or
suet shred very small: but it will be very good without either of these.
page then put this mixtion into a deep woodden dish (like a great butter-box)
which must first be on the inside a little greased with butter, and a
little flower sprinkled thereon, to save the pudding from sticking to the
sides of the dish. then put a linnen cloth or handkercher over the mouth of
the dish, and reverse the mouth downwards, so that you may tye the napkin
close with two knots by the corners cross, or with a strong thred, upon the
bottom of the dish, then turned upwards; all which is, that the matter may
not get out, and yet the boiling water get through the linnen upon it on
one side enough to bake the pudding sufficiently. put the woodden-dish thus
filled and tyed up into a great possnet or little kettle of boiling water.
the faster it boils, the better it will be. the dish will turn and rowl up
and down in the water, as it gallopeth in boiling. an hours boiling is
sufficient. then unty your linnen, and take it off, and reverse the mouth
of the dish downwards into the silver-dish you will serve it up in; wherein
is sufficient melted butter thickened with beating, and sweetened to your
taste with sugar, to serve for sauce. you may beat a little sack or
muscadine, or rose, or orange-flower-water with the sauce; a little of any
of which may also go into the composition of the pudding. if you put in
more flower, or more then one white of egg to this proportion, it will
binde the pudding too close and stiff.
in plain bag-puddings it makes them much more savoury, to put into them a
little penny-royal shreded very small, as also other sweet-herbs. you must
put in so little, as not to taste strong of them, but onely to quicken the
other flat ingredients.
page 
take a pint and half of good sweet-cream; set it on the fire, and let it
just boil up, take a peny manchet, not too new, cut off the crust, and
slice it very thin, put it into a clean earthen pan, and pour the cream
upon it, and cover it very close an hour or thereabouts, to steep the
bread; when it is steeped enough, take four new laid-eggs, yolks and
whites, beat them with a spoonful of rose-water, and two of sack; grate
into it half a nutmeg, and put into it a quarter of a pound of good
white-sugar finely beaten, stir all this together with the cream and bread;
then shred very small half a pound of good beef-kidney-suet, and put this
to the rest, and mingle them very well together with a slice or spoon; then
size your dish, that you intend to bake it in, and rub the bottom of it
with a little sweet-butter; then put your pudding into it, and take the
marrow of two good bones, and stick it in lumps here and there all over
your pudding; so put it into the oven three quarters of an hour, in which
time it will be well baked. strew on it some fine sugar, and serve it.
take a pottle of half-cut groats; pick them clean, that there may be no
husks nor foulness in them; then put them into a mortar, bruise them a
little with a pestle; then have ready either milk, or fresh meat-broth
boiled up, and the oat-meal immediately put into it; it must be just so
much as will cover it; then cover the thing close page that it is in, and let it
steep twenty four hours; to this two quarts of oatmeal, put a pint and
half of blood, season it well with salt, and a little pepper, and a little
beaten cloves and mace, eight eggs, yolks and whites, five pound of
kidney-beef-suet shred, but not too small; then put in of these herbs;
peny-royal, fennel, leek-blades, parsley, sage, straw-berry-leaves and
violet leaves, equal parts, in all to the quantity of a good handful; let
them be pick'd and washed very clean, and chop'd very small, and mingled
well with the former things; then fill your puddings.
make ready your guts in this manner. cleanse them very well, when they are
fresh taken out of the hog; and after they are well washed and scowred, lay
them to soak in fair water three days and three nights, shifting the water
twice every day: and every time you shift the water, scour them first with
water and salt. an hour and a quarter is enough to boil them.
take good sound clear pippins, pare, quarter and coar them; then put them
into a skillet of conduit-water, such a proportion as you intend to make;
boil it very well: then let the liquor run from the pulp through a sieve,
without forcing, and let it stand till the next morning. take orange or
limon peel, and boil in a skillet of water, till they are tender; then rowl
them up in a linnen cloth to dry the water well out of them; let them lie
so all night. then take of double refined and finely beaten and searced
sugar a poundpage  to every pint of pippin liquor that ran through the sieve,
and to every pound of sugar, and pint of liquor, put ten ounces of pippins
in quarters or in slices, but cut them not too thin; boil them a little
while very fast in the pippin-liquor, before you put in the sugar, then
strew in the sugar all over them as it boileth, till it is all in, keeping
it still fast boiling, until they look very clear; by that you may know
they are enough. while they boil, you must still be scumming them; then put
in your juyce of limon to your last, and amber, if you please; and after
let it boil half a dozen walms, but no more. then take it from the fire,
and have ready some very thin brown-paper, and clap a single sheet close
upon it, and if any scum remain, it will stick to the paper. then put your
quarters or slices into your glasses, and strew upon them very small slices
of limon or orange (which you please) which you had before boiled; then
fill up your glasses with your jelly.
for making your pippin-liquor, you may take about some fourty pippins to
two quarts of water, or so much as to make your pippin-liquor strong of the
pippins, and the juyce of about four limons.
cut a leg or two of mutton into thin slices, which beat very well. put them
to fry over a very quick fire in a pan first glased over, with no more
butter melted in it, then just to besmear a little all the bottom of the
pan. turn them in due time. there must never be but one row in the pan, nor
any slice lying upon another; but evpage ery one immediate to the pan. when they
are fryed enough, lay them in a hot dish covered, over a chafing-dish, and
pour upon them the gravy that run out of them into the pan. then lay
another row of slices in the pan to fry as before; and when they are
enough, put them into the dish to the other. when you have enough, by such
repetitions, or by doing them in two or three pans, all at a time; take a
porrenger full of gravy of mutton, and put into it a piece of butter as
much a wall-nut, and a quartered onion if you will (or rub the dish
afterwards with garlike) and pepper and salt, and let this boil to be very
hot; then throw away the onion, and pour this into the dish upon the
slices, and let them stew a little together; then squeese an orange upon
it, and serve it up.
cut a leg of veal into thin slices, and beat them; or the like with
chicken, which must be flead off their skin. put about half a pint of water
or flesh-broth to them in a frying-pan, and some thyme, and sweet-marjoram,
and an onion or two quartered, and boil them till they be tender, having
seasoned them with salt, and about twenty corns of whole white pepper, and
four or five cloves. when they are enough, take half a pint of white wine,
four yolks of eggs, a quarter of a pound of butter (or more) a good
spoonful of thyme, sweet-marjoram and parsley (more parsley then of the
others) all minced small; a porrenger full of gravy. when all these are
well incorporated together over the fire, and well beaten, poupage r it into the
pan to the rest, and turn it continually up and down over the fire, till
all be well incorporated. then throw away the onion and first sprigs of
herbs, squeese orange to it, and so serve it up hot.
if instead of a fricacee, you will make un estuveé de veau, stew or boil
simpringly your slices of veal in white-wine and water, ana, with a good
lump of butter, seasoning it with pepper and salt and onions. when it is
enough, put to it store of yolks of eggs beaten with verjuyce, or
white-wine and vinegar, and some nutmeg (and gravy if you will) and some
herbs as in the fricacee; and stir all very well over the fire till the
sauce be well lié together.
take three pints of cream, fourteen new-laid-eggs (seven whites put away)
one pint of juyce of spinage, six or seven spoonfuls of juyce of tansy, a
nutmeg (or two) sliced small, half a pound of sugar, and a little salt.
beat all these well together, then fryit in a pan with no more butter then
is necessary. when it is enough, serve it up with juyce of orange or slices
of limon upon it.
take what quantity you will of the best oysters to eat raw. open them,
putting all their water with the fish into a bason. take out the oysters
one by one (that you may have them washed clean in their own water) and lay
them in the dish you intend to stew them in. then let their water run upon
them through a fine linnen, that all their foulness may remain behind. then
put a good great lump of butter to them, which mpage ay be (when melted) half as
much, as their water. season them with salt, nutmeg, and a very few
cloves. let this boil smartly, covered. when it is half boiled, put in some
crusts of light french-bread, and boil on, till all be enough, and then
serve them up.
you may put in three or four grains of ambergreece, when you put in the
nutmeg, that in the boiling it may melt. you may also put in a little
white-wine or verjuyce at the last, or some juyce of orange.
at glocester they use lamprey's thus. heat water in a pot or kettle with a
narrow mouth, till it be near ready to boil; so that you may endure to dip
your hand into it, but not to let it stay in. put your lamprey's, as they
come out of the river, into this scalding-water, and cover the pot, that
little while they remain in, which must be but a moment, about an ave
maria while. then with a woodden ladle take them out, and lay them upon a
table, and hold their head in a napkin (else it will slip away, if held in
the bare hand) and with the back of a knife scrape off the mud, which will
have risen out all along the fish. a great deal and very thick will come
off: and then the skin will look clean and shining and blew, which must
never be flead off. then open their bellies all along, and with a pen-knife
loosen the string which begins under the gall (having first cast away the
gall and entrails) then pull it out, and in the pulling away, it will
stretch much in length; then pick out a black substance, that is all along
under the string, cutting tpage owards the back as much as is needful for this
end. then rowl them up and down in a soft and dry napkin, changing this as
soon as it is wet for another, using so many napkins as may make the fishes
perfectly dry; for in that consisteth a chief part of their preparation.
then powder them well with pepper and salt, rubbing them in well, and lay
them round in a pot or strong crust upon a good lare of butter, and store
of onions every where about them, and chiefly a good company in the middle.
then put more butter upon them, covering the pot with a fit cover, and so
set them into a quick oven, that is strongly heated; where they will
require three or four hours (at least) baking. when they are taken out of
the oven and begin to cool, pour store of melted butter upon them, to fill
up the pot at least three fingers breadth above the fish, and then let it
cool and harden; and thus it will keep a year, if need be, so the butter be
not opened, nor craked, that the air get into the fish.
to eat them presently, they dress them thus: when they are prepared, as
abovesaid, (ready for baking) boil them with store of salt and gross
pepper, and many onions, in no more water, then is necessary to cover them,
as when you boil a carp or pike au court bouillon. in half or three
quarters of an hour, they will be boiled tender. then take them and drain
them from the water, and serve them with thickened butter, and some of the
onions minced into it, and a little pepper, laying the fish upon some
sippets of spungy bread, that may soak up the water, if any come from the
fish; and pour butter upon the fish; so serve it up hot.
page 
beat the fish very well with a large woodden-mallet, so as not to break it,
but to loosen all the flakes within. it is the best way to have them beaten
with hard heavy ropes. and though thus beaten, they will keep a long time,
if you put them into pease straw, so thrust in as to keep them from all
air, and that they touch not one another, but have straw enough between
every fish. when you will make the best dish of them, take only the tails,
and tye up half a dozen or eight of them with white-thred. first, they must
be laid to soak over night in cold water. about an hour and half, (or a
little more) before they are to be eaten, put them to boil in a pot or
pipkin, that you may cover with a cover of tin or letton so close, that no
steam can get out; and lay a stone or other weight upon it, to keep the
cover from being driven off by the steam of the water. put in no more
water, then well to cover them. they must never boil strongly, but very
leasurely and but simpringly. it will be near half an hour before the water
begin to boil so: and from their beginning to do so, they must boil a good
hour. you must never put in any new water, though hot, for that will make
the fish hard. after the hour, take out the fishes and untie them, and lay
them loose in a colander with holes to drain out the water, and toss them
in it up and down very well, as you use to do butter and peasepage ; and that
will loosen and break asunder all the flakes, which will make them the
more susceptible of the butter, when you stew them in it, and make it
pierce the better into the flakes, and make them tender. then lay them by
thin rows in the dish, they are to be served up in: casting upon every row
a little salt, and some green parsley minced very small. they who love
young-green onions or sives, or other savory herbs, or pepper, may use them
also in the same manner, when they are in season. when all is in, fill up
with sweet butter well melted and thickened; and so let it stew there a
while, to soak well into the fish; which will lie in fine loose tender
flakes, well buttered and seasoned. you may eat it with mustard besides.
boil whitings as if you would eat them in the ordinary way with thick
butter-sauce. pick them clean from skin and bones, and mingle them well
with butter, and break them very small, and season them pretty high with
salt. in the mean time butter some eggs in the best manner, and mingle them
with the buttered whitings, and mash them well together. the eggs must not
be so many by a good deal as the fish. it is a most savoury dish.
the way of dressing poor-john, to make it very tender and good meat, is
this. put it into the kettle in cold water, and so hang it over the fire;
and so let it soak and stew without boiling for  hours: but the water must
be very hot. then make it boil two or three walms. by this tipage me it will be
very tender and swelled up. then take out the back-bone, and put it to fry
with onions. if you put it first into hot water (as ling and such salt
fish,) or being boiled, if you let it cool, and heat it again it will be
tough and hard.
buckorne is to be watered a good hour before you put it to the fire. then
boil it till it be tender, which it will be quickly. then butter it as you
do ling; and if you will, put eggs to it.
first beat it exceedingly well, a long time, but with moderate blows, that
you do not break it in pieces, but that you shake and loosen all the inward
fibers. then put it into water (which may be a little warmed) to soak, and
infuse so during twelve or fourteen hours (or more, if it be not yet
pierced into the heart by the water, and grown tender.) then put it to boil
very gently, (and with no more water, then well to cover it, which you must
supply with new hot water as it consumeth) for six or seven hours at least,
that it may be very tender and loose and swelled up. then press and drain
out all the water from it; and heat it again in a dish, with store of
melted butter thickened; and if you like it, you may season it also with
pepper and mustard. but it will be yet better, if after it is well and
tender boiled in water, and that you have pressed all the water you can out
of it, you boil it again an hour longer in milk; out of which when you take
it, to put it into the dish with butter, you do not industriously press out
all the milk, apage s you did the water, but only drain it out gently, pressing
it moderately. in the stewing it with butter, season it to your taste,
with what you think fitting.
beat it exceeding well with a large woodden mallet, till you may easily
pluck it all in pieces, severing every flake from other, and every one of
them in it so being loose, spungy and limber, as the whole fish must be,
and plyant like a glove, which will be in less then an hour. pull then the
bones out, and throw them away, and pluck off the skin (as whole as you
can; but it will have many breaches and holes in it, by the beating) then
gather all the fish together, and lap it in the skin as well as you can,
into a round lump, like a bag-pudding, and tye it about with cords or
strings (like a little collar of brawn, or souced fish) and so put it into
lukewarm water (overnight) to soak, covering the vessel close; but you need
not keep it near any heat whiles it lyeth soaking. next morning take it out
that water and vessel, and put it into another, with a moderate quantity of
other water, to boil; which it must do very leisurely, and but simpringly.
the main care must be, that the vessel it boileth in, be covered so
exceeding close, that not the least breath of steam get out, else it will
not be tender, but tough and hard. it will be boiled enough, and become
very tender in about a good half hour. then take it out, unty it, and throw
away the skin, and lay the flaky fish in a cullender, to drain away the
water from it. you must presently throw a little salt upon it, and all
about in it, to season it. for then it will page imbibe it into it self
presently; whereas if you salt it not, till it grow cold in the air, it
will not take it in. mean while prepare your sauce of melted well thickened
butter (which you may heighten with shreded onions or syves, or what well
tasted herbs you please) and if you will, you may first strew upon the fish
some very small shreded young onions, or sibbouls, or syves, or parsley.
then upon that pour the melted butter to cover the fish all over, and soak
into it. serve it in warm and covered.
scrape well three or four good large roots, cleansing well their outside,
and cutting off as much of the little end as is fibrous, and of the great
end as is hard. put them into a possnet or pot, with about a quart of milk
upon them, or as much as will cover them in boiling, which do moderately,
till you find they are very tender. this may be in an hour and half, sooner
or later, as the roots are of a good kind. then take them out, and scrape
all the outside into a pulpe, like the pulpe of roasted apples, which put
in a dish upon a chafing dish of coals, with a little of the milk, you
boiled them in, put to them; not so much as to drown them, but only to
imbibe them: and then with stewing, the pulpe will imbibe all that milk.
when you see it is drunk in, put to the pulpe a little more of the same
milk, and stew that, till it be drunk in. continue doing thus till it hath
drunk in a good quantity of the milk, and is well swelled with it, and will
take in no more, which may be in a good half hour. eat them so, without
sugar or butter; for they will have a natural sweetness, that is beyond
sugar, and will be unctuous, so as not to need butter.
page 
parsneps (raw) cut into little pieces, is the best food for tame rabets,
and makes them sweet. as rice (raw) is for tame pigeons, and they like it
best, varying it sometimes with right tares, and other seeds.
a very good cream to eat hot, is thus made. into a quart of sweet cream,
put a spoonful of very fine powder of rice, and boil them together
sufficiently, adding cinnamon, or mace and nutmeg to your liking. when it
is boiled enough take it from the fire, and beat a couple of yolks of
new-laid eggs, to colour it yellow. sweeten it to your taste. put bread to
it, in it's due time.
doctor pridion ordered my lord cornwallis, for his chief diet in his
looseness, the following grewel, which he found very tastefull.
take about two parts of oat-meal well beaten in a mortar, and one part of
rice in subtile powder. boil these well in water, as you make water-grewel,
adding a good proportion of cinnamon to boil also in due time, then strain
it through a cloth, and sweeten it to your taste.
the yolk of an egg beaten with a little sherry-sack, and put to it, is not
bad in a looseness. at other times you may add butter. it is very tasteful
and nourishing.
take two or three spoonfuls of the liquor the carp was boiled in, and put
it ipage nto a pipkin; there must be no more, then even to cover the bottom of
the pipkin. make this boil by itself; as soon as it doth so, put to this
half a pound of sweet butter, let it melt gently, or suddenly, it imports
not, so as the liquor boiled, when you did put the butter in; when the
butter is melted, then take it from the fire, and holding the handle in
your hand, shake it round a good while and strongly, and it will come to be
thick, that you may almost cut it with a knife. then squeese juyce of limon
into it, or of sharp orange, or verjuyce or vinegar; and heat it again as
much as you please upon the fire. it will ever after continue thick, and
never again, upon any heating, grow oily, though it be cold and heated
again twenty times. butter done with fair water, as is said above, with the
other liquor, will be thick in the same manner, (for the liquors make no
difference in that:)
put of this butter to boiled pease in their dish, which cover with another;
so shake them very strongly, and a good while together. this is by much the
best way to butter pease, and not to let the butter melt in the middle of
them, and then stir them long with a spoon. this will grow oily (though it
be good at the first doing) if you heat them again: the other, never; and
therefore, is the best way upon all occasions to make such thickened melted
butter. you may make sauce for a pike in the same manner you did for a
carpe; putting horse-radish to it if you please.
put great store of sliced onions, with currants and raisins of the sun both
above and under the herrings, and store of butter, and so bake them.
page 
take a reasonable quantity (as about half a porrenger full) of the syrup,
that hath served in the making of dryed plums; and into a large
syllabub-pot milk or squirt, or let fall from high a sufficient quantity of
milk or cream. this syrup is very quick of the fruit, and very weak of
sugar; and therefore makes the syllabub exceeding well tasted. you may also
use the syrup used in the like manner in the drying of cherries.
the best liquor to fry fish in, is to take butter and salet oyl, first well
clarified together. this hath not the unsavoury taste of oyl alone, nor the
blackness of butter alone. it fryeth fish crisp, yellow, and well tasted.
when you will butter shrimps, first wash them well in warm milk and water
equally mingled together, and let them soak a little in it; then wash them
again in fresh milk and water warmed, letting them also soak therein a
while. do this twice or thrice with fresh milk and water. this will take
away all the rankness and slimyness of them. then butter them, or prepare
them for the table, as you think fit.
my lady lusson makes thus her plain tosts of kidney of veal: cut the kidney
with all the fat about it, and a good piece of the lean flesh besides. hash
all this as smallpage  as you can. put to it a quarter of a pound of picked and
washed currants, and as much sugar, one nutmeg grated, four yolks and two
whites of new-laid eggs raw; work all these very well together, seasoning
it with salt. spread it thick upon slices of light white-bread cut like
tosts. then fry them in butter, such quantity as may boil over the tops of
the tosts.
the best way of making mustard is this: take of the best mustard-seed
(which is black) for example a quart. dry it gently in an oven, and beat it
to subtle powder, and searse it. then mingle well strong wine-vinegar with
it, so much that it be pretty liquid, for it will dry with keeping. put to
this a little pepper beaten small (white is the best) at discretion, as
about a good pugil, and put a good spoonful of sugar to it (which is not to
make it taste sweet, but rather quick, and to help the fermentation) lay a
good onion in the bottom, quartered if you will, and a race of ginger
scraped and bruised; and stir it often with a horse-radish root cleansed,
which let always lie in the pot, till it have lost it's vertue, then take a
new one. this will keep long, and grow better for a while. it is not good
till after a month, that it have fermented a while.
some think it will be the quicker, if the seed be ground with fair water,
in stead of vinegar, putting store of onions in it.
my lady holmeby makes her quick fine mustard thus: choose true
mustard-seed; dry it in an oven, after the bpage read is out. beat and searse it
to a most subtle powder. mingle sherry-sack with it (stirring it a long
time very well, so much as to have it of a fit consistence for mustard.
then put a good quantity of fine sugar to it, as five or six spoonfuls, or
more, to a pint of mustard. stir and incorporate all well together. this
will keep good a long time. some do like to put to it a little (but a
little) of very sharp wine-vinegar.
boil three pints of sweet cream with a very little salt and some sliced
nutmeg. as soon as it begins to boil, take it from the fire. in the mean
time beat the yolks of twelve or fifteen new-laid eggs very well with some
rose or orange-flower-water, and sweeten the cream to your taste with
sugar. then beat three or four spoonfuls of cream with them, and quickly as
many more; so proceeding, till you have incorporated all the cream and all
the eggs. then pour the eggs and cream into a deep dish laid over with
sippets of fine light bread, which will rise up to the top for the most
part. when it is cooled and thickened enough to bear raisins of the sun,
strew all over the top with them (well-washed.) then press a little way
into it with great lumps of raw marrow. two bones will suffice. cover your
dish with another, and set it upon a great pot of boiling water, with a
good space between the water and the dish, that there be room for the hot
steam to rise and strike upon the dish. keep good fire always under your
pot. in less then an hour (usually) it is baked enough. you will perceive
that, if the mpage arrow look brown, and be enough baked. if it should continue
longer on the heat, it would melt. you may bake it in an oven if you will;
but it is hard to regulate it so, that it be not too much or too little:
whereas the boiling water is certain. you may strew ambred sugar upon it,
either before you set it to bake, or after it is done.
to rost fine meat (as partridge, pheasant, chicken, pigeon) that it be full
of juyce; baste it as soon as it is through hot, and time to baste, with
butter. when it is very moist all over, sprinkle flower upon it every
where, that by turning about the fire, it may become a thin crust. then
baste it no more till the latter end. this crust will keep in all the
juyce. a little before you take it up, baste it again with butter, and this
will melt away all the crust. then give it three or four turns of the spit,
that it may make the outside yellow and crisp.
you may also baste such meat with yolks of new-laid eggs, beaten into a
thin oyl. but with this you continue basting all the while the meat
rosteth.
take a rump of beef, break all the bones; season it with pepper and salt to
your liking; take three or four nutmegs, and a quantity of mace, beat them
grossly; then take a bunch of very good sweet herbs, and one good onion cut
in quarters, or garlike, as you like it. put in half a pint of white-wine
vinegar, and one pint of good claret, one handful of sugar; and a piece or
two of beef suet or butter: shred some cabbage under page and over, and scrape
in a pound of good old cheese. put all these into an earthen pot, and let
it stand in an oven with brown-bread four or five hours; but let the pot be
covered close with paste.
take a fat rump of young beef, as it comes from the butcher, and take out
all the bones, excepting the tip of it towards the tail that is all fat,
which you cannot take out, without spoiling or defacing or breaking it. but
take out all the thick bones towards the chine, and the thick sinews, that
are on the outer sides of the flesh; (which will never become tender with
boiling) so that you have nothing but the pure flesh and fat, without any
bony or tough substance. then beat well the lean part with a woodden roling
pin, and when you have beaten well one side, turn the other. then rub it
well with pepper grosly beaten, and salt; just as you would do, to season a
venison pasty, making the seasoning higher or gentler according to your
taste. then lay it in a fit vessel, with a flat bottom (pipkin or kettle as
you have conveniency) that will but just contain it, but so that it may lye
at ease. or you may tye it up in a loose thin linnen cloth, or boulter, as
they do capons à la mode, or brawn, or the like. then put water upon it,
but just to cover it, and boil it close covered a matter of two hours
pretty smartly, so that it be well half boiled. then take it out of that,
and put it into another fit vessel, or the same cleansed, and put upon it
about two quarts of good strong deep well bodied claret-wine, and a good
bundle page of sweet-herbs, (penny-royal, sweet-marjoram, winter-savory, limon
thyme, &c.) and a good large onion peeled, and stuck as close with cloves,
as you can stick it, if you like the taste of onions. they must be the
strong biting onions, that are round and red: a little nutmeg, and some
mace. put to the wine about a pint of the liquor that you have already
boiled the beef in; and if you would have it strong of the seasoning of
pepper, and salt; take the bottom of this liquor. thus let it boil very
gently, simpringly, or rather stew with char-coal over a little furnace, or
a fit chafing-dish, a matter of three hours, close covered. if the liquor
waste too much, you may recruit it with what you have kept of that, which
your beef was boiled in. when it is near time to take it up, stew some
oysters in their own liquor (to which you may add at the latter end, some
of the winy liquor, that the beef is now stewing in, or some of the first
beef-broth, or use some good pickled oysters) and at the same time make
some thin tostes of kingstone manchet, which toste very leisurely, or
rather dry them throughly, and very hard, and crisp, but not burned, by
lying long before the fire. and if you have fresh champignons, dress a good
dish full of them, to be ready at the same time, when all the rest is
ready; if not, use pickled ones, without further dressing. when you find
your beef is as tender as can be, and will scarcely hold together, to be
taken up together, and that all the other things are ready, lay the tostes
in the dish, where the beef is to lye; pour some of the liquor upon it.
then lay thepage  beef upon the tosts; throw away the bundle of herbs and
onions; and pour the rest of the liquor upon the beef, as also the
oysters, and the mushrooms, to which add a pretty deal, about half a pint
of broom-buds: and so let it stand a while well covered over coals to
mittoner; and to have all the several substances communicate their tastes
to one another, and to have the tostes swell up like a gelly. then serve it
up. if you want liquor, you may still recruit your self out of the first
beef-broth, which you keep all to supply any want afterwards. have a care,
whiles it is stewing, in the winy-liquor, to lift the flesh sometimes up
from the bottom of the vessel, least if it should lye always still, it may
stick to the bottom, and burn; but you cannot take it out, for it would
fall in pieces. it will be yet better meat, if you add to it, at the last
(when you add all the other heightnings) some marrow, and some chess-nuts,
and some pistachios, if you will. put to your broom-buds (before you put
them in to the rest) some elder vinegar, enough to soak them, and even to
cover them. if you find this make your composition of the whole too sharp,
you may next time take less. when you put the beef to stew with the wine
(or a while after) you may put to it a pretty quantity (as much as you can
take in both hands at once) of shreded cabbage, if it be the season; or of
turneps, if you like either of these. carrots make it somewhat flat. if the
wine be not quick enough, you may put a little elder vinegar to it. if you
like garlike, you may put in a little, or rub the dish with it.
page 
champignons are best, that grow upon gravelly dry rising grounds. gather
them of the last nights growth; and to preserve them white, it is well to
cast them into a pitcher of fair-water, as you gather them: but that is not
absolutely necessary, if you will go about dressing them as soon as you
come home. cut the great ones into halves or quarters, seeing carefully
there be no worms in them; and peel off their upper skin on the tops: the
little ones, peel whole. as you peel them, throw them into a bason of
fair-water, which preserves them white. then put them into a pipkin or
possnet of copper (no iron) and put a very little water to them, and a
large proportion of salt. if you have a pottle of mushrooms, you may put to
them ten or twelve spoonfuls of water, and two or three of salt. boil them
with pretty quick-fire, and scum them well all the while, taking away a
great deal of foulness, that will rise. they will shrink into a very little
room. when they are sufficiently parboiled to be tender, and well cleansed
of their scum, (which will be in about a quarter of an hour,) take them
out, and put them into a colander, that all the moisture may drain from
them. in the mean time make your pickle thus: take a quart of pure sharp
white wine vinegar (elder-vinegar is best) put two or three spoonfuls of
whole pepper to it, twenty or thirty cloves, one nutmeg quartered, two or
three flakes of mace, three bay-leaves; (some like limon-thyme and
rose-mary; but then it mustpage  be a very little of each) boil all these
together, till the vinegar be well impregnated with the ingredients, which
will be in about half an hour. then take it from the fire, and let it cool.
when the pickle is quite cold, and the mushrooms also quite cold, and
drained from all moisture: put them into the liquor (with all the
ingredients in it) which you must be sure, be enough to cover them. in ten
or twelve days, they will have taken into them the full taste of the
pickle, and will keep very good half a year. if you have much supernatant
liquor, you may parboil more mushrooms next day, and put them to the first.
if you have not gathered at once enough for a dressing, you may keep them
all night in water to preserve them white, and gather more the next day, to
joyn to them.
pare them, put them into a pipkin, with so much red or claret wine and
water, ana, as will near reach to the top of the pears. stew or boil
gently, till they grow tender, which may be in two hours. after a while,
put in some sticks of cinnamon bruised and a few cloves. when they are
almost done, put in sugar enough to season them well and their syrup, which
you pour out upon them in a deep plate.
pare them and cut them into slices. stew them with wine and water as the
pears, and season them in like manner with spice. towards the end sweeten
them with sugar, breaking the apples into pap by stirring them. when you
are rpage eady to take them off, put in good store of fresh-butter, and
incorporate it well with them, by stirring them together. you stew these
between two dishes. the quickest apples are the best.
the way that the countess de penalva makes the portuguez eggs for the
queen, is this. take the yolks (clean picked from the whites and germ) of
twelve new-laid eggs. beat them exceedingly with a little (scarce a
spoonful) of orange-flower-water. when they are exceeding liquid, clear,
and uniformly a thin liquor, put to them one pound of pure double refined
sugar (if it be not so pure, it must be clarified before) and stew them in
your dish or bason over a very gentle fire, stirring them continually,
whiles they are over it, so that the whole may become one uniform
substance, of the consistence of an electuary (beware they grow not too
hard; for without much caution and attention, that will happen on a sudden)
which then you may eat presently, or put into pots to keep. you may
dissolve ambergreece (if you will, ground first very much with sugar) in
orange-flower or rose-water, before hand, and put it (warm and dissolved)
to the eggs, when you set them to stew. if you clarifie your sugar, do it
with one of these waters, and whites of eggs. the flavor of these
sweet-waters goeth almost all away with boiling. therefore half a spoonful
put into the composition, when you take it from the fire, seasoneth it more
then ten times as much, put in at the first.
page 
a certain and infallible method to boil new-laid eggs to sup up, and yet
that they have the white turned to milk, is thus: break a very little hole,
at the bigger end of the shell, and put it into the water, whiles it
boileth. let it remain boiling, whiles your pulse beateth two hundred
stroaks. then take it out immediately, and you will find it of an exact
temper: others put eggs into boyling water just as you take it from the
fire, and let them remain there, till the water be so cooled, that you may
just put in your hand, and take out the eggs.
others put the eggs into cold water, which they set upon the fire, and as
soon as the water begins to boil, the eggs are enough.
take two pound of the broadest open bran of the best wheat, and put it to
infuse in a gallon of water, during two or three days, that the water may
soak into the pure flower, that sticks to the bran. then boil it three or
four walms, and presently take it from the fire, and strain it through some
fine strainer. a milky substance will come out, which let stand to settle
about half a day. pour off the clear water, that swimmeth over the starch
or flomery, that is in the bottom (which is very good for pap, &c.) and
boil it up to a gelly, as you do harts-horn gelly or the like, and season
it to your taste.
boil the bones (well broken) page and remaining flesh of the venison, from
whence the meat of the pasty is cut, in the liquor, wherein capons and
veal, or mutton have been boiled, so to make very strong broth of them. the
bones must be broken, that you may have the marrow of them in the liquor;
and they must stew a long time (covering the pot close:) that you may make
the broth as strong as you can; and if you put some gravy of mutton or veal
to it, it will be the better. when the pasty is half baked, pour some of
this broth into it, by the hole at the top; and the rest of it, when it is
quite baked, and wanteth but standing in the oven to soak. or put it all in
at once, when the pasty is sufficiently baked, and afterwards let it remain
in the oven a good while soaking.
you may bake the bones (broken) with the broth and gravy, or for want
thereof, with only water in an earthen pot close stopped, till you have all
the substance in the liquor; which you may pour into the pasty an hour
before it is baked enough.
if you are in a park, you may soak the venison a night in the blood of the
deer; and cover the flesh with it, clotted together when you put it in
paste. mutton blood also upon venison, is very good. you may season your
blood a little with pepper and salt.
after you have boned it, and cut away all the sinews, then season it with
pepper and salt pretty high, and divide a stag into four pots; then put
about a pound of butter upon the top of each pot, and cover it with
rye-past pretty thick. your page oven must be so hot, that after a whole night
it maybe baked very tender, which is a great help to the keeping of it.
and when you draw it, drain all the liquor from it, and turn your pot upon
a pie plate, with the bottom upwards, and so let it stand, until it is
cold; then wipe your pot, that no gravy remain therein, and then put your
venison into the same pot again; then have your butter very well clarified,
that there be no dross remaining; then fill up your pot about two inches
above the meat with butter, or else it will mould. and so the next day
binde it up very close, with a piece of sheeps leather so that no air can
get in. after which you may keep it as long as you please.
master adrian may put's up his venison in pots, to keep long, thus:
immediately as soon as he hath killed it, he seasoneth and baketh it as
soon as he can, so that the flesh may never be cold. and this maketh that
the fat runneth in among the lean, and is like calvered salmon, and eats
much more mellow and tender. but before the deer be killed, he ought to be
hunted and chafed as much as may be. then seasoned and put in the oven
before it be cold. be sure to pour out all the gravy, that settleth to the
bottom, under the flesh after the baking, before you put the butter to it,
that is to lie very thick upon the meat, to keep it all the year.
it must be a very large oven, that so it may contract the stronger heat,
and keep it the longer. it must be at least eight hours heating with wood,
that it be as hot as is possible. if the brawn be young, it will suffice
eight hours or a little morepage  in the oven. but if old, it must be ten or
eleven. put but two collars into each pot, for bigger are unwieldy. into
every pot, put twelve corns of whole pepper, four cloves, a great onion
peeled and quartered, and two bay-leaves, before you put them into the
oven. before they are set in, you do not fill them with water to the top,
least any should spill in sliding them in; but fill them up by a bowl
fastned to a long pole. no water must be put in, after the oven is closed
(nor the oven ever be opened, till after all is throughly baked) and
therefore you must put in enough at first to serve to the last; you must
rowl your collars as close as may be, that no air may be left in the folds
of them: and sow them up in exceeding strong cloth, which a strong man must
pull as hard as he can in the sowing. their cloths must not be pulled off,
till the collars have been three or four days out of the oven, least you
pull off part of the brawn with them. you may put the same proportion of
pepper, cloves, &c. into the souce drink as you did in the baking them;
which at either time (especially at first) give them a fine taste. the
souce-drink is made of six shillings beer, and thames or river-water, of
each an equal quantity, well boiled with salt. when boiled and cold, put in
to it two or three quarts of skimmed milk, only to colour it; and so change
it once in three weeks. tender brawn sliced thin, and laid sallet-wise in a
dish as the sliced capon, and seasoned with pepper, salt and vinegar and
oyl, with a little limon, is a very good sallet.
it is a good sallet, to slice page a cold capon thin; mingle with it some
sibbolds, lettice, rocket and tarragon sliced small. season all with
pepper, salt, vinegar and oyl, and sliced limon. a little origanum doth
well with it.
take a large fat loin of mutton (or two) boned after the manner of venison.
season it well to your taste with pepper and salt. then lay it to steep all
night in enough of the sheep's blood, to cover it over, and soak well into
it. then lay it into the past, with all the clotted thick blood, under it,
upon it, and hanging about it. you may season the blood with pepper and
salt, before you lay the meat in it. but though you do not, it will not be
amiss, so as the meat be seasoned high enough. then bake it as you do an
ordinary pasty; and you may put gravy of mutton or strong broth into it.
you may do it in a dish with past; as my lady of newport doth her venison.
this way of steeping in blood before you bake it, is very good also for
venison.
hash the flesh of as many hares, as you please, very small. then beat them
strongly in a mortar into a paste, which season duly with pepper and salt.
lard it throughly all over with great lardons of lard well rowled in pepper
and salt. put this into a straight earthen pot, to lye close in it. if you
like onions, you may put one or two quartered into the bottom of the pot.
put store of sweet-butter upon the meat, and upon that, some strong red
claret-wine. cover page the pot with a double strong brown paper, tyed close
about the mouth of it. set it to bake with houshold-bread (or in an oven,
as a venison pasty) for eight or ten hours. then take out the pot, and
thence the meat, and pour away all the liquor, which let settle. then take
all the congealed butter, and clarifie it well. put your meat again into
the pot, and put upon it your clarified butter, and as much more as is
necessary. and i believe the putting of claret-wine to it now is better,
and to omit it before. bake it again, but a less while. pour out all the
liquor, when it is baked, and clarifie the butter again, and pour it upon
the meat, and so let it cool; the butter must be at least two or three
fingers breadth over the meat.
bone it, and beat it exceeding well on all sides, with a roling pin, upon a
table. then season it with pepper and salt, (rubbing them in very well) and
some parsley, and a few sweet herbs (penny-royal, winter-savoury,
sweet-marjoram, limon thyme, red-sage, which yet to some seems to have a
physical taste) an onion if you will. squeese it into the pot as close as
you can. put butter upon it, and claret-wine, and covered all as above.
bake it in a strong oven eight or ten hours. take it out of the oven, and
the meat out of the pot, which make clean, from all settlings; and squeese
all the juyce from it (even by a gentle press.) then put it in again hard
pressed into the pot. clarifie the butter, that you poured with the liquor
from the meat out of the pot; and pour it again with more flesh, to have
enough to cover it two or three fingers thick.
page 
season them duly with pepper and salt; then lay them in the pot, and put
store of butter, and some claret-wine to them. cover and bake as above: but
a less while according to the tenderness of the meat. in due time take out
your pot, and your birds out of it, which press not, but only wipe off the
liquor. pour it out all. clarifie the butter; put in the birds again, and
the clarified butter, and as much more as needs (all melted) upon them, and
let it cool. you may put a few bay-leaves upon any of these baked meats,
between the meat and the butter.
an excellent cold pye is thus made. take two fat green-geese; bone them,
and lay them in paste one upon the other, seasoning them well with pepper
and salt, and some little nutmeg, both above and below and between the two
geese. when it is well-baked and out of the oven, pour in melted butter at
a hole made in the top. the crust is much better than of a stubble-goose.
the way to have beef tenderest, short and best boiled, as my lord of saint
alban's useth it, is thus. take a rump or brisket of beef; keep it without
salt as long as you may, without danger to have it smell ill. for so it
groweth page mellow and tender, which it would not do, if it were presently
salted. when it is sufficiently mortified, rub it well with salt; let it
lie so but a day and a night, or at most two nights and a day. then boil it
in no more water then is necessary. boil it pretty smartly at first, but
afterwards but a simpring or stewing boiling, which must continue seven or
eight hours. sometimes he boileth it half over night, and the rest next
morning. if you should not have time to salt it, you may supply that want
thus; when the beef is through boiled, you may put so much salt into the
pot as to make the broth like brine, and then boil it gently an hour
longer; or take out the beef, and put it into a deep dish, and put to it
some of his broth made brine, and cover it with another dish, and stew it
so an hour. a hanch of venison may be done the same way.
season your duck and teal with pepper and salt, both within and without, so
much as you think may season them; then crack their bones with a roling
pin; then put them into an earthen pot close, and cover them with butter,
and bake them in an oven as hot as for bread, and let them stand three or
four hours; when you take them out of the oven, pour out all the liquor
from them, then melt so much butter as will cover them; when you have
melted your butter, let it stand a while, until all the dross be settled to
the bottom, and put in the clear butter, which must cover the fowl.
page 
bake humble-pyes without chapping them small in a pye, seasoned with
pepper and salt, adding a pretty deal of parsley, a little sweet-marjoram
and savoury, and a very little thyme.
rost wilde ducks putting into their bellies some sage and a little onion
(both well shreded) wrought into a lump with butter, adding a little pepper
and salt. and let their sauce be a little gravy of mutton, to enlarge the
seasoned gravy, that comes from the ducks when they are cut up.
take a good fat turkey or two; dress them clean, and bone them; then tye
them up in the manner of sturgeon with some thing clean washed. take your
kettle, and put into it a pottle of good white-wine, a quart of water, and
a quart of vinegar; make it boil, and season it with salt pretty well. then
put in your turkeys, and let them boil till they be very tender. when they
are enough boiled, take them out, and taste the liquor; if it be not sharp
enough, put more vinegar, and let it boil a little; then put it into an
earthen pot, that will hold both turkeys. when it is cold enough, and the
turkeys through-cold, put them into the liquor in the pot, and be sure they
be quite covered with the liquor; let them lye in it three weeks or a
month; then serve it to the table, with fennel on it, and eat it with elder
vinegar.
you may do a capon or two put together in the same manner: but first
larding it with great lardons rowled in pepper and salt. a shorter time
lying in the pickle will serve.
page 
take a fat goose, and powder it with salt eight or ten days; then boil it
tender, and put it into pickle, like sturgeon-pickle. you may do the like
with a very fat turkey; but the best pickle of that is, the italian
marinating, boiling mace, nutmeg, &c. in it. you may boil garlick in the
belly of the fouls, if you like it, or in the pickle.
cut it down the back, and take out all the bones; lard it very well with
green bacon, and season it well with three quarters of an ounce of pepper;
half an ounce of ginger; a quarter of an ounce of cloves, and salt as you
judge proportionable; a pint of white wine and some butter. put three or
four bay-leaves under the meat, and bake it with brown-bread in an earthen
pot close covered, and the edges of the cover closed with paste. let it
stand three or four days in the pickle; then eat it cold with vinegar.
at franckfort they use the following cautions about the bacon they salt for
gambons or sides to keep. the best is of male hogs of two year old, that
have been gelt, when they were young. they kill them in the wane of the
moon, from a day or two after the full, till the last quarter. they fetch
off their hair with warm-water, not by burning (which melteth the fat, and
maketh it apt to grow rpage esty), and after it hath lain in the open air a full
day, they salt it with dry salt, rubbing it in well: then lay what
quantity you will in a tub for seven or eight days (in which time the salt
dissolveth to water); then take it out, and wipe it dry, and hang it in a
room, where they keep fire, either on a hearth, or that smoak cometh out of
a stove into the room (as most of those rooms do smoak) but hang them not
in the chimney, that the hot smoak striketh upon them; but if you have a
very large chimney, hang them pretty high and aside, that the smoak may not
come full upon them. after a while, (when they are dry) take them thence,
and hang them from the smoak in a dry warm room. when the weather groweth
warm as in may, there will drop from them a kinde of melted oyly grease,
and they will heat, and grow resty, if not remedied. take them down then,
and lay them in a cold dry place, with hay all about them, that one may not
touch another. change the hay every thirty, or twenty, or fifteen days,
till september, when the weather groweth cool; then hang them up again in
the free air, in a dry chamber. if you make the shoulders into gambons, you
must have a care to cut away a little piece of flesh within, called in
dutch the mause; for if that remain in it, the bacon will grow resty.
take spinage, sorrel, tansey, wheat, a quart of cream; bread (the quantity
of a two peny loaf) twenty eggs, and half the whites, one nutmeg, half a
pound of sugar, and the juyce of a couple of limons. spinage is thpage e chief
herb to have the juyce; wheat also is very good, when it is young and
tender. you must not take much sorrel, for fear of turning the cream; but
less tansey, so little that it may not taste distinctly in the composition.
the juyce of limons is put in at the end of all. you may lay thin slices of
limon upon the tansey made, and sugar upon them.
beat twelve eggs (six whites put away) by themselves exceeding well (two or
three hours), sometimes putting in a spoonful of cream to keep them from
oyling; then mingle them well with a quart of cream; to which put about
half a pint of juyce of spinage (as much as will make the cream green) or
of green wheat, and four spoonfuls of juyce or tansey, one nutmeg scraped
into thin slices, and half a pound of sugar; all things exceeding well
incorporated together; fry this with fresh butter, no more then to glase
the pan over, and keep the tansey from sticking to the pan.
take twelve quarts of milk warm from the cow, turn it with a good spoonful
of runnet. break it well, and put it into a large strainer, in which rowl
it up and down, that all the whey may run out into a little tub; when all
that will is run out, wring out more. then break the curds well; then wring
it again, and more whey will come. thus break and wring till no more come.
then work the curds exceedingly with your hand in a tray, till they become
a short uniform paste. then put to it the yolks of eight new laid eggs, and
two whites, and a pound of butter. work all this long together.
page 
in the long working (at the several times) consisteth the making them
good. then season them to your taste with sugar finely beaten; and put in
some cloves and mace in subtile powder. then lay them thick in coffins of
fine paste, and bake them.
to half a peck of fine flower, take a pound and half of butter, in this
manner. put your butter with at least three quarts of cold water (it
imports not how much or how little the water is) into a little kettle to
melt, and boil gently: as soon as it is melted, scum off the butter with a
ladle, pouring it by ladlefuls (one a little after another, as you knead it
with the flower) to some of the flower (which you take not all at once,
that you may the better discern, how much liquor is needful) and work it
very well into paste. when all your butter is kneaded, with as much of the
flower, as serves to make paste of a fitting consistence, take of the water
that the butter was melted in, so much as to make the rest of the flower
into paste of due consistence; then joyn it to the paste made with butter,
and work them both very well together, of this make your covers and coffins
thin. if you are to make more paste for more tarts or pyes, the water that
hath already served, will serve again better then fresh.
to make goose-pyes, and such of thick crust, you must put at least two
page pound of butter to half a peck of flower. put no more salt to your past,
then what is in the butter, which must be the best new butter that is sold
in the market.
take eight wine quarts of flower; one pound of loaf sugar beaten and
searsed; one ounce of mace, beat it very fine: then take thirty eggs,
fifteen whites, beat them well; then put to them a quart of new ale-yest;
beat them very well together, and strain them into your flower; then take a
pint of rose-water, wherein six grains of ambergreece and musk have been
over night. then take a pint and half of cream or something more, and set
it on the fire, and put into it four pounds and three quarters of butter;
and when it is all melted, take it off the fire and stir it about, until it
be pretty cool; and pour all into your flower, and stir it up quick with
your hands, like a lith pudding; then dust a little flower over it, and let
it stand covered with a flannel, or other woollen cloth, a quarter of an
hour before the fire, that it may rise; then have ready twelve pounds of
currants very well washed and pick'd, that there may be neither stalks, nor
broken currants in them. then let your currants be very well dryed before
the fire, and put warm into your cake; then mingle them well together with
your hands; then get a tin hoop that will contain that quantity, and butter
it well, and put it upon two sheets of paper well buttered; so pour in your
cake, and so set it into the oven, being quick that it may be well soaked,
but not to burn. it must bake above an hour apage nd a quarter; near an hour and
half. take then a pound and half of double refined sugar purely beaten and
searsed; put into the whites of five eggs; two or  spoonfuls of
rose-water; keep it a beating all the time, that the cake is a baking which
will be two hours; then draw your cake out of the oven, and pick the dry
currants from the top of it, and so spread all that you have beaten over
it, very smooth, and set it a little into the oven, that it may dry.
take three pounds and an half of flower; one penny worth of cloves and
mace; and a quarter of a pound of sugar and salt, and strew it on the
flower. then take the yolks of eight eggs well beaten, with a spoonful and
half of rose water; then take a pint of thick cream, and a pound of butter;
melt them together, and when it is so, take three quarters of a pint of
ale-yest, and mingle the yest and eggs together. then take the warm liquor,
and mingle all together; when you have done, take all, and pour it in the
bowl, and so cover the flower over the liquor; then cover the pan with a
napkin, and when it is risen, take four pounds of currants, well washed and
dryed, and half a pound of raisins of the sun sliced, and let them be well
dryed and hot, and so stir them in. when it is risen, have your oven hot
against the cake is made; let it stand three quarters of an hour. when it
is half baked, ice it over with fine sugar and rose-water, and the whites
of eggs, and musk and ambergreece.
when you mingle your yest and eggs together for the cake, put musk and
amber to that.
page 
take a peck of flower, and put it in half. then take two quarts of good
ale-yest, and strain it into half the flower, and some new milk boiled, and
almost cold again; make it into a very light paste, and set it before the
fire to rise; then take five pound of butter, and melt it in a skillet,
with a quarter of a pint of rose-water; when your paste is risen, and your
oven almost hot, which will be by this time, take your paste from the fire,
and break it into small pieces, and take your other part of flower, and
strew it round your paste; then take the melted butter, and put it to the
past, and by degrees work the paste and flower together, till you have
mingled all very well. take six nutmegs, some cinnamon and mace well
beaten, and two pound of sugar, and strew it into the paste, as they are a
working it. take three pounds of raisins stoned, and twelve pounds of
currants very well washed and dryed again; one pound of dates sliced; half
a pound of green citron dryed and sliced very thin; strew all these into
the paste, till it have received them all; then let your oven be ready, and
make up your cake, and set it into the oven; but you must have a great
care, it doth not take cold. then to ice it, take a pound and half of
double refined sugar beaten and searsed; the whites of three eggs new-laid,
and a little orange-flower-water, with a little musk and ambergreece,
beaten and searsed, and put to your sugar; then strew your sugar into the
eggs, and beat it in a stone mortar with a woopage dden pestel, till it be as
white as snow, which will be by that time the cake is baked; then draw it
to the ovens mouth, and drop it on, in what form you will; let it stand a
little again in the oven to harden.
to a peck of fine flower, take six pounds of fresh butter, which must be
tenderly melted, ten pounds of currants, of cloves and mace, half an ounce
of each, an ounce of cinnamon, half an ounce of nutmegs, four ounces of
sugar, one pint of sack mixed with a quart at least of thick barm of ale
(as soon as it is settled, to have the thick fall to the bottom, which will
be, when it is about two days old) half a pint of rose-water; half a
quarter of an ounce of saffron. then make your paste, strewing the spices,
finely beaten, upon the flower: then put the melted butter (but even just
melted) to it; then the barm, and other liquors: and put it into the oven
well heated presently. for the better baking of it, put it in a hoop, and
let it stand in the oven one hour and half. you ice the cake with the
whites of two eggs, a small quantity of rose-water, and some sugar.
to half a peck of flower, take three spoonfuls of barm, two ounces of
seeds; aniseeds or fennel-seeds. make the paste very stiff, with nothing
but water, and dry it (they must not have so much heat, as to make them
rise, but only dry by degrees; as in an oven after manchet is taken out, or
a gentle stove) in flat cakes very well in an oven or stove.
take three pound andpage  a half of the finest flower and dry it in an oven; one
pound and a half of sweet butter, and mix it with the flower, until it be
crumbled very small, that none of it be seen; then take three quarters of a
pint of new ale-yeast, and half a pint of sack, and half a pint of new
milk; six spoonfuls of rose-water, four yolks, and two whites of eggs; then
let it lie before the fire half an hour or more. and when you go to make it
up, put in three quarters of a pound of caraway-confits, and a pound and
half of biskets. put it into the oven, and let it stand an hour and half.
take four quarts of fine flower, two pound and half of butter, three
quarters of a pound of sugar, four nutmegs; a little mace; a pound of
almonds finely beaten, half a pint of sack, a pint of good ale-yest, a pint
of boiled cream, twelve yolks, and four whites of eggs; four pound of
currants. when you have wrought all these into a very fine past, let it be
kept warm before the fire half an hour, before you set it into the oven. if
you please, you may put into it, two pound of raisins of the sun stoned and
quartered. let your oven be of a temperate heat, and let your cake stand
therein two hours and a half, before you ice it; and afterwards only to
harden the ice. the ice for this cake is made thus: take the whites of
three new laid eggs, and three quarters of a pound of fine sugar finely
beaten; beat it well together with the whites of the eggs, and ice the
cake. if you please you may add a little musk or ambergreece.
page 
take three pound of very fine flower well dryed by the fire, and put to it
a pound and half of loaf sugar sifted in a very fine sieve and dryed; three
pounds of currants well washed and dryed in a cloth and set by the fire;
when your flower is well mixed with the sugar and currants, you must put in
it a pound and half of unmelted butter, ten spoonfuls of cream, with the
yolks of three new-laid eggs beat with it, one nutmeg; and if you please,
three spoonfuls of sack. when you have wrought your paste well, you must
put it in a cloth, and set it in a dish before the fire, till it be through
warm. then make them up in little cakes, and prick them full of holes; you
must bake them in a quick oven unclosed. afterwards ice them over with
sugar. the cakes should be about the bigness of a hand-breadth and thin: of
the cise of the sugar cakes sold at barnet.
blanch nut-kernels from the husks in the best manner you can. then pun them
with a due proportion of sugar, and a little orange-flower, or rose-water.
when it is in a fitting uniform paste, make it into round cakes, about the
bigness of your hand, or a little larger, and about a finger thick; and lay
every one upon a fine paper cut fit to it; which lay upon a table. you must
have a pan like a tourtiere, made to contain coals on the top, that is
flat, with edges roundpage  about to hold in the coals, which set over the
cakes, with fire upon it. let this remain upon the cakes, till you
conceive, it hath dryed them sufficiently for once; which may be within a
quarter of an hour; but you take it off two or three times in that time, to
see you scorch not the outside, but only dry it a little. then remove it to
others, that lye by them; and pull the papers from the first, and turn them
upon new papers. when the others are dryed enough, remove the pan back to
the first, to dry their other side: which being enough, remove it back to
the second, that by this time are turned, and laid upon new papers. repeat
this turning the cakes, and changing the pan, till they are sufficiently
dry: which you must not do all at once, least you scorch them: and though
the outside be dry, the inside must be very moist and tender. then you must
ice them thus: make a thick pap with orange flower or rose-water, and
purest white sugar: a little of the whites of eggs, not above half a
spoonful of that oyl of eggs, to a porrenger full of thick pap, beaten
exceeding well with it, and a little juyce of limons. lay this smooth upon
the cakes with a knife, and smoothen it with a feather. then set the pan
over them to dry them. which being if there be any unevenness, or cracks or
discolouring, lay on a little more of that mortar, and dry it as before.
repeat this, till it be as clear, and smooth, and white, as you would have
it. then turn the other sides, and do the like to them. you must take care,
not to scorch them: for then they would look yellow or red, and they must
page be pure, white and smooth like silver between polished and matte, or like a
looking glass. this coat preserves the substance of the cakes within, the
longer moist. you may beat dissolved amber, or essence of cinnamon, with
them.
according to the bigness of your moulds proportion your stroakings for your
cheese-curds. to six quarts of stroakings, take a pint of springwater: if
the weather be hot, then let the water be cold, and before you put it into
the stroakings, let them stand a while to cool after they are milked, and
then put in the water with a little salt first stirred in it: and having
stirred it well together, let it stand a little while, and then put in
about two good spoonfuls of runnet, stir it well together, and cover it
with a fair linnen-cloth, and when it is become hard like a thick jelly,
with a skimming-dish lay it gently into the moulds, and as it sinks down
into the moulds, fill it still up again, till all be in, which will require
some three or four hours time. then lay a clean fine cloth into another
mould of the same cise, and turn it into it, and then turn the skirts of
the cloth over it, and lay upon that a thin board, and upon that as much
weight, as with the board may make two pound or thereabouts. and about an
hour after, lay another clean cloth into the other mould, and turn the
cheese into that; then lay upon the board so much, as will make it six or
seven pound weight; and thus continue turning of it till night: then take
away the weight, and lay it no more on it; then take a vpage ery small quantity
of salt finely beaten, and sprinkle the cheese all over with it as lightly
as can be imagined. next morning turn it into another dry cloth, and let it
lye out of the mould upon a plain board, and change it as often as it wets
the cloth, which must be three or four times a day: when it is so dry, that
it wets the cloth no more, lay it upon a bed of green-rushes, and lay a row
upon it; but be sure to pick the bents clean off, and lay them even all one
way: if you cannot get good rushes, take nettles or grass. if the weather
is cold, cover them with a linnen and woollen cloth; in case you cannot get
stroakings, take five quarts of new milk, and one of cream. if the weather
be cold, heat the water that you put to the stroakings. turn the cheese
every day, and put to it fresh of whatsoever you keep it in. they are
usually ripe in ten days.
master phillips his method and proportions in making slippe-coat cheese,
are these. take six wine quarts of stroakings, and two quarts of cream;
mingle these well together, and let them stand in a bowl, till they are
cold. then power upon them three pints of boiling fair water, and mingle
them well together; then let them stand, till they are almost cold, colder
then milk-warm. then put to it a moderate quantity of runnet, made with
fair water (not whey, or any other thing then water; this is an important
point), and let it stand till it come. have a care not to break the curds,
nor ever to touch them with your hands, but only with your skimming dish.
page in due time lade the curds with the dish, into a thin fine napkin, held up
by two persons, that the whey may run from them through the bunt of the
napkin, which you rowl gently about, that the curds may dry without
breaking. when the whey is well drained out, put the curds as whole as you
can into the cheese-fat, upon a napkin, in the fat. change the napkin, and
turn the cheese every quarter of an hour, and less, for ten, twelve or
fourteen times; that is, still as soon as you perceive the napkin wet with
the whay running from the curds. then press it with a half pound weight for
two or three hours. then add half a pound more for as long time, then
another half pound for as long, and lastly another half pound, which is two
pounds in all; which weight must never be exceeded. the next day, (when
about twenty four hours are past in all) salt your cheese moderately with
white salt, and then turn it but three or four times a day, and keep it in
a cotton cloth, which will make it mellow and sweet, not rank, and will
preserve the coat smooth. it may be ready to eat in about twelve days. some
lay it to ripen in dock-leaves, and it is not amiss; but that in rain they
will be wet, which moulds the cheese. others in flat fit boxes of wood,
turning them, as is said, three or four times a day. but a cotton cloth is
best. this quantity is for a round large cheese, of about the bigness of a
sale ten peny cheese, a good fingers-breadth thick. long broad grass
ripeneth them well, and sucketh out the moisture. rushes are good also.
they are hot, but dry not the moisture so well.
page 
my lady of middlesex makes excellent slipp-coat cheese of good morning
milk, putting cream to it. a quart of cream is the proportion she useth to
as much milk, as both together make a large round cheese of the bigness of
an ordinary tart-plate, or cheese-plate; as big as an ordinary soft cheese,
that the market-women sell for ten pence. thus for want of stroakings at
london, you may take one part of cream to five or six of morning milk, and
for the rest proceed as with stroakings; and these will prove as good.
take three quarts of the last of the stroakings of as many cows as you
have; keep it covered, that it may continue warm; put to it a skimming
dishful of spring-water; then put in two spoonfuls of runnet, so let it
stand until it be hard come: when it is hard come, set your fat on the
bottome of a hair-sieve, take it up by degrees, but break it not; when you
have laid it all in the fat, take a fine cloth, and lay it over the cheese,
and work it in about the sides, with the back of a knife; then lay a board
on it, for half an hour: after half an hour, set on the board an half pound
stone, so let it stand two hours; then turn it on that board, and let the
cloth be both under and over it, then pour it into the fat again; then lay
a pound and half weight on it; two hours after turn it again on a dry
cloth, and salt it, then set on it two pound weight, and let it stand until
the next morning. then turn it out of the cheese-fat, on a dry board, and
so keep it with turning on dry boards thpage ree days. in case it run abroad,
you must set it up with wedges; when it begins to stiffen, lay green grass
or rushes upon it: when it is stiff enough, let rushes be laid both under
and over it. if this cheese be rightly made, and the weather good to dry
it, it will be ready in eight days: but in case it doth not dry well, you
must lay it on linnen-cloth, and woollen upon it, to hasten the ripening of
it.
take six gallons of new milk: put to it two quarts of the evening cream;
then put to it good runnet for winter cheese; let it stand, till it be even
well, then sink it as long as you can get any whey out: then put it into
your fat, and set it in the press, and let it stand half an hour: in this
time turn it once. when you take it out of the press, set on the fire two
gallons of the same whey; then put your cheese in a big bowl, break the
curd as small with your hands as you do your cheese-cakes: when your whey
is scalding hot, take off the scum: lay your strainer over the curd, and
put in your whey: take a slice, and stir up your curd, that it may scald
all alike: put in as much whey as will cover it well: if you find that
cold, put it out, and put in more to it that is hot. stir it as before:
then cover it with a linnen and woollen cloth: then set some new whey on
the fire, put in your cheese-fat and suter and cloth. after three quarters
of an hour, take up the curd, and put it into the cheese fat, as fast, as
two can work it in: then put it into the hot cloth, and set it into the
press. have a care to look to it, and after a while turn it, and so keep it
in the press with turning, till the next day: then take it forth and salt
it.
page 
strain your whey, and set it on the fire: make a clear and gentle fire
under the kettle: as they rise, put in whey, so continuing, till they are
ready to skim. then take your skimmer, and put them on the bottom of a
hair-sieve: so let them drain till they are cold. then take them off, and
put them into a bason, and beat them with three or four spoonfuls of cream
and sugar.
cut pieces of quick, fat, rich, well tasted cheese, (as the best of brye,
cheshire, &c. or sharp thick cream-cheese) into a dish of thick beaten
melted butter, that hath served for sparages or the like, or pease, or
other boiled sallet, or ragout of meat, or gravy of mutton: and, if you
will, chop some of the asparages among it, or slices of gambon of bacon, or
fresh-collops, or onions, or sibboulets, or anchovis, and set all this to
melt upon a chafing-dish of coals, and stir all well together, to
incorporate them; and when all is of an equal consistence, strew some gross
white-pepper on it, and eat it with tosts or crusts of white-bread. you may
scorch it at the top with a hot fire-shovel.
first give them for two days paste made of barley meal and milk with
clyster sugar to scowre them. then feed them with nothing but hashed
raisins of the sun. the less drink they have, the better it is: for it
washeth away their fat; but that little they have, let it be broken beer;
page milk were as good or better; but then you must be careful to have it
always sweet in their trough, and no sowerness there to turn the milk.
they will be prodigiously fat in about twelve days: and you must kill them,
when they are at their height: else they will soon fall back, and grow fat
no more.
others make their paste of barley meal with milk and a little course sugar,
and mingle with it a little (about an eight part) of powder of green glass
beaten exceeding small. give this only for two days to cleanse their
stomacks. then feed them with paste of barley-meal, made sometimes with
milk and sugar, and sometimes with the fat skimmed off from the pot, giving
them drink as above.
others make a pretty stiff paste for them with barley-meal (a little of the
coursest bran sifted from it) and the fat scummed off from the boiling pot,
be it of beef (even salted) or mutton, &c. lay this before them for their
food for four days. then give them still the same, but mingled with a
little powder of glass for  or five days more. in which time they will be
extremely fat and good. for their drink, give them the droppings of good
ale or good beer. when you eat them, you will find some of the powder of
glass in their stomacks, i.e. gizzards.
my lady fanshaws way of feeding capons, pullets, hens, chickens or turkies,
is thus. have coops, wherein every fowl is a part, and not room to turn in,
and means to cleanse daily the ordure behind them, and two troughs; for
before that, one may be scalding and drying the dapage y the other is used, and
before every fowl one partition for meat, another for drink. all their
meat is this: boil barley in water, till it be tender, keep some so, and
another parcel of it boil with milk, and another with strong ale. let them
be boiled as wheat that is creed. use them different days for variety, to
get the fowl appetite. lay it in their trough, with some brown-sugar
mingled with it. in the partition for liquor, let them have water or strong
ale to drink. they will be very drunk and sleep; then eat again. let a
candle stand all night over the coop, and then they will eat much of the
night. with this course they will be prodigiously fat in a fortnight. be
sure to keep them very sweet. this maketh the taste pure.
take barley meal, and with droppings of small ale, (or ale it self) make it
into a consistence of batter for pan-cakes. let this be all their food.
which put into the troughs before them, renewing it thrice a day, morning,
noon and evening; making their troughs very clean every time, and keeping
their coops always very clean and sweet. this is to serve them for drink as
well as meat, and no other drink be given them. feed them thus six days;
the seventh give them nothing in their troughs but powder of brick searced,
which scowreth and cleanseth them much, and makes their flesh exceeding
white. the next day fall to their former food for six days more, and the
seventh again to powder of brick. then again to barley meal and ale. thus
they will be exceeding fat in fifteen days, and purely white and sweet.
page 
boil rice in milk till it be very tender and pulpy, as when you make milk
potage. it must be thick, almost so thick, that a spoon may stand an-end in
it. sweeten this very well with ordinary sugar. put this into their troughs
where they feed, that they may be always eating of it. it must be made
fresh every day. their drink must be onely milk, in another little trough
by their meat-trough. let a candle (fitly disposed) stand by them all
night; for seeing their meat, they will eat all night long. you put the
chicken up, as soon as they can feed of themselves; which will be within a
day or two after they are hatched, and in twelve days, or a fortnight, they
will be prodigiously fat; but after they have come to their height, they
will presently fall back. therefore they must be eaten as soon as they are
come to their height. their pen or coop must be contrived so, that the hen
(who must be with them, to sit over them) may not go at liberty to eat away
their meat, but be kept to her own diet, in a part of the coop that she
cannot get out of. but the chicken must have liberty to go from her to
other parts of the coop, where they may eat their own meat, and come in
again to the hen, to be warmed by her, at their pleasure. you must be
careful to keep their coop very clean.
fatten your chicken the first week with oatmeal scalded in milk; the spage econd
with rice and sugar in milk. in a fortnight they will be prodigiously fat.
it is good to give them sometimes a little gravel, or powder of glass, to
cleanse their maws, and give them appetite.
if you put a little bran with their meat, it will keep their maws clean,
and give them appetite.
boil white bread in milk, as though you were to eat it; but make it thick
of the bread, which is sliced into it in thin slices, not so thick as if it
were to make a pudding; but so, that when the bread is eaten out, there may
some liquid milk remain for the chicken to drink; or that at first you may
take up some liquid milk in a spoon, if you industriously avoid the bread:
sweeten very well this potage with good kitchin sugar of six pence a pound;
so put it into the trough before them. put there but a little at a time,
(two or three spoonfuls) that you may not clog them, and feed them five
times a day, between their wakening in the morning, and their roosting at
night. give them no other drink; the milk that remaineth after they have
eaten the bread, is sufficient; neither give them gravel, or ought else.
keep their coops very clean, as also their troughs, cleansing them very
well every morning. to half a dozen very little chickens, little bigger
then black-birds, an ordinary porenger full every day may serve. and in
eight days they will be prodigiously fat, one peny loaf, and less then two
quarts of milk and about half a pound of sugar will serve little ones the
whole time. bigger chickenspage  will require more, and two or three days longer
time. when any of them are at their height of fat, you must eat them; for
if they live longer, they will fall back, and grow lean. be sure to make
their potage very sweet.
stone a pound of raisins of the sun, and beat them in a mortar to pulp;
pour a quart of milk upon them, and let them soak so all night. next
morning stir them well together, and put to them so much crums of grated
stale white bread as to bring it to a soft paste, work all well together,
and lay it in the trough before the chicken (which must not be above six in
a pen, and keep it very clean) and let a candle be by them all night. the
delight of this meat will make them eat continually; and they will be so
fat (when they are but of the bigness of a black-bird) that they will not
be able to stand, but lie down upon their bellies to eat.
you must often change their food, giving them but of one kind at a time,
that so their appetites may be fresh to the others, when they are weary of
the present. sometimes dry wheat; sometimes wheat soaked two or three days
in water, to make it soft and tender; sometimes barley so used; sometimes
oats in like manner. give them continually to lie by them; some of the
great green leaves of cabbages, that grow at the bottom of the stalk, and
that are thrown away, when you gather the cabbage; which you may page give them
either whole or a little chopped. give them often ants and their eggs,
laying near them the inward mould of an ant hill, taken up with the ants in
it.
take new milk curds, strained well from the whey; then rub them very well;
season them with nutmeg, mace, rose-water and sugar; then take an egg or
two, a good piece of butter, and a handful of flower; work all together,
and make them into balls; bake them in an oven, upon sheets of paper; when
they are baked, serve them up with butter melted and beaten with rose-water
and sugar. in stead of flower, you may take fine grated-bread, dried very
well, but not crisp.
my lady paget makes her fine preserved pippins, thus: they are done best,
when pippins are in their prime for quickness, which is in november. make
your pippin-water as strong as you can of the apples, and that it may be
the less boiled, and consequently the paler, put in at first the greatest
quantity of pared and quartered apples, the water will bear. to every pint
of pippin-water add (when you put the sugar to it) a quarter of a pint of
fair spring-water, that will bear soap (of which sort only you must use)
and use half a pound of sugar, the purest double refined. if you will have
much gelly, two pippins finely pared and whole, will be enough; you may put
in more, if you will have a greater proportion of substance to the gelly.
put at first but half the sugar to the liquor; for so it will be the paler.
boil the apples by themselvpage es in fair water, with a very little sugar, to
make them tender; then put them into the liquor, and the rest, the other
half of the sugar with them. boil them with a quick fire, till they be
enough, and the liquor do gelly, and that you see the apples look very
clear, and as though they were transparent. you must put the juyce of two
limons and half an orange to this in the due time. every pippin should be
lapped over in a broad-pill of orange; which you must prepare thus. pare
your orange broad and very thin, and all hanging together, rub it with
salt, prick it, and boil it in several waters, to take away the bitterness,
and make it tender. then preserve it by it self with sufficient quantity of
sugar. when it is throughly done, and very tender (which you must cast to
do before hand, to be ready when the apples are ready to be put up) take
them out of their syrup, and lap every pippin in an orange-peel, and put
them into a pot or glass, and pour the liquor upon them: which will be
gelly over and about the apples, when all is cold. this proportion of
liquor, apples, and orange-peels, will take up about three quarters of a
pound of sugar in all. if you would keep them any time, you must put in
weight for weight of sugar.
i conceive apple-john's in stead of pippins will do better, both for the
gelly and syrup; especially at the latter end of the year; and i like them
thin sliced, rather than whole; and the orange-peels scattered among them
in little pieces or chipps.
quarter and core your pippins; then stamp them in a mortar, and strain out
page the juyce. let it settle, that the thick dregs may go to the bottom; then
pour off the clear; and to have it more clear and pure, filter it through
sucking paper in a glass funnel. to one pound of this take one pound and an
half of pure double refined sugar, and boil it very gently (scarce
simpringly, and but a very little while) till you have scummed away all the
froth and foulness (which will be but little) and that it be of the
consistence of syrup. if you put two pound of sugar to one pound of juyce,
you must boil it more & stronglier. this will keep longer, but the colour
is not so fine. it is of a deeper yellow. if you put but equal parts of
juyce and sugar, you must not boil it, but set it in a cucurbite in
bulliente balneo, till all the scum be taken away, and the sugar well
dissolved. this will be very pale and pleasant, but will not keep long.
you may make your syrup with a strong decoction of apples in water (as when
you make gelly of pippins) when they are green; but when they are old and
mellow, the substance of the apple will dissolve into pap, by boiling in
water.
take three or four spoonfuls of this syrup in a large draught of fountain
water, or small posset-ale, pro ardore urinæ to cool and smoothen, two or
three times a day.
cut your apples into quarters (either pared or unpared). boil them in a
sufficient quantity of water, till it be very strong of the apples. take
the clear liquor, and put to it sufficient sugar to make gelly, and the
slices of apage pple; so boil them all together, till the slices be enough, and
the liquor gelly; or you may boil the slices, in apple-liquor without
sugar, and make gelly of other liquor, and put the slices into it, when it
is gelly, and they be sufficiently boiled. either way, you must put at the
last some juyce of limon to it; and amber and musk if you will. you may do
it with halves or quartered apples, in deep glasses, with store of gelly
about them. to have these clear, take the pieces out of the gelly they are
boiled in, with a slice, so as you may have all the rags run from them, and
then put neat clean pieces into clear gelly.
pare and core the wardens, and put a little of the thin rind of a limon
into the hole that the core leaveth. to every pound of wardens, take half a
pound of sugar, and half a pint of water. make a syrup of your sugar and
water; when it is well scummed, put it into a pewter dish, and your wardens
into the syrup, and cover it with another pewter dish; and so let this boil
very gently, or rather stew, keeping it very well covered, that the steam
get out as little as may be. continue this, till the wardens are very
tender, and very red, which may be in five, or six, or seven hours. then
boil them up to the height the syrup ought to be to keep: which yet will
not be well above three or four months. the whole secret of making them
red, consisteth in doing them in pewter, which spoileth other preserves,
and in any other mettal these will not be red. if you will have any amber
in them, you may to ten orpage  twelve pounds of wardens, put in about twenty
grains of amber, and one, or at most, two grains of musk, ground with a
little sugar, and so put in at the last. though the wardens be not covered
over with the syrup in the stewing by a good deal, yet the steam, that
riseth and cannot get out, but circulateth, will serve both to stew them,
and to make them red and tender.
my lady barclay makes her fine apple-gelly with slices of john apples.
sometimes she mingles a few pippins with the john's to make the gelly. but
she liketh best the john's single, and the colour is paler. you first fill
the glass with slices round-wise cut, and then the gelly is poured in to
fill up the vacuities. the gelly must be boiled to a good stiffness. then
when it is ready to take from the fire, you put in some juyce of limon, and
of orange too, if you like it: but these must not boil; yet it must stand a
while upon the fire stewing in good heat, to have the juyces incorporate
and penetrate well. you must also put in some ambergreece, which doth
exceeding well in this sweet-meat.
when flomery is made and cold, you may make a pleasant and wholesome caudle
of it, by taking some lumps and spoonfuls of it, and boil it with ale and
white wine, then sweeten it to your taste with sugar. there will remain in
the caudle some lumps of the congealed flomery, which are not ungrateful.
page 
take four ounces of blanched almonds; of pine kernels, and of pistachios,
ana, four ounces. erin-go-roots, candid-limon peels, ana, three ounces,
candid orange peels two ounces, candid citron-peels four ounces, of powder
of white amber, as much as will lie upon a shilling; and as much of the
powder of pearl,  grains of ambergreece, three grains of musk, a book of
leaf gold, cloves and mace, of each as much as will lie upon a three pence;
cut all these as small as possible you can. then take a pound of sugar, and
half a pint of water, boil it to a candy-height, then put in the
ambergreece and musk, with three or four spoonfulls of orange flower water.
then put in all the other things and stir them well together, and cast them
upon plates, and set them to dry: when both sides are dry, take
orange-flower-water and sugar, and ice them.
take four ounces of harts-horn rasped, boil it in four pound of water, till
it will be a gelly, which you may try upon a plate (it will be so, in four
or five or six hours gentle boiling) and then pass the clear liquor from
the horn (which will be a good quart) then set it on the fire again with
fine sugar in it to your taste; when that is dissolved (or at the same time
you put that in) put half a pound of white-wine or sack into it, and a bag
of spice, containing a little ginger, a stick of cinnamon bruised, a nutmeg
quartered, two or three cloves, and what other spice you like, but pepper.
as soon as it beginneth to boil, put into it the whites of three or four
eggs beaten, and let it boipage l up gently, till the eggs harden into a curd.
then open it with a spoon, and pour into it the juyce of three or four
good limons; then take it presently off the fire, letting it not boil more
above a walm: then run it through a hippocras bag, putting spirit of
cinnamon, or of ambergreece, or what you please to it.
for gelly of flesh you proceed in the same manner, with a brawny capon or
cock, and a rouelle of veal (first skinned, and soaked from the blood) in
stead of harts-horn: and when the broth will gelly, do as above, using a
double or treble proportion of wine. boil no salt in it at first, for that
will make the gelly black.
take a pound of harts-horn, and boil it in five quarts of water, until it
come to three pints, then strain it through a sieve or strainer, and so let
it stand, until it be cold; and according to the strength you may take more
or less of the following ingredients. first, take your stock of gelly, &
put it into a skillet or pipkin with a pound of fine loaf sugar, and set it
over a fire of charcoal; and when it begins to boil, put in a pint or more
of rhenish-wine. then take the whites of eggs six or eight, beaten very
well, with three or four spoonfuls of rose-water, and put into the gelly.
then take two grains of amber, and one grain of musk, and put thereto, so
let it boil a quarter of an hour, but not too violent; then put in three or
four spoonfuls of cinnamon-water, with the juyce of seven or eight limons;
boil it one walm more, and run it very hot through your gelly-bag; this
done, run it again as cool and softly as you can into your glasses and
pots.
page 
take a pound of harts-horn, and a prety big lean chicken, and put it into a
skillet with about nine quarts of water, and boil your stock prety stiff,
so that you may cut it with a knife; you may try it in a spoon, as it is a
boiling. then drain your liquor clear away from the harts-horn through a
fine searse, and let it stand until the next morning; then if there be any
fat upon it, pare it away, and likewise the settlings at the bottom. then
put your gelly into a good big skillet, and put to it a quart of the palest
white-wine that you can procure, or a quart of rhenish-wine, and one pound
of double refined sugar, and half an ounce of cinnamon broken into small
pieces, with three or four flakes of mace. then set it upon the fire, and
boil it a good pace. then have the whites of sixteen eggs beaten to a high
froth; so put in the froth of your eggs, and boil it five or six walms;
then put in the juyce of six limons, and boil it a little while after, and
then run it into a silver bason through your gelly-bag: and keep it warm by
the fire, until it have run through the second time. you must observe to
put but a very little into your bag at a time for the second running, that
it may but little more then drop; and it will be so much the clearer: and
you must not remove the whites of eggs nor spice out of the bag, all the
while it is running. and if the weather be hot, you need not put in so much
wine; for it will not then be so apt to gelly as in cold weather.
page 
take a small cock-chick, when it is scalded, slit it in two pieces, lay it
to soak in warm water, until the blood be well out of it. then take a
calves foot half boiled, slit it in the middle and pick out the fat and
black of it. put these into a gallon of fair-water; skim it very well; then
put into it one ounce of harts-horn, and one ounce of ivory. when it is
half consumed, take some of it up in a spoon; and if it gelly, take it all
up, and put it into a silver bason, or such a pewter one as will endure
char-coal. then beat four whites of eggs, with three or four spoonfuls of
damask-rose-water very well together. then put these into the gelly, with a
quarter of an ounce of cinnamon broken into very small pieces; one flake of
mace; three or four thin slices of ginger; sweeten it with loaf sugar to
your liking; set it then over a chafing dish of coals; stir it well, and
cover it close; blow under it, until there arise a scum or curd; let it
boil a little, then put into it one top of rose-mary, two or three of sweet
marjoram; wring into it the juyce of half a limon; let not your curd fall
again, for it will spoil the clearness of the gelly. if you will have it
more cordial, you may grind in a sawcer, with a little hard sugar, half a
grain of musk, a grain of ambergreece. it must be boiled in an earthen
pipkin, or a very sweet iron-pot, after the harts-horn and ivory is in it.
it must constantly boil, until it gellieth. if there arise any scum, it
must be taken off.
page 
take the quickest pippins, when they are newly gathered, and are sharp;
pare and core and cut them into half quarters. put to them their weight of
the finest sugar in powder, or broken into little pieces. put upon these in
your preserving pan, as much fountain water, as will even cover them. boil
them with a quick-fire, till by trying a little upon a plate, you find it
gellieth. when it is cold (which may be in less then half an hour) then
take it from the fire, and put into it a little of the yellow rind of
limons rasped very small, and a little of the yellow rinde of oranges
boiled tender (casting away the first waters to correct their bitterness)
and cut into narrow slices (as in the gelly of pippins) and some
ambergreece, with a fourth part of musk, and break the apples with the back
of your preserving spoon, whiles it cooleth. if you like them sharper, you
may put in a little juyce of limon, a little before you take the pan from
the fire. when it is cold, put it into pots. this will keep a year or two.
try if the juyce of apples (strained out of rasped apples) in such sort, as
you make marmulate of quinces, with the juyce of quinces, would not be
better, then fair-water, to boil your apples and sugar in.
my last gelly of quinces i made thus. the quinces being very ripe, and
having been long gathered, i took the flesh of twelve quinces in quarters,
and the juyce of fifteen or spage ixteen others, which made me two pounds of
juyce; and i made a strong decoction of about twenty four others, adding
to these twenty four (to make the decoction the stronger, and more slimy)
the cores and the parings of the twelve in quarters; and i used the cores
sliced and parings of all these. all this boiled about an hour and half in
eight or ten pound of water; then i strained and pressed out the decoction
(which was a little viscous, as i desired) and had between  and five pound
of strong decoction. to the decoction and syrup, i put three pound of pure
sugar, which being dissolved and scummed, i put in the flesh, and in near
an hour of temperate boiling (covered) and often turning the quarters, it
was enough. when it was cold, it was store of firm clear red gelly,
environing in great quantity the quarters, that were also very tender and
well penetrated with the sugar. i found by this making, that the juyce of
quinces is not so good to make gelly. it maketh it somewhat running like
syrup, and tasteth sweetish, mellowy, syrupy.
the decoction of the flesh is only good for syrup. i conceive, it would be
a grateful sweetmeat to mingle a good quantity of good gelly with the
marmulate, when it is ready to put into pots. to that end they must both be
making at the same time: or if one be a little sooner done then the other,
they may be kept a while warm (fit to mingle) without prejudice. though the
gelly be cold and settled, it will melt again with the warmth of the
marmulate, and so mingle with it, and make a marmulate, that will appear
page very gellyish; or peradventure it may be well to fill up a pot or glass
with gelly, when it is first half filled with marmulate a little cooled.
when i made quinces with gelly, i used the first time these proportions; of
the decoction of quinces three pound; of sugar one pound three quarters;
flesh of quince two pound and an half; the second time these, of decoction
two pound and an half, sugar two pound and a quarter, of flesh two pound
three quarters. i made the decoction by boyling gently each time a dozen or
fourteen quinces in a pottle of water, an hour and a half, or two hours, so
that the decoction was very strong of the quinces. i boiled the parings
(which for that end were pared very thick, after the quinces were well
wiped) with all the substance of the quince in thick slices, and part of
the core (excepting all the kernels) and then let it run through a loose
napkin, pressing gently with two plates, that all the decoction might come
out; but be clear without any flesh or mash. the first making i intended
should be red; and therefore both the decoction, and the whole were boiled
covered, and it proved a fine clear red. this boiled above an hour, when
all was in. the other boiled not above half an hour, always uncovered (as
also in making his decoction) and the gelly was of a fine pale yellow. i
first did put the sugar upon the fire with the decoction, and as soon as it
was dissolved, i put in the flesh in quarters and halves; and turned the
pieces often in the pan; elspage e the bottom of such as lay long unturned,
would be of a deeper colour then the upper part. the flesh was very tender
and good. i put some of the pieces into jar-glasses (carefully, not to
break them,) and then poured gelly upon them. then more pieces, then more
gelly, &c. all having stood a while to cool a little.
take quinces newly from the tree, fair and sound, wipe them clean, and boil
them whole in a large quantity of water, the more the better, and with a
quick fire, till the quinces crack and are soft, which will be in a good
half hour, or an hour. then take out the quinces, and press out their
juyce, with your hands hard, or gently in a press through a strainer, that
only the clear liquor or juyce run out, but none of the pap, or solid and
fleshy substance of the quince. (the water, they were boiled in, you may
throw away.) this liquor will be slimy and mucilaginous, which proceedeth
much from the seeds that remaining within the quinces, do contribute to
making this liquor. take three pound of it, and one pound of fine sugar,
and boil them up to a gelly, with a moderate fire, so that they boil every
where, but not violently. they may require near an hours boiling to come to
a gelly. the tryal of that is, to take a tin or silver plate, and wet it
with fair-water, and drop a little of the boiling juyce upon the wet plate;
if it stick to the plate, it is not enough; but if it fall off (when you
slope the plate) without sticking at all to it, then is it enough: and then
you put it into flat shallpage ow tin forms, first wetted with cold water, and
let it stand in them four or five hours in a cold place, till it be quite
cold. then reverse the plates, that it may shale and fall out, and so put
the parcels up in boxes.
note, you take fountain water, and put the quinces into it, both of them
being cold. then set your kettle to boil with a very quick-fire, that
giveth a clear smart flame to the bottom of the kettle, which must be
uncovered all the while, that the gelly may prove the whiter; and so
likewise it must be whiles the juyce or expression is boiling with the
sugar, which must be the finest, that it may not need clarifying with an
egg; but that little scum that riseth at the sides at the beginning of
moderate boiling must be scummed away. you let your juyce or expression
settle a while, that if any of the thick substance be come out with it, it
may settle to the bottom; for you are to use for this only the clear juyce:
which to have it the clearer, you may let it run through a large, thin,
open, strainer, without pressing it. when you boil the whole quinces, you
take them out, to strain them as soon as their skins crack, and that they
are quite soft; which will not happen to them all at the same time, but
according to their bigness and ripeness. therefore first take out and press
those, that are ready first: and the rest still as they grow to a fit state
to press. you shall have more juyce by pressing the quinces in a torcular,
but it will be clearer, doing it with your hands; both ways, you lap them
in a strainer.
page 
take a pound and an half of flesh of quinces sliced, one pound of sugar,
and one pound of liquor (which is a decoction made very strong of quinces
boiled in fair water). boil these with a pretty quick fire, till they be
enough, and that you find it gellieth. then proceed as in my way.
take six pounds of flesh of quince, and two pound of sugar moistened well
with juyce of quinces. boil these together in a fit kettle; first gently,
till the liquor be sweated out from the quince, and have dissolved all the
sugar; then very quick and fast, proceeding as in my way, (bruising the
quinces with a spoon, &c.) till it be enough. this will be very fine and
quick in taste; but will not keep well beyond easter. in this course you
may make marmulate without any juyce or water (by the meer sweeting of the
flesh) if you be careful, proceeding slowly till juyce enough be sweated
out, least else it burn to; and then quick, that the flesh may be boiled
enough, before the moisture be evaporated away.
take a quart of the juyce of quince, and when it is on the fire, put into
it, pared, quartered and cored as much quince, as the juyce will cover;
when it is boiled tender, pass the liquor through a sieve & put the pulp
into a stone mortar, and beat it very fine with a woodden pestel; tpage hen
weigh it, and to every pound of pulp, take a quarter of a pound of loaf
sugar, and boil it up to a candy-height in some of the juyce, which you
passed through the sieve; then put therein your pulp, stirring it well
together, till it hath had one boil and no more; then drop it on glasses,
or spread it on plates, and set it to dry.
into the juyce that remains, you may put more flesh of quinces, and boil it
tender, doing all as at the first. then adding it (beaten to pulp in a
mortar) unto the former pulp; repeating this, till you have taken up all
your juyce. then put your proportion of sugar to the whole quantity of
pulp, and so make it up into paste, and dry it, and sometimes before a
gentle fire, sometimes in a very moderate stove.
to one pound of flesh or solid substance of quinces (when they are pared,
cored, and quartered,) take but a quarter of double refined sugar. do thus,
scald your flesh of quinces in a little of the juyce of other quinces, that
they may become tender, as if they were coddled.
then beat them in a mortar to a subtle uniform smooth pulp (which you may
pass through a searce.) in the mean time let your sugar be dissolved, and
boiling upon the fire. when it is of a candy-height, put the pulp of quince
to it, and let it remain a little while upon the fire, till it boil up one
little puff or bubbling, and that it is uniformly mixed with the sugar; you
must stir it well all the while. then take it off, and drop it into page little
cakes, or put it thin into shallow glasses which you may afterwards cut
into slices. dry the cakes and slices gently and by degrees in a stove,
turning them often. these will keep all the year, and are very quick of
taste.
put the quinces whole into scalding water, and let them boil there, till
they be tender. then take them out and peel them, and scrape off the pulp,
which pass through a strainer; and when it is cold enough to every pound
put three quarters of a pound of double refined sugar in subtile powder;
work them well together into an uniform paste; then make little cakes of
it, and dry them in a stove. if you would have the cakes red, put a little
(very little; the colour will tell you, when it is enough) of juyce of
barberies to the paste or pulp. you have the juyce of barberries thus: put
them ripe into a pot over the fire, till you see the juyce sweat out. then
strain them, and take the clear juyce. if you would have the paste tarter,
you may put a little juyce of limons to it.
a pleasant gelly in the beginning of the winter is made, of pearmains,
pippins and juyce of quinces. also a marmulate made of those apples, and
juyce of quinces, is very good.
take only the cores, and slice them thin, with the seeds in them. if you
have a pound of them, you may put a pottle of water to them. boil them,
till they be all mash, and that the water hath drawn the mucilage out of
them, and thatpage  the decoction will be a gelly, when it is cold. then let it
run through a widestrainer or fitcolender (that the gross part may remain
behind, but all the slyminess go through), and to every pint of liquor take
about half a pound of double refined sugar, and boil it up to a gelly. if
you put in a little juyce of quince, when you boil it up, it will be the
quicker.
you may also take a pound of the flesh of quinces (when you have not cores
enow, to make as much as you desire) and one ounce of seeds of other
quinces, and boil them each a part, till the one be a strong decoction; the
other a substantial mucilage. then strain each from their course fæces:
and mingle the decoctions, and put sugar to them, and boil them up to a
gelly.
or with the flesh and some juyce of quinces, make marmulate in the ordinary
way; which whiles it is boiling, put to it the mucilage of the seeds to
incorporate it with the marmulate. you may take to this a less proportion
of sugar than to my marmulate.
take four pound of the best kentish cherries, before they be stoned, to one
pound of pure loaf sugar, which beat into small powder: stone the cherries,
and put them into your preserving pan over a gentle fire, that they may not
boil, but resolve much into liquor. take away with the spoon much of the
thin liquor, (for else the marmulate will be glewy) leaving the cherries
moist enough, but not swimming in clear liquor. then put to them half your
sugar, and bopage il it up quick, and scum away the froth that riseth. when that
is well incorporated and clear, strew in a little more of the sugar; and
continue doing so by little and little, till you have put in all your
sugar; which course will make the colour the finer. when they are boiled
enough, take them off, and bruise them with the back of a spoon; and when
they are cold, put them up in pots.
you may do the same with morello cherries; which will have a quicker-tast,
and have a fine, pure, shining, dark colour.
both sorts will keep well all the year.
mingle juyce of raspes and red currants with the stoned cherries, and boil
this mixture into marmulate, with a quarter, or at most, a third part of
sugar. the juyces must be so much as to make gelly of them to mingle
handsomely with the cherries, to appear among and between them.
madam plancy (who maketh this sweet-meat for the queen) useth this
proportion. take three pounds of cherries stoned; half a pound of clear
juyce of raspes, and one pound of the juyce of red currants, and one pound
of fine sugar. put them all together into the preserving pan; boil them
with a quick fire, especially at the first, skimming them all the while, as
any scum riseth. when you find them of a fit consistence, with a fine clear
gelly, mingled with the cherries, take the preserving pan from the fire,
and braise the cherries with the back of your preserving spoon; and when
they are of a fit temper of coolness, pot them up.
page 
peradventure, to keep all the year, there may be requisite a little more
sugar.
slice a dozen or twenty pippins into thin slices, and lay them in a deep
dish, stratum super stratum, with pure double refined sugar in powder.
put two or three spoonfuls of water to them, and cover them close with
another dish, luting their joyning that nothing may expire. then set them
into an oven. and when you take out the dish, you will have an excellent
syrup, and the remaining substance of the apples will be insipid.
you may proceed with damsens, or other plumms, in the same manner, and you
will have excellent stewed damsens, (as fair as preserved ones) swimming in
a very fine syrup.
she maketh the past of apricocks (which is both very beautiful and clear,
and tasteth most quick of the fruit) thus, take six pound of pared and
sliced apricocks, put them into a high pot, which stop close, and set it in
a kettle of boiling water, till you perceive the flesh is all become an
uniform pulp; then put it out into your preserving pan or possenet, and
boil it gently till it be grown thick, stirring it carefully all the while.
then put two pound of pure sugar to it, and mingle it well, and let it boil
gently, till you see the matter come to such a thickness and page solidity, that
it will not stick to a plate. then make it up into what form you will. the
like you may do with raspes or currants.
it is a pleasant and beautiful sweet meat to do thus: boil raspes in such a
pot, till they be all come to such a liquor; then let the clear run through
a strainer; to a pound, or english wine pint whereof, put a pound of red
currants (first stoned and the black ends cut off) and a pound of sugar.
boil these, till the liquor be gellied. then put it in glasses. it will
look like rubies in clear gelly. you may do the like with cherries, either
stoned, and the stalks cut off, or three or four capped upon one stalk, and
the stone left in the first, and boiled in liquor of raspes.
she makes her curious red marmulate thus: take six pounds of quince-flesh;
six pounds of pure sugar; and eight pints of juyce; boil this up with quick
fire, till you have scummed it, then pull away all the coals, and let it
but simper, for four or five hours, remaining covered, renewing from time
to time so little fire, as to cause it so to continue simpring. but as soon
as it is scummed, put into it a handful of quince kernels, two races of
ginger sliced, and fourteen or fifteen cloves whole; all these put into a
tyffany-bag tyed fast; when you finde that the colour is almost to your
minde, make a quick fire, and boil it up a pace, then throw away your bag
of kernels, ginger and cloves, and pot up your marmulate, when it is cool
enough.
she makes her red gelly of quince thus: put the quinces pared and sliced
page into a pot, as above; and to every pound of this flesh put about half a
demistier of fair water, and put this into a kettle of boiling water, till
you perceive all the juyce is boiled out of the quince. then strain it out,
and boil this liquor (which will not yet be clear) till you perceive it
gellieth upon a plate. then to every pint of liquor put a pound of sugar,
and boil it up to a gelly, skimming it well, as the scum riseth, and you
will have a pure gelly.
take them clean picked, and fresh gathered in the morning, in a bason, set
them over the fire, that their juyce may sweat out, pressing them all the
while with the back of your preserving spoon, to squeese out of them all
that is good. when you see all is out, strain the liquor from them, and let
it stand to settle four or five hours, that the gross matter may sink to
the bottom. then take the pure clear, (the thick settling will serve to add
in making of marmulate of cherries, or the like) and to every pint or pound
of it, put three quarters of a pound of the purest refined sugar, and boil
them up with a quick fire, till they come to a gelly height (which will be
done immediately in less then a quarter of an hour) which you may try with
a drop upon a plate. then take it off, and when it is cold enough, put it
into glasses. you must be careful to skim it well in due time, and with
thin brown paper to take off the froth, if you will be so curious.
take four pound of good spage ugar, clarifie it with whites of eggs, then boil
it up to a candid height (that is, till throwing it, it goeth into
flakes): then put into it five pound (or at discretion) of pure juyce of
red currants first boiled to clarifie it by skimming it. boil them together
a little while, till it be well scummed, and enough to become gelly. then
put a good handful or two of the berries of currants whole, and cleansed
from the stalks and black ends, and boil them a little till they be enough.
you need not to boil the juyce, before you put it to the sugar, and
consequently do not scum it before the sugar and it boil together: but then
scum it perfectly: and take care before, that the juyce be very clear and
well strained.
take some juyce of red currants, and put into it a convenient proportion of
some entire currants cleansed from the stalks and buttons at the other end.
let these boil a little together. have also ready some fine sugar boiled to
a candy height. put of this to the currants at discretion, and boil them
together, till they be enough: and bruise them with the back of your spoon,
that they may be in the consistence of marmulate (like that of cherries)
which put in pots, when it is cool enough. you do not stone the whole
currants put into the juyce, unless you please.
to candy or preserve the tender stalks of mallows, do thus; take them in
the spring, when they are very young and tender; and peel off the strings
that are round about the outsipage de, as you do french-beans, and boil them,
till they are very tender. in the mean time prepare a high syrup of pure
sugar, and put the boiled stalkes into it, whiles it is boiling hot, but
taken from the fire. let them lie soaking there till the next morning. then
take out the stalks, and heat the syrup again, scalding hot, and return the
stalks into it, letting them lie there till next morning; (note, that the
stalks must never boil in the syrup,) repeat this six, or eight, or nine
times, that is to say, till they are sufficiently imbibed with the syrup.
when they are at this pass, you may either keep them as a wet sucket in
syrup, or dry them in a stove upon papers, turning them continually, in
such sort as dried sweet-meats are to be made. i like them best dry, but
soft and moist within (medullosi) like candied eryngos. in italy they eat
much of them, for sharpness and heat of urine, and in gonorrhœa's to take
away pain in urining.
a sucket is made in like manner of the carneous substance of stalks of
lettice. it is the knob, out of which the lettice groweth, which being
pared, and all the tough rind being taken off, is very tender and so it is
a pretty way downwards the root. this also is very cooling and smoothing.
in italy these tender stalks of mallows are called mazzocchi, and they
eat them (boiled tender) in sallets, either hot or cold, with vinegar and
oyl, or butter and vinegar, or juyce of oranges.
doctor glisson makes his conserve of red roses thus: boil gently a pound of
red rose leaves (well picked, and the nails cut offpage ) in about a pint and a
half (or a little more, as by discretion you shall judge fit, after having
done it once; the doctors apothecary takes two pints) of spring water; till
the water have drawn out all the tincture of the roses into it self, and
that the leaves be very tender, and look pale like linnen; which may be in
a good half hour, or an hour, keeping the pot covered whiles it boileth.
then pour the tincted liquor from the pale leaves (strain it out, pressing
it gently, so that you may have liquor enough to dissolve your sugar) and
set it upon the fire by it self to boil, putting into it a pound of pure
double refined sugar in small powder; which as soon as it is dissolved, put
in a second pound; then a third, lastly a fourth, so that you have four
pound of sugar to every pound of rose-leaves. (the apothecary useth to put
all the four pounds into the liquor altogether at once,) boil these four
pounds of sugar with the tincted liquor, till it be a high syrup, very near
a candy height, (as high as it can be, not to flake or candy) then put the
pale rose-leaves, into this high syrup, as it yet standeth upon the fire,
or immediately upon the taking it off the fire. but presently take it from
the fire, and stir them exceeding well together, to mix them uniformly;
then let them stand till they be cold; then pot them up. if you put up your
conserve into pots, whiles it is yet throughly warm, and leave them
uncovered some days, putting them in the hot sun or stove, there will grow
a fine candy upon the top, which will preserve the conserve without paper
upon it, from moulding, till you break the candied crust, to take out some
of the conserve.
page 
the colour both of the rose-leaves and the syrup about them, will be
exceeding beautiful and red, and the taste excellent; and the whole very
tender and smoothing, and easie to digest in the stomack without clogging
it, as doth the ordinary rough conserve made of raw roses beaten with
sugar, which is very rough in the throat. the worst of it is, that if you
put not a paper to lie always close upon the top of the conserve, it will
be apt to grow mouldy there on the top; especially aprés que le pot est
entamé.
the conserve of roses, besides being good for colds and coughs, and for the
lunges, is exceeding good for sharpness and heat of urine, and soreness of
the bladder, eaten much by it self, or drunk with milk, or distilled water
of mallows, and plantaine, or of milk.
doctor bacon related to me, that mr. minito the roman apothecary, made him
some conserve of roses, in this manner. he took twelve pounds (of sixteen
ounces to the pound) of the best lump or kitchin sugar, and clarified it
very well with whites of eggs, using spring-water in doing this. he made
his reckoning, that his twelve pound of sugar, came to be but nine pound,
when all the scum was taken away, and the sugar perfectly clarified. boil
it then to a syrup, and when it is about half boiled, go roundly about your
rose-leaves. they must be picked and the white nails cut off before-hand;
but begin not to beat them bpage efore your syrup is half boiled. then put
thirty ounces (which is two pound and an half of roses to every pound of
such sugar) of your red-roses into the mortar, and beat them well,
squeesing into them, as you beat them, some of the subtilest and best part
(which comes out first) of about two limons, which brings out their colour
finely. you must have finished beating your roses, by then the sugar is
come by boiling to a high syrup (for if you should let them lie still in
the air, but a little while, they would grow black, and of ill colour) then
with your ladle put the roses to the sugar, and stir them very well in it,
to incorporate all well and uniformly together. so let them boil on gently
(for all this while you take not your preserving pan from the fire, and a
thick scum of the roses will rise, which you scum off from time to time
continually as it comes up, and reserve this in a pot by it self, for it
will be good hard sugar of roses, and may be about an eight or ninth part
of the whole. after it is clear from scum, and hath boiled near a quarter
of an hour with the roses in it, and that you see by a drop upon a plate,
that it is of a due consistence; take your pan from the fire, and stir all
very well together, and put it into pots, which leave uncovered during ten
or twelve days, setting them in the hot strong sun all the day long during
that time, to give the roses a fine hard crust or candy at the top; but
under it, in the substance of the matter, it will be like a fine clear
syrupy gelly. if the sun favour you not, then you may use a stove. after
twelve days, tie covers of paper, upon the pots.
page 
doctor bacon useth to make a pleasant julep of this conserve of roses, by
putting a good spoonful of it into a large drinking glass or cup; upon
which squeese the juyce of a limon, and clip in unto it a little of the
yellow rinde of the limon; work these well together with the back of a
spoon, putting water to it by little and little, till you have filled up
the glass with spring-water: so drink it. he sometimes passeth it through
an hypocras bag, and then it is a beautiful and pleasant liquor.
page 
page 
scotch ale from my lady holmbey 
to make ale drink quick 
a very pleasant drink of apples 
ale with honey 
small ale for the stone 
apple drink with sugar, honey, &c. 
master webbs ale and bragot 
to stew apples 
apples in gelly 
sweet-meat of apples 
to make an excellent syrup of apples 
stewed broth 
portugal broth, as it was made for the queen 
nourishing broth 
broth and potage 
broth for sick and convalescent persons 
a savoury and nourishing boiled capon 
to stew beef 
to stew a rump of beef , , 
to rost wilde boar 
about making of brawn 
to bake beef 
to boil beef or venison 
ordering bacon for gambons, and to keep 
to make bisket 
page 
to make cider 
sir paul neal's way of making cider 
dr. harvey's pleasant water cider, whereof he used to drink much, making it
his ordinary drink 
a good dish of cream 
an excellent spanish cream 
another clouted cream 
my lord of st. alban's cresme fouettee 
to make the cream curds 
the queens barley cream 
capon in white-broth 
to make cock-ale 
savoury collops of veal 
to pickle capons my lady portland's way 
scotch collops 
excellent good collops 
my lady diana porter's scotch collops 
cream with rice 
pickled champignons 
sallet of cold capon rosted 
to make cheese cakes 
short and crisp crust for tarts and pyes 
to make a cake 
to make a caraway-cake 
excellent small cakes 
to make scalded cheese 
the cream-courds 
savoury tosted or melted cheese 
to feed chicken 
to fatten young chicken in a wonderful degree 
an excellent way to cram chicken 
gelly of red currants 
gelly of currants with the fruit whole in it 
to bake wilde ducks or teals 
to rost wilde ducks 
page 
to butter eggs with cream 
portuguez eggs 
to boil eggs 
wheaten flomery 
a fricacee of lamb-stones, &c. 
to boil smoaked flesh 
a fricacee of veal , 
butter and oyl to fry fish 
a flomery-caudle 
smallage gruel 
about water gruel 
an excellent and wholesome water gruel with wood sorrel and currants 
gruel of oatmeal and rice 
to make clear gelly of bran 
an excellent meat of goose or turkey 
to pickle an old fat goose 
some notes upon honey 
my lord hollis hydromel 
hydromel as i made it weak for the q. mother 
to make honey drink 
weak honey drink 
to make an hotchpot , 
the queens hotchpot 
a nourishing hachy 
red herrings boiled 
to season humble pyes 
to make harts-horn gelly -
to dress lampreys 
master corsellises antwerp meath 
page 
to make excellent meathe 
a weaker, but very pleasant meathe 
an excellent white meathe 
master webbes meathe -
my own considerations for making of meathe 
my lady gower's white meathe 
strong meathe 
a receipt for making of meathe 
my lord morice's meathe 
my lady morice her sisters meathe 
to make white meath 
sir william paston's meathe 
another way of making meathe 
sir baynam throckmorton's meathe 
my lady bellassises meathe 
my lord gorge his meathe 
several sorts of meathe, small and strong 
to make meathe 
sir john arundel's white meathe 
to make a meathe good for the liver and lungs 
a very good meathe 
my lord herbert's meathe 
to make small white meathe 
meathe from the muscovian ambassadour's steward 
meathe with raisins 
a receipt to make metheglin as it is made at liege, communicated by mr.
masillon 
white metheglin of my lady hungerfords which is exceedingly praised 
a receipt to make a tun of metheglin 
the countess of bullingbrook's white metheg. 
metheglin composed by myself 
sir thomas gower's metheglin for health 
metheglin for taste and colour 
an excellent way of making white metheglin 
several ways of making metheglin 
to make white metheglin 
page 
another metheglin 
mr. pierce's excellent white metheglin 
an excellent way to make metheglin, called the liquor of life 
to make good metheglin 
to make white metheglin of sir j. fortescue 
the lady vernon's white metheglin 
to make metheglin 
a most excellent metheglin 
to make white metheg. of the count. of dorset 
to make small metheglin 
the earl of denbigh's metheglin 
to make metheglin that looks like white wine 
metheglin, or sweet-drink of my lady stuart 
a metheg. for the colick-stone, of the same lady 
a receipt for metheglin of my lady windebanke 
marrow sops with wine 
to make a shoulder of mutton like venison 
an excellent way of making mutton steaks 
to make mustard 
for roasting of meat 
mutton baked with venison 
my lord of denbigh's almond march-pane 
marmulate of pippins 
white marmulate, the queens way 
my lady of bath's way 
marmulate of cherries 
marmulate of red currants 
a plain but good spanish oglia 
to stew oysters 
excellent marrow-spinage pasties 
to make a french barley posset 
to make puff-past 
to make a pudding with puff past 
page 
to make pear puddings 
marrow puddings 
to make excellent black puddings 
a receipt to make white puddings 
to make an excellent pudding 
pyes 
to make pith puddings 
an oat-meal pudding 
to make call puddings 
a barley pudding 
a pippin pudding 
to make a baked oat-meal pudding 
a plain quaking pudding 
a good quaking bag pudding 
to preserve pippins in jelly 
to dress poor-john, and buckorn 
to dress parsneps 
to butter pease 
a herring pye 
to make an excellent hare pye 
to bake pidgeons, teals or wild ducks 
green-geese pye 
to make a plain ordinary posset 
concerning potages 
plain savoury english potage 
potage de blanc de chapon 
ordinary potage 
barley potage 
an english potage 
another potage 
nourissant potage de santé 
potage de santé , 
good nourishing potage 
pap of oat-meal 
panado 
barley pap 
oat-meal pap. sir john colladon 
page 
pressis-nourissant 
pan-cotto 
my lord lumley's pease-potage 
an excellent posset 
pease of the seedy buds of tulips 
to make plague-water , 
an excellent baked pudding 
my lady of portland's minced pyes 
minced pyes 
to feed poultry 
to feed partridges that you have taken wilde 
to make puffs 
gelly of pippins or john-apples 
to keep quinces all the year good 
gelly of quinces 
preserved quince with gelly 
to make fine white gelly of quinces 
paste of quinces , 
a smoothening quiddany or gelly of the cores of quinces 
r [transcribers note: "r" was missing in the original.]
rice & orge mondé 
boiled rice dry 
to rost fine meat 
to make red-dear 
conserve of red roses , 
sack with clove gilly-flowers 
to make stepponi 
to make a sack-posset 
a barley sack-posset 
my lord of carlile's sack-posset 
a syllabub 
to make a whip syllabub 
page 
to make spinage-broth 
sauce of horse-radish 
very good sauce for partridges and chicken 
to dress stock-fish , 
to prepare shrimps for dressing 
to make slip-coat-cheese -
sweet-meats of my lady windebanks 
sucket of mallow-stalks 
tea with eggs 
a tansy , , 
to souce turkeys 
pleasant cordial tablets 
to stew a breast of veal 
vuova lattate 
vuova spersa 
baked venison 
tosts of veal 
morello wine 
currants wine 
the countess of newport's cherry wine 
strawberry wine 
to make wine of cherries alone 
to make rasbery-wine 
to make a white-pot , 
buttered whitings with eggs 
to stew wardens or pears 
preserved wardens 
[] this table reproduces the index to the original volume. an
index on modern lines, for more ready reference, will be found on pages
page 
. aqua mirabilis. sir kenelm digby's way.
take cubebs, gallingale, cardamus, mellilot-flowers, cloves, mace, ginger,
cinammon, of each one dram bruised small, juyce of celandine one pint,
juyce of spearmint half a pint, juyce of balm half a pint, sugar one pound,
flower of cowslips, rosemary, borage, bugloss, marigold, of each two drams,
the best sack three pints, strong angelica-water one pint, red rose-water
half a pint; bruise the spices & flowers, & steep them in the sack & juyces
one night; the next morning distil it in an ordinary or glass-still, &
first lay harts-tongue leaves in the bottom of the still.
this water preserveth the lungs without grievances, & helpeth them; being
wounded, it suffereth the blood not to putrifie, but multiplieth the same.
this water suffereth not the heart to burn, nor melancholly, nor the spleen
to be lifted up above nature: it expelleth the rheum, preserveth the
stomach, conserveth youth, & procureth a good colour: it preserveth memory,
it destroyeth the palsie: if this be given to one a dying, a spoonful of it
reviveth him; in the summer use one spoonful a week fasting; in the winter
two spoonfuls.
the above receipt is given in the rd edition of the closet opened, ,
also in the queen's closet opened.
. another more precious cosmetick, or beautifying water, by sir kenelm
digby.page 
take white lillies six drams, florence orrice roots, beans, cicers, lupins,
of each half an ounce, fresh bean-flowers a handful, gum tragant, white
lead, fine sugar, of each half an ounce, crums of white bread, (steeped in
milk) an ounce, frankincense, and gum arabick of each three drams, borax,
and feather'd allom of each two drams, the white of an egg, camphire a dram
and a half; infuse them four and twenty hours in a sufficient quantity of
rose and bean-flower water, equal parts; then distil it in b.m.
this water smooths, whitens, beautifies & preserves the complexions of
ladies. they may wash their faces with it at any time, but especially
morning and evening.
. another richer perfume; being pleasant and wholesome, to perfume
tobacco taken in a pipe.
take balm of peru half an ounce, seven or eight drops of oyl of cinamon,
oyl of cloves five drops, oyl of nutmegs, of thyme, of lavender, of fennel,
of aniseeds (all drawn by distillation) of each a like quantity, or more or
less as you like the odour, and would have it strongest; incorporate with
these half a dram of ambergrease; make all these into a paste; which keep
in a box; when you have fill'd your pipe of tobacco, put upon it about the
bigness of a pin's head of this composition.
it will make the smoak most pleasantly odoriferous, both to the takers,
and to them that come into the room; and ones breath will be sweet all the
day after. it also comforts the head and brains. approved by sir kenelm
digby.
from hartman, the true preserver of health, .
the true preparation of the powder of sympathy, as it was prepared every
year in sir kenelm digby's elaboratory, and as i prepare it now.
take good english vitriol, which you may buy for two pence a pound,
page dissolve it in warm water, using no more water than will dissolve it,
leaving some of the impurest part at the bottom undissolved; then powr it
off and filtre it, which you may do by a coffin of fine gray paper put
into a funnel, or by laying a sheet of gray paper in a sieve, and powring
your water or dissolution of vitriol into it by degrees, setting the sieve
upon a large pan to receive the filtred liquor; when all your liquor is
filtred, boil it in an earthen vessel glazed, till you see a thin scum upon
it; then set it in a cellar to cool, covering it loosly, so that nothing
may fall in; after two or three days standing, powr off the liquor, and you
will find at the bottom and on the sides large and fair green christals
like emerauds; drain off all the water clean from them, and dry them; then
spread them abroad, in a large flat earthen dish, & expose them to the hot
sun in the dog-days, taking them in at night, and setting them out in the
morning, securing them from the rain; and when the sun hath calcin'd them
to whiteness, beat them to powder, & set this powder again in the sun,
stirring it sometimes, and when you see it perfectly white, powder it, &
sift it finely, and set it again in the sun for a day, and you will have a
pure white powder, which is the powder of sympathy; which put up in a
glass, and stop it close. the next yeare when the dog-days come, if you
have any of this powder left, you may expose it again in the sun, spreading
it abroad to renew its vertue by the influence of the sun-beams.
the way of curing wounds, with it, is, to take some of the blood upon a
rag, and put some of the powder upon the blood, then keep only the wound
clean, with a clean linnen about it, and in a moderate temper betwixt hot
and cold, and wrap up the rag with the blood, and keep it either in your
pocket, or in a box, & the wound will be healed without any oyntment or
plaister, and without any pain. but if the wound be somewhat old, and hot,
and inflamed, you must put some of this powder into a porringer or bason
full of cold water, and then put any thing into it that hath been upon the
wound, and hath some of the blood or matter upon it, and it will presently
page take away all pain and inflammation, as you see in sir kenelm's relation
of mr. howard [sic].
to staunch the blood either of a wound or bleeding at the nose, take only
some of the blood upon a rag, & put some powder upon it, or take a bason
with fresh water, and put some of the powder into it, and bath the nostrils
with it.
from hartman, the preserver of health.
a list of the herbs, flowers, fruits, etc., referred to in the closet
opened:—
. agrimony; alexander; angelica; avens, leaves & flowers; balm;
bay-leaves; beet leaves; bettony, wild; bettony, paul's; bistort;
bloodwort; bluebottles; blue-button; borage, leaves & flowers; bramble,
red, tops of; broom-buds; bugle; bugloss, leaves & flowers; burnet; carduus
benedictus; carrot, wild; celandine; cersevril; chicory; chives; clove
gilly-flowers; clown's all-heal; coltsfoot; comfrey; cowslip & french
cowslip flowers; dragons; elder flowers; endive; eyebright; fennel;
fever-few; garlic; ground-ivy; groundsel; hart's tongue, leaves; hops,
flowers; horehound; hypericum, tops & flowers; hyssop; ladies' mantle;
lettuce, leaves & stalks; lily of the valley; liquorice; liverwort;
maidenhair; marigold, flowers & leaves; marjoram, sweet; marjoram, wild;
marshmallow, leaves, flowers, & stalks; may-weed, brown; meadowsweet;
mellilot, flowers; mint; spearmint; mouse-ear; mugwort; muscovy; nettle,
red; oak of jerusalem; organ; origanum [wild marjoram]; oseille; parietary;
peas (chick); pellitory-of-the-wall; penny-royal; philipendula; pimpernel;
pourpier; primrose, flowers; purslane; ribwort; rocket; rosemary, tops,
flowers, & sprigs; rose; rue; sage, (red & wild), leaves & flowers;
saxifrage; sanicle; scabious; scurvy grass; self-heal; shallots;
page 
sibboulets; skirrets; smallage; sorrel (wood); spike [spignel?];
spleenwort; spinach; st. john's wort; strawberry leaves; sweetbriar,
leaves, tops, buds; sweet oak; sweetwort; tamarisk; tansy; thyme (broad,
lemon, mother, & wild); violet, leaves & flowers; wallflowers (yellow);
wall rue; watercress; wheat (green); white-wort; winter savoury; woodbine;
wormwood (sea & roman); yarrow. (from this list i have omitted the commoner
vegetables.)
. roots.—alexander; angelica; asparagus; beet; betony, bittersweet;
bluebottle; borage; coltsfoot; elecampane; eringo; fennel; fern; galingale;
horse-radish; marshmallow; nettle (red); orris; parsley; scabious; sorrel;
strawberry; succory; thyme (wild); tormentilla.
. seeds.—anise; cardamom; carraway; citron; coriander; fennel;
gromwell; melon; musk grains; mustard; nettle; parsley; saffron; tulip,
seedy buds of; wormwood.
. fruits.—apples (codlings, ginet moils, pearmains, pippins, golden
pippins, red streaks); apricots; barberries; bilberries; cherries (black,
kentish, morello); currants (dried, black, red); damsons; dates; jujubes;
juniper berries; lemons; pears (bon chrétien & wardens); plums; prunes;
raisins; rasps; sweetbriar berries; strawberries.
. barks, woods.—ash-tree bark; lignum cassiæ.
. nuts.—almonds; chestnuts; pine kernels; pistachios; walnuts (green).
. juices.—balm; celandine; cherry; hop; lemon; onion; orange;
spearmint; spinach; tansy.
.—distilled waters of angelica; cinnamon; mallow; orange-flower;
plantain; rose (red & damask).
. spices of all sorts; cloves; cinnamon (also oil of, & spirit of);
ginger; mace; mustard; nutmeg; pepper; peppercorns.
. wines.—canary sack; claret; deal; elder; malaga (old); muscat;
muscadine (greek); red; rhenish; sack, sherry sack; spanish; white.
page 
. other liquors.—ale & beer; afterworts; lees of beer & wine; aqua
vitæ; orangeado.
. vinegars of elder wine, & of white wine.
. verjuice of cider, & green sour grapes.
. other notable seasonings and ingredients:—
ambergris; ivory; leaf gold; powder of white amber; powder of
pearl; spanish pastilles (ambergris, sugar, & musk).
page 
introduction
p. x .  old cookery books and ancient cuisine. by w. carew hazlitt.
booklovers' library. .
p. x .  the life of sir kenelm digby. by one of his descendants [t.
longueville]. .
p. xi .  for the controversy about the date of his birth, see the
usual biographical authorities:—longueville, op. cit., digby's
memoirs, ed. nicolas, ; dict. of nat. biog.; biog. brit.
(kippis); wood's athenae oxon., iii. ; aubrey's lives, ii.
, etc. etc.
p. xiv .  "the elder lady digby." see text, p. .
p. xv .  "manuscript of elections." see w.h. black's catalogue of
the ashmolean mss., ,  and , .
p. xx .  journal of a voyage to scanderoon, ed. j. bruce for
camden soc., .
page 
