[] ezek. ix.
[] zech. i. f.
[] zech. iii. .
[] job i., ii. cf. i chron. xxi. .
[] pss. xci. , ciii.  &c.
[] tobit xii. ; rev. viii. .
[] dan. viii. , x. , , .
[] tob. xii. .
[] job iv. .
[] tobit iii. , , vi. .
[] e.g. matt. i.  (to joseph), iv. . (to jesus),
luke i.  (to mary), acts xii.  (to peter).
[] e.g. mark viii. , xiii. .
[] mark xii. .
[] luke i. .
[] rev. ix. .
[] mark iii. .
[] mark i. .
[] michael, jude .
[] rom. viii. ; col, ii. .
[] col. i. .
[] rev. vii. .
[] gen. xviii. .
[] gen. xix. .
[] zech. iv. .
[] judges vi. , .
[] rev. vii. . viii.
[] rev. viii. , xiv. .
[] job xxxviii. ; asc. of isaiah, iv. ; slav.
enoch, iv. .
[] rev. xiv. , xvi. ; possibly gal. iv. ; col. ii. ,
[] ps. lxviii. ; dan. vii. .
[] matt, xviii. ; acts xii. .
[] gal. iii. ; heb. ii. ; lxx. of deut. xxxiii.
angel, a gold coin, first used in france (angelot, ange) in
, and introduced into england by edward iv. in  as a new issue
of the "noble," and so at first called the "angel-noble." it varied in
value between that period and the time of charles i. (when it was
last coined) from s. d. to s. the name was derived from the
representation it bore of st. michael and the dragon. the angel was the
coin given to those who came to be touched for the disease known
as king's evil; after it was no longer coined, medals, called
touch-pieces, with the same device, were given instead.
angelica, a genus of plants of the natural order umbelliferae,
represented in britain by one species, a. sylvestris, a tall
perennial herb with large bipinnate leaves and large compound umbels
of white or purple flowers. the name angelica is popularly given to a
plant of an allied genus, archangelica officinalis, the
tender shoots of which are used in making certain kinds of aromatic
sweetmeats. angelica balsam is obtained by extracting the roots
with alcohol, evaporating and extracting the residue with ether. it
is of a dark brown colour and contains angelica oil, angelica wax
and angelicin, cho. the essential oil of the roots of
angelica archangelica contains β-terebangelene,
ch, and other terpenes; the oil of the seeds also
contains β-terebangelene, together with methylethylacetic acid and
hydroxymyristic acid.
the angelica tree is a member of the order avaliaceae, a
species of aralia (a. spinosa), a native of north america; it
grows  to  ft. high, has a simple prickle-bearing stem forming an
umbrella-like head, and much divided leaves.
angelico, fra (-), italian painter. il beato fra giovanni
angelico da fiesole is the name given to a far-famed painter-friar of
the florentine state in the th century, the representative, beyond
all other men, of pietistic painting. he is often, but not accurately,
termed simply "fiesole," which is merely the name of the town where he
first took the vows; more often fra angelico. if we turn his compound
designation into english, it runs thus—"the beatified friar john the
angelic of fiesole." in his lifetime he was known no doubt simply as
fra giovanni or friar john; "the angelic" is a laudatory term which
was assigned to him at an early date,—we find it in use within thirty
years after his death; and, at some period which is not defined in
our authorities, he was beatified by due ecclesiastical process. his
baptismal name was guido, giovanni being only his name in religion. he
was born at vicchio, in the tuscan province of mugello, of unknown
but seemingly well-to-do parentage, in  (not  as sometimes
stated); in  he became a novice in the convent of s. domenico at
fiesole, and in  he took the vows and entered the dominican order.
whether he had previously been a painter by profession is not certain,
but may be pronounced probable. the painter named lorenzo monaco may
have contributed to his art-training, and the influence of the sienese
school is discernible in his work.
[v. p.]
according to vasari, the first paintings of this artist
were in the certosa of florence; none such exist there now. his
earliest extant performances, in considerable number, are at cortona,
whither he was sent during his novitiate, and here apparently he spent
all the opening years of his monastic life. his first works executed
in fresco were probably those, now destroyed, which he painted in the
convent of s. domenico in this city; as a fresco-painter, he may have
worked under, or as a follower of, gherardo starnina. from 
to  he was back at fiesole; in  he was transferred to the
dominican convent of s. marco in florence, and in  undertook to
paint the altarpiece for the choir, followed by many other works;
he may have studied about this time the renowned frescoes in the
brancacci chapel in the florentine church of the carmine and also the
paintings of orcagna. in or about  he was invited by the pope to
rome. the pope who reigned from  to  was eugenius iv., and he
it was who in  appointed another dominican friar, a colleague of
angelico, to be archbishop of florence. if the story (first told by
vasari) is true—that this appointment was made at the suggestion of
angelico only after the archbishopric had been offered to himself, and
by him declined on the ground of his inaptitude for so elevated and
responsible a station—eugenius, and not (as stated by vasari) his
successor nicholas v., must have been the pope who sent the invitation
and made the offer to fra giovanni, for nicholas only succeeded in
. the whole statement lacks authentication, though in itself
credible enough. certain it is that angelico was staying in rome in
the first half of ; and he painted in the vatican the cappella del
sacramento, which was afterwards demolished by paul iii. in june
 he proceeded to orvieto, to paint in the cappella nuova of the
cathedral, with the co-operation of his pupil benozzo gozzoli. he
afterwards returned to rome to paint the chapel of nicholas v. in
this capital he died in , and he lies buried in the church of the
minerva.
according to all the accounts which have reached us, few men on
whom the distinction of beatification has been conferred could
have deserved it more nobly than fra giovanni. he led a holy and
self-denying life, shunning all advancement, and was a brother to
the poor; no man ever saw him angered. he painted with unceasing
diligence, treating none but sacred subjects; he never retouched
or altered his work, probably with a religious feeling that such as
divine providence allowed the thing to come, such it should remain. he
was wont to say that he who illustrates the acts of christ should
be with christ. it is averred that he never handled a brush without
fervent prayer and he wept when he painted a crucifixion. the last
judgment and the annunciation were two of the subjects he most
frequently treated.
bearing in mind the details already given as to the dates of fra
giovanni's sojournings in various localities, the reader will be able
to trace approximately the sequence of the works which we now proceed
to name as among his most important productions. in florence, in the
convent of s. marco (now converted into a national museum), a series
of frescoes, beginning towards ; in the first cloister is the
crucifixion with st. dominic kneeling; and the same treatment recurs on
a wall near the dormitory; in the chapterhouse is a third crucifixion,
with the virgin swooning, a composition of twenty life-sized
figures—the red background, which has a strange and harsh effect, is
the misdoing of some restorer; an "annunciation," the figures of about
three-fourths of life-size, in a dormitory; in the adjoining passage,
the "virgin enthroned," with four saints; on the wall of a cell,
the "coronation of the virgin," with saints paul, thomas aquinas,
benedict, dominic, francis and peter martyr; two dominicans welcoming
jesus, habited as a pilgrim; an "adoration of the magi"; the "marys
at the sepulchre." all these works are later than the altarpiece which
angelico painted (as before mentioned) for the choir connected
with this convent, and which is now in the academy of florence; it
represents the virgin with saints cosmas and damian (the patrons of
the medici family), dominic, peter, francis, mark, john evangelist and
stephen; the pediment illustrated the lives of cosmas and damian, but
it has long been severed from the main subject. in the uffizi gallery,
an altarpiece, the virgin (life-sized) enthroned, with the infant and
twelve angels. in s. domenico, fiesole, a few frescoes, less fine than
those in s. marco; also an altarpiece in tempera of the virgin and
child between saints peter, thomas aquinas, dominic and peter martyr,
now much destroyed. the subject which originally formed the predella
of this picture has, since , been in the national gallery, london,
and worthily represents there the hand of the saintly painter. the
subject is a glory, christ with the banner of the resurrection, and
a multitude of saints, including, at the extremities, the saints or
beati of the dominican order; here are no fewer than  figures
or portions of figures, many of them having names inscribed. this
predella was highly lauded by vasari; still more highly another
picture which used to form an altarpiece in fiesole, and which now
obtains world-wide celebrity in the louvre—the "coronation of the
virgin," with eight predella subjects of the miracles of st. dominic.
for the church of santa trinita, florence, angelico executed a
"deposition from the cross," and for the church of the angeli, a "last
judgment," both now in the florentine academy; for s. maria novella, a
"coronation of the virgin," with a predella in three sections, now
in the uffizi,—this again is one of his masterpieces. in orvieto
cathedral he painted three triangular divisions of the ceiling,
portraying respectively christ in a glory of angels, sixteen saints
and prophets, and the virgin and apostles: all these are now much
repainted and damaged. in rome, in the chapel of nicholas v., the acts
of saints stephen and lawrence; also various figures of saints, and
on the ceiling the four evangelists. these works of the painter's
advanced age, which have suffered somewhat from restorations, show
vigour superior to that of his youth, along with a more adequate
treatment of the architectural perspectives. naturally, there are a
number of works currently attributed to angelico, but not really his;
for instance, a "st thomas with the madonna's girdle," in the lateran
museum, and a "virgin enthroned," in the church of s. girolamo,
fiesole. it has often been said that he commenced and frequently
practised as an illuminator; this is dubious and a presumption arises
that illuminations executed by giovanni's brother, benedetto, also
a dominican, who died in , have been ascribed to the more famous
artist. benedetto may perhaps have assisted giovanni in the frescoes
at s. marco, but nothing of the kind is distinctly traceable. a folio
series of engravings from these paintings was published in florence,
in . along with gozzoli already mentioned, zanobi strozzi and
gentile da fabriano are named as pupils of the beato.
we have spoken of angelico's art as "pietistic"; this is in fact
its predominant character. his visages have an air of rapt suavity,
devotional fervency and beaming esoteric consciousness, which is
intensely attractive to some minds and realizes beyond rivalry a
particular ideal—that of ecclesiastical saintliness and detachment
from secular fret and turmoil. it should not be denied that he did not
always escape the pitfalls of such a method of treatment, the faces
becoming sleek and prim, with a smirk of sexless religiosity which
hardly eludes the artificial or even the hypocritical; on other minds,
therefore, and these some of the most masculine and resolute, he
produces little genuine impression. after allowing for this, angelico
should nevertheless be accepted beyond cavil as an exalted typical
painter according to his own range of conceptions, consonant with his
monastic calling, unsullied purity of life and exceeding devoutness.
exquisite as he is in his special mode of execution, he undoubtedly
falls far short, not only of his great naturalist contemporaries such
as masaccio and lippo lippi, but even of so distant a precursor as
giotto, in all that pertains to bold or life-like invention of a
subject or the realization of ordinary appearances, expressions and
actions—the facts of nature, as distinguished from the aspirations or
contemplations of the spirit. technically speaking, he had much finish
and harmony of composition and colour, without corresponding
mastery of light and shade, and his knowledge of the human frame
was restricted. the brilliancy and fair light scale of his tints
is constantly remarkable, combined with a free use of gilding; this
conduces materially to that celestial character
[v. p.] which so pre-eminently distinguishes his pictured
visions of the divine persons, the hierarchy of heaven and the glory
of the redeemed.
books regarding fra angelico are numerous. we may mention those by s.
beissel, ; v. m. crawford, ; r. l. douglas, ; i. b. supino,
; d. tumiati, ; g. williamson, .
angell, george thorndike (-), american philanthropist, was
born at southbridge, massachusetts, on the th of june . he
graduated at dartmouth in , studied law at the harvard law school,
and in  was admitted to the bar in boston, where he practised
for many years. in  he founded and became president of the
massachusetts society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, in the
same year establishing and becoming editor of our dumb animals,
a journal for the promotion of organized effort in securing the humane
treatment of animals. for many years he was active in the organization
of humane societies in england and america. in  he initiated the
movement for the establishment of bands of mercy (for the promotion
of humane treatment of animals), of which in  there were more than
, in active existence. in  he founded and became president
of the american humane education society. he became well known as a
criminologist and also as an advocate of laws for the safeguarding of
the public health and against adulteration of food. he died at boston
on the th of march .
angel-lights, in architecture, the outer upper lights in a
perpendicular window, next to the springing; probably a corruption of
the word angle-lights, as they are nearly triangular.
angelus, a roman catholic devotion in memory of the annunciation.
it has its name from the opening words, angelus domini nuntiavit
mariae. it consists of three texts describing the mystery, recited
as versicle and response alternately with the salutation "hail, mary!"
this devotion is recited in the catholic church three times daily,
about  a.m., noon and  p.m. at these hours a bell known as the
angelus bell is rung. this is still rung in some english country
churches, and has often been mistaken for and alleged to be a survival
of the curfew bell. the institution of the angelus is by some ascribed
to pope urban ii., by some to john xxii. the triple recitation is
ascribed to louis xi. of france, who in  ordered it to be thrice
said daily.
angelus silesius (-), german religious poet, was born in 
at breslau. his family name was johann scheffler, but he is generally
known by the pseudonym angelus silesius, under which he published his
poems and which marks the country of his birth. brought up a lutheran,
and at first physician to the duke of württemberg-oels, he joined in
 the roman catholic church, in  took orders as a priest, and
became coadjutor to the prince bishop of breslau. he died at breslau
on the th of july . in  silesius published under the title
heilige seelenlust, oder geistliche hirtenlieder der in ihren jesum
verliebten psyche (), a collection of  hymns, the most
beautiful of which, such as, liebe, die du mich zum bilde deiner
gottheit hast gemacht and mir nach, spricht christus, unser
held, have been adopted in the german protestant hymnal. more
remarkable, however, is his geistreiche sinn-und schluss-reime
(), afterwards called cherubinischer wandersmann ().
this is a collection of "reimsprüche" or rhymed distichs embodying
a strange mystical pantheism drawn mainly from the writings of jakob
böhme and his followers. silesius delighted specially in the subtle
paradoxes of mysticism. the essence of god, for instance, he held to
be love; god, he said, can love nothing inferior to himself; but he
cannot be an object of love to himself without going out, so to speak,
of himself, without manifesting his infinity in a finite form; in
other words, by becoming man. god and man are therefore essentially
one.
a complete edition of scheffler's works (sämtliche poetische
werke) was published by d. a. rosenthal,  vols. (regensburg,
). both the cherubinischer wandersmann and heilige
seelenlust have been republished by g. ellinger ( and );
a selection from the former work by o. e. hartleben (). for further
notices of silesius' life and work, see hoffmann von fallersleben
in weimarisches jahrbuch i. (hanover, ); a. kahlert,
angelus silesius (); c. seltmann, angelus silesius und
seine mystik (), and a biog. by h. mahn (dresden, ).
angermünde, a town of germany, in the prussian province of
brandenburg, on lake münde,  m. from berlin by the berlin-stettin
railway, and at the junction of lines to prenzlau, freien-walde and
schwedt. pop. () . it has three protestant churches, a grammar
school and court of law. its industries embrace iron founding and
enamel working. in  the elector frederick i. of brandenburg gained
here a signal victory over the pomeranians.
angerona, or angeronia, an old roman goddess, whose name and functions
are variously explained. according to ancient authorities, she was a
goddess who relieved men from pain and sorrow, or delivered the
romans and their flocks from angina (quinsy); or she was the
protecting goddess of rome and the keeper of the sacred name of the
city, which might not be pronounced lest it should be revealed to
her enemies; it was even thought that angerona itself was this name.
modern scholars regard her as a goddess akin to ops, acca larentia
and dea dia; or as the goddess of the new year and the returning
sun (according to mommsen, ab angerendo= ἀπὸ τοῦ
ἀναφέρεσθαι. τὸν ἥλιον). her festival, called divalia or
angeronalia, was celebrated on the st of december. the priests
offered sacrifice in the temple of volupia, the goddess of pleasure,
in which stood a statue of angerona, with a finger on her mouth, which
was bound and closed (macrobius i. ; pliny, nat. hist. iii.
; varro, l. l. vi. ). she was worshipped as ancharia
at faesulae, where an altar belonging to her has been recently
discovered. (see faesulae.)
angers, a city of western france, capital of the department of
maine-et-loire,  m. s.w. of paris by the western railway to nantes.
pop. () ,. it occupies rising ground on both banks of the
maine, which are united by three bridges. the surrounding district is
famous for its flourishing nurseries and market gardens. pierced
with wide, straight streets, well provided with public gardens, and
surrounded by ample, tree-lined boulevards, beyond which lie new
suburbs, angers is one of the pleasantest towns in france. of its
numerous medieval buildings the most important is the cathedral of
st. maurice, dating in the main from the th and th centuries.
between the two flanking towers of the west façade, the spires of
which are of the th century, rises a central tower of the same
period. the most prominent feature of the façade is the series of
eight warriors carved on the base of this tower. the vaulting of the
nave takes the form of a series of cupolas, and that of the choir and
transept is similar. the chief treasures of the church are its rich
stained glass (th, th and th centuries) and valuable tapestry
(th to th centuries). the bishop's palace which adjoins the
cathedral contains a fine synodal hall of the th century. of the
other churches of angers, the principal are st. serge, an abbey-church
of the th and th centuries, and la trinité (th century). the
prefecture occupies the buildings of the famous abbey of st. aubin; in
its courtyard are elaborately sculptured arcades of the th and th
centuries, from which period dates the tower, the only survival of the
splendid abbey-church. ruins of the old churches of toussaint (th
century) and notre-dame du ronceray (th century) are also to be
seen. the castle of angers, an imposing building girt with towers and
a moat, dates from the th century and is now used as an armoury.
the ancient hospital of st. jean (th century) is occupied by an
archaeological museum; and the logis barrault, a mansion built about
, contains the public library, the municipal museum, which has
a large collection of pictures and sculptures, and the musée david,
containing works by the famous sculptor david d'angers, who was a
native of the town. one of his masterpieces, a bronze statue of rené
of anjou, stands close by the castle. the hôtel de pincé or d'anjou
(-) is the finest of the stone mansions of angers; there are
also many curious wooden houses of the th and th centuries. the
palais de justice, the catholic institute, a fine theatre, and
[v. p.] a hospital with  beds are the more remarkable of
the modern buildings of the town. angers is the seat of a bishopric,
dating from the rd century, a prefecture, a court of appeal and a
court of assizes. it has a tribunal of first instance, a tribunal
of commerce, a board of trade-arbitrators, a chamber of commerce,
a branch of the bank of france and several learned societies. its
educational institutions include ecclesiastical seminaries, a lycée,
a preparatory school of medicine and pharmacy, a university with
free faculties (facultés libres) of theology, law, letters and
science, a higher school of agriculture, training colleges, a school
of arts and handicrafts and a school of fine art. the prosperity of
the town is largely due to the great slate-quarries of the vicinity,
but the distillation of liqueurs from fruit, cable, rope and
thread-making, and the manufacture of boots and shoes, umbrellas and
parasols are leading industries. the weaving of sail-cloth and woollen
and other fabrics, machine construction, wire-drawing, and manufacture
of sparkling wines and preserved fruits are also carried on. the chief
articles of commerce, besides slate and manufactured goods, are hemp,
early vegetables, fruit, flowers and live-stock.
angers, capital of the gallic tribe of the andecavi, was under the
romans called juliomagus. during the th century it became the seat
of the counts of anjou (q.v.). it suffered severely from the
invasions of the northmen in  and the succeeding years, and of the
english in the th and th centuries; the huguenots took it in ,
and the vendean royalists were repulsed near it in . till the
revolution, angers was the seat of a celebrated university founded in
the th century.
see l. m. thorode, notice de la ville d'angers (angers, ).
angerstein, john julius (-), london merchant, and patron of
the fine arts, was born at st. petersburg and settled in london about
. his collection of paintings, consisting of about forty of
the most exquisite specimens of the art, purchased by the british
government, on his death, formed the nucleus of the national gallery.
angilbert (d. ), frankish latin poet, and minister of charlemagne,
was of noble frankish parentage, and educated at the palace school
under alcuin. as the friend and adviser of the emperor's son, pippin,
he assisted for a while in the government of italy, and was later
sent on three important embassies to the pope, in ,  and .
although he was the father of two children by charlemagne's daughter,
bertha, one of them named nithard, we have no authentic account of
his marriage, and from  he was abbot of st. riquier, where his
brilliant rule gained for him later the renown of a saint. angilbert,
however, was little like the true medieval saint; his poems reveal
rather the culture and tastes of a man of the world, enjoying the
closest intimacy with the imperial family. he accompanied charlemagne
to rome in  and was one of the witnesses to his will in .
angilbert was the homer of the emperor's literary circle, and was
the probable author of an epic, of which the fragment which has been
preserved describes the life at the palace and the meeting between
charlemagne and leo iii. it is a mosaic from virgil, ovid, lucan and
fortunatus, composed in the manner of einhard's use of suetonius,
and exhibits a true poetic gift. of the shorter poems, besides the
greeting to pippin on his return from the campaign against the avars
(), an epistle to david (charlemagne) incidentally reveals a
delightful picture of the poet living with his children in a house
surrounded by pleasant gardens near the emperor's palace. the
reference to bertha, however, is distant and respectful, her name
occurring merely on the list of princesses to whom he sends his
salutation.
angilbert's poems have been published by e. dummler in the
monumenta germaniae historica. for criticisms of this edition
see traube in roederer's schriften für germanische philologie
(). see also a. molinier, les sources de l'histoire de
france.
angina pectoris (latin for "pain of the chest"), a term applied to a
violent paroxysm of pain, arising almost invariably in connexion
with disease of the coronary arteries, a lesion causing progressive
degeneration of the heart muscle (see heart: disease). an
attack of angina pectoris usually comes on with a sudden seizure
of pain, felt at first over the region of the heart, but radiating
through the chest in various directions, and frequently extending down
the left arm. a feeling of constriction and of suffocation accompanies
the pain, although there is seldom actual difficulty in breathing.
when the attack comes on, as it often does, in the course of some
bodily exertion, the sufferer is at once brought to rest, and during
the continuance of the paroxysm experiences the most intense agony.
the countenance becomes pale, the surface of the body cold, the pulse
feeble, and death appears to be imminent, when suddenly the attack
subsides and complete relief is obtained. the duration of a paroxysm
rarely exceeds two or three minutes, but it may last for a longer
period. the attacks are apt to recur on slight exertion, and even in
aggravated cases without any such exciting cause. occasionally the
first seizure proves fatal; but more commonly death takes place as the
result of repeated attacks. angina pectoris is extremely rare under
middle life, and is much more common in males than in females. it
must always be regarded as a disorder of a very serious nature. in the
treatment of the paroxysm, nitrite of amyl has now replaced all other
remedies. it can be carried by the patient in the form of nitrite
of amyl pearls, each pearl containing the dose prescribed by the
physician. kept in this way the drug does not lose strength. as soon
as the pain begins the patient crushes a pearl in his handkerchief
and holds it to his mouth and nose. the relief given in this way is
marvellous and usually takes place within a very few seconds. in the
rare cases where this drug does not relieve, hypodermic injections
of morphia are used. but on account of the well-known dangers of this
drug, it should only be administered by a medical man. to prevent
recurrence of the attacks something may be done by scrupulous
attention to the general health, and by the avoidance of mental and
physical strain. but the most important preventive of all is "bed,"
of which fourteen days must be enforced on the least premonition of
anginal pain.
pseudo-angina.—in connexion with angina pectoris, a far more
common condition must be mentioned that has now universally received
the name of pseudo-angina. this includes the praecordial pains which
very closely resemble those of true angina. the essential difference
lies in the fact that pseudo-angina is independent of structural
disease of the heart and coronary arteries. in true angina there is
some condition within the heart which starts the stimulus sent to the
nerve centres. in pseudo-angina the starting-point is not the heart
but some peripheral or visceral nerve. the impulse passes thence to
the medulla, and so reaching the sensory centres starts a feeling of
pain that radiates into the chest or down the arm. there are three
main varieties:—() the reflex, () the vaso-motor, () the toxic.
the reflex is by far the most common, and is generally due
to irritation from one of the abdominal organs. an attack of
pseudo-angina may be agonizing, the pain radiating through the chest
and into the left arm, but the patient does not usually assume the
motionless attitude of true angina, and the duration of the seizure is
usually much longer. the treatment is that of the underlying neurosis
and the prognosis is a good one, sudden death not occurring.
angiosperms. the botanical term "angiosperm" (ἀγγεῖον,
receptacle, and σπέρμα, seed) was coined in the form
angiospermae by paul hermann in , as the name of that one of
his primary divisions of the plant kingdom, which included flowering
plants possessing seeds enclosed in capsules, in contradistinction to
his gymnospermae, or flowering plants with achenial or schizo-carpic
fruits—the whole fruit or each of its pieces being here regarded as
a seed and naked. the term and its antonym were maintained by linnaeus
with the same sense, but with restricted application, in the names of
the orders of his class didynamia. its use with any approach to its
modern scope only became possible after robert brown had established
in  the existence of truly naked seeds in the cycadeae and
coniferae, entitling them to be correctly called gymnosperms. from
that time onwards, so long as these gymnosperms were, as was usual,
reckoned as dicotyledonous flowering plants, the term angiosperm was
used antithetically by botanical writers, but with varying limitation,
as a group-name for other [v. p.] dicotyledonous plants. the advent in  of
hofmeister's brilliant discovery of the changes proceeding in the
embryo-sac of flowering plants, and his determination of the correct
relationships of these with the cryptogamia, fixed the true position
of gymnosperms as a class distinct from dicotyledons, and the
term angiosperm then gradually came to be accepted as the suitable
designation for the whole of the flowering plants other than
gymnosperms, and as including therefore the classes of dicotyledons
and monocotyledons. this is the sense in which the term is nowadays
received and in which it is used here.
the trend of the evolution of the plant kingdom has been in the
direction of the establishment of a vegetation of fixed habit and
adapted to the vicissitudes of a life on land, and the angiosperms are
the highest expression of this evolution and constitute the dominant
vegetation of the earth's surface at the present epoch. there is no
land-area from the poles to the equator, where plant-life is possible,
upon which angiosperms are not found. they occur also abundantly in
the shallows of rivers and fresh-water lakes, and in less number in
salt lakes and in the sea; such aquatic angiosperms are not, however,
primitive forms, but are derived from immediate land-ancestors.
associated with this diversity of habitat is great variety in general
form and manner of growth. the familiar duckweed which covers the
surface of a pond consists of a tiny green "thalloid" shoot, one, that
is, which shows no distinction of parts—stem and leaf, and a
simple root growing vertically downwards into the water. the great
forest-tree has a shoot, which in the course perhaps of hundreds of
years, has developed a wide-spreading system of trunk and branches,
bearing on the ultimate twigs or branchlets innumerable leaves, while
beneath the soil a widely-branching root-system covers an area of
corresponding extent. between these two extremes is every conceivable
gradation, embracing aquatic and terrestrial herbs, creeping, erect or
climbing in habit, shrubs and trees, and representing a much greater
variety than is to be found in the other subdivision of seed-plants,
the gymnosperms.
internal structure.
in internal structure also the variety of tissue-formation far exceeds
that found in gymnosperms (see plants: anatomy). the vascular
bundles of the stem belong to the collateral type, that is to say,
the elements of the wood or xylem and the bast or phloem stand side
by side on the same radius. in the larger of the two great groups into
which the angiosperms are divided, the dicotyledons, the bundles in
the very young stem are arranged in an open ring, separating a central
pith from an outer cortex. in each bundle, separating the xylem and
phloem, is a layer of meristem or active formative tissue, known as
cambium; by the formation of a layer of cambium between the bundles
(interfascicular cambium) a complete ring is formed, and a regular
periodical increase in thickness results from it by the development
of xylem on the inside and phloem on the outside. the soft phloem soon
becomes crushed, but the hard wood persists, and forms the great bulk
of the stem and branches of the woody perennial. owing to differences
in the character of the elements produced at the beginning and end
of the season, the wood is marked out in transverse section into
concentric rings, one for each season of growth—the so-called annual
rings. in the smaller group, the monocotyledons, the bundles are more
numerous in the young stem and scattered through the ground tissue.
moreover they contain no cambium and the stem once formed increases in
diameter only in exceptional cases.
vegetative organs.
as in gymnosperms, branching is monopodial; dichotomy or the forking
of the growing point into two equivalent branches which replace the
main stem, is absent both in the case of the stem and the root. the
leaves show a remarkable variety in form (see leaf), but are generally
small in comparison with the size of the plant; exceptions occur in
some monocotyledons, e.g. in the aroid family, where in some
genera the plant produces one huge, much-branched leaf each season.
in rare cases the main axis is unbranched and ends in a flower,
as, for instance, in the tulip, where scale-leaves, forming the
underground bulb, green foliage-leaves and coloured floral leaves are
borne on one and the same axis. generally, flowers are formed only
on shoots of a higher order, often only on the ultimate branches of
a much branched system. a potential branch or bud, either foliage or
flower, is formed in the axil of each leaf; sometimes more than one
bud arises, as for instance in the walnut, where two or three stand in
vertical series above each leaf. many of the buds remain dormant, or
are called to development under exceptional circumstances, such as
the destruction of existing branches. for instance, the clipping of
a hedge or the lopping of a tree will cause to develop numerous buds
which may have been dormant for years. leaf-buds occasionally arise
from the roots, when they are called adventitious; this occurs in many
fruit trees, poplars, elms and others. for instance, the young shoots
seen springing from the ground around an elm are not seedlings but
root-shoots. frequently, as in many dicotyledons, the primary root,
the original root of the seedling, persists throughout the life of
the plant, forming, as often in biennials, a thickened tap-root, as
in carrot, or in perennials, a much-branched root system. in many
dicotyledons and most monocotyledons, the primary root soon perishes,
and its place is taken by adventitious roots developed from the stem.
flower.
the most characteristic feature of the angiosperm is the flower, which
shows remarkable variety in form and elaboration, and supplies the
most trustworthy characters for the distinction of the series and
families or natural orders, into which the group is divided. the
flower is a shoot (stem bearing leaves) which has a special form
associated with the special function of ensuring the fertilization of
the egg and the development of fruit containing seed. except where
it is terminal it arises, like the leaf-shoot, in the axil of a leaf,
which is then known as a bract. occasionally, as in violet, a flower
arises singly in the axil of an ordinary foliage-leaf; it is then
termed axillary. generally, however, the flower-bearing portion of
the plant is sharply distinguished from the foliage leaf-bearing or
vegetative portion, and forms a more or less elaborate branch-system
in which the bracts are small and scale-like. such a branch-system is
called an inflorescence. the primary function of the flower is to bear
the spores. these, as in gymnosperms, are of two kinds, microspores
or pollen-grains, borne in the stamens (or microsporophylls) and
megaspores, in which the egg-cell is developed, contained in the
ovule, which is borne enclosed in the carpel (or megasporophyll). the
flower may consist only of spore-bearing leaves, as in willow, where
each flower comprises only a few stamens or two carpels. usually,
however, other leaves are present which are only indirectly concerned
with the reproductive process, acting as protective organs for the
sporophylls or forming an attractive envelope. these form the perianth
and are in one series, when the flower is termed monochlamydeous, or
in two series (dichlamydeous). in the second case the outer series
(calyx of sepals) is generally green and leaf-like, its function being
to protect the rest of the flower, especially in the bud; while
the inner series (corolla of petals) is generally white or brightly
coloured, and more delicate in structure, its function being to
attract the particular insect or bird by agency of which pollination
is effected. the insect, &c., is attracted by the colour and scent
of the flower, and frequently also by honey which is secreted in some
part of the flower. (for further details on the form and arrangement
of the flower and its parts, see flower.)
stamen and pollen.
each stamen generally bears four pollen-sacs (microsporangia)
which are associated to form the anther, and carried up on a stalk
or filament. the development of the microsporangia and the contained
spores (pollen-grains) is closely comparable with that of the
microsporangia in gymnosperms or heterosporous ferns. the pollen is
set free by the opening (dehiscence) of the anther, generally by means
of longitudinal slits, but sometimes by pores, as in the heath family
(ericaceae), or by valves, as in the barberry. it is then dropped
or carried by some external agent, wind, water or some member of the
animal kingdom, on to the receptive surface of
[v. p.] the carpel of the same or another flower. the carpel,
or aggregate of carpels forming the pistil or gynaeceum, comprises an
ovary containing one or more ovules and a receptive surface or stigma;
the stigma is sometimes carried up on a style. the mature pollen-grain
is, like other spores, a single cell; except in the case of some
submerged aquatic plants, it has a double wall, a thin delicate wall
of unaltered cellulose, the endospore or intine, and a tough outer
cuticularized exospore or extine. the exospore often bears spines or
warts, or is variously sculptured, and the character of the markings
is often of value for the distinction of genera or higher groups.
germination of the microspore begins before it leaves the pollen-sac.
in very few cases has anything representing prothallial development
been observed; generally a small cell (the antheridial or generative
cell) is cut off, leaving a larger tube-cell. when placed on the
stigma, under favourable circumstances, the pollen-grain puts forth a
pollen-tube which grows down the tissue of the style to the ovary, and
makes its way along the placenta, guided by projections or hairs,
to the mouth of an ovule. the nucleus of the tube-cell has meanwhile
passed into the tube, as does also the generative nucleus which
divides to form two male- or sperm-cells. the male-cells are carried
to their destination in the tip of the pollen-tube.
pistil and embryo-sac.
the ovary contains one or more ovules borne on a placenta, which is
generally some part of the ovary-wall. the development of the ovule,
which represents the macrosporangium, is very similar to the
process in gymnosperms; when mature it consists of one or two coats
surrounding the central nucellus, except at the apex where an opening,
the micropyle, is left. the nucellus is a cellular tissue enveloping
one large cell, the embryo-sac or macrospore. the germination of the
macrospore consists in the repeated division of its nucleus to form
two groups of four, one group at each end of the embryo-sac. one
nucleus from each group, the polar nucleus, passes to the centre of
the sac, where the two fuse to form the so-called definitive nucleus.
of the three cells at the micropylar end of the sac, all naked cells
(the so-called egg-apparatus), one is the egg-cell or oosphere, the
other two, which may be regarded as representing abortive egg-cells
(in rare cases capable of fertilization), are known as synergidae.
the three cells at the opposite end are known as antipodal cells
and become invested with a cell-wall. the gametophyte or prothallial
generation is thus extremely reduced, consisting of but little more
than the male and female sexual cells—the two sperm-cells in the
pollen-tube and the egg-cell (with the synergidae) in the embryo-sac.
fertilization.
at the period of fertilization the embryo-sac lies in close proximity
to the opening of the micropyle, into which the pollen-tube has
penetrated, the separating cell-wall becomes absorbed, and the male or
sperm-cells are ejected into the embryo-sac. guided by the synergidae
one male-cell passes into the oosphere with which it fuses, the two
nuclei uniting, while the other fuses with the definitive nucleus, or,
as it is also called, the endosperm nucleus. this remarkable
double fertilization as it has been called, although only recently
discovered, has been proved to take place in widely-separated
families, and both in monocotyledons and dicotyledons, and there is
every probability that, perhaps with variations, it is the normal
process in angiosperms. after impregnation the fertilized oosphere
immediately surrounds itself with a cell-wall and becomes the oospore
which by a process of growth forms the embryo of the new plant. the
endosperm-nucleus divides rapidly to produce a cellular tissue which
fills up the interior of the rapidly-growing embryo-sac, and forms a
tissue, known as endosperm, in which is stored a supply of nourishment
for the use later on of the embryo. it has long been known that after
fertilization of the egg has taken place, the formation of endosperm
begins from the endosperm nucleus, and this had come to be regarded as
the recommencement of the development of a prothallium after a pause
following the reinvigorating union of the polar nuclei. this view is
still maintained by those who differentiate two acts of fertilization
within the embryo-sac, and regard that of the egg by the first
male-cell, as the true or generative fertilization, and that of the
polar nuclei by the second male gamete as a vegetative fertilization
which gives a stimulus to development in correlation with the other.
if, on the other hand, the endosperm is the product of an act of
fertilization as definite as that giving rise to the embryo itself,
we have to recognize that twin-plants are produced within the
embryo-sac—one, the embryo, which becomes the angiospermous plant,
the other, the endosperm, a short-lived, undifferentiated nurse to
assist in the nutrition of the former, even as the subsidiary embryos
in a pluri-embryonic gymnosperm may facilitate the nutrition of the
dominant one. if this is so, and the endosperm like the embryo is
normally the product of a sexual act, hybridization will give a hybrid
endosperm as it does a hybrid embryo, and herein (it is suggested) we
may have the explanation of the phenomenon of xenia observed in the
mixed endosperms of hybrid races of maize and other plants, regarding
which it has only been possible hitherto to assert that they were
indications of the extension of the influence of the pollen beyond the
egg and its product. this would not, however, explain the formation
of fruits intermediate in size and colour between those of crossed
parents. the signification of the coalescence of the polar nuclei is
not explained by these new facts, but it is noteworthy that the second
male-cell is said to unite sometimes with the apical polar nucleus,
the sister of the egg, before the union of this with the basal polar
one. the idea of the endosperm as a second subsidiary plant is no new
one; it was suggested long ago in explanation of the coalescence of
the polar nuclei, but it was then based on the assumption that these
represented male and female cells, an assumption for which there
was no evidence and which was inherently improbable. the proof of a
coalescence of the second male nucleus with the definitive nucleus
gives the conception a more stable basis. the antipodal cells aid more
or less in the process of nutrition of the developing embryo, and may
undergo multiplication, though they ultimately disintegrate, as do
also the synergidae. as in gymnosperms and other groups an interesting
qualitative change is associated with the process of fertilization.
the number of chromosomes (see plants: cytology) in the nucleus
of the two spores, pollen-grain and embryo-sac, is only half the
number found in an ordinary vegetative nucleus; and this reduced
number persists in the cells derived from them. the full number is
restored in the fusion of the male and female nuclei in the process of
fertilization, and remains until the formation of the cells from which
the spores are derived in the new generation.
in several natural orders and genera departures from the course of
development just described have been noted. in the natural order
rosaceae, the series querciflorae, and the very anomalous genus
casuarina and others, instead of a single macrospore a more
or less extensive sporogenous tissue is formed, but only one
cell proceeds to the formation of a functional female cell. in
casuarina, juglans and the order corylaceae, the
pollen-tube does not enter by means of the micropyle, but passing down
the ovary wall and through the placenta, enters at the chalazal end
of the ovule. such a method of entrance is styled chalazogamic, in
contrast to the porogamic or ordinary method of approach by means of
the micropyle.
embryology.
the result of fertilization is the development of the ovule into
the seed. by the segmentation of the fertilized egg, now invested by
cell-membrane, the embryo-plant arises. a varying number of transverse
segment-walls transform it into a pro-embryo—a cellular row of which
the cell nearest the micropyle becomes attached to the apex of the
embryo-sac, and thus fixes the position of the developing embryo,
while the terminal cell is projected into its cavity. in dicotyledons
the shoot of the embryo is wholly derived from the terminal cell of
the pro-embryo, from the next cell the root arises, and the remaining
ones form the suspensor. in many monocotyledons the terminal cell
forms the cotyledonary portion alone of the shoot of the embryo, its
axial part and the root being derived from the adjacent cell; the
cotyledon is thus a terminal structure and the apex of the primary
stem a lateral one—a condition in marked contrast with that of the
dicotyledons. in some monocotyledons,
[v. p.] however, the cotyledon is not really terminal. the
primary root of the embryo in all angiosperms points towards the
micropyle. the developing embryo at the end of the suspensor grows out
to a varying extent into the forming endosperm, from which by surface
absorption it derives good material for growth; at the same time the
suspensor plays a direct part as a carrier of nutrition, and may even
develop, where perhaps no endosperm is formed, special absorptive
"suspensor roots" which invest the developing embryo, or pass out into
the body and coats of the ovule, or even into the placenta. in some
cases the embryo or the embryo-sac sends out suckers into the nucellus
and ovular integument. as the embryo develops it may absorb all the
food material available, and store, either in its cotyledons or in
its hypocotyl, what is not immediately required for growth, as
reserve-food for use in germination, and by so doing it increases
in size until it may fill entirely the embryo-sac; or its absorptive
power at this stage may be limited to what is necessary for growth and
it remains of relatively small size, occupying but a small area of
the embryo-sac, which is otherwise filled with endosperm in which
the reserve-food is stored. there are also intermediate states. the
position of the embryo in relation to the endosperm varies, sometimes
it is internal, sometimes external, but the significance of this has
not yet been established.
the formation of endosperm starts, as has been stated, from the
endosperm nucleus. its segmentation always begins before that of the
egg, and thus there is timely preparation for the nursing of the young
embryo. if in its extension to contain the new formations within it
the embryo-sac remains narrow, endosperm formation proceeds upon the
lines of a cell-division, but in wide embryo-sacs the endosperm is
first of all formed as a layer of naked cells around the wall of the
sac, and only gradually acquires a pluricellular character, forming
a tissue filling the sac. the function of the endosperm is primarily
that of nourishing the embryo, and its basal position in the
embryo-sac places it favourably for the absorption of food material
entering the ovule. its duration varies with the precocity of the
embryo. it may be wholly absorbed by the progressive growth of the
embryo within the embryo-sac, or it may persist as a definite and more
or less conspicuous constituent of the seed. when it persists as
a massive element of the seed its nutritive function is usually
apparent, for there is accumulated within its cells reserve-food, and
according to the dominant substance it is starchy, oily, or rich in
cellulose, mucilage or proteid. in cases where the embryo has stored
reserve food within itself and thus provided for self-nutrition, such
endosperm as remains in the seed may take on other functions, for
instance, that of water-absorption.
some deviations from the usual course of development may be noted.
parthenogenesis, or the development of an embryo from an egg-cell
without the latter having been fertilized, has been described in
species of thalictrum, antennaria and alchemilla.
polyembryony is generally associated with the development of
cells other than the egg-cell. thus in erythronium and
limnocharis the fertilized egg may form a mass of tissue on
which several embryos are produced. isolated cases show that any of
the cells within the embryo-sac may exceptionally form an embryo,
e.g. the synergidae in species of mimosa, iris
and allium, and in the last-mentioned the antipodal cells also.
in coelebogyne (euphorbiaceae) and in funkia (liliaceae)
polyembryony results from an adventitious production of embryos from
the cells of the nucellus around the top of the embryo-sac. in a
species of allium, embryos have been found developing in the
same individual from the egg-cell, synergids, antipodal cells and
cells of the nucellus. in two malayan species of balanophora,
the embryo is developed from a cell of the endosperm, which is
formed from the upper polar nucleus only, the egg apparatus
becoming disorganized. the last-mentioned case has been regarded
as representing an apogamous development of the sporophyte from the
gametophyte comparable to the cases of apogamy described in ferns. but
the great diversity of these abnormal cases as shown in the examples
cited above suggests the use of great caution in formulating definite
morphological theories upon them.
fruit and seed.
as the development of embryo and endosperm proceeds within the
embryo-sac, its wall enlarges and commonly absorbs the substance of
the nucellus (which is likewise enlarging) to near its outer limit,
and combines with it and the integument to form the seed-coat;
or the whole nucellus and even the integument may be absorbed. in some
plants the nucellus is not thus absorbed, but itself becomes a seat
of deposit of reserve-food constituting the perisperm which may
coexist with endosperm, as in the water-lily order, or may alone
form a food-reserve for the embryo, as in canna. endospermic
food-reserve has evident advantages over perispermic, and the latter
is comparatively rarely found and only in non-progressive series.
seeds in which endosperm or perisperm or both exist are commonly
called albuminous or endospermic, those in which neither
is found are termed exalbuminous or exendospermic. these
terms, extensively used by systematists, only refer, however, to the
grosser features of the seed, and indicate the more or less evident
occurrence of a food-reserve; many so-called exalbuminous seeds show
to microscopic examination a distinct endosperm which may have other
than a nutritive function. the presence or absence of endosperm, its
relative amount when present, and the position of the embryo within
it, are valuable characters for the distinction of orders and groups
of orders. meanwhile the ovary wall has developed to form the fruit or
pericarp, the structure of which is closely associated with the manner
of distribution of the seed. frequently the influence of fertilization
is felt beyond the ovary, and other parts of the flower take part in
the formation of the fruit, as the floral receptacle in the apple,
strawberry and others. the character of the seed-coat bears a definite
relation to that of the fruit. their function is the twofold one of
protecting the embryo and of aiding in dissemination; they may also
directly promote germination. if the fruit is a dehiscent one and the
seed is therefore soon exposed, the seed-coat has to provide for the
protection of the embryo and may also have to secure dissemination. on
the other hand, indehiscent fruits discharge these functions for the
embryo, and the seed-coat is only slightly developed.
dissemination.
dissemination is effected by the agency of water, of air, of
animals—and fruits and seeds are therefore grouped in respect of this
as hydrophilous, anemophilous and zooidiophilous. the needs for these
are obvious—buoyancy in water and resistance to wetting for the
first, some form of parachute for the second, and some attaching
mechanism or attractive structure for the third. the methods in which
these are provided are of infinite variety, and any and every part of
the flower and of the inflorescence may be called into requisition to
supply the adaptation (see fruit). special outgrowths, arils, of the
seed-coat are of frequent occurrence. in the feature of fruit and
seed, by which the distribution of angiosperms is effected, we have a
distinctive character of the class. in gymnosperms we have seeds,
and the carpels may become modified and close around these, as in
pinus, during the process of ripening to form an imitation of a
box-like fruit which subsequently opening allows the seeds to escape;
but there is never in them the closed ovary investing from the outset
the ovules, and ultimately forming the ground-work of the fruit.
germination of seed.
their fortuitous dissemination does not always bring seeds upon a
suitable nidus for germination, the primary essential of which is a
sufficiency of moisture, and the duration of vitality of the embryo is
a point of interest. some seeds retain vitality for a period of many
years, though there is no warrant for the popular notion that genuine
"mummy wheat" will germinate; on the other hand some seeds lose
vitality in little more than a year. further, the older the seed the
more slow as a general rule will germination be in starting, but there
are notable exceptions. this pause, often of so long duration, in
the growth of the embryo between the time of its perfect development
within the seed and the moment of germination, is one of the
remarkable and distinctive features of the life of spermatophytes. the
aim of germination is the fixing of the embryo in the soil, effected
usually by means of the root, which is the first part of the embryo
to appear, in preparation for the elongation of the epicotyledonary
portion of the shoot, and there is infinite variety in the details of
the process. in albuminous dicotyledons the cotyledons act as the
absorbents of the reserve-food of the seed and are commonly brought
above ground (epigeal), either withdrawn from the seed-coat or
carrying it upon them, and then they serve as the first green
organs of the plant. the part of the stem below the cotyledons
(hypocotyl) commonly plays the greater part in bringing this
about. exalbuminous dicotyledons usually store reserve-food in
their cotyledons, which may in germination remain below ground
(hypogeal). in [v. p.]
 albuminous monocotyledons the cotyledon itself,
probably in consequence of its terminal position, is commonly the
agent by which the embryo is thrust out of the seed, and it may
function solely as a feeder, its extremity developing as a sucker
through which the endosperm is absorbed, or it may become the first
green organ, the terminal sucker dropping off with the seed-coat when
the endosperm is exhausted. exalbuminous monocotyledons are either
hydrophytes or strongly hygrophilous plants and have often peculiar
features in germination.
vegetative reproduction.
distribution by seed appears to satisfy so well the requirements of
angiosperms that distribution by vegetative buds is only an occasional
process. at the same time every bud on a shoot has the capacity
to form a new plant if placed in suitable conditions, as the
horticultural practice of propagation by cuttings shows; in nature we
see plants spreading by the rooting of their shoots, and buds we know
may be freely formed not only on stems but on leaves and on roots.
where detachable buds are produced, which can be transported through
the air to a distance, each of them is an incipient shoot which may
have a root, and there is always reserve-food stored in some part of
it. in essentials such a bud resembles a seed. a relation between
such vegetative distribution buds and production of flower is usually
marked. where there is free formation of buds there is little flower
and commonly no seed, and the converse is also the case. viviparous
plants are an illustration of substitution of vegetative buds for
flower.
phylogeny and taxonomy.
the position of angiosperms as the highest plant-group is
unassailable, but of the point or points of their origin from the
general stem of the plant kingdom, and of the path or paths of their
evolution, we can as yet say little.
until well on in the mesozoic period geological history tells us
nothing about angiosperms, and then only by their vegetative organs.
we readily recognize in them now-a-days the natural classes of
dicotyledons and monocotyledons distinguished alike in vegetative
and in reproductive construction, yet showing remarkable parallel
sequences in development; and we see that the dicotyledons are the
more advanced and show the greater capacity for further progressive
evolution. but there is no sound basis for the assumption that
the dicotyledons are derived from monocotyledons; indeed, the
palaeontological evidence seems to point to the dicotyledons being
the older. this, however, does not entitle us to assume the origin
of monocotyledons from dicotyledons, although there is manifestly a
temptation to connect helobic forms of the former with ranal ones of
the latter. there is no doubt that the phylum of angiosperms has not
sprung from that of gymnosperms.
within each class the flower-characters as the essential feature
of angiosperms supply the clue to phylogeny, but the uncertainty
regarding the construction of the primitive angiospermous flower gives
a fundamental point of divergence in attempts to construct progressive
sequences of the families. simplicity of flower-structure has appeared
to some to be always primitive, whilst by others it has been taken to
be always derived. there is, however, abundant evidence that it may
have the one or the other character in different cases. apart from
this, botanists are generally agreed that the concrescence of parts of
the flower-whorls—in the gynaeceum as the seed-covering, and in the
corolla as the seat of attraction, more than in the androecium and the
calyx—is an indication of advance, as is also the concrescence
that gives the condition of epigyny. dorsiventrality is also clearly
derived from radial construction, and anatropy of the ovule has
followed atropy. we should expect the albuminous state of the seed
to be an antecedent one to the exalbuminous condition, and the recent
discoveries in fertilization tend to confirm this view. amongst
dicotyledons the gamopetalous forms are admitted to be the highest
development and a dominant one of our epoch. advance has been along
two lines, markedly in relation to insect-pollination, one of which
has culminated in the hypogynous epipetalous bicarpellate forms with
dorsiventral often large and loosely arranged flowers such as occur
in scrophulariaceae, and the other in the epigynous bicarpellate
small-flowered families of which the compositae represent the most
elaborate type. in the polypetalous forms progression from hypogyny
to epigyny is generally recognized, and where dorsiventrality with
insect-pollination has been established, a dominant group has been
developed as in the leguminosae. the starting-point of the class,
however, and the position within it of apetalous families with
frequently unisexual flowers, have provoked much discussion. in
monocotyledons a similar advance from hypogyny to epigyny is observed,
and from the dorsiventral to the radial type of flower. in this
connexion it is noteworthy that so many of the higher forms are
adapted as bulbous geophytes, or as aerophytes to special xerophilous
conditions. the gramineae offer a prominent example of a dominant
self-pollinated or wind-pollinated family, and this may find
explanation in a multiplicity of factors.
though best known for his artificial (or sexual) system, linnaeus
was impressed with the importance of elaborating a natural system of
arrangement in which plants should be arranged according to their true
affinities. in his philosophia botanica () linnaeus grouped
the genera then known into sixty-seven orders (fragmenta), all
except five of which are angiosperms. he gave names to these but did
not characterize them or attempt to arrange them in larger groups.
some represent natural groups and had in several cases been already
recognized by ray and others, but the majority are, in the light
of modern knowledge, very mixed. well-defined polypetalous and
gamopetalous genera sometimes occur in the same order, and even
monocotyledons and dicotyledons are classed together where they have
some striking physiological character in common.
work on the lines suggested by the linnaean fragmenta was
continued in france by bernard de jussieu and his nephew, antoine
laurent, and the arrangement suggested by the latter in his genera
plantarum secundum ordines naturales disposita () is the
first which can claim to be a natural system. the orders are carefully
characterized, and those of angiosperms are grouped in fourteen
classes under the two main divisions monocotyledons and dicotyledons.
the former comprise three classes, which are distinguished by the
relative position of the stamens and ovary; the eleven classes of
the latter are based on the same set of characters and fall into
the larger subdivisions apetalae, monopetalae and polypetalae,
characterized respectively by absence, union or freedom of the petals,
and a subdivision, diclines irregulares, a very unnatural
group, including one class only. a. p. de candolle introduced several
improvements into the system. in his arrangement the last subdivision
disappears, and the dicotyledons fall into two groups, a larger
containing those in which both calyx and corolla are present in the
flower, and a smaller, monochlamydeae, representing the apetalae and
diclines irregulares of jussieu. the dichlamydeous group is
subdivided into three, thalamiflorae, calyciflorae and corolliflorae,
depending on the position and union of the petals. this, which we may
distinguish as the french system, finds its most perfect expression in
the classic genera plantarum (-) of bentham and hooker,
a work containing a description, based on careful examination of
specimens, of all known genera of flowering plants. the subdivision is
as follows:—
 polypetalae:
 thalamiflorae.
 disciflorae.
 calyciflorae.
 gamopetalae:
 inferae.
 heteromerae.
 bicarpellatae.
 monochlamydeae in eight series.
 monocotyledons in seven series.
of the polypetalae, series , thalamiflorae, is characterized by
hypogynous petals and stamens, and contains  orders distributed in 
larger groups or cohorts. series , disciflorae, takes its name from
a development of the floral axis which forms a ring or cushion at the
base of the ovary or is broken up into glands; the ovary is superior.
it contains  orders in  cohorts. series , calyciflorae, has petals
and stamens perigynous, or sometimes superior. it contains  orders
in  cohorts.
of the gamopetalae, series , inferae, has an interior ovary and
stamens usually as many as the corolla-lobes. it contains  orders
in  cohorts. series , heteromerae, has generally a superior ovary,
stamens as many as the corolla-lobes or more, and more than two
carpels. it contains  orders in  cohorts. series , bicarpellatae,
has generally a superior ovary and usually two carpels. it contains 
orders in  cohorts.
the eight series of monochlamydeae, containing  orders, form groups
characterized mainly by differences in the ovary and ovules, and are
now recognized as of unequal value.
the seven series of monocotyledons represent a sequence beginning
with the most complicated epigynous orders, such as orchideae and
scitamineae, and passing through the petaloid hypogynous orders
(series coronarieae) of which liliaceae is the representative to
juncaceae and the palms (series calycinae) where the perianth loses
its petaloid character and thence to the aroids, screw-pines and
[v. p.]
 others where it is more or less aborted (series
nudiflorae). series , apocarpeae, is characterized by  carpels, and
in the last series glumaceae, great simplification in the flower is
associated with a grass-like habit.
the sequence of orders in the polypetalous subdivision of dicotyledons
undoubtedly represents a progression from simpler to more elaborate
forms, but a great drawback to the value of the system is the
inclusion among the monochlamydeae of a number of orders which are
closely allied with orders of polypetalae though differing in absence
of a corolla. the german systematist, a. w. eichler, attempted
to remove this disadvantage which since the time of jussieu had
characterized the french system, and in  grouped the dicotyledons
in two subclasses. the earlier choripetalae embraces the polypetalae
and monochlamydae of the french systems. it includes  series, and
is an attempt to arrange as far as possible in a linear series those
orders which are characterized by absence or freedom of petals. the
second subclass, gamopetalae, includes  series and culminates
in those which show the most elaborate type of flower, the series
aggregatae, the chief representative of which is the great and
wide-spread order compositae. a modification of eichler's system,
embracing the most recent views of the affinities of the orders of
angiosperms, has been put forward by dr. adolf engler of berlin, who
adopts the suggestive names archichlamydeae and metachlamydeae for the
two subdivisions of dicotyledons. dr. engler is the principal editor
of a large series of volumes which, under the title die naturlichen
pflanzenfamilien, is a systematic account of all the known genera
of plants and represents the work of many botanists. more recently
in das pflanzenreich the same author organized a series of
complete monographs of the families of seed-plants.
as an attempt at a phylogenetic arrangement, engler's system is now
preferred by many botanists. more recently a startling novelty in the
way of system has been produced by van tieghem, as follows:
 monocotyledons.
 liorhizal dicotyledons.
 dicotyledons.
 unitegmineae.
 bitegmineae.
the most remarkable feature here is the class of liorhizal
dicotyledons, which includes only the families of nymphaeaceae
and gramineae. it is based upon the fact that the histological
differentiation of the epidermis of their root is that generally
characteristic of monocotyledons, whilst they have two cotyledons—the
old view of the epiblast as a second cotyledon in gramineae being
adopted. but the presence of a second cotyledon in grasses is
extremely doubtful, and though there may be ground for reconsidering
the position of nymphaeaceae, their association with the grasses as
a distinct class is not warranted by a comparative examination of the
members of the two orders. ovular characters determine the grouping in
the dicotyledons, van tieghem supporting the view that the integument,
the outer if there be two, is the lamina of a leaf of which the
funicle is the petiole, whilst the nucellus is an outgrowth of
this leaf, and the inner integument, if present, an indusium. the
insemineae include forms in which the nucellus is not developed, and
therefore there can be no seed. the plants included are, however,
mainly well-established parasites, and the absence of nucellus is only
one of those characters of reduction to which parasites are liable.
even if we admit van tieghem's interpretation of the integuments to
be correct, the diagnostic mark of his unitegminous and bitegminous
groups is simply that of the absence or presence of an indusium, not a
character of great value elsewhere, and, as we know, the number of the
ovular coats is inconstant within the same family. at the same time
the groups based upon the integuments are of much the same extent as
the polypetalae and gamopetalae of other systems. we do not yet
know the significance of this correlation, which, however, is not an
invariable one, between number of integuments and union of petals.
within the last few years prof. john coulter and dr. c. j. chamberlain
of chicago university have given a valuable general account of the
morphology of angiosperms as far as concerns the flower, and
the series of events which ends in the formation of the seed
(morphology of angiosperms, chicago, ).
authorities.—the reader will find in the following works details
of the subject and references to the literature: bentham and
hooker, genera plantarum (london, -); eichler,
bluthendiagramme (leipzig, -); engler and prantl,
die naturlichen pflanzenfamilien (leipzig, -); engler,
syllabus der pflanzenfamilien, rd ed. (berlin, ); knuth,
handbuch der blutenbiologie (leipzig, , ); sachs,
history of botany, english ed. (oxford, ); solereder,
systematische anatomie der dicotyledonen (stuttgart, );
van tieghem, elements de botanique; coulter and chamberlain,
morphology of angiosperms (new york, ).
angkor, an assemblage of ruins in cambodia, the relic of the ancient
khmer civilization. they are situated in forests to the north of the
great lake (tonle-sap), the most conspicuous of the remains being the
town of angkor-thom and the temple of angkor-vat, both of which lie on
the right bank of the river siem-reap, a tributary of tonle-sap.
other remains of the same form and character lie scattered about the
vicinity on both banks of the river, which is crossed by an ancient
stone bridge.
angkor-thom lies about a quarter of a mile from the river. according
to aymonier it was begun about a.d. , in the reign of the khmer
sovereign jayavarman iii., and finished towards a.d. . it consists
of a rectangular enclosure, nearly  m. in each direction, surrounded
by a wall from  to  ft. in height. within the enclosure, which
is entered by five monumental gates, are the remains of palaces and
temples, overgrown by the forest. the chief of these are:—
() the vestiges of the royal palace, which stood within an enclosure
containing also the pyramidal religious structure known as the
phimeanakas. to the east of this enclosure there extends a terrace
decorated with magnificent reliefs.
() the temple of bayon, a square enclosure formed by galleries with
colonnades, within which is another and more elaborate system of
galleries, rectangular in arrangement and enclosing a cruciform
structure, at the centre of which rises a huge tower with a circular
base. fifty towers, decorated with quadruple faces of brahma, are
built at intervals upon the galleries, the whole temple ranking as
perhaps the most remarkable of the khmer remains.
angkor-vat, the best preserved example of khmer architecture, lies
less than a mile to the south of the royal city, within a rectangular
park surrounded by a moat, the outer perimeter of which measures 
yds. on the west side of the park a paved causeway, leading over the
moat and under a magnificent portico, extends for a distance of a
quarter of a mile to the chief entrance of the main building. the
temple was originally devoted to the worship of brahma, but afterwards
to that of buddha; its construction is assigned by aymonier to the
first half of the th century a.d. it consists of three stages,
connected by numerous exterior staircases and decreasing in dimensions
as they rise, culminating in the sanctuary, a great central tower
pyramidal in form. towers also surmount the angles of the terraces
of the two upper stages. three galleries with vaulting supported on
columns lead from the three western portals to the second stage.
they are connected by a transverse gallery, thus forming four square
basins. khmer decoration, profuse but harmonious, consists chiefly in
the representation of gods, men and animals, which are displayed on
every flat surface. combats and legendary episodes are often depicted;
floral decoration is reserved chiefly for borders, mouldings and
capitals. sandstone of various colours was the chief material employed
by the khmers; limonite was also used. the stone was cut into huge
blocks which are fitted together with great accuracy without the use
of cement.
see e. aymonier, le cambodge ( vols., -); doudart de
lagrée, voyage d'exploration en indo-chine (-); a. h.
mouhot, travels in indo-china, cambodia and laos ( vols.,
); fournereau and porcher, les ruines d'angkor (); l.
delaporte, voyage au cambodge: l'architecture khmer (); j.
moura, le royaume de cambodge ( vols., ).
angle (from the lat. angulus, a corner, a diminutive, of which
the primitive form, angus, does not occur in latin; cognate are
the lat. angere, to compress into a bend or to strangle, and
the gr. ἄγκος, a bend; both connected with the aryan root
ank-, to bend: see angling), in geometry, the inclination of
one line or plane to another. euclid (elements, book i) defines
a plane angle as the inclination to each other, in a plane, of two
lines which meet each other, and do not lie straight with respect to
each other (see geometry, euclidean). according to proclus an angle
must be either a quality or a quantity, or a relationship. the first
concept was utilized by eudemus, who regarded an angle as a deviation
from a straight line; the second by carpus of antioch, who regarded
it as the interval or space between the intersecting lines; euclid
adopted the third concept, although his definitions of right, acute,
and obtuse angles are certainly quantitative. a discussion of
[v. p.] these concepts and the various definitions of angles in
euclidean geometry is to be found in w. b. frankland, the first book
of euclid's elements (). following euclid, a right angle is
formed by a straight line standing upon another straight line so as to
make the adjacent angles equal; any angle less than a right angle is
termed an acute angle, and any angle greater than a right angle an
obtuse angle. the difference between an acute angle and a right angle
is termed the complement of the angle, and between an angle and two
right angles the supplement of the angle. the generalized view of
angles and their measurement is treated in the article trigonometry.
a solid angle is definable as the space contained by three or more
planes intersecting in a common point; it is familiarly represented
by a corner. the angle between two planes is termed dihedral, between
three trihedral, between any number more than three polyhedral.
a spherical angle is a particular dihedral angle; it is the angle
between two intersecting arcs on a sphere, and is measured by the
angle between the planes containing the arcs and the centre of the
sphere.
the angle between a line and a curve (mixed angle) or between two
curves (curvilinear angle) is measured by the angle between the line
and the tangent at the point of intersection, or between the tangents
to both curves at their common point. various names (now rarely, if
ever, used) have been given to particular cases:—amphicyrtic (gr.
ἀμφί, on both sides, κυρτός, convex) or cissoidal
(gr. κισσός, ivy), biconvex; xystroidal or sistroidal (gr.
ξυστρίς, a tool for scraping), concavo-convex; amphicoelic
(gr. κοίλη, a hollow) or angulus lunularis,
biconcave.
the angler (lophius piscatorius).
angler, also sometimes called fishing-frog, frog-fish, sea-devil
(lophius piscatorius), a fish well known off the coasts of
great britain and europe generally, the grotesque shape of its body
and its singular habits having attracted the attention of naturalists
of all ages. to the north sea fishermen this fish is known as the
"monk," a name which more properly belongs to rhina squatina,
a fish allied to the skates. its head is of enormous size, broad,
flat and depressed, the remainder of the body appearing merely like an
appendage. the wide mouth extends all round the anterior circumference
of the head; and both jaws are armed with bands of long pointed teeth,
which are inclined inwards, and can be depressed so as to offer no
impediment to an object gliding towards the stomach, but to prevent
its escape from the mouth. the pectoral and ventral fins are so
articulated as to perform the functions of feet, the fish being
enabled to move, or rather to walk, on the bottom of the sea, where it
generally hides itself in the sand or amongst sea-weed. all round
its head and also along the body the skin bears fringed appendages
resembling short fronds of sea-weed, a structure which, combined with
the extraordinary faculty of assimilating the colour of the body to
its surroundings, assists this fish greatly in concealing itself in
places which it selects on account of the abundance of prey. to render
the organization of this creature perfect in relation to its wants, it
is provided with three long filaments inserted along the middle of the
head, which are, in fact, the detached and modified three first spines
of the anterior dorsal fin. the filament most important in the economy
of the angler is the first, which is the longest, terminates in a
lappet, and is movable in every direction. the angler is believed to
attract other fishes by means of its lure, and then to seize them
with its enormous jaws. it is probable enough that smaller fishes are
attracted in this way, but experiments have shown that the action
of the jaws is automatic and depends on contact of the prey with the
tentacle. its stomach is distensible in an extraordinary degree, and
not rarely fishes have been taken out quite as large and heavy as
their destroyer. it grows to a length of more than  ft.; specimens
of  ft. are common. the spawn of the angler is very remarkable. it
consists of a thin sheet of transparent gelatinous material  or 
ft. broad and  to  ft. in length. the eggs in this sheet are in a
single layer, each in its own little cavity. the spawn is free in the
sea. the larvae are free-swimming and have the pelvic fins elongated
into filaments. the british species is found all round the coasts of
europe and western north america, but becomes scarce beyond ° n.
lat.; it occurs also on the coasts of the cape of good hope. a second
species (lophius budegassa) inhabits the mediterranean, and a
third (l. setigerus) the coasts of china and japan.
anglesey, arthur annesley, st earl of (-), british statesman,
son of the st viscount valentia (cr. ) and baron mountnorris (cr.
), and of dorothy, daughter of sir john philipps of picton castle,
pembrokeshire, was born at dublin on the th of july , was
educated at magdalen college, oxford, and was admitted to lincoln's
inn in . having made the grand tour he returned to ireland; and
being employed by the parliament in a mission to the duke of ormonde,
now reduced to the last extremities, he succeeded in concluding a
treaty with him on the th of june , thus securing the country
from complete subjection to the rebels. in april  he was
returned for radnorshire to the house of commons. he supported the
parliamentary as against the republican or army party, and appears
to have been one of the members excluded in . he sat in richard
cromwell's parliament for dublin city, and endeavoured to take his
seat in the restored rump parliament of . he was made president of
the council in february , and in the convention parliament sat for
carmarthen borough. the anarchy of the last months of the commonwealth
converted him to royalism, and he showed great activity in bringing
about the restoration. he used his influence in moderating measures of
revenge and violence, and while sitting in judgment on the regicides
was on the side of leniency. in november  by his father's death
he had become viscount valentia and baron mountnorris in the irish
peerage, and on the th april  he was created baron annesley of
newport pagnell in buckinghamshire and earl of anglesey in the
peerage of great britain. he supported the king's administration in
parliament, but opposed strongly the unjust measure which, on the
abolition of the court of wards, placed the extra burden of
taxation thus rendered necessary on the excise. his services in the
administration of ireland were especially valuable. he filled the
office of vice-treasurer from  till , served on the committee
for carrying out the declaration for the settlement of ireland and on
the committee for irish affairs, while later, in  and , he was
a leading member of various commissions appointed to investigate the
working of the acts of settlement. in february  he had obtained a
captaincy of horse, and in  he exchanged his vice-treasuryship of
ireland for the treasuryship of the navy. his public career was marked
by great independence and fidelity to principle. on the th of july
 he alone signed a protest against the bill "for the encouragement
of trade," on the plea that owing to the free export of coin and
bullion allowed by the act, and to the importation of foreign
commodities being greater than the export of home goods, "it must
necessarily follow ... that our silver will also be carried away into
foreign parts and all trade fail for want of money."[] he especially
disapproved of another clause in the same bill forbidding the
importation of irish cattle into england, a mischievous measure
promoted by the duke of buckingham, and he opposed again the bill
brought in with that object in january
[v. p.] . this same year his naval accounts were subjected
to an examination in consequence of his indignant refusal to take part
in the attack upon ormonde;[] and he was suspended from his office in
, no charge, however, against him being substantiated. he took
a prominent part in the dispute in  between the two houses
concerning the right of the lords to amend money bills, and wrote a
learned pamphlet on the question entitled the privileges of the
house of lords and commons (), in which the right of the lords
was asserted. in april  he was appointed lord privy seal, and
was disappointed at not obtaining the great seal the same year on the
removal of shaftesbury. in  he was included in sir w. temple's
new-modelled council.
in the bitter religious controversies of the time anglesey showed
great moderation and toleration. in  he is mentioned as
endeavouring to prevent the justices putting into force the laws
against the roman catholics and nonconformists.[] in the panic of the
"popish plot" in  he exhibited a saner judgment than most of his
contemporaries and a conspicuous courage. on the th of december he
protested with three other peers against the measure sent up from the
commons enforcing the disarming of all convicted recusants and taking
bail from them to keep the peace; he was the only peer to dissent
from the motion declaring the existence of an irish plot; and though
believing in the guilt and voting for the death of lord stafford, he
interceded, according to his own account,[] with the king for him as
well as for langhorne and plunket. his independent attitude drew
upon him an attack by dangerfield, and in the commons by the
attorney-general, sir w. jones, who accused him of endeavouring to
stifle the evidence against the romanists. in march  he protested
against the second reading of the bill for disabling danby. in 
anglesey wrote a letter from a person of honour in the country,
as a rejoinder to the earl of castlehaven, who had published memoirs
on the irish rebellion defending the action of the irish and the roman
catholics. in so doing anglesey was held by ormonde to have censured
his conduct and that of charles i. in concluding the "cessation,"
and the duke brought the matter before the council. in  he wrote
the account of arthur, earl of anglesey ... of the true state of
your majesty's government and kingdom, which was addressed to the
king in a tone of censure and remonstrance, but appears not to have
been printed till .[] in consequence he was dismissed on the th
of august  from the office of lord privy seal. in  he appeared
at the old bailey as a witness in defence of lord russell, and in june
 he protested alone against the revision of stafford's attainder.
he died at his home at blechingdon in oxfordshire on the th of april
, closing a career marked by great ability, statesmanship and
business capacity, and by conspicuous courage and independence of
judgment. he amassed a large fortune in ireland, in which country he
had been allotted lands by cromwell.
the unfavourable character drawn of him by burnet is certainly unjust
and not supported by any evidence. pepys, a far more trustworthy
judge, speaks of him invariably in terms of respect and approval as a
"grave, serious man," and commends his appointment as treasurer of
the navy as that of "a very notable man and understanding and will do
things regular and understand them himself."[] he was a learned and
cultivated man and collected a celebrated library, which was dispersed
at his death. besides the pamphlets already mentioned, he wrote:—a
true account of the whole proceedings betwixt ... the duke of ormond
and ... the earl of anglesey (); a letter of remarks upon
jovian (); other works ascribed to him being the king's
right of indulgence in matters spiritual ... asserted ();
truth unveiled, to which is added a short treatise on ...
transubstantiation (); the obligation resulting from the
oath of supremacy (); and england's confusion ().
memoirs of lord anglesey were published by sir p. pett in ,
but contain little biographical information and were repudiated as a
mere imposture by sir john thompson (lord haversham), his son-in-law,
in his preface to lord anglesey's state of the government in
. the author however of the preface to the rights of the lords
asserted (), while blaming their publication as "scattered and
unfinished papers," admits their genuineness.
lord anglesey married elizabeth, daughter and co-heiress of sir james
altham of oxey, hertfordshire, by whom, besides other children, he had
james, who succeeded him, altham, created baron altham, and richard,
afterwards rd baron altham. his descendant richard, the th earl
(d. ), left a son arthur, whose legitimacy was doubted, and the
peerage became extinct. he was summoned to the irish house of peers as
viscount valentia, but was denied his writ to the parliament of great
britain by a majority of one vote. he was created in  earl of
mountnorris in the peerage of ireland. all the male descendants of the
st earl of anglesey became extinct in the person of george, nd earl
of mountnorris, in , when the titles of viscount valentia and
baron mountnorris passed to his cousin arthur annesley (-),
who thus became th viscount valentia, being descended from the
st viscount valentia the father of the st earl of anglesey in the
annesley family. the st viscount was also the ancestor of the earls
annesley in the irish peerage.
authorities.—dict. of nat. biography, with authorities there
collected; lives in wood's athenae oxonienses (bliss), iv.
, biographia britannica, and h. walpole's royal and noble
authors (), iii.  (the latter a very inadequate review of
anglesey's character and career); also bibliotheca anglesiana
... per thomam philippum (); the happy future state of
england, by sir peter pett (); great news from poland
(), where his religious tolerance is ridiculed; somers
tracts (scott, ), viii. ; notes of the privy council
(roxburghe club, ); cal. of state papers, dom.; state
trials, viii. and ix. .
[] protests of the lords, by j. e. thorold rogers
(), i. : carti's life of ormonde (), iv. ;
parl. hist. iv. .
[] carti's ormonde, iv. , .
[] cal. of state pap. dom. (-), p. .
[] memoirs, , .
[] by sir j. thompson, his son-in-law. reprinted in
somers tracts (scott, ), viii. , and in parl.
hist. iv. app. xvi.
[] diary (ed. wheatley, ), iv. , vii. .
anglesey, henry william paget, st marquess of (-), british
field-marshal, was born on the th of may . he was the eldest son
of henry paget, st earl of uxbridge (d. ), and was educated at
westminster school and christ church, oxford, afterwards entering
parliament in  as member for carnarvon, for which he sat for six
years. at the outbreak of the french revolutionary wars lord paget (as
he was then styled), who had already served in the militia, raised on
his father's estate the regiment of staffordshire volunteers, in which
he was given the temporary rank of lieutenant-colonel (). the
corps soon became part of the regular army as the th foot, and it
took part, under lord paget's command, in the flanders campaign of
. in spite of his youth he held a brigade command for a time, and
gained also, during the campaign, his first experience of the cavalry
arm, with which he was thenceforward associated. his substantive
commission as lieutenant-colonel of the th light dragoons bore the
date of the th of june , and in  he was made a colonel
in the army. in  he married lady caroline elizabeth villiers,
daughter of the earl of jersey. in april  lord paget was
transferred to a lieut.-colonelcy in the th light dragoons, of which
regiment he became colonel in . from the first he applied himself
strenuously to the improvement of discipline, and to the perfection of
a new system of cavalry evolutions. in the short campaign of 
in holland, paget commanded the cavalry brigade, and in spite of the
unsuitable character of the ground, he made, on several occasions,
brilliant and successful charges. after the return of the expedition,
he devoted himself zealously to his regiment, which under his command
became one of the best corps in the service. in  he was promoted
major-general, and six years later lieutenant-general. in command of
the cavalry of sir john moore's army during the corunna campaign, lord
paget won the greatest distinction. at sahagun, mayorga and benavente,
the british cavalry behaved so well under his leadership that moore
wrote:—"it is impossible for me to say too much in its praise.... our
cavalry is very superior in quality to any the french have, and
[v. p.]
 the right spirit has been infused into them by the
example and instruction of their ... leaders...." at benavente one
of napoleon's best cavalry leaders, general lefebvre desnoëttes, was
taken prisoner. corunna was paget's last service in the peninsula.
his liaison with the wife of henry wellesley, afterwards
lord cowley, made it impossible at that time for him to serve with
wellington, whose cavalry, on many occasions during the succeeding
campaigns, felt the want of the true cavalry leader to direct them.
his only war service from  to  was in the disastrous walcheren
expedition () in which he commanded a division. during these
years he occupied himself with his parliamentary duties as member
for milborne port, which he represented almost continuously up to his
father's death in , when he took his seat in the house of lords as
earl of uxbridge. in  he was divorced and married mrs wellesley,
who had about the same time been divorced from her husband. lady
paget was soon afterwards married to the duke of argyll. in  lord
uxbridge received command of the british cavalry in flanders. at a
moment of danger such as that of napoleon's return from elba, the
services of the best cavalry general in the british army could not be
neglected. wellington placed the greatest confidence in him, and on
the eve of waterloo extended his command so as to include the whole of
the allied cavalry and horse artillery. he covered the retirement of
the allies from quatre bras to waterloo on the th of june, and on
the th gained the crowning distinction of his military career in
leading the great cavalry charge of the british centre, which checked
and in part routed d'erlon's corps d'armée (see waterloo
campaign). freely exposing his own life throughout, the earl received,
by one of the last cannon shots fired, a severe wound in the leg,
necessitating amputation. five days later the prince regent created
him marquess of anglesey in recognition of his brilliant services,
which were regarded universally as second only to those of the duke
himself. he was made a g. c. b. and he was also decorated by many of the
allied sovereigns.
in  the marquess was made a knight of the garter, in  he
became full general, and at the coronation of george iv. he acted as
lord high steward of england. his support of the proceedings against
queen caroline made him for a time unpopular, and when he was on one
occasion beset by a crowd, who compelled him to shout "the queen,"
he added the wish, "may all your wives be like her." at the close of
april  he became a member of the canning administration, taking
the post of master-general of the ordnance, previously held by
wellington. he was at the same time sworn a member of the privy
council. under the wellington administration he accepted the
appointment of lord-lieutenant of ireland (march ), and in the
discharge of his important duties he greatly endeared himself to
the irish people. the spirit in which he acted and the aims which
he steadily set before himself contributed to the allaying of party
animosities, to the promotion of a willing submission to the laws,
to the prosperity of trade and to the extension and improvement of
education. on the great question of the time his views were opposed
to those of the government. he saw clearly that the time was come when
the relief of the catholics from the penal legislation of the past was
an indispensable measure, and in december  he addressed a letter
to the roman catholic primate of ireland distinctly announcing his
view. this led to his recall by the government, a step sincerely
lamented by the irish. he pleaded for catholic emancipation in
parliament, and on the formation of earl grey's administration in
november , he again became lord-lieutenant of ireland. the times
were changed; the act of emancipation had been passed, and the task of
viceroy in his second tenure of office was to resist the agitation for
repeal of the union carried on by o'connell. he felt it his duty now
to demand coercion acts for the security of the public peace; his
popularity was diminished, differences appeared in the cabinet on
the difficult subject, and in july  the ministry resigned. to the
marquess of anglesey ireland is indebted for the board of education,
the origination of which may perhaps be reckoned as the most memorable
act of his viceroyalty. for thirteen years after his retirement
he remained out of office, and took little part in the affairs of
government. he joined the russell administration in july  as
master-general of the ordnance, finally retiring with his chief in
march . his promotion in the army was completed by his advancement
to the rank of field-marshal in . four years before, he exchanged
his colonelcy of the th light dragoons which he had held over forty
years, for that of the royal horse guards. he died on the th of
april .
the marquess had a large family by each of his two wives, two sons
and six daughters by the first and six sons and four daughters by the
second. his eldest son, henry, succeeded him in the marquessate;
but the title passed rapidly in succession to the rd, th and th
marquesses. the latter, whose extravagances were notorious, died in
, when the title passed to his cousin.
other members of the paget family distinguished themselves in the army
and the navy. of the first marquess's brothers one, sir charles paget
(-), rose to the rank of vice-admiral in the royal navy;
another, general sir edward paget (-), won great distinction
by his skilful and resolute handling of a division at corunna,
and from  to  was commander-in-chief in india. one of the
marquess's sons by his second marriage, lord clarence edward paget
(-), became an admiral; another, lord george augustus
frederick paget (-), led the th light dragoons in the charge
of the light brigade at balaklava, and subsequently commanded the
brigade, and, for a short time, the cavalry division in the crimea.
in  he was made inspector-general of cavalry, in 
lieutenant-general and k. c. b., and in  full general. his crimean
journals were published in .
anglesey, or anglesea, an insular northern county of wales. its area
is , acres or about  sq. m. anglesey, in the see of bangor,
is separated from the mainland by the menai straits (afon menai),
over which were thrown telford's suspension bridge, in , and the
stephenson tubular railway bridge in . the county is flat,
with slight risings such as parys, cadair mynachdy (or monachdy,
i.e.. "chair of the monastery"; there is a nanner, "convent,"
not far away) and holyhead mountain. there are a few lakes, such as
cors cerrig y daran, but rising water is generally scarce. the climate
is humid, the land poor for the most part compared with its old state
of fertility, and there are few industries.
as regards geology, the younger strata in anglesey rest upon a
foundation of very old pre-cambrian rocks which appear at the
surface in three areas:—() a western region including holyhead and
llanfaethlu, () a central area about aberffraw and trefdraeth,
and () an eastern region which includes newborough, caerwen and
pentraeth. these pre-cambrian rocks are schists and slates, often much
contorted and disturbed. the general line of strike of the formations
in the island is from n.e. to s.w. a belt of granitic rocks lies
immediately north-west of the central pre-cambrian mass, reaching from
llanfaelog near the coast to the vicinity of llanerchymedd. between
this granite and the pre-cambrian of holyhead is a narrow tract of
ordovician slates and grits with llandovery beds in places; this
tract spreads out in the n. of the island between dulas bay and carmel
point. a small patch of ordovician strata lies on the northern side of
beaumaris. in parts, these ordovician rocks are much folded, crushed
and metamorphosed, and they are associated with schists and altered
volcanic rocks which are probably pre-cambrian. between the eastern
and central pre-cambrian masses carboniferous rocks are found. the
carboniferous limestone occupies a broad area s. of ligwy bay and
pentraeth, and sends a narrow spur in a south-westerly direction by
llangefni to malldraeth sands. the limestone is underlain on the
n.w. by a red basement conglomerate and yellow sandstone (sometimes
considered to be of old red sandstone age). limestone occurs again on
the n. coast about llanfihangel and llangoed; and in the s.w. round
llanidan on the border of the menai strait. puffin island is made
of carboniferous limestone. malldraeth marsh is occupied by coal
measures, and a small patch of the same formation appears near
tall-y-foel ferry on the menai straits. a patch of granitic and
felsitic rocks form parys mountain, where copper and iron
[v. p.]
 ochre have been worked. serpentine (mona marble) is
found near llanfaerynneubwll and upon the opposite shore in holyhead.
there are abundant evidences of glaciation, and much boulder clay and
drift sand covers the older rocks. patches of blown sand occur on the
s.w. coast.
the london & north-western railway (chester and holyhead branch)
crosses anglesey from llanfairpwllgwyngyll to gaerwen and holyhead
(caer gybi), also from gaerwen to amlwch. the staple of the island is
farming, the chief crops being turnips, oats, potatoes, with flax in
the centre. copper (near amlwch), lead, silver, marble, asbestos, lime
and sandstone, marl, zinc and coal have all been worked in anglesey,
coal especially at malldraeth and trefdraeth. the population of the
county in  was ,. there is no parliamentary borough, but one
member is returned for the county. it is in the north-western circuit,
and assizes are held at beaumaris, the only municipal borough (pop.
). amlwch (), holyhead (,), llangefni () and menai
bridge (pont y borth, ) are urban districts. there are six
hundreds and seventy-eight parishes.
môn (a cow) is the welsh name of anglesey, itself a corrupted form of
o. e., meaning the isle of the angles. old welsh names are ynys dywyll
("dark isle") and ynys y cedairn (cedyrn or kedyrn; "isle of brave
folk"). it is the mona of tacitus (ann. xiv. , agr.
xiv. ), pliny the elder (iv. ) and dio cassius (). it is called
mam cymru by giraldus cambrensis. clas merddin, y vel ynys (honey
isle), ynys prydein, ynys brut are other names. according to the
triads (), anglesey was once part of the mainland, as geology
proves. the island was the seat of the druids, of whom  cromlechs
remain, on uplands overlooking the sea, e.g. at plâs newydd.
the druids were attacked in a.d.  by suetonius paulinus, and by
agricola in a.d. . in the th century caswallon lived here, and
here, at aberffraw, the princes of gwynedd lived till . the
present road from holyhead to llanfairpwllgwyngyll is originally
roman. british and roman camps, coins and ornaments have been dug up
and discussed, especially by the hon. mr. stanley of penrhos. pen caer
gybi is roman. the island was devastated by the danes (dub gint
or black nations, gentes), especially in a.d. .
see edw. breese, kalendar of gwynedd (venedocia), on anglesey,
carnarvon and merioneth (london, ); and the history of powys
fadog.
anglesite, a mineral consisting of lead sulphate, pbso,
crystallizing in the orthorhombic system, and isomorphous with
barytes and celestite. it was first recognized as a mineral species
by dr. withering in , who discovered it in the parys copper-mine
in anglesey; the name anglesite, from this locality, was given by f. s.
beudant in . the crystals from anglesey, which were formerly found
abundantly on a matrix of dull limonite, are small in size and simple
in form, being usually bounded by four faces of a prism and four faces
of a dome; they are brownish-yellow in colour owing to a stain of
limonite. crystals from some other localities, notably from monteponi
in sardinia, are transparent and colourless, possessed of a brilliant
adamantine lustre, and usually modified by numerous bright faces. the
variety of combinations and habits presented by the crystals is very
extensive, nearly two hundred distinct forms being figured by v.
von lang in his monograph of the species; without measurement of the
angles the crystals are frequently difficult to decipher. the hardness
is  and the specific gravity .. there are distinct cleavages
parallel to the faces of the prism () and the basal plane (),
but these are not so well developed as in the isomorphous minerals
barytes and celestite.
anglesite specimen.
anglesite is a mineral of secondary origin, having been formed by the
oxidation of galena in the upper parts of mineral lodes where these
have been affected by weathering processes. at monteponi the crystals
encrust cavities in glistening granular galena; and from leadhills,
in scotland, pseudomorphs of anglesite after galena are known. at most
localities it is found as isolated crystals in the lead-bearing
lodes, but at some places, in australia and mexico, it occurs as large
masses, and is then mined as an ore of lead, of which the pure mineral
contains %.
angli, anglii or angles, a teutonic people mentioned by tacitus in his
germania (cap. ) at the end of the st century. he gives no
precise indication of their geographical position, but states that,
together with six other tribes, including the varini (the warni of
later times), they worshipped a goddess named nerthus, whose
sanctuary was situated on "an island in the ocean." ptolemy in his
geography (ii. . § ), half a century later, locates them
with more precision between the rhine, or rather perhaps the ems,
and the elbe, and speaks of them as one of the chief tribes of the
interior. unfortunately, however, it is clear from a comparison of
his map with the evidence furnished by tacitus and other roman writers
that the indications which he gives cannot be correct. owing to
the uncertainty of these passages there has been much speculation
regarding the original home of the angli. one theory, which however
has little to recommend it, is that they dwelt in the basin of the
saale (in the neighbourhood of the canton engilin), from which region
the lex angliorum et werinorum hoc est thuringorum is believed
by many to have come. at the present time the majority of scholars
believe that the angli had lived from the beginning on the coasts of
the baltic, probably in the southern part of the jutish peninsula.
the evidence for this view is derived partly from english and danish
traditions dealing with persons and events of the th century (see
below), and partly from the fact that striking affinities to the cult
of nerthus as described by tacitus are to be found in scandinavian,
especially swedish and danish, religion. investigations in this
subject have rendered it very probable that the island of nerthus was
sjaelland (zealand), and it is further to be observed that the kings
of wessex traced their ancestry ultimately to a certain scyld, who
is clearly to be identified with skiöldr, the mythical founder of the
danish royal family (skiöldungar). in english tradition this person is
connected with "scedeland" (pl.), a name which may have been applied
to sjaelland as well as skåne, while in scandinavian tradition he
is specially associated with the ancient royal residence at leire in
sjaelland.
bede states that the angli before they came to britain dwelt in a
land called angulus, and similar evidence is given by the historia
brittonum. king alfred and the chronicler æthelweard identified
this place with the district which is now called angel in the province
of schleswig (slesvig), though it may then have been of greater
extent, and this identification agrees very well with the indications
given by bede. full confirmation is afforded by english and danish
traditions relating to two kings named wermund (q.v.) and offa
(q.v.), from whom the mercian royal family were descended,
and whose exploits are connected with angel, schleswig and rendsburg.
danish tradition has preserved record of two governors of schleswig,
father and son, in their service, frowinus (freawine) and wigo (wig),
from whom the royal family of wessex claimed descent. during the
th century the angli invaded this country (see britain,
anglo-saxon), after which time their name does not recur on the
continent except in the title of the code mentioned above.
the province of schleswig has proved exceptionally rich in prehistoric
antiquities which date apparently from the th and th centuries.
among the places where these have been found, special mention should
be made of the large cremation cemetery at borgstedterfeld, between
rendsburg and eckernförde, which has yielded many urns and brooches
closely resembling those found in heathen graves in england. of still
greater importance are the great deposits at thorsbjaerg (in angel)
and nydam, which contained large quantities of arms, ornaments,
articles of clothing, agricultural implements, &c., and in the latter
case even ships. by the help of these discoveries we are able to
reconstruct a fairly detailed picture of english civilization in the
age preceding the invasion of britain.
authorities.—bede, hist. ecc. i. : king alfred's version of
orosius, i. . §§ , ; æthelweard's chronicle, lib.
i. for traditions concerning the kings of angel, see under offa ().
l. weiland, [v. p.]
die angeln (); a. erdmann, über die heimat
und den namen der angeln (upsala, —cf. h. möller in the
anzeiger für deutsches altertum und deutsche litteratur, xxii.
 ff.); a. kock in the historisk tidskrift (stockholm), ,
xv. p.  ff.; g. schütte, var anglerne tyskere? (flensborg,
); r. munro chadwick, the origin of the english nation
(cambridge, ); c. engelhardt, denmark in the early iron
age (london, ); j. mestorf, urnenfriedhofe in
schleswig-holstein (hamburg, ); s. müller, nordische
altertumskunde (ger. trans., strassburg, ), ii. p.  ff.;
see further anglo-saxons and britain, anglo-saxon.
anglican communion, the name used to denote that great branch of the
christian church consisting of the various churches in communion with
the church of england. the necessity for such a phrase as "anglican
communion," first used in the th century, marked at once the immense
development of the anglican church in modern times and the change
which has taken place in the traditional conceptions of its character
and sphere. the church of england itself is the subject of a separate
article (see england, church of); and it is not without significance
that for more than two centuries after the reformation the history
of anglicanism is practically confined to its developments within the
limits of the british isles. even in ireland, where it was for over
three centuries the established religion, and in scotland, where it
early gave way to the dominant presbyterianism, its religious was long
overshadowed by its political significance. the church, in fact,
while still claiming to be catholic in its creeds and in its religious
practice, had ceased to be catholic in its institutional conception,
which was now bound up with a particular state and also with a
particular conception of that state. to the native irishman and the
scotsman, as indeed to most englishmen, the anglican church was one of
the main buttresses of the supremacy of the english crown and nation.
this conception of the relations of church and state was hardly
favourable to missionary zeal; and in the age succeeding the
reformation there was no disposition on the part of the english church
to emulate the wonderful activity of the jesuits, which, in the th
and th centuries, brought to the church of rome in countries beyond
the ocean compensation for what she had lost in europe through the
protestant reformation. even when english churchmen passed beyond the
seas, they carried with them their creed, but not their ecclesiastical
organization. prejudice and real or imaginary legal obstacles stood in
the way of the erection of episcopal sees in the colonies; and though
in the th century archbishop laud had attempted to obtain a bishop
for virginia, up to the time of the american revolution the churchmen
of the colonies had to make the best of the legal fiction that
their spiritual needs were looked after by the bishop of london, who
occasionally sent commissaries to visit them and ordained candidates
for the ministry sent to england for the purpose.
the change which has made it possible for anglican churchmen to claim
that their communion ranks with those of rome and the orthodox east
as one of the three great historical divisions of the catholic church,
was due, in the first instance, to the american revolution. the
severance of the colonies from their allegiance to the crown brought
the english bishops for the first time face to face with the idea of
an anglican church which should have nothing to do either with the
royal supremacy or with british nationality. when, on the conclusion
of peace, the church-people of connecticut sent dr. samuel seabury to
england, with a request to the archbishop of canterbury to consecrate
him, it is not surprising that archbishop moore refused. in the
opinion of prelates and lawyers alike, an act of parliament was
necessary before a bishop could be consecrated for a see abroad; to
consecrate one for a foreign country seemed impossible, since, though
the bestowal of the potestas ordinis would be valid, the
crown, which, according to the law, was the source of the episcopal
jurisdiction, could hardly issue the necessary mandate for the
consecration of a bishop to a see outside the realm (see bishop).
the scottish bishops, however, being hampered by no such legal
restrictions, were more amenable; and on the th of november 
seabury was consecrated by them to the see of connecticut. in ,
on the initiative of the archbishop, the legal difficulties in england
were removed by the act for the consecration of bishops abroad; and,
on being satisfied as to the orthodoxy of the church in america and
the nature of certain liturgical changes in contemplation, the two
english archbishops proceeded, on the th of february ,
to consecrate william white and samuel prevoost to the sees of
pennsylvania and new york (see protestant episcopal church).
this act had a significance beyond the fact that it established in the
united states of america a flourishing church, which, while completely
loyal to its own country, is bound by special ties to the religious
life of england. it marked the emergence of the church of england from
that insularity to which what may be called the territorial principles
of the reformation had condemned her. the change was slow, and it is
not yet by any means complete.
since the church of england, whatever her attitude towards the
traditional catholic doctrines, never disputed the validity of
catholic orders whether roman or orthodox, nor the jurisdiction of
catholic bishops in foreign countries, the expansion of the anglican
church has been in no sense conceived as a protestant aggressive
movement against rome. occasional exceptions, such as the consecration
by archbishop plunket of dublin of a bishop for the reformed church in
spain, raised so strong a protest as to prove the rule. in the main,
then, the expansion of the anglican church has followed that of the
british empire, or, as in america, of its daughter states; its claim,
so far as rights of jurisdiction are concerned, is to be the church
of england and the english race, while recognizing its special duties
towards the non-christian populations subject to the empire or brought
within the reach of its influence. as against the church of rome, with
its system of rigid centralization, the anglican church represents the
principle of local autonomy, which it holds to be once more primitive
and more catholic. in this respect the anglican communion has
developed on the lines defined in her articles at the reformation;
but, though in principle there is no great difference between a church
defined by national, and a church defined by racial boundaries, there
is an immense difference in effect, especially when the race—as in
the case of the english—is itself ecumenical.
the realization of what may be called this catholic mission of the
english church, in the extension of its organization to the colonies,
was but a slow process.
the church in the colonies.
on the th of august  dr. charles inglis was consecrated bishop
of nova scotia, with jurisdiction over all the british possessions in
north america. in  the see of the québec was founded; jamaica
and barbados followed in , and toronto and newfoundland in .
meanwhile the needs of india has been tardily met, on the urgent
representations in parliament of william wilberforce and others, by
the consecration of dr. t. f. middleton as bishop of calcutta, with
three archdeacons to assist him. in  ceylon was added to his
charge; in  all british subjects in the east indies and the
islands of the indian ocean; and in  "new south wales and its
dependencies"! some five years later, on the nomination of the duke
of wellington, william broughton was sent out to work in this enormous
jurisdiction as archdeacon of australia. soon afterwards, in 
and , the sees of madras and bombay were founded; whilst in 
broughton himself was consecrated as first bishop of australia. thus
down to  there were but ten colonial bishops; and of these several
were so hampered by civil regulations that they were little more
than government chaplains in episcopal orders. in april of that year,
however, bishop blomfield of london published his famous letter to the
archbishop of canterbury, declaring that "an episcopal church without
a bishop is a contradiction in terms," and strenuously advocating a
great effort for the extension of the episcopate. it was not in vain.
the plan was taken up with enthusiasm, and on whitsun tuesday of 
the bishops of the united kingdom met and issued a declaration which
inaugurated the colonial bishoprics council. subsequent
[v. p.]
declarations in  and  have served both to record
progress and to stimulate to new effort. the diocese of new zealand
was founded in , being endowed by the church missionary society
through the council, and george augustus selwyn was chosen as the
first bishop. since then the increase has gone on, as the result both
of home effort and of the action of the colonial churches. moreover,
in many cases bishops have been sent to inaugurate new missions, as
in the cases of the universities' mission to central africa, lebombo,
corea and new guinea; and the missionary jurisdictions so founded
develop in time into dioceses. thus, instead of the ten colonial
jurisdictions of , there are now about a hundred foreign and
colonial jurisdictions, in addition to those of the protestant
episcopal church of the united states.
it was only very gradually that these dioceses acquired legislative
independence and a determinate organization. at first, sees were
created and bishops were nominated by the crown by means of letters
patent; and in some cases an income was assigned out of public
funds. moreover, for many years all bishops alike were consecrated in
england, took the customary "oath of due obedience" to the archbishop
of canterbury, and were regarded as his extra-territorial suffragans.
but by degrees changes have been made on all these points.
provincial organization.
() local conditions soon made a provincial organization necessary,
and it was gradually introduced. the bishop of calcutta received
letters patent as metropolitan of india when the sees of madras and
bombay were founded; and fresh patents were issued to bishop broughton
in  and bishop gray in , as metropolitans of australia and
south africa respectively. similar action was taken in , when
bishop selwyn became metropolitan of new zealand; and again in ,
when, on the petition of the canadian bishops to the crown and the
colonial legislature for permission to elect a metropolitan, letters
patent were issued appointing bishop fulford of montreal to that
office. since then metropolitans have been chosen and provinces formed
by regular synodical action, a process greatly encouraged by
the resolutions of the lambeth conferences on the subject. the
constitution of these provinces is not uniform. in some cases, as
south africa, new south wales, and queensland, the metropolitan see
is fixed. elsewhere, as in new zealand, where no single city can claim
pre-eminence, the metropolitan is either elected or else is the senior
bishop by consecration. two further developments must be mentioned:
(a) the creation of diocesan and provincial synods, the first diocesan
synod to meet being that of new zealand in , whilst the formation
of a provincial synod was foreshadowed by a conference of australasian
bishops at sydney in ; (b) towards the close of the th
century the title of archbishop began to be assumed by the
metropolitans of several provinces. it was first assumed by the
metropolitans of canada and rupert's land, at the desire of the
canadian general synod in ; and subsequently, in accordance with
a resolution of the lambeth conference of , it was given by their
synods to the bishop of sydney as metropolitan of new south wales
and to the bishop of cape town as metropolitan of south africa. civil
obstacles have hitherto delayed its adoption by the metropolitan of
india.
freedom from state control.
() by degrees, also, the colonial churches have been freed from their
rather burdensome relations with the state. the church of the west
indies was disestablished and disendowed in . in  it was
decided, in regina v. eton college, that the crown
could not claim the presentation to a living when it had appointed the
former incumbent to a colonial bishopric, as it does in the case of an
english bishopric. in , after some protest from the crown lawyers,
two missionary bishops were consecrated without letters patent for
regions outside british territory: c. f. mackenzie for the zambezi
region and j. c. patteson for melanesia, by the metropolitans of cape
town and new zealand respectively. in  the privy council declared,
in long v. the bishop of cape town, that "the church of
england, in places where there is no church established by law, is in
the same situation with any other religious body." in  it adjudged
bishop gray's letters patent, as metropolitan of cape town, to be
powerless to enable him "to exercise any coercive jurisdiction, or
hold any court or tribunal for that purpose," since the cape colony
already possessed legislative institutions when they were issued; and
his deposition of bishop colenso was declared to be "null and void in
law" (re the bishop of natal). with the exception of colenso
the south african bishops forthwith surrendered their patents, and
formally accepted bishop gray as their metropolitan, an example
followed in  in the province of new zealand. in , when the
diocese of ontario was formed, the bishop was elected in canada, and
consecrated under a royal mandate, letters patent being by this time
entirely discredited. and when, in , a coadjutor was chosen for
the bishop of toronto, an application for a royal mandate produced
the reply from the colonial secretary that "it was not the part of the
crown to interfere in the creation of a new bishop or bishopric, and
not consistent with the dignity of the crown that he should advise her
majesty to issue a mandate which would not be worth the paper on which
it was written, and which, having been sent out to canada, might be
disregarded in the most complete manner." and at the present day the
colonial churches are entirely free in this matter. this, however,
is not the case with the church in india. here the bishops of sees
founded down to  receive a stipend from the revenue (with the
exception of the bishop of ceylon, who no longer does so). they are
not only nominated by the crown and consecrated under letters
patent, but the appointment is expressly subjected "to such power of
revocation and recall as is by law vested" in the crown; and where
additional oversight was necessary for the church in tinnevelly, it
could only be secured by the consecration of two assistant bishops,
who worked under a commission for the archbishop of canterbury which
was to expire on the death of the bishop of madras. since then,
however, new sees have been founded which are under no such
restrictions: by the creation of dioceses either in native states
(travancore and cochin), or out of the existing dioceses (chota
nagpur, lucknow, &c.). in the latter case there is no legal
subdivision of the older diocese, the new bishop administering
such districts as belonged to it under commission from its bishop,
provision being made, however, that in all matters ecclesiastical
there shall be no appeal but to the metropolitan of india.
spiritual autonomy.
() by degrees, also, the relations of colonial churches to the
archbishop of canterbury have changed. until  no colonial bishop
was consecrated outside the british isles, the first instance being
dr. macdougall of labuan, consecrated in india under a commission
from the archbishop of canterbury; and until  it was held to be
unlawful for a bishop to be consecrated in england without taking the
suffragan's oath of due obedience. this necessity was removed by
the colonial clergy act of , which permits the archbishop at his
discretion to dispense with the oath. this, however, has not been done
in all cases; and as late as  it was taken by the metropolitan of
sydney at his consecration. thus the constituent parts of the anglican
communion gradually acquire autonomy: missionary jurisdictions develop
into organized dioceses, and dioceses are grouped into provinces with
canons of their own. but the most complete autonomy does not involve
isolation. the churches are in full communion with one another, and
act together in many ways; missionary jurisdictions and dioceses are
mapped out by common arrangement, and even transferred if it seems
advisable; e.g. the diocese honolulu (hawaii), previously under
the jurisdiction of the archbishop of canterbury, was transferred
in  to the episcopal church in the united states on account of
political changes. though the see of canterbury claims no primacy
over the anglican communion analogous to that exercised over the
roman church by the popes, it is regarded with a strong affection and
deference, which shows itself by frequent consultation and interchange
of greetings. there is also a strong common life emphasized by common
action.
pan-anglican congress.
the conference of anglican bishops from all parts of the world,
[v. p.]
 instituted by archbishop longley in , and known as
the lambeth conferences (q.v.), though even for the anglican
communion they have not the authority of an ecumenical synod, and
their decisions are rather of the nature of counsels than commands,
have done much to promote the harmony and co-operation of the various
branches of the church. an even more imposing manifestation of this
common life was given by the great pan-anglican congress held in
london between the th and th of june , which preceded the
lambeth conference opened on the th of july. the idea of this
originated with bishop montgomery, secretary to the society for the
propagation of the gospel, and was endorsed by a resolution of the
united boards of mission in . as the result of negotiations and
preparations extending over five years,  bishops, together with
delegates, clerical and lay, from every diocese in the anglican
communion, met in london, the opening service of intercession being
held in westminster abbey. in its general character, the meeting
was but a church congress on an enlarged scale, and the subjects
discussed, e.g.. the attitude of churchmen towards the question
of the marriage laws or that of socialism, followed much the same
lines. the congress, of course, had no power to decide or to legislate
for the church, its main value being in drawing its scattered members
closer together, in bringing the newer and more isolated branches into
consciousness of their contact with the parent stem, and in opening
the eyes of the church of england to the point of view and the
peculiar problems of the daughter-churches.
the anglican communion consists of the following:—() the church of
england,  provinces, canterbury and york, with  and  dioceses
respectively. () the church of ireland,  provinces, armagh and
dublin, with  and  dioceses respectively. () the scottish episcopal
church, with  dioceses. () the protestant episcopal church of
the united states, with  dioceses and missionary jurisdictions,
including north tokyo, kyoto, shanghai, cape palmas, and the
independent dioceses of hayti and brazil. () the canadian church,
consisting of (a) the province of canada, with  dioceses; (b) the
province of rupert's land, with  dioceses. () the church in india
and ceylon,  province of  dioceses. () the church of the west
indies,  province of  dioceses, of which barbados and the windward
islands are at present united. () the australian church, consisting
of (a) the province of new south wales, with  dioceses; (b) the
province of queensland, with  dioceses; (c) the province of victoria,
with  dioceses. () the church of new zealand,  province of 
dioceses, together with the missionary jurisdiction of melanesia.
() the south african church,  province of  dioceses, with the 
missionary jurisdictions of masbonaland and lebombo. () nearly 
isolated dioceses and missionary jurisdictions holding mission from
the see of canterbury.
authorities.—official year-book of the church of england;
phillimore, ecclesiastical law, vol. ii. (london, );
digest of s. p. g. records (london, ); e. stock, history
of the church missionary society,  vols. (london, ); h. w.
tucker, the english church in other lands (london, ); a. t.
wirgman, the church and the civil power (london, ).
angling, the art or practice of the sport of catching fish by means
of a baited hook or "angle" (from the indo-european root ank-,
meaning "bend").[] it is among the most ancient of human activities,
and may be said to date from the time when man was in the infancy of
the stone age, eking out a precarious existence by the slaughter of
any living thing which he could reach with the rude weapons at his
command. it is probable that attack on fishes was at first much the
same as attack on animals, a matter of force rather than of guile, and
conducted by means of a rude spear with a flint head. it is probable,
too, that the primitive harpooners were not signally successful in
their efforts, and so set their wits to work to devise other means of
getting at the abundant food which waited for them in every piece of
water near their caves. observation would soon show them that fish fed
greedily on each other and on other inhabitants of the water or
living things that fell into it, and so, no doubt, arose the idea of
entangling the prey by means of its appetite. hence came the notion of
the first hook, which, it seems certain, was not a hook at all but a
"gorge," a piece of flint or stone which the fish could swallow with
the bait but which it could not eject afterwards. from remains found
in cave-dwellings and their neighbourhood in different parts of the
world it is obvious that these gorges varied in shape, but in general
the idea was the same, a narrow strip of stone or flake of flint,
either straight or slightly curved at the ends, with a groove in the
middle round which the line could be fastened. buried in the bait it
would be swallowed end first; then the tightening of the line would
fix it cross-wise in the quarry's, stomach or gullet and so the
capture would be assured. the device still lingers in france and in
a few remote parts of england in the method of catching eels which is
known as "sniggling." in this a needle buried in a worm plays the part
of the prehistoric gorge.
the evolution of the fish-hook from the slightly curved gorge is
easily intelligible. the ends became more and more curved, until
eventually an object not unlike a double hook was attained. this
development would be materially assisted by man's discovery of the
uses of bronze and its adaptability to his requirements. the single
hook, of the pattern more or less familiar to us, was possibly a
concession of the lake-dweller to what may even then have been a
problem—the "education" of fish, and to a recognition of the fact
that sport with the crude old methods was falling off. but it is
also not improbable that in some parts of the world the single
hook developed pari passu with the double, and that, on the
sea-shore for instance, where man was able to employ so adaptable
a substance as shell, the first hook was a curved fragment of shell
lashed with fibre to a piece of wood or bone, in such a way that the
shell formed the bend of the hook while the wood or bone formed the
shank. both early remains and recent hooks from the fiji islands bear
out this supposition. it is also likely that flint, horn and bone were
pressed into service in a similar manner. the nature of the line or
the rod that may have been used with these early hooks is largely
a matter of conjecture. the first line was perhaps the tendril of a
plant, the first rod possibly a sapling tree. but it is fairly obvious
that the rod must have been suggested by the necessity of getting the
bait out over obstacles which lay between the fisherman and the water,
and that it was a device for increasing both the reach of the arm
and the length of the line. it seems not improbable that the rod very
early formed a part of the fisherman's equipment.
literary history.—from prehistoric times down to comparatively
late in the days of chronicles, angling appears to have remained a
practice; its development into an art or sport is a modern idea. in
the earliest literature references to angling are not very numerous,
but there are passages in the old testament which show that
fish-taking with hook as well as net was one of the common industries
in the east, and that fish, where it was obtainable, formed an
important article of diet. in numbers (xi. ) the children of
israel mourn for the fish which they "did eat in egypt freely." so
much too is proved by the monuments of egypt; indeed more, for the
figures found in some of the egyptian fishing pictures using short
rods and stout lines are sometimes attired after the manner of those
who were great in the land. this indicates that angling had already,
in a highly civilized country, taken its place among the methods
of diversion at the disposal of the wealthy, though from the
uncompromising nature of the tackle depicted and the apparent
simplicity of the fish it would scarcely be safe to assume that in
egypt angling arrived at the dignity of becoming an "art." in europe
it took very much longer for the taking of fish to be regarded even as
an [v. p.]
 amusement, and the earliest references to it in the
greek and latin classics are not very satisfying to the sportsman. there is, however, a passage in the odyssey (xii. ) which is
of considerable importance, as it shows that fishing with rod and line
was well enough understood in early greece to be used as a popular
illustration. it occurs in the well-known scene where scylla seizes
the companions of odysseus out of the ship and bears them upwards,
just as "some fisher on a headland with a long rod" brings small
fishes gasping to the shore. another important, though comparatively
late, passage in greek poetry is the twenty-first idyll of theocritus.
in this the fisherman asphalion relates how in a dream he hooked
a large golden fish and describes graphically, albeit with some
obscurity of language, how he "played" it. asphalion used a rod and
fished from a rock, much after the manner of the homeric angler. among
other greek writers, herodotus has a good many references to fish and
fishing; the capture of fish is once or twice mentioned or implied
by plato, notably in the laws (vii. ); aristotle deals with
fishes in his natural history, and there are one or two fishing
passages in the anthology. but in greek literature, as a whole the
subject of angling is not at all prominent. in writers of late greek,
however, there is more material. plutarch, for instance, gives us the
famous story of the fishing match between antony and cleopatra, which
has been utilized by shakespeare. moreover, it is in greek that
the first complete treatise on fishing which has come down to us
is written, the halieutica of oppian (c. a.d. ). it is a
hexameter poem in five books with perhaps more technical than sporting
interest, and not so much even of that as the length of the work would
suggest. still it contains some information about tackle and methods,
and some passages describing battles with big fish, in the right
spirit of enthusiasm. also in greek is what is famous as the first
reference in literature to fly-fishing, in the fifteenth book of
aelian's natural history (rd century a.d.). it is there
described how the macedonians captured a certain spotted fish in
the river astraeus by means of a lure composed of coloured wool
and feathers, which was presumably used in the manner now known as
"dapping." that there were other greek writers who dealt with fish and
fishing and composed "halieutics" we know from athenaeus. in the first
book of his deipnosophistae he gives a list of them. but he
compares their work unfavourably with the passage of homer already
cited, in a way which suggests that their knowledge of angling was not
a great advance upon the knowledge of their remote literary ancestors.
in latin literature allusions to angling are rather more numerous than
in greek, but on the whole they are unimportant. part of a poem by
ovid, the halieuticon, composed during the poet's exile at tomi
after a.d. , still survives. in other roman writers the subject is
only treated by way of allusion or illustration. martial, however,
provides, among other passages, what may perhaps be entitled to rank
as the earliest notice of private fishery rights—the epigram ad
piscatorem, which warns would-be poachers from casting a line
in the baian lake. pliny the elder devoted the ninth book of his
natural history to fishes and water-life, and plautus, cicero,
catullus, horace, juvenal, pliny the younger and suetonius all allude
to angling here and there. agricultural writers, too, such as varro
and columella, deal with the subject of fish ponds and stews rather
fully. later than any of these, but still just included in latin
literature, we have ausonius (c. a.d. ) and his well-known
idyll the mosella, which contains a good deal about the fish
of the moselle and the methods of catching them. in this poem is to
be found the first recognizable description of members of the
salmon family, and, though the manner of their application is rather
doubtful, the names salmo, salar and fario strike a
responsive note in the breast of the modern angler.
post-classical literature.—as to what happened in the world
of angling in the first few centuries of the christian era we know
little. it may be inferred, however, that both fish and fishermen
occupied a more honourable position in christendom than they ever did
before. the prominence of fishermen in the gospel narratives would in
itself have been enough to bring this about, but it also happened
that the greek word for fish, ιχθυς, had an anagrammatic
significance which the devout were not slow to perceive. the initials
of the word resolve into what is practically a confession of faith,
ἰησοῦς χριστὸς θεοῦ υἱὸς σωτήρ (jesus christ, son of god,
saviour). it is therefore not surprising that we find the fish very
prominent as a sacred emblem in the painting and sculpture of
the primitive church, or that clement of alexandria should have
recommended it, among other things, as a device for signet rings or
seals. the fisherman too is frequently represented in early christian
art, and it is worthy of remark that he more often uses a line and
hook than a net. the references to fish and fishing scattered about
in the writings of the early fathers for the most part reflect the two
ideas of the sacredness of the fish and divine authorization of the
fisherman; the second idea certainly prevailed until the time of izaak
walton, for he uses it to justify his pastime. it is also not unlikely
that the practice of fasting (in many cases fish was allowed when meat
was forbidden) gave the art of catching fish additional importance.
it seems at any rate to have been a consideration of weight when
sites were chosen for monasteries in europe, and in many cases when
no fish-producing river was at hand the lack was supplied by the
construction of fish-ponds. despite all this, however, save for an
occasional allusion in the early fathers, there is hardly a connecting
link between the literature of pagan rome and the literature
that sprang up on the invention of printing. one volume, the
geoponica, a greek compilation concerning whose authorship
and date there has been much dispute, is attributed in bibliotheca
piscatoria to the beginning of the th century. it contains one
book on fish, fish-ponds and fishing, with prescriptions for baits,
&c., extracted for the most part from other writers. but it seems
doubtful whether its date should not be placed very much earlier.
tradition makes it a carthaginian treatise translated into greek. a
more satisfactory fragment of fishing literature is to be found in the
colloquy of ælfric, written (ad pucros linguae latinae locutionis
exercendos) towards the end of the same century. ælfric became
archbishop of canterbury in a.d. , and the passage in the
anglo-saxon text-book takes honourable rank as the earliest reference
to fishing in english writings, though it is not of any great length.
it is to be noted that the fisher who takes a share in the colloquy
states that he prefers fishing in the river to fishing in the sea.
ascribed to the th or th century is a latin poem de vetula,
whose author was apparently richard de fournival. it contains a
passage on angling, and was placed to the credit of ovid when first
printed (c. ). a manuscript in the british museum, comptes des
pêcheries de l'église de troyes (a.d. -), gives a minute
account of the fisheries with the weights of fish captured and the
expenses of working. there is, however, practically nothing else
of importance till we come to the first printed book on angling (a
translation of oppian, , excepted), and so to the beginning of
the literature proper. this first book was a little volume printed
in antwerp probably in  at the press of matthias van der goes. in
size it is little more than a pamphlet, and it treats of birds as well
as fish:—dit boecxken leert hoe men mach voghelen ... ende ...
visschen vangen metten kanden. ende oeck andersins.... ("this book
teaches how one may catch birds ... and ... fish with the hands, and
also otherwise"). only one copy apparently survives, in the denison
library, and a translation privately printed for mr. alfred denison in
 was limited to twenty-five copies. at least two other editions
of the book appeared in flemish, and it also made its way, in , to
germany, where, translated and with certain alterations and additions,
it seems to have been re-issued frequently. next in date comes
the famous treatyse of fysshynge wyth an angle, printed at
westminster by wynkyn de worde in  as a part of the second edition
of the book of st. albans. the treatise is for this reason
associated with the name of dame juliana berners, but that somewhat
dubious compiler can have had nothing whatever to do with it. the
treatise is almost certainly a compilation from some earlier work on
angling ("bokes of credence" are mentioned in its text), possibly
from a manuscript of the earlier part of the th century, of which a
portion is [v. p.]
 preserved in the denison collection. this was published
in  by mr. thomas satchell under the title an older form of the
treatyse of fysshynge wyth an angle. but it is also possible that
a still older work was the parent of both books, for it has been held
that the manuscript is an independent version. however this may be, it
is certain that the treatise itself has been the parent of many other
works. many of the instructions contained in it are handed down
from generation to generation with little change except in diction.
especially is this the case with the list of trout-flies, a meagre
twelve, which survives in many fishing books until well into the th
century.
from the beginning of the th century the fisherman's library begins
to grow apace, as, though books solely devoted to fishing are not yet
frequent, works on husbandry and country pursuits almost all contain
something on the subject. in italy the fisherman and his occupation
apparently were considered poetically; the word pescatore or
its cognates are common on italian th and th century title-pages,
though in many instances the fulfilment of the implied promise is
not adequate, from an angler's point of view. from the pages of
bibliotheca piscatoria a fairly long list of italian
writers could be gleaned. among them may be mentioned sannazaro
(piscatoria, &c., rome, ) and andrea calmo (rime
pescatorie, venice, ). a century later was parthenius, who
published a volume of halieutica at naples. this writer has
an amusing reference to the art of "tickling" trout as practised in
britain. in germany, as has been shown, the original little flemish
treatise had a wide vogue in the th century, and fishing played
a part in a good many books on husbandry such as that of conrad
heresbach (). fish and fish-ponds formed the main topic of a latin
work by dubravius (), while gesner in the middle of the th and
aldrovandi at the beginning of the th centuries wrote at length
on the natural history of fishes. in france the subject is less well
represented, but les pescheries of chris. de gamon (lyons,
) and le plaisir des champs of cl. gauchet (paris, )
deserve to be noted. les ruses innocentes by françois fortin,
first published at paris in , and several times in later editions,
is characterized by messrs westwood and satchell as "on the whole
the most interesting contribution made by france to the literature
of angling." england during the most part of the th century was
evidently well enough served by the original treatise out of the
book of st. albans. it was republished twice by wynkyn de worde,
six or seven times by copland, and some five times by other printers.
it was also practically republished in a booke of fishing by
l. m. (). l. m. (leonard mascall) ranks as an angling author, but
he did little more than borrow and edit the treatise. the same may
be said of another version of the book of st. albans "now newly
collected by w. g. faulkener" and issued in .
modern literature.—in  appeared john taverner's
certaine experiments concerning fish and fruite, and after
this the period of angling literature proper begins. the secrets
of angling (), by j(ohn) d(ennys). esq., is one of the most
important volumes in the angler's library, both on account of the
excellence of the verse in which it is written and also on account of
its practical value. gervase markham, "the first journalist," as he
has been called, published his first book of husbandry at the same
date, and, as in most of his many books on the same subject, devoted a
certain amount of space to fishing. but markham gathered his materials
in a rather shameless manner and his angling passages have little
originality. thomas barker's the art of angling (st ed., )
takes a more honourable position, and received warm commendation from
izaak walton himself, who followed it in  with the compleat
angler. so much has been written about this treasured classic that
it is only necessary to indicate its popularity here by saying that
its editions occupy some twenty pages in bibliotheca piscatoria
(), and that since that work was published at least forty new
editions have to be added to the list. during walton's life-time
the book ran through five editions, and with the fifth () was
incorporated charles cotton's second part, the "instructions how to
angle for a trout or grayling, in a clear stream." in some cases too
there was added a third book, the fourth edition of the experienced
angler, by robert venables (st ed., ). the three books
together bore the title of the universal angler. venables's
portion was dropped later, but it is worth reading, and contained
sound instruction though it has not the literary merit of walton and
cotton.
a few other notable books of the century call for enumeration, the
gentleman's recreation by nicholas cox (), gilbert's the
angler's delight (), chetham's vade-mecum (),
the complete troller by robert nobbes (), r. franck's
northern memoirs (), and the true art of angling by
j. s. (). of these chetham, nobbes, franck and j. s. have the merit
of considerable originality. franck has gained some notoriety by his
round abuse of walton. in the th century among others we find
the secrets of angling by c. g. (), robert hewlett's the
angler's sure guide (), the whole art of fishing
(), the compleat fisherman by james saunders (), the
art of angling by r. brookes (), another book with the same
title by r. and c. bowlker (worcester, c. ), the complete
sportsman by thomas fairfax (c. ), the angler's museum
by t. shirley (), and a concise treatise on the art of
angling by thomas best (). of these only saunders's, bowlker's
and best's books are of much importance, the rest being for the most
part "borrowed." one volume of verse in the th century calls for
notice, moses browne's piscatory eclogues (). among greater
names we get angling passages in pope, gay and thomson; the two last
were evidently brothers of the angle.
with the th century angling literature becomes too big a subject to
be treated in detail, and it is only possible to glance at a few of
the more important books and writers. daniel's rural sports
appeared in ; it is a treasure-house of odd facts. in  sir
humphry davy published his famous salmonia, which was reviewed
in the quarterly by sir walter scott. at about this time
too were appearing the noctes ambrosianae in blackwood's
magazine. christopher north (professor wilson) often touched upon
angling in them, besides contributing a good many angling articles
to the magazine. in  that excellent angling writer thomas tod
stoddart began his valuable series of books with the art of angling
as practised in scotland. in  he published songs and
poems, among which are pieces of great merit. during this
period, too, first appeared, year by year, the newcastle fishers'
garlands, collected by joseph crawhall afterwards and republished
in . these border verses, like stoddart's, have often a genuine
ring about them which is missing from the more polished effusions of
gay and thomson. alfred ronalds's the fly-fisher's entomology
(st ed., ) was a publication of great importance, for it marked
the beginning of the scientific spirit among trout-fishers. it ran
through many editions and is still a valuable book of reference.
a step in angling history is also marked by george pulman's
vade-mecum of fly-fishing for trout (), for it contains the
first definite instructions on fishing with a "dry fly." another is
marked by hewett wheatley's the rod and the line (), where
is to be found the earliest reference to the "eyed" hook. yet another
is marked by w. c. stewart's the practical angler (), in
which is taught the new doctrine of "up-stream" fishing for trout.
this is a book of permanent value. among the many books of this period
charles kingsley's miscellanies () stands out, for it
contains the immortal "chalk-stream studies." the work of francis
francis begins at about the same time, though his a book on
angling, which is still one of the most valuable text-books,
was not first published till . another well-known and excellent
writer, mr. h. cholmondeley pennell, began in the early 'sixties; it
is to him that we owe the admirable volumes on fresh-water fishing in
the "badminton library." among other english writers mention must be
made of messrs william senior, john bickerdyke and f. m. halford, who
have all performed signal services for angling and its literature.
(see further bibliography ad fin.) in america the latter half
of the th century produced a good deal of fishing literature, much
of it of a high standard.
i go [v. p.]
a-fishing by dr. w. c. prime (),
fishing with the fly by c. f. orvis, a. nelson cheney and others
(), the american salmon fisherman and fly rods and fly
tackle by h. p. wells ( and ), little rivers and
other books by the rev. h. van dyke—these are only a few specially
distinguished in style and matter. germany and france have not
contributed so largely to the modern library, but in the first country
we find several useful works by max von dem borne, beginning with the
handbuch der angelfischerei of , and there are a good many
other writers who have contributed to the subject, while in france
there are a few volumes on fishing by different hands. the most
noticeable is m. g. albert petit's la truite de rivière (),
an admirable book on fly-fishing. as yet, however, though there are
many enthusiastic anglers in france, the sport has not established
itself so firmly as to have inspired much literature of its own; the
same may be said of germany.
modern conditions.—in the modern history of angling there are
one or two features that should be touched upon. the great increase
in the number of fishermen has had several results. one is a
corresponding increase in the difficulty of obtaining fishing, and a
notable rise in the value of rivers, especially those which are famed
for salmon and trout. salmon-fishing now may be said to have become
a pastime of the rich, and there are signs that trout-fishing will
before long have to be placed in the same exclusive category, while
even the right to angle for less-esteemed fish will eventually be a
thing of price. the development is natural, and it has naturally
led to efforts on the part of the angling majority to counteract, if
possible, the growing difficulty. these efforts have been directed
chiefly in two ways, one the establishment of fishing clubs, the other
the adoption of angling in salt water. the fishing club of the
big towns was originally a social institution, and its members met
together to sup, converse on angling topics and perhaps to display
notable fish that they had caught. later, however, arose the idea that
it would be a convenience if a club could give its members privileges
of fishing as well as privileges of reunion. so it comes about that
all over the united kingdom, in british colonies and dependencies, in
the united states, and also in germany and france, fishing clubs rent
waters, undertake preservation and restocking and generally lead
an active and useful existence. it is a good sign for the future of
angling and anglers that they are rapidly increasing in number. one of
the oldest fishing clubs, if not the oldest, was the schuylkill
club, founded in pennsylvania in . an account of its history was
published in philadelphia in . among the earliest clubs in
london are to be numbered such societies as the true waltonians, the
piscatorial, the friendly anglers and the gresham, which are still
flourishing. a certain amount of literary activity has been observable
in the world of angling clubs, and several volumes of "papers" are
on the records. most noticeable perhaps are the three volumes of
anglers' evenings published in -, a collection of
essays by members of the manchester anglers' association. the other
method of securing a continuance of sport, the adoption of sea-angling
as a substitute for fresh-water fishing, is quite a modern thing.
within the memory of men still young the old tactics of hand-line and
force were considered good enough for sea fish. now the fresh-water
angler has lent his centuries of experience in deluding his quarry;
the sea-angler has adopted many of the ideas presented to him, has
modified or improved others, and has developed the capture of sea-fish
into a science almost as subtle as the capture of their fresh-water
cousins. one more modern feature, which is also a result of the
increase of anglers, is the great advance made in fish-culture,
fish-stocking and fish-acclimatization during the last half-century.
fish-culture is now a recognized industry; every trout-stream of
note and value is restocked from time to time as a matter of course;
salmon-hatcheries are numerous, though their practical utility is
still a debated matter, in great britain at any rate; coarse fish
are also bred for purposes of restocking; and, lastly, it is now
considered a fairly simple matter to introduce fish from one country
to another, and even from continent to continent. in england the
movement owes a great deal to francis francis, who, though he was not
the earliest worker in the field, was among the first to formulate
the science of fish-breeding; his book fish-culture, first
published in , still remains one of the best treatises on the
subject. in the united states, where fishery science has had the
benefit of generous governmental and official support and countenance
and so has reached a high level of achievement, dr. t. garlick (the
artificial reproduction of fishes, cleveland, ) is honoured
as a pioneer. on the continent of europe the latter half of the th
century saw a very considerable and rapid development in fish-culture,
but until comparatively recently the propagation and care of fish in
most european waters have been considered almost entirely from the
point of view of the fish-stew and the market. as to what has been
done in the way of acclimatization it is not necessary to say much.
trout (salmo fario) were introduced to new zealand in the
late 'sixties from england; in the 'eighties rainbow trout (salmo
irideus) were also introduced from california; now new zealand
provides the finest trout-fishing of its kind in the world. american
trout of different kinds have been introduced into england, and brown
trout have been introduced to america; but neither innovation can
be said to have been an unqualified success, though the rainbow has
established itself firmly in some waters of the united kingdom. it
is still regarded with some suspicion, as it has a tendency to wander
from waters which do not altogether suit it. for the rest, trout have
been established in ceylon, in kashmir and in south africa, and early
in  an attempt was made to carry them to british central africa.
in fact the possibilities of acclimatization are so great that, it
seems probable, in time no river of the civilized world capable of
holding trout will be without them.
angling now divides itself into two main divisions, fishing in fresh
water and fishing in the sea. the two branches of the sport have much
in common, and sea-angling is really little more than an adaptation of
fresh-water methods to salt-water conditions. therefore it will not
be necessary to deal with it at great length and it naturally comes in
the second place. angling in fresh water is again divisible into three
principal parts, fishing on the surface, i.e. with the fly; in
mid-water, i.e. with a bait simulating the movements of a small
fish or with the small fish itself; and on the bottom with worms,
paste or one of the many other baits which experience has shown that
fish will take. with the premise that it is not intended here to
go into the minutiae of instruction which may more profitably be
discovered in the many works of reference cited at the end of this
article, some account of the subdivisions into which these three
styles of fishing fall may be given.
fresh-water fishing.
fly-fishing.—fly-fishing is the most modern of them, but it
is the most highly esteemed, principally because it is the method par
excellence of taking members of the most valuable sporting family of
fish, the salmonidae. it may roughly be considered under three
heads, the use of the "wet" or sunk fly, of the "dry" or floating fly,
and of the natural insect. of these the first is the most important,
for it covers the widest field and is the most universally practised.
there are few varieties of fish which may not either consistently or
occasionally be taken with the sunk fly in one of its two forms. the
large and gaudy bunch of feathers, silk and tinsel with which salmon,
very large trout, black bass and occasionally other predaceous
fish are taken is not, strictly speaking, a fly at all. it rather
represents, if anything, some small fish or subaqueous creature on
which the big fish is accustomed to feed and it may conveniently
receive the generic name of salmon-fly. the smaller lures, however,
which are used to catch smaller trout and other fish that habitually
feed on insect food are in most cases intended to represent that
food in one of its forms and are entitled to the name of "artificial
flies." the dry or floating fly is simply a development of the
imitation theory, and has been evolved from the wet fly in course of
closer observation of the habits of flies and fish in certain waters.
both wet and dry fly methods are really a substitute for the third and
[v. p.]
oldest kind of surface-fishing, the use of a natural
insect as a bait. each method is referred to incidentally below.
spinning, &c.—mid-water fishing, as has been said, broadly
consists in the use of a small fish, or something that simulates it,
and its devices are aimed almost entirely at those fish which prey
on their fellows. spinning, live-baiting and trolling[] are these
devices. in the first a small dead fish or an imitation of it made in
metal, india-rubber, or other substance, is caused to revolve rapidly
as it is pulled through the water, so that it gives the idea of
something in difficulties and trying to escape. in the second a small
fish is put on the angler's hook alive and conveys the same idea by
its own efforts. in the third a small dead fish is caused to dart up
and down in the water without revolving; it conveys the same idea as
the spinning fish, though the manipulation is different.
bottom-fishing.—bottom-fishing is the branch of angling which
is the most general. there is practically no fresh-water fish that
will not take some one or more of the baits on the angler's list
if they are properly presented to it when it is hungry. usually
the baited hook is on or near the bottom of the water, but the rule
suggested by the name "bottom-fishing" is not invariable and often the
bait is best used in mid-water; similarly, in "mid-water fishing"
the bait must sometimes be used as close to the bottom as possible.
bottom-fishing is roughly divisible into two kinds, float-fishing, in
which a bite is detected by the aid of a float fastened to the line
above the hook and so balanced that its tip is visible above the
water, and hand-fishing, in which no float is used and the angler
trusts to his hand to feel the bite of a fish. in most cases either
method can be adopted and it is a matter of taste, but broadly
speaking the float-tackle is more suited to water which is not very
deep and is either still or not rapid. in great depths or strong
streams a float is difficult to manage.
the fish.
it is practically impossible to classify the fish an angler catches
according to the methods which he employs, as most fish can be taken
by at least two of these methods, while many of those most highly
esteemed can be caught by all three. sporting fresh-water fish are
therefore treated according to their families and merits from the
angler's point of view, and it is briefly indicated which method or
methods best succeed in pursuit of them.
salmon.—first in importance come the migratory
salmonidae, and at the head of them the salmon (salmo
salar), which has a two-fold reputation as a sporting and as
a commercial asset. the salmon fisheries of a country are a very
valuable possession, but it is only comparatively recently that this
has been realized and that salmon rivers have received the legal
protection which is necessary to their well-being. even now it cannot
be asserted that in england the salmon question, as it is called,
is settled. partly owing to our ignorance of the life-history of
the fish, partly owing to the difficulty of reconciling the opposed
interests of commerce and sport, the problem as to how a river should
be treated remains only partially solved, though it cannot be denied
that there has been a great advance in the right direction. the
life-history of the salmon, so far as it concerns the matter in hand,
may be very briefly summed up. it is bred in the rivers and fed in the
sea. the parent fish ascend in late autumn as high as they can get,
the ova are deposited on gravel shallows, hatching out in the course
of a few weeks into parr. the infant salmon remains in fresh water at
least one year, generally two years, without growing more than a few
inches, and then about may assumes what is called the smolt-dress,
that is to say, it loses the dark parr-bands and red spots of infancy
and becomes silvery all over. after this it descends without delay
to the sea, where it feeds to such good purpose that in a year it has
reached a weight of  lb to  lb or more, and it may then reascend
as a grilse. small grilse indeed may only have been in the sea a few
months, ascending in the autumn of the year of their first descent. if
the fish survives the perils of its first ascent and spawning season
and as a kelt or spawned fish gets down to the sea again, it comes up
a second time as a salmon of weight varying from  lb upwards. whether
salmon come up rivers, and, if so, spawn, every year, why some fish
are much heavier than others of the same age, what their mode of life
is in the sea, why some run up in spring and summer when the breeding
season is not till about november or december, whether they were
originally sea-fish or river-fish—these and other similar questions
await a conclusive answer. one principal fact, however, stands out
amid the uncertainty, and that is that without a free passage up and
down unpolluted rivers and without protection on the spawning beds
salmon have a very poor chance of perpetuating their species. economic
prudence dictates therefore that every year a considerable proportion
of running salmon should be allowed to escape the dangers that
confront them in the shape of nets, obstructions, pollutions, rods and
poachers. and it is in the adjustment of the interests which are bound
up in these dangers (the last excepted; officially poachers have no
interests, though in practice their plea of "custom and right" has
too often to be taken into consideration) that the salmon question
consists. to secure a fair proportion of fish for the market, a fair
proportion for the rods and a fair proportion for the redds, without
unduly damaging manufacturing interests, this is the object of those
who have the question at heart, and with many organizations and
scientific observers at work it should not be long before the object
is attained. already the system of "marking" kelts with a small silver
label has resulted in a considerable array of valuable statistics
which have made it possible to estimate the salmon's ordinary rate
of growth from year to year. it is very largely due to the efforts of
anglers that the matter has gone so far. whether salmon feed in fresh
water is another question of peculiar interest to anglers, for it
would seem that if they do not then the whole practice of taking
them must be an anomaly. champions have arisen on both sides of the
argument, some, scientists, asserting that salmon (parr and kelts
excluded, for both feed greedily as opportunity occurs) do not
feed, others, mostly anglers, maintaining strongly that they do, and
bringing as evidence their undoubted and customary capture by rod and
line, not only with the fly, but also with such obvious food-stuffs as
dead baits, worms and prawns. on the other side it is argued that
food is never found inside a salmon after it has been long enough in a
river to have digested its last meal taken in salt water. the very few
instances of food found in salmon which have been brought forward to
support the contrary opinion are in the scientific view to be regarded
with great caution; certainly in one case of recent years, which at
first appeared to be well authenticated, it was afterwards found that
a small trout had been pushed down a salmon's throat after capture
by way of a joke. a consideration of the question, however, which
may perhaps make some appeal to both sides, is put forward by dr. j.
kingston barton in the first of the two volumes on fishing
(country life series). he maintains that salmon do not
habitually feed in fresh water, but he does not reject the possibility
of their occasionally taking food. his view is that after exertion,
such as that entailed by running from pool to pool during a spate, the
fish may feel a very transient hunger and be impelled thereby to snap
at anything in its vicinity which looks edible. the fact that the
angler's best opportunity is undoubtedly when salmon have newly
arrived into a pool, supports this contention. the longer they are
compelled to remain in the same spot by lack of water the worse
becomes the prospect of catching them, and "unfishable" is one of the
expressive words which fishermen use to indicate the condition of a
river during the long periods of drought which too often distinguish
the sport.
salmon tackle and methods.—it is when the drought breaks up
and the long-awaited rain has come that the angler has his chance
and makes ready his tackle, against the period of a few days (on some
short streams only a few hours) during which the water will be right;
right is a very exact term on some rivers, meaning not only
that the colour of the water is suitable to the fly, but that its
height shall be within an inch or two of a given mark, prescribed by
experience. as to the tackle which is made ready,
[v. p.]
there is, as in most angling matters, divergence of
opinion. salmon fly-rods are now made principally of two materials,
greenheart and split-cane; the former is less expensive, the latter is
more durable; it is entirely a matter of taste which a man uses,
but the split-cane rod is now rather more in favour, and for
salmon-fishing it is in england usually built with a core of steel
running from butt to tip and known as a "steel centre." how long the
rod shall be is also a matter on which anglers differ, but from 
ft. to  ft.  in. represents the limits within which most rods
are preferred. the tendency is to reduce rather than to increase the
length of the rod, which may be accounted for by the adoption of a
heavy line. early in the th century anglers used light-topped rods
of  ft. and even more, and with them a light line composed partly of
horse-hair; they thought  ft. with such material a good cast. modern
experience, however, has shown that a shorter rod with a heavier top
will throw a heavy dressed silk line much farther with less exertion.
ninety feet is now considered a good fishing cast, while many men can
throw a great deal more. in the united states, where rods have long
been used much lighter than in england, the limits suggested would be
considered too high. from  ft.  in. to  ft.  in. is about
the range of the american angler's choice, though long rods are not
unknown with him. the infinite variety of reels, lines, gut collars[]
and other forms of tackle which is now presented to the angler's
consideration and for his bewilderment is too wide a subject to be
touched upon here. something, however, falls to be said about flies.
one of the perennially fruitful topics of inquiry is what the fish
takes a salmon-fly to be. beyond a fairly general admission that it
is regarded as something endowed with life, perhaps resembling a
remembered article of marine diet, perhaps inviting gastronomic
experiment, perhaps irritating merely and rousing an impulse to
destroy, the discussion has not reached any definite conclusion. but
more or less connected with it is the controversy as to variety of
colour and pattern. some authorities hold that a great variety of
patterns with very minute differences in colour and shades of colour
is essential to complete success; others contend that salmon do not
differentiate between nice shades of colour, that they only draw
distinctions between flies broadly as being light, medium or dark in
general appearance, and that the size of a fly rather than its colour
is the important point for the angler's consideration. others again
go some way with the supporters of the colour-scheme and admit the
efficacy of flies whose general character is red, or yellow, or black,
and so on. the opinion of the majority, however, is probably based on
past experience, and a man's favourite flies for different rivers
and condition of water are those with which he or someone else has
previously succeeded. it remains a fact that in most fly-books great
variety of patterns will be discoverable, while certain old standard
favourites such as the jock scott, durham ranger, silver doctor, and
thunder and lightning will be prominent. coming out of the region of
controversy it is a safe generalization to say that the general rule
is: big flies for spring fishing when rivers are probably high, small
flies for summer and low water, and flies medium or small in autumn
according to the conditions. spring fishing is considered the cream of
the sport. though salmon are not as a rule so numerous or so heavy as
during the autumn run, and though kelts are often a nuisance in the
early months, yet the clean-run fish of february, march or april amply
repays patience and disappointment by its fighting powers and its
beauty. summer fishing on most rivers in the british islands is
uncertain, but in norway summer is the season, which possibly explains
to some extent the popularity of that country with british anglers,
for the pleasure of a sport is largely increased by good weather.
two methods of using the fly are in vogue, casting and harling. the
first is by far the more artistic, and it may be practised either from
a boat, from the bank or from the bed of the river itself; in the last
case the angler wades, wearing waterproof trousers or wading-stockings
and stout nail-studded brogues. in either case the fishing is similar.
the fly is cast across and down stream, and has to be brought over the
"lie" of the fish, swimming naturally with its head to the stream,
its feathers working with tempting movement and its whole appearance
suggesting some live thing dropping gradually down and across stream.
most anglers add to the motion of the fly by "working" it with short
pulls from the rod-top. when a fish takes, the rise is sometimes seen,
sometimes not; in any case the angler should not respond with the rod
until he feels the pull. then he should tighten, not
strike. the fatal word "strike," with its too literal interpretation,
has caused many a breakage. having hooked his fish, the angler must
be guided by circumstances as to what he does; the salmon will usually
decide that for him. but it is a sound rule to give a well-hooked fish
no unnecessary advantage and to hold on as hard as the tackle will
allow. good tackle will stand an immense strain, and with this "a
minute a pound" is a fair estimate of the time in which a fish should
be landed. a foul-hooked salmon (no uncommon thing, for a fish not
infrequently misses the fly and gets hooked somewhere in the body)
takes much longer to land. the other method of using the fly, harling,
which is practised on a few big rivers, consists in trailing the
fly behind a boat rowed backward and forwards across the stream and
dropping gradually downwards. fly-fishing for salmon is also practised
on some lakes, into which the fish run. on lakes the boat drifts
slowly along a "beat," while the angler casts diagonally over the
spots where salmon are wont to lie. salmon may also be caught by
"mid-water fishing," with a natural bait either spun or trolled
and with artificial spinning-baits of different kinds, and by
"bottom-fishing" with prawns, shrimps and worms. spinning is usually
practised when the water is too high or too coloured for the fly;
trolling is seldom employed, but is useful for exploring pools which
cannot be fished by spinning or with the fly; the prawn is a valuable
lure in low water and when fish are unwilling to rise; while the worm
is killing at all states of the river, but except as a last resource
is not much in favour. there are a few waters where salmon have the
reputation of not taking a fly at all; in them spinning or prawning
are the usual modes of fishing. but most anglers, wherever possible,
prefer to use the fly. the rod for the alternative methods is
generally shorter and stiffer than the fly-rod, though made of like
material. twelve to fourteen feet represents about the range of
choice. outside the british islands the salmon-fisher finds the
headquarters of his sport in europe in scandinavia and iceland, and in
the new world in some of the waters of canada and newfoundland.
land-locked salmon.—the land-locked salmon (salmo salar
sebago) of canada and the lakes of maine is, as its name implies,
now regarded by scientists as merely a land-locked form of the salmon.
it does not often attain a greater size than  ft, but it is a fine
fighter and is highly esteemed by american anglers. in most waters it
does not take a fly so well as a spinning-bait, live-bait or worm. the
methods of angling for it do not differ materially from those employed
for other salmonidae.
pacific salmon.—closely allied to salmo salar both in
appearance and habits is the genus oncorhynchus, commonly known
as pacific salmon. it contains six species, is peculiar to the north
pacific ocean, and is of some importance to the angler, though of
not nearly so much as the atlantic salmon. the quinnat is the largest
member of the genus, closely resembles salar in
[v. p.]
 appearance and surpasses him in size. the others,
sockeye, humpback, cohoe, dog-salmon and masu, are smaller and of
less interest to the angler, though some of them have great commercial
value. the last-named is only found in the waters of japan, but the
rest occur in greater or less quantities in the rivers of kamchatka,
alaska, british columbia and oregon. the problems presented to science
by solar are offered by oncorhynchus also, but there are
variations in his life-history, such as the fact that few if any fish
of the genus are supposed to survive their first spawning season. when
once in the rivers none of these salmon is of very much use to the
angler; as, though it is stated that they will occasionally take a fly
or spoon in fresh water, they are not nearly so responsive as their
atlantic cousin and in many streams are undoubtedly not worth trying
for. at the mouths of some rivers, however, where the water is
distinctly tidal, and in certain bays of the sea itself they give very
fine sport, the method of fishing for them being usually to trail a
heavy spoonbait behind a boat. by this means remarkable bags of fish
have been made by anglers. the sport is of quite recent development.
sea-trout.—next to the salmon comes the sea-trout, the other
migratory salmonid of europe. this is a fish with many local names and
a good deal of local variation. modern science, however, recognises
two "races" only, salmo trutta, the sea-trout proper, and
salmo cambricus or eriox, the bull-trout, or sewin of
wales, which is most prominent in such rivers as the coquet and tweed.
the life-history of sea-trout is much the same as that of salmon, and
the fish on their first return from the sea in the grilse-stage are
called by many names, finnock, herling and whitling being perhaps the
best known. of the two races salmo trutta alone is of much use
to the fly-fisher. the bull-trout, for some obscure reason, is not at
all responsive to his efforts, except in its kelt stage. then it will
take greedily enough, but that is small consolation. the bull-trout
is a strong fish and grows to a great size and it is a pity that it
is not of greater sporting value, if only to make up for its bad
reputation as an article of food. some amends, however, are made by
its cousin the sea-trout, which is one of the gamest and daintiest
fish on the angler's list. it is found in most salmon rivers and also
in not a few streams which are too small to harbour the bigger fish,
while there are many lakes in scotland and ireland (where the fish
is usually known as white trout) where the fishing is superb when the
trout have run up into them. fly-fishing for sea-trout is not a thing
apart. a three-pounder that will impale itself on a big salmon-fly,
might equally well have taken a tiny trout-fly. many anglers, when
fishing a sea-trout river where they run large,  lb or more, and
where there is also a chance of a salmon, effect a compromise by using
a light  ft. or  ft. double-handed rod, and tackle not so slender
as to make hooking a salmon a certain disaster. but undoubtedly to get
the full pleasure out of sea-trout-fishing a single-handed rod of 
ft. to  ft. with reasonably fine gut and small flies should be used,
and the way of using it is much the same as in wet-fly fishing for
brown trout, which will be treated later. when the double-handed rod
and small salmon-flies are used, the fishing is practically the same
as salmon-fishing except that it is on a somewhat smaller scale. flies
for sea-trout are numberless and local patterns abound, as may be
expected with a fish which has so catholic a taste. but, as with
salmon-fishers so with sea-trout-fishers, experience forms belief and
success governs selection. among the small salmon-flies and loch-flies
which will fill his book, the angler will do well to have a store of
very small trout-flies at hand, while experience has shown that even
the dry fly will kill sea-trout on occasion, a thing that is worth
remembering where rivers are low and fish shy. july, august and
september are in general the best months for sea-trout, and as they
are dry months the angler often has to put up with indifferent sport.
the fish will, however, rise in tidal water and in a few localities
even in the sea itself, or in salt-water lochs into which streams run.
sea-trout have an irritating knack of "coming short," that is to
say, they will pluck at the fly without really taking it. there are
occasions, on the other hand, in loch-fishing where plenty of time
must be given to the fish without tightening on it, especially if it
happens to be a big one. like salmon, sea-trout are to be caught with
spinning-baits and also with the worm. the main controversy that is
concerned with sea-trout is whether or no the fish captured in early
spring are clean fish or well-mended kelts. on the whole, as sea-trout
seldom run before may, the majority of opinion inclines to their being
kelts.
non-migratory salmonidae.—of the non-migratory members of the
salmonidae the most important in great britain is the brown
trout (salmo fario). its american cousin the rainbow trout
(s. irideus) is now fairly well established in the country too,
while other transatlantic species both of trout and char (which are
some of them partially migratory, that is to say, migratory when
occasion offers), such as the steelhead (s. rivularis),
fontinalis (s. fonlinalis) and the cut-throat trout (s.
clarkii), are at least not unknown. all these fish, together with
their allied forms in america, can be captured with the fly, and,
speaking broadly, the wet-fly method will do well for them all.
therefore it is only necessary to deal with the methods applicable to
one species, the brown trout.
trout.—of the game-fishes the brown trout is the most popular,
for it is spread over the whole of great britain and most of europe,
wherever there are waters suited to it. it is a fine sporting fish and
is excellent for the table, while in some streams and lakes it grows
to a very considerable size, examples of  lb from southern rivers
and  lb from irish and scottish lakes being not unknown. one of the
signs of its popularity is that its habits and history have produced
some very animated controversies. some of the earliest discussions
were provoked by the liability of the fish to change its appearance
in different surroundings and conditions, and so at one time many a
district claimed its local trout as a separate species. now, however,
science admits but one species, though, to such well-defined varieties
as the loch leven trout, the estuarine trout and the gillaroo, it
concedes the right to separate names and "races." in effect all, from
the great ferox of the big lakes of scotland and ireland to
the little fingerling of the devonshire brook, are one and the
same—salmo fario.
wet-fly fishing for trout.—fly-fishing for trout is divided
into three kinds: fishing with the artificial fly sunk or "wet,"
fishing with it floating or "dry" and fishing with the natural insect.
of the two first methods the wet fly is the older and may be taken
first. time was when all good anglers cast their flies downstream and
thought no harm. but in  w. c. stewart published his practical
angler, in which he taught that it paid better to fish up-stream,
for by so doing the angler was not only less likely to be seen by
the trout but was more likely to hook his fish. the doctrine was much
discussed and criticized, but it gradually won adherents, until now
up-stream fishing is the orthodox method where it is possible. stewart
was also one of the first to advocate a lighter rod in place of the
heavy  ft. and  ft. weapons that were used in the north in his
time. there are still many men who use the long rod for wet-fly
fishing in streams, but there are now more who find  ft. quite
enough for their purpose. for lake-fishing from a boat, however, the
longer rod is still in many cases preferred. in fishing rivers the
main art is to place the right flies in the right places and to let
them come naturally down with the stream. the right flies may be
ascertained to some extent from books and from local wisdom, but the
right places can only be learnt by experience. it does not, however,
take long to acquire "an eye for water" and that is half the battle,
for the haunts of trout in rapid rivers are very much alike. in
lake-fishing chance has a greater share in bringing about success, but
here too the right fly and the right place are important; the actual
management of rod, line and flies, of course, is easier, for there is
no stream to be reckoned with. though there is little left to be said
about wet-fly fishing where the fly is an imitation more or less exact
of a natural insect, there is another branch of the art which has been
stimulated by modern developments. this is the use of salmon-flies for
big trout much in the same way as for salmon. in such rivers as the
thames, where the trout are cannibals and run very large, ordinary
trout-flies are of little use, and the fly-fisher's only
[v. p.]
chance is to use a big fly and "work" it, casting across
and down stream. the big fly has also been found serviceable with the
great fish of new zealand and with the inhabitants of such a piece of
water as blagdon lake near bristol, where the trout run very large.
for this kind of fishing much stronger tackle and a heavier rod are
required than for catching fish that seldom exceed the pound.
dry fly.—fishing with the floating fly is a device of southern
origin, and the idea no doubt arose from the facts that on the placid
south country streams the natural fly floats on the surface and that
the trout are accustomed to feed on it there. the controversy "dry
versus wet" was long and spirited, but the new idea won the day
and now not only on the chalk-streams, but on such stretches of even
highland rivers as are suitable, the dry-fly man may be seen testing
his theories. these theories are simple and consist in placing before
the fish an exact imitation of the insect on which it is feeding, in
such a way that it shall float down exactly as if it were an insect
of the same kind. to this end special tackle and special methods have
been found necessary. not only the fly but also the line has to float
on the wafer; the line is very heavy and therefore the rod (split-cane
or greenheart) must be stiff and powerful; special precautions have
to be taken that the fly shall float unhindered and shall not "drag";
special casts have to be made to counteract awkward winds; and,
lastly, the matching of the fly with the insect on the water is a
matter of much nicety, for the water-flies are of many shades and
colours. many brains have busied themselves with the solution of these
problems with such success that dry-fly fishing is now a finished art.
the entomology of the dry-fly stream has been studied very deeply by
mr. f. m. halford, the late g. s. marryat and others, and improvements
both in flies and tackle have been very great. quite lately, however,
there has been a movement in favour of light rods for dry-fly fishing
as well as wet-fly fishing. the english split-cane rod for dry-fly
work weighs about an ounce to the foot, rather more or rather
less. the american rod of similar action and material weighs much
less—approximately  oz. to  ft. the light rod, it is urged, is
much less tiring and is quite powerful enough for ordinary purposes.
against it is claimed that dry-fly fishing is not "ordinary purposes,"
that chalk-stream weeds are too strong and chalk-stream winds too wild
for the light rod to be efficient against them. however, the light rod
is growing in popular favour; british manufacturers are building rods
after the american style; and anglers are taking to them more and
more. the dry-fly method is now practised by many fishermen both in
germany and france, but it has scarcely found a footing as yet in the
united states or canada.
fishing with the natural fly.—the natural fly is a very
killing bait for trout, but its use is not wide-spread except
in ireland. in ireland "dapping" with the green drake or the
daddy-longlegs is practised from boats on most of the big loughs.
a light whole-cane rod of stiff build, about  ft. in length, is
required with a floss-silk line light enough to be carried out on the
breeze; the "dap" (generally two mayflies or daddy-longlegs on a small
stout-wired hook) is carried out by the breeze and just allowed to
touch the water. when a trout rises it is well to count "ten" before
striking. very heavy trout are caught in this manner during the mayfly
season. in the north "creeper-fishing" is akin to this method, but
the creeper is the larva of the stone-fly, not a fly itself, and it
is cast more like an ordinary fly and allowed to sink. sometimes,
however, the mature insect is used with equally good results. a few
anglers still practise the old style of dapping or "dibbling" after
the manner advised by izaak walton. it is a deadly way of fishing
small overgrown brooks. a stiff rod and strong gut are necessary, and
a grasshopper or almost any large fly will serve for bait.
other methods.—the other methods of taking trout principally
employed are spinning, live-baiting and worming. for big river trout
such as those of the thames a gudgeon or bleak makes the best spinning
or live bait, for great lake trout (jerox) a small fish of
their own species and for smaller trout a minnow. there are numberless
artificial spinning-baits which kill well at times, the devon being
perhaps the favourite. the use of the drop-minnow, which is trolling
on a lesser scale, is a killing method employed more in the north of
england than elsewhere. the worm is mostly deadly in thick water, so
deadly that it is looked on askance. but there is a highly artistic
mode of fishing known as "clear-water worming." this is most
successful when rivers are low and weather hot, and it needs an expert
angler to succeed in it. the worm has to be cast up-stream rather like
a fly, and the method is little inferior to fly-fishing in delicacy
and difficulty. the other baits for trout, or rather the other baits
which they will take sometimes, are legion. wasp-grubs, maggots,
caterpillars, small frogs, bread, there is very little the fish will
not take. but except in rural districts little effort is made to catch
trout by means less orthodox than the fly, minnow and worm, and the
tendency nowadays both in england and america is to restrict anglers
where possible to the use of the artificial fly only.
grayling.—the only other member of the salmon family in
england which gives much sport to the fly-fisher is the grayling, a
fish which possesses the recommendation of rising well in winter. it
can be caught with either wet or dry fly, and with the same tackle
as trout, which generally inhabit the same stream. grayling will
take most small trout-flies, but there are many patterns of fly tied
specially for them, most of them founded on the red tag or the green
insect. worms and maggots are also largely used in some waters
for grayling, and there is a curious contrivance known as the
"grasshopper," which is a sort of compromise between the fly and
bait. it consists of a leaded hook round the shank of which is twisted
bright-coloured wool. the point is tipped with maggots, and the lure,
half artificial, half natural, is dropped into deep holes and worked
up and down in the water. in some places the method is very killing.
the grayling has been very prominent of late years owing to the
controversy "grayling versus trout." many people hold that
grayling injure a trout stream by devouring trout-ova and trout-food,
by increasing too rapidly and in other ways. beyond, however, proving
the self-evident fact that a stream can only support a given amount
of fish-life, the grayling's opponents do not seem to have made out
a very good case, for no real evidence of its injuring trout has been
adduced.
char.—the chars (sahelinus) are a numerous family
widely distributed over the world, but in great britain are not
very important to the angler. one well-defined species (sahelinus
alpinus) is found in some lakes of wales and scotland, but
principally in westmorland and cumberland. it sometimes takes a small
fly but is more often caught with small artificial spinning-baits. the
fish seldom exceeds ½ lb in great britain, though in scandinavia
it is caught up to  lb or more. there are some important chars
in america, fontinalis being one of the most esteemed. some
members of the genus occasionally attain a size scarcely excelled
by the salmon. among them are the great lake trout of america,
cristinomer namaycush, and the danubian "salmon" or huchen,
salmo hucho. both of these fish are caught principally with
spinning-baits, but both will on occasion take a salmon-fly, though
not with any freedom after they have reached a certain size. an
attempt has been made to introduce huchen into the thames but at the
time of writing the result cannot yet be estimated.
pike.—the pike (esox lucius), which after the
salmonidae is the most valued sporting fish in great britain,
is a fish of prey pure and simple. though it will occasionally take a
large fly, a worm or other ground-bait, its systematic capture is only
essayed with small fish or artificial spinning-baits. a live bait is
supposed to be the most deadly lure for big pike, probably because it
is the method employed by most anglers. but spinning is more artistic
and has been found quite successful enough by those who give it a fair
and full trial. trolling, the method of "sink and draw" with a dead
bait, referred to previously in this article, is not much practised
nowadays, though at one time it was very popular. it was given up
because the traditional form of trolling-tackle was such that the bait
had to be swallowed by the pike before the hook would take hold, and
that necessitated killing all fish caught, whether large or small. the
same objection formerly applied to
live-baiting with what was known as a gorge-hook. now,
however, what is called snap-tackle is almost invariably used in
[v. p.]
live-baiting, and the system is by some few anglers extended to the
other method too. pike are autumn and winter fish and are at their
best in december. they grow to a very considerable size, fish of 
lb being regarded as "specimens" and an occasional thirty-pounder
rewarding the zealous and fortunate. the heaviest pike caught with a
rod in recent years which is sufficiently authenticated, weighed 
lb, but heavier specimens are said to have been taken in irish lakes.
river pike up to about  lb in weight are excellent eating.
america has several species of pike, of which the muskelunge of the
great lake region (esox masquinongy) is the most important.
it is a very fine fish, excelling esox lucius both in size and
looks. from the angler's point of view it may be considered simply
as a large pike and may be caught by similar methods. it occasionally
reaches the weight of  lb or perhaps more. the pickerel (esox
reticulatus) is the only other of the american pikes which gives
any sport. it reaches a respectable size, but is as inferior to the
pike as the pike is to the muskelunge.
perch.—next to the pikes come the perches, also predatory
fishes. the european perch (perca fluviatilis) has a place by
itself in the affections of anglers. when young it is easy to catch by
almost any method of fishing, and a large number of walton's disciples
have been initiated into the art with its help. worms and small
live-baits are the principal lures, but at times the fish will take
small bright artificial spinning-baits well, and odd attractions such
as boiled shrimps, caddis-grubs, small frogs, maggots, wasp-grubs, &c.
are sometimes successful. the drop-minnow is one of the best methods
of taking perch. very occasionally, and principally in shallow pools,
the fish will take an artificial fly greedily, a small salmon-fly
being the best thing to use in such a case. a perch of  lb is a
good fish, and a specimen of ½ lb about the limit of angling
expectation. there have been rare instances of perch over  lb,
and there are legends of eight-pounders, which, however, need
authentication.
black bass.—the yellow perch of america (perca
flavescens) is very much like its european cousin in appearance
and habits, but it is not so highly esteemed by american anglers,
because they are fortunate in being possessed of a better fish in the
black bass, another member of the perch family. there are two kinds
of black bass (micropterus salmoides and micropterus
dolomieu), the large-mouthed and the small-mouthed. the first is
more a lake and pond fish than the second, and they are seldom found
in the same waters. as the black bass is a fly-taking fish and a
strong fighter, it is as valuable to the angler as a trout and is
highly esteemed. bass-flies are sui generis, but incline more
to the nature of salmon-flies than trout-flies. an artificial frog
cast with a fly-rod or very light spinning-rod is also a favourite
lure. for the rest the fish will take almost anything in the nature of
worms or small fish, like its cousin the perch. a  lb bass is a good
fish, but five-pounders are not uncommon. black bass have to some
extent been acclimatized in france.
the ruffe or pope (acerina vulgaris) is a little
fish common in the thames and many other slow-flowing english rivers.
it is very like the perch in shape but lacks the dusky bars which
distinguish the other, and is spotted with dark brown spots on a
golden olive background. it is not of much use to the angler as it
seldom exceeds  oz. in weight. it takes small worms, maggots and
similar baits greedily, and is often a nuisance when the angler is
expecting better fish. allied to the perches is the pike-perch,
of which two species are of some importance to the angler, one the
wall-eye of eastern america (stizostedion vitreum) and the
other the zander of central europe (sandrus lucioperca). the
last especially is a fine fighter, occasionally reaching a weight of
 lb. it is usually caught by spinning, but will take live-baits,
worms and other things of that nature. the danube may be described as
its headquarters. it is a fish whose sporting importance will be more
realized as anglers on the continent become more numerous.
cyprinidae.—the carp family (cyprinidae) is a large one
and its members constitute the majority of english sporting fishes.
in america the various kinds of chub, sucker, dace, shiner, &c. are
little esteemed and are regarded as spoils for the youthful angler
only, or as baits for the better fish in which the continent is so
rich. in england, however, the cyprinidae have an honoured
place in the affections of all who angle "at the bottom," while in
europe some of them have a commercial value as food-fishes. in india
at least one member of the family, the mahseer, takes rank with the
salmon as a "big game" fish.
carp, tench, barbel, bream.—the family as represented in
england may be roughly divided into two groups, those which feed on
the bottom purely and those which occasionally take flies. the first
consists of carp, tench, barbel and bream. of these carp, tench and
bream are either river or pool fish, while the barbel is found only in
rivers, principally in the thames and trent. the carp grows to a great
size,  lb being not unknown; tench are big at  lb; barbel have been
caught up to  lb or rather more; and bream occasionally reach  lb,
while a fish of over  lb is on record. all these fish are capricious
feeders, carp and barbel being particularly undependable. in some
waters it seems to be impossible to catch the large specimens, and the
angler who seeks to gain trophies in either branch of the sport needs
both patience and perseverance. tench and bream are not quite so
difficult. the one fish can sometimes be caught in great quantities,
and the other is generally to be enticed by the man who knows how to
set about it. two main principles have to be observed in attacking all
these fish, ground-baiting and early rising. ground-baiting consists
in casting food into the water so as to attract the fish to a certain
spot and to induce them to feed. without it very little can be done
with shy and large fish of these species. early rising is necessary
because they only feed freely, as a rule, from daybreak till about
three hours after sun-rise. the heat of a summer or early autumn day
makes them sluggish, but an hour or two in the evening is sometimes
remunerative. the bait for them all should usually lie on the bottom,
and it consists mainly of worms, wasp and other grubs, pastes of
various kinds; and for carp, and sometimes bream, of vegetable baits
such as small boiled potatoes, beans, peas, stewed wheat, pieces of
banana, &c. none of these fish feed well in winter.
roach, rudd, dace, chub.—the next group of cyprinidae
consists of fish which will take a bait similar to those already
mentioned and also a fly. the sizes which limit the ordinary angler's
aspirations are roach about  lb, rudd about ½ lb, dace about  lb
and chub about  lb. there are instances of individuals heavier than
this, one or two roach and many rudd of over  lb being on record,
while dace have been caught up to  lb  oz., and chub of over  lb
are not unknown. roach only take a fly as a rule in very hot weather
when they are near the surface, or early in the season when they
are on the shallows; the others will take it freely all through the
summer. ordinary trout flies do well enough for all four species,
but chub often prefer something larger, and big bushy lures called
"palmers," which represent caterpillars, are generally used for them.
the fly may be used either wet or dry for all these fish, and there
is little to choose between the methods as regards effectiveness.
fly-fishing for these fish is a branch of angling which might be more
practised than it is, as the sport is a very fair substitute for trout
fishing. roach, chub and dace feed on bottom food and give good sport
all the winter.
gudgeon, bleak, minnow, &c.—the small fry of european
waters, gudgeon, bleak, minnow, loach, stickleback and bullhead, are
principally of value as bait for other fish, though the first-named
species gives pretty sport on fine tackle and makes a succulent dish.
small red worms are the best bait for gudgeon and minnows, a maggot
or small fly for bleak, and the rest are most easily caught in a
small-meshed net. the loach is used principally in ireland as a trout
bait, and the other two are of small account as hook-baits, though
sticklebacks are a valuable form of food for trout in lakes and pools.
mahseer.—among the carps of india, several of which give
good sport, special mention must be made of the mahseer (barbus
mosal), a fish which rivals the salmon both in size and strength.
it reaches a weight of  lb and sometimes more and is fished for in
much the same manner as salmon, with the
[v. p.]
difference that after about  lb it takes a
spinning-bait, usually a heavy spoon-bait, better than a fly.
cat-fish.—none of the fresh-water cat-fishes (of which no
example is found in england) are what may be called sporting fish, but
several may be caught with rod and line. there are several kinds in
north america, and some of them are as heavy as  lb, but the
most important is the wels (silurus glanis) of the danube and
neighbouring waters. this is the largest european fresh-water fish,
and it is credited with a weight of  lb or more. it is a bottom
feeder and will take a fish-bait either alive or dead; it is said
occasionally to run at a spinning bait when used very deep.
burbot.—the burbot (lota vulgaris) is the only
fresh-water member of the cod family in great britain, and it is found
only in a few slow-flowing rivers such as the trent, and there not
often, probably because it is a fish of sluggish habits which feeds
only at night. it reaches a weight of  lb or more, and will take most
flesh or fish baits on the bottom. the burbot of america has similar
characteristics.
sturgeon.—the sturgeons, of which there are a good many
species in europe and america, are of no use to the angler. they
are anadromous fishes of which little more can be said than that a
specimen might take a bottom bait once in a way. in russia they
are sometimes caught on long lines armed with baited hooks, and
occasionally an angler hooks one. such a case was reported from
california in the field of the th of august .
shad.—two other anadromous fish deserve notice. the first is
the shad, a herring-like fish of which two species, allice and twaite
(clupea alosa and c. finta), ascend one or two british
and several continental rivers in the spring. the twaite is the more
common, and in the severn, wye and teme it sometimes gives very fair
sport to anglers, taking worm and occasionally fly or small spinning
bait. it is a good fighter, and reaches a weight of about  lb. its
sheen when first caught is particularly beautiful. america also has
shads.
flounder.—the other is the flounder (pleuronectes
flesus), the only flat-fish which ascends british rivers. it
is common a long way up such rivers as the severn, far above tidal
influence, and it will take almost any flesh-bait used on the bottom.
a flounder of  lb is, in a river, a large one, but heavier examples
are sometimes caught.
eel.—the eel (anguilla vulgaris) is regarded by
the angler more as a nuisance than a sporting fish, but when of
considerable size (and it often reaches a weight of  lb or more) it
is a splendid fighter and stronger than almost any fish that swims.
its life history has long been disputed, but it is now accepted that
it breeds in the sea and ascends rivers in its youth. it is found
practically everywhere, and its occurrence in isolated ponds to which
it has never been introduced by human agency has given rise to a
theory that it travels overland as well as by water. the best baits
for eels are worms and small fish, and the best time to use them is at
night or in thundery or very wet weather.
sea angling.
sea angling is attended by almost as many refinements of tackle and
method as fresh-water angling. the chief differences are differences
of locality and the habits of the fish. to a certain extent sea
angling may also be divided into three classes—fishing on the surface
with the fly, at mid-water with spinning or other bait, and on the
bottom; but the first method is only practicable at certain times and
in certain places, and the others, from the great depths that often
have to be sounded and the heavy weights that have to be used in
searching them, necessitate shorter and stouter rods, larger reels and
stronger tackle than fresh-water anglers employ. also, of course, the
sea-fisherman is liable to come into conflict with very large fish
occasionally. in british waters the monster usually takes the form of
a skate or halibut. a specimen of the former weighing  lb has
been landed off the irish coast with rod and line in recent years. in
american waters there is a much greater opportunity of catching fish
of this calibre.
great game fishes.—there are several giants of the sea which
are regularly pursued by american anglers, chief among them being
the tarpon (tarpon atlanticus) and the tuna or tunny (thunnus
thynnus), which have been taken on rod and line up to  lb and 
lb respectively. jew-fish and black sea-bass of over  lb have been
taken on rod and line, and there are many other fine sporting fish
of large size which give the angler exciting hours on the reefs of
florida, or the coasts of california, texas or mexico. practically
all of them are taken with a fish-bait either live or dead, and used
stationary on the bottom or in mid-water trailed behind a boat.
british game fishes.—on a much smaller scale are the fishes
most esteemed in british waters. the bass (labrax lupus) heads
the list as a plucky and rather difficult opponent. a fish of  lb is
a large one, but fifteen-pounders have been taken. small or "school"
bass up to  lb or  lb may sometimes be caught with the fly
(generally a roughly constructed thing with big wings), and when they
are really taking the sport is magnificent. in some few localities it
is possible to cast for them from rocks with a salmon rod, but usually
a boat is required. in other places bass may be caught from the shore
with fish bait used on the bottom in quite shallow water. they may
again sometimes be caught in mid-water, and in fact there are few
methods and few lures employed in sea angling which will not account
for them at times. the pollack (gadus pollachius) and coal-fish
(gadus virens) come next in esteem. both in some places reach a
weight of  lb or more, and both when young will take a fly. usually,
however, the best sport is obtained by trailing some spinning-bait,
such as an artificial or natural sand-eel, behind a boat. sometimes,
and especially for pollack, the bait must be kept near the bottom and
heavy weights on the line are necessary; the coal-fish are more prone
to come to the surface for feeding. the larger grey mullet (mugil
capito) is a great favourite with many anglers, as it is extremely
difficult to hook, and when hooked fights strongly. fishing for mullet
is more akin to fresh-water fishing than any branch of sea-angling,
and indeed can be carried on in almost fresh water, for the fish
frequent harbours, estuaries and tidal pools. they can be caught
close to the surface, at mid-water and at the bottom, and as a rule
vegetable baits, such as boiled macaroni, or ragworms are found to
answer best. usually ground-baiting is necessary, and the finer the
tackle used the greater is the chance of sport. not a few anglers fish
with a float as if for river fish. the fish runs up to about  lb in
weight. the cod (gadus morhua) grows larger and fights less
gamely than any of the fish already mentioned. it is generally caught
with bait used on the bottom from a boat, but in places codling, or
young cod, give some sport to anglers fishing from the shore. the
mackerel (scomber scomber) gives the best sport to a bait,
usually a strip of fish skin, trailed behind a boat fairly close to
the surface, but it will sometimes feed on the bottom. mackerel on
light tackle are game fighters, though they do not usually much exceed
 lb. whiting and whiting-pout (gadus merlangus and gadus
luscus) both feed on or near the bottom, do not grow to any great
size, and are best sought with fine tackle, usually an arrangement
of three or four hooks at intervals above a lead which is called
a "paternoster." if one or more of the hooks are on the bottom the
tackle will do for different kinds of flat fish as well, flounders
and dabs being the two species most often caught by anglers. the
bream (pagellus centrodontus) is another bottom-feeder which
resembles the fresh-water bream both in appearance and habits. it is
an early morning or rather a nocturnal fish, and grows to a weight of
 lb or  lb. occasionally it will feed in mid-water or even close
to the surface. the conger eel (conger vulgaris) is another
night-feeder, which gives fine sport, as it grows to a great size, and
is very powerful. strong tackle is essential for conger fishing, as so
powerful an opponent in the darkness cannot be given any law. the bait
must be on or near the bottom. there are, of course, many other fish
which come to the angler's rod at times, but the list given is fairly
complete as representing the species which are especially sought.
beside them are occasional (in some waters too frequent) captures such
as dog-fish and sharks, skates and rays. many of them run to a great
size and give [v. p.]
 plenty of sport on a rod, though they are not as a rule
welcomed. lastly, it must be mentioned that certain of the salmonidae,
smelts (osmerus eperlanus), sea-trout, occasionally brown
trout, and still more occasionally salmon can be caught in salt water
either in sea-lochs or at the mouths of rivers. smelts are best fished
for with tiny hooks tied on fine gut and baited with fragments of
shrimp, ragworm, and other delicacies.
modern authorities and reference books.—history and
literature: prof. a. n. mayer, sport with gun and rod (new
york and edinburgh), with a chapter on "the primitive fish-hook," by
barnet phillips; dr. r. munro, lake dwellings of europe (london,
), with many illustrations and descriptions of early fish-books,
&c.; h. cholmondeley pennell and others, fishing gossip
(edinburgh, ), contains a paper on "fishing and fish-hooks of
the earliest date," by jonathan couch; c. d. badham, prose
halieutics (london, ), full of curious lore, relating,
however, more to ichthyophagy than angling; the angler's note-book
and naturalist's record (london, st series , nd series
), edited by t. satchell, the two volumes containing much valuable
matter on angling history, literature, and other topics; r. blakey,
angling literature (london, ), inaccurate and badly
arranged, but containing a good deal of curious matter not to be found
elsewhere; o. lambert, angling literature in england (london,
), a good little general survey; j. j. manley, fish and
fishing (london, ), with chapters on fishing literature,
&c.; r. b. marston, walton and some earlier writers on fish and
fishing (london and new york, ); piscatorial society's
papers (vol. i. london, ), contains a paper on "the useful
and fine arts in their relation to fish and fishing," by s. c. harding;
super flumina (anon.; london, ), gives passim
useful information on fishing literature; t. westwood and t. satchell,
bibliotheca piscatoria (london, ) an admirable bibliography
of the sport: together with the supplement prepared by r. b. marston,
, it may be considered wonderfully complete.
methods and practice.—general fresh-water fishing: f. francis,
a book on angling (london, ), though old, a thoroughly
sound text-book, particularly good on salmon fishing; h. c. pennell
and others, fishing—salmon and trout and pike and coarse fish
(badminton library,  vols., london, ); john bickerdyke, the
book of the all-round angler (london, ); horace g. hutchinson
and others, fishing (country life series,  vols., london,
), contains useful ichthyological notes by g. a. boulenger, a
chapter on "the feeding of salmon in fresh-water," by dr. j. kingston
barton, and a detailed account of the principal salmon rivers of
norway, by c. e. radclyffe.
salmon and trout.—major j. p. traherne, the habits of the
salmon (london, ); g. m. kelson, the salmon fly (london,
), contains instructions on dressing salmon-flies; a. e. gathorne
hardy, the salmon ("fur, feather and fin series," london,
); sir h. maxwell, bt., salmon and sea trout (angler's
library, london, ); sir e. grey, bt., fly fishing (haddon
hall library, london and new york, ); w. earl hodgson, salmon
fishing (london, ), contains a series of coloured plates of
salmon flies; marquis of granby, the trout ("fur, feather and
fin series," london, ). wet fly fishing: w. c. stewart, the
practical angler (london, ), a new edition of an old but still
valuable work; e. m. tod, wet fly fishing (london, ); w.
earl hodgson, trout fishing (london, ), contains a series
of admirable coloured plates of artificial flies. dry fly fishing:
f. m. halford, dry-fly fishing in theory and practice (london,
), the standard work on the subject; g. a. b. dewar, the book of
the dry fly (london, ). grayling: t. e. pritt, the book of
the grayling (leeds, ); h. a. rolt, grayling fishing in south
country streams (london, ).
coarse fish.—c. h. wheeley, coarse fish (angler's
library, london, ); j. w. martin, practical fishing
(london); float-fishing and spinning (london, ); w. senior
and others, pike and perch ("fur, feather and fin series,"
london, ); a. j. jardine, pike and perch (angler's library,
london, ); h. c. pennell, the book of the pike (london,
); greville fennell, the book of the roach (london, ).
sea fishing.—j. c. wilcocks, the sea fisherman (london,
); john bickerdyke (and others), sea fishing (badminton
library, london, ); practical letters to sea fishers
(london, ); f. g. aflalo, sea fish (angler's library,
london, ); p. l. haslope, practical sea fishing (london,
tackle, flies, &c.—h. c. pennell, modern improvements in
fishing tackle (london, ); h. p. wells, fly rods and
fly tackle (new york and london, ); a. ronalds, the
fly-fisher's entomology (london, ); f. m. halford, dry fly
entomology (london, ); floating flies and how to dress
them (london, ); t. e. pritt, north country flies
(london, ); h. g. m'clelland, how to tie flies for trout and
grayling (london, ); capt. j. h. hale, how to tie salmon
flies (london, ); f. g. aflalo, john bickerdyke and c. h.
wheeley. how to buy fishing tackle (london).
ichthyology, fisheries, fish-culture, &c.—dr. francis day,
fishes of great britain and ireland ( vols., london, );
british and irish salmonidae (london, ); dr. a. c. l. g.
günther, introduction to the study of fishes (london, );
dr. d. s. jordan, a guide to the study of fishes ( vols.,
new york and london, ); f. francis, practical management of
fisheries (london, ); fish culture (london, ); f. m.
halford, making a fishery (london, ); j. j. armistead,
an angler's paradise (dumfries, ); f. mather, modern
fish-culture (new york, ); livingstone stone, domesticated
trout (charlestown and london, ).
angling guide books, geographical information, &c.—great
britain: the angler's diary (london), gives information about
most important waters in the british isles, and about some foreign
waters, published annually; the sportsman's and tourist's guide to
scotland (london), a good guide to angling in scotland, published
twice a year; augustus grimble, the salmon rivers of scotland
(london, ,  vols.); the salmon rivers of ireland (london,
); the salmon and sea trout rivers of england and wales
(london, ,  vols.), this fine series gives minute information
as to salmon pools, flies, seasons, history, catches, &c.; w. m.
gallichan, fishing in wales (london, ); fishing in
derbyshire (london, ); j. watson, english lake district
fisheries (london, ); c. wade, exmoor streams (london,
); g. a. b. dewar, south country trout streams (london,
); "hi regan," how and where to fish in ireland (london,
); e. s. shrubsole, the land of lakes (london, ), a
guide to fishing in county donegal. europe: "palmer hackle," hints
on angling (london, ), contains "suggestions for angling
excursions in france and belgium," but they are too old to be of much
service; w. m. gallichan, fishing and travel in spain (london,
); g. w. hartley, wild sport with gun, rifle and salmon rod
(edinburgh, ), contains a chapter on huchen fishing; max von dem
borne, wegweiser für angler durch deutschland, oesterreich und die
schweiz (berlin, ), a book of good conception and
arrangement, and still useful, though out of date in many particulars;
illustrierte angler-schule (der deutschen fischerei zeitung),
stettin, contains good chapters on the wels and huchen; h. storck, der
angelsport (munich, ), contains a certain amount of geographical
information; e. b. kennedy, thirty seasons in scandinavia
(london, ), contains useful information about fishing; general
e. f. burton, trouting in norway (london, ); abel chapman,
wild norway (london, ); f. sandeman, angling travels in
norway (london, ). america: c. f. holder, big game fishes of
the united states (new york, ); j. a. henshall, bass,
pike, perch and pickerel (new york, ); dean sage and others,
salmon and trout (new york, ); e. t. d. chambers, angler's
guide to eastern canada (québec, ); rowland ward, the english
angler in florida (london, ); j. turner turner, the giant
fish of florida (london, ). india: h. s. thomas, the rod
in india (london, ); "skene dhu," the mighty mahseer
(madras, ), contains a chapter on the acclimatization of trout
in india and ceylon. new zealand: w. h. spackman, trout in new
zealand (london, ); capt. hamilton, trout fishing and sport
in maoriland (wellington, ), contains a valuable section on
fishing waters.
fishery law.—g. c. oke, a handy book of the fishery laws
(edited by j. w. willis band and a. c. m'barnet, london, ).
[] as to whether "angling" necessarily implies a rod as
well as a line and hook, see the discussion in the law case of
barnard v. roberts (times l. r., april , ),
when the question arose as to the use of night-lines being angling;
but the decision against night-lines went on the ground of the absence
of the personal element rather than on the absence of a rod.
the various dictionaries are blind guides on this point, and the
authorities cited are inconclusive; but, broadly speaking, angling
now implies three necessary factors—a personal angler, the sporting
element, and the use of recognized fishing-tackle.
[] trolling is very commonly confused in angling writing and
talk with trailing, which simply means drawing a spinning-bait
along behind a boat in motion.
[] the precise date when silkworm gut (now so important a
feature of the angler's equipment) was introduced is obscure. pepys,
in his diary (), mentions "a gut string varnished over"
which "is beyond any hair for strength and smallness" as a new angling
secret which he likes "mightily." in the third edition () of
chetham's vade-mecum, already cited, appears an advertisement
of the "east india weed, which is the only thing for trout, carp and
bottom-fishing." again, in the third edition of nobbes's art of
trolling (), in the supplementary matter, appears a letter
signed by j. eaton and g. gimber, tackle-makers of crooked lane
(july , ), in which it is stated that gut "is produced from
the silkworm and not an indian weed, as has hitherto been
conjectured...." the word "gut" is employed before this date, but
it seems obvious that silkworm gut was for a long time used under the
impression that it was a weed, and that its introduction was a thing
of the th century. it is probable, however, that vegetable fibre was
used too; we believe that in some parts of india it is used by natives
to this day. pepys' "minikin" was probably cat-gut.
anglo-israelite theory, the contention that the british people in the
united kingdom, its colonies, and the united states, are the racial
descendants of the "ten tribes" forming the kingdom of israel, large
numbers of whom were deported by sargon king of assyria on the fall
of samaria in  b.c. the theory (which is fully set forth in a book
called philo-israel) rests on premises which are deemed by
scholars—both theological and anthropological—to be utterly unsound.
anglo-norman literature:—the french language (q.v.) came over
to england with william the conqueror. during the whole of the th
century it shared with latin the distinction of being the literary
language of england, and it was in use at the court until the th
century. it was not until the reign of henry iv. that english became
the native tongue of the kings of england. after the loss of the
french provinces, schools for the teaching of french were established
in england, among the most celebrated of which we may quote that
of marlborough. the language then underwent certain changes which
gradually distinguished it from the french spoken in france; but,
except for some graphical characteristics, from which certain rules
of pronunciation are to be inferred, the changes to which the language
was subjected were the individual modifications of the various
authors, so that, while we may still speak of anglo-norman writers, an
anglo-norman language, properly so called, gradually ceased to exist.
the prestige enjoyed by the french language, which, in the th
century, the author of the manière de language calls "le plus
bel et le plus gracious language
[v. p.]
 et plus noble parler, apres latin d'escole, qui soit au
monde et de touz genz mieulx prisée et amée que nul autre (quar dieux
le fist si douce et amiable principalement à l'oneur et loenge de luy
mesmes. et pour ce il peut comparer au parler des angels du ciel, pour
la grand doulceur et biaultée d'icel)," was such that it was not till
 that the chancellor opened the parliamentary session with an
english speech. and although the hundred years' war led to a
decline in the study of french and the disappearance of anglo-norman
literature, the french language continued, through some vicissitudes,
to be the classical language of the courts of justice until the th
century. it is still the language of the channel islands, though there
too it tends more and more to give way before the advance of english.
it will be seen from the above that the most flourishing period of
anglo-norman literature was from the beginning of the th century to
the end of the first quarter of the th. the end of this period is
generally said to coincide with the loss of the french provinces to
philip augustus, but literary and political history do not correspond
quite so precisely, and the end of the first period would be more
accurately denoted by the appearance of the history of william
the marshal in  (published for the societe de l'histoire de
france, by paul meyer,  vols., -). it owes its brilliancy
largely to the protection accorded by henry ii. of england to the men
of letters of his day. "he could speak french and latin well, and is
said to have known something of every tongue between'the bay of biscay
and the jordan.' he was probably the most highly educated sovereign of
his day, and amid all his busy active life he never lost his interest
in literature and intellectual discussion; his hands were never empty,
they always had either a bow or a book" (dict. of nat. biog.).
wace and benoît de sainte-more compiled their histories at his
bidding, and it was in his reign that marie de france composed her
poems. an event with which he was closely connected, viz. the murder
of thomas becket, gave rise to a whole series of writings, some of
which are purely anglo-norman. in his time appeared the works of
béroul and thomas respectively, as well as some of the most celebrated
of the anglo-norman romans d'aventure. it is important to keep
this fact in mind when studying the different works which anglo-norman
literature has left us. we will examine these works briefly, grouping
them into narrative, didactic, hagiographic, lyric, satiric and
dramatic literature.
narrative literature: (a) epic and romance.—the
french epic came over to england at an early date. we know that the
chanson de roland was sung at the battle of hastings, and
we possess anglo-norman mss. of a few chansons de geste.
the pèlerinage de charlemagne (koschwitz, altfranzösische
bibliothek, ) was, for instance, only preserved in an
anglo-norman manuscript of the british museum (now lost), although
the author was certainly a parisian. the oldest manuscript of the
chanson de roland that we possess is also a manuscript written
in england, and amongst the others of less importance we may mention
la chançun de willame, the ms. of which has (june ) been
published in facsimile at chiswick (cf. paul meyer, romania,
xxxii. -). although the diffusion of epic poetry in england did
not actually inspire any new chansons de geste, it developed
the taste for this class of literature, and the epic style in which
the tales of horn, of bovon de hampton, of guy of
warwick (still unpublished), of waldef (still unpublished),
and of fulk fitz warine are treated, is certainly partly due to
this circumstance. although the last of these works has come down
to us only in a prose version, it contains unmistakable signs of a
previous poetic form, and what we possess is really only a rendering
into prose similar to the transformations undergone by many of the
chansons de geste (cf. l. brandin, introduction to fulk fitz
warine, london, ).
the interinfluence of french and english literature can be studied in
the breton romances and the romans d'aventure even better than
in the epic poetry of the period. the lay of orpheus is known
to us only through an english imitation; the lai du cor was
composed by robert biket, an anglo-norman poet of the th century
(wulff, lund, ). the lais of marie de france were written
in england, and the greater number of the romances composing the
matière de bretagne seem to have passed from england to france
through the medium of anglo-norman. the legends of merlin and arthur,
collected in the historia regum britanniae by geoffrey
of monmouth († ), passed into french literature, bearing the
character which the bishop of st. asaph had stamped upon them.
chrétien de troye's perceval (c. ) is doubtless based on an
anglo-norman poem. robert de boron (c. ) took the subject of his
merlin (published by g. paris and j. ulrich, ,  vols., société
des anciens textes) from geoffrey of monmouth. finally, the
most celebrated love-legend of the middle ages, and one of the most
beautiful inventions of world-literature, the story of tristan and
iseult, tempted two authors, béroul and thomas, the first of whom
is probably, and the second certainly, anglo-norman (see arthurian
legend; grail, the holy; tristan). one folie tristan was
composed in england in the last years of the th century. (for all
these questions see soc. des anc. textes, muret's ed. ;
bédier's ed. -). less fascinating than the story of tristan
and iseult, but nevertheless of considerable interest, are the
two romans d'aventure of hugh of rutland, ipomedon
(published by kölbing and koschwitz, breslau, ) and
protesilaus (still unpublished) written about . the first
relates the adventures of a knight who married the young duchess of
calabria, niece of king meleager of sicily, but was loved by medea,
the king's wife. the second poem is the sequel to ipomedon, and
deals with the wars and subsequent reconciliation between ipomedon's
sons, daunus, the elder, lord of apulia, and protesilaus, the younger,
lord of calabria. protesilaus defeats daunus, who had expelled him
from calabria. he saves his brother's life, is reinvested with the
dukedom of calabria, and, after the death of daunus, succeeds to
apulia. he subsequently marries medea, king meleager's widow, who
had helped him to seize apulia, having transferred her affection for
ipomedon to his younger son (cf. ward, cat. of rom., i.
). to these two romances by an anglo-norman author, amadas et
idoine, of which we only possess a continental version, is to be
added. gaston paris has proved indeed that the original was composed
in england in the th century (an english miscellany presented
to dr. furnivall in honour of his seventy-fifth birthday, oxford,
, -). the anglo-norman poem on the life of richard coeur
de lion is lost, and an english version only has been preserved.
about  eustace of kent introduced into england the roman
d'alexandre in his roman de toute chevalerie, many passages
of which have been imitated in one of the oldest english poems on
alexander, namely, king alisaunder (p. meyer, alexandre le
grand, paris, , ii. , and weber, metrical romances,
edinburgh).
(b) fableaux, fables and religious tales.—in spite of
the incontestable popularity enjoyed by this class of literature, we
have only some half-dozen fableaux written in england, viz.
le chevalier à la corbeille, le chevalier qui faisait parler les
muets, le chevalier, sa dame et un clerc, les trois dames, la gageure,
le prêtre d'alison, la bourgeoise d'orléans (bédier, les
fabliaux, ). as to fables, one of the most popular collections
in the middle ages was that written by marie de france, which she
claimed to have translated from king alfred. in the contes
moralisés, written by nicole bozon shortly before  (soc.
anc. textes, ), a few fables bear a strong resemblance to
those of marie de france.
the religious tales deal mostly with the mary legends, and have been
handed down to us in three collections:
(i.) the adgar's collection. most of these were translated from
william of malmesbury († ?) by adgar in the th century
("adgar's marien-legenden," altfr. biblioth. ix.; j. a. herbert,
rom. xxxii. ).
(ii.) the collection of everard of gateley, a monk of st. edmund at
bury, who wrote c.  three mary legends (rom. xxix.
(iii.) an anonymous collection of sixty mary legends composed
c.  (brit. museum old roy.  b, xiv.), some of which have
been published in suchier's bibliotheca normannica; in
the altf. bibl. see also mussafia, "studien zu den
mittelalterlichen
[v. p.]
marien-legenden" in sitzungsh. der wien. akademie
(t. cxiii., cxv., cxix., cxxiii., cxxix.).
another set of religious and moralizing tales is to be found in
chardri's set dormans and josaphat, c.  (koch,
altfr. bibl., ; g. paris, poèmes et légendes du moyen
âge).
(c) history.—of far greater importance, however, are
the works which constitute anglo-norman historiography. the first
anglo-norman historiographer is geoffrey gaimar, who wrote his
estorie des angles (between  and ) for dame constance,
wife of robert fitz-gislebert (the anglo-norman metrical
chronicle, hardy and martin, i. ii., london, ). this history
comprised a first part (now lost), which was merely a translation of
geoffrey of monmouth's historia regum britanniae, preceded by
a history of the trojan war, and a second part which carries us as far
as the death of william rufus. for this second part he has consulted
historical documents, but he stops at the year , just when he has
reached the period about which he might have been able to give us some
first-hand information. similarly, wace in his roman de rou et des
dues de normandie (ed. andresen, heilbronn, -,  vols.),
written -, stops at the battle of tinchebray in  just
before the period for which he would have been so useful. his
brut or geste des bretons (le roux de lincy, -,
 vols.), written in , is merely a translation of geoffrey of
monmouth. "wace," says gaston paris, speaking of the roman de
rou, "traduit en les abrégeant des historiens latins que nous
possédons; mais çà et là il ajoute soit des contes populaires, par
exemple sur richard 'er, sur robert 'er, soit des particularités
qu'il savait par tradition (sur ce même robert le magnifique, sur
l'expédition de guillaume, &c.) et qui donnent à son oeuvre un réel
intérêt historique. sa langue est excellente; son style clair, serré,
simple, d'ordinaire assez monotone, vous plaît par sa saveur archaïque
et quelquefois par une certaine grâce et une certaine malice."
the history of the dukes of normandy by benoît de sainte-more
is based on the work of wace. it was composed at the request of
henry ii. about , and takes us as far as the year  (ed. by
francisque michel, -, collection de documents inédits,
 vols.). the , lines which it contains are of but little
interest to the historian; they are too evidently the work of
a romancier courtois, who takes pleasure in recounting
love-adventures such as those he has described in his romance of
troy. other works, however, give us more trustworthy information, for
example, the anonymous poem on henry ii.'s conquest of ireland
in  (ed. francisque michel, london, ), which, together with
the expugnatio hibernica of giraud de barri, constitutes our
chief authority on this subject. the conquest of ireland was
republished in  by goddard henry orpen, under the title of the
song of dermot and the earl (oxford, clarendon press). similarly,
jourdain fantosme, who was in the north of england in , wrote an
account of the wars between henry ii., his sons, william the lion of
scotland and louis vii., in  and  (chronicle of the reigns
of stephen ... iii., ed. by joseph stevenson and fr. michel,
london, , pp. -). not one of these histories, however, is to
be compared in value with the history of william the marshal, count
of striguil and pembroke, regent of england from -,
which was found and subsequently edited by paul meyer (société de
l'histoire de france,  vols., -). this masterpiece of
historiography was composed in  or  by a professional poet of
talent at the request of william, son of the marshal. it was compiled
from the notes of the marshal's squire, john d'early (†  or ),
who shared all the vicissitudes of his master's life and was one of
the executors of his will. this work is of great value for the history
of the period -, as the information furnished by john d'early
is either personal or obtained at first hand. in the part which deals
with the period before , it is true, there are various mistakes,
due to the author's ignorance of contemporary history, but these
slight blemishes are amply atoned for by the literary value of
the work. the style is concise, the anecdotes are well told, the
descriptions short and picturesque; the whole constitutes one of the
most living pictures of medieval society. very pale by the side of
this work appear the chronique of peter of langtoft, written
between  and , and mainly of interest for the period -
(ed. by t. wright, london, -); the chronique of
nicholas trevet (?-?), dedicated to princess mary, daughter
of edward i. (duffus hardy, descr. catal. iii., -); the
scala chronica compiled by thomas gray of heaton († c.
), which carries us to the year - (ed. by j. stevenson,
maitland club, edinburgh, ); the black prince, a poem by
the poet chandos, composed about , and relating the life of the
black prince from - (re-edited by francisque michel,
london and paris, ); and, lastly, the different versions of the
brutes, the form and historical importance of which have
been indicated by paul meyer (bulletin de la société des anciens
textes, , pp. -), and by f. w. d. brie (geschichte und
quellen der mittelenglischen prosachronik, the brute of england or the
chronicles of england, marburg, ).
finally we may mention, as ancient history, the translation of
eutropius and dares, by geoffrey of waterford (th century), who gave
also the secret des secrets, a translation from a work
wrongly attributed to aristotle, which belongs to the next division
(rom. xxiii. ).
didactic literature.—this is the most considerable, if not the
most interesting, branch of anglo-norman literature: it comprises a
large number of works written chiefly with the object of giving both
religious and profane instruction to anglo-norman lords and ladies.
the following list gives the most important productions arranged in
chronological order:—
philippe de thaun, comput, c.  (edited by e. mall,
strassburg, ), poem on the calendar; bestiaire, c. 
(ed. by e. walberg, paris, ; cf. g. paris, rom. xxxi. );
lois de guillaume le conquérant (redaction between  and
, ed. by j. e. matzke, paris, ); oxford psalter, c. 
(fr. michel, libri psalmorum versio antiqua gallica, oxford,
); cambridge psalter, c.  (fr. michel, le livre
des psaumes, paris, ); london psalter, same as oxford
psalter (cf. beyer, zt. f. rom. phil. xi. -; xii. -);
disticha catonis, translated by everard de kirkham and elie
de winchester (stengel, ausg. u. abhandlungen); le roman de
fortune, summary of boetius' de consolatione philosophiae,
by simon de fresne (hist. lit. xxviii. ); quatre livres
des rois, translated into french in the th century, and imitated
in england soon after (p. schlösser, die lautverhältnisse der
quatre livres des rois, bonn, ; romania, xvii. );
donnei des amanz,, the conversation of two lovers, overheard
and carefully noted by the poet, of a purely didactic character,
in which are included three interesting pieces, the first being an
episode of the story of tristram, the second a fable, l'homme et
le serpent, the third a tale, l'homme et l'oiseau, which is
the basis of the celebrated lai de l'oiselet (rom. xxv.
); livre des sibiles (); enseignements trebor, by
robert de ho (=hoo, kent, on the left bank of the medway) [edited by
mary vance young, paris; picard, ; cf. g. paris, rom.
xxxii. ]; lapidaire de cambridge (pannier, les lapidaires
français); frére angier de ste. frideswide, dialogues,
th of november  (rom. xii. -, and xxix.; m. k.
pope, étude sur la langue de frère angier, paris, );
li dialoge grégoire le pape, ed. by foerster, ; petit
plet, by chardri, c.  (koch, altfr bibliothek.
i., and mussafia, z. f. r. p. iii. ); petite philosophie,
c.  (rom. xv. ; xxix. ); histoire de marie et
de jésus (rom. xvi. -); poème sur l'ancien testament
(not. et extr. xxxiv. , ; soc. anc. textes, ,
-); le corset and le miroir, by robert de gretham
(rom. vii. ; xv. ); lumière as lais, by pierre
de peckham, c.  (rom. xv. ); an anglo-norman
redaction of image du monde, c.  (rom. xxi. );
two anglo-norman versions of quatre soeurs (justice,
truth, peace, mercy), th century (ed. by fr. michel, psautier
d'oxford, pp. -, bulletin soc. anc. textes, ,
, romania, xv. ); another comput by raüf de lenham,
 (p. meyer, archives des missions, nd series iv.  and
-; rom. xv. ); le chastel d'amors, by robert
grosseteste or greathead, bishop of
[v. p.]
lincoln († ) [ed. by cooke, carmina
anglo-normannica, , caxton society]; poème sur l'amour
de dieu et sur la haine du péché, th century, second part
(rom. xxix. ); le mariage des neuf filles du diable
(rom. xxix. ); ditie d' urbain, attributed without any
foundation to henry i. (p. meyer, bulletin soc. anc. textes,
, p.  and romania xxxii, ); dialogue de l'évêque
saint julien et son disciple (rom. xxix. ); poème sur
l'antichrist et le jugement dernier, by henri d'arci (rom.
xxix. ; not. et. extr. , i. ). wilham de waddington
produced at the end of the th century his manuel des péchés,
which was adapted in england by robert of brunne in his handlying
sinne () [hist. lit. xxviii. -; rom. xxix.
, -]; see furnivall,robert of brunne's handlying synne
(roxb. club, ); in the th century we find nicole bozon's
contes moralisés (see above); traité de naturesse
(rom. xiii. ); sermons in verse (p. meyer, op. cit.
xlv.); proverbes de bon enseignement (op. cit. xlvi.). we have
also a few handbooks on the teaching of french. gautier de biblesworth
wrote such a treatise à madame dyonise de mountechensi pur aprise
de langage (wright, a volume of vocabularies; p. meyer,
rec. d'anc. textes, p.  and romania xxxii, );
orthographia gallica (sturzinger, altfr. bibl. );
la manière de language, written in  (p. meyer, rev.
crit. d'hist. et de litt. nos. compl. de ); un petit livre
pour enseigner les enfants de leur entreparler comun françois, c.
 (stengel, z. für n.f. spr. u. litt. i. ). the important
mirour de l'omme, by john gower, contains about , lines
written in very good french at the end of the th century (macaulay,
the complete works of john gower, i., oxford, ).
hagiography.—among the numerous lives of saints written in
anglo-norman the most important ones are the following, the list of
which is given in chronological order:—voyage de saint brandan
(or brandain), written in , by an ecclesiastic for queen
aelis of louvain (rom. st. i. -; z. f. r. p.
ii. -; rom. xviii. . c. wahlund, die altfr.
prosaübersetz. von brendan's meerfahrt, upsala, ); life of
st. catherine by clemence of barking (rom. xiii. , jarnik,
); life of st giles, c. , by guillaume de berneville (soc.
anc. textes fr., ; rom. xi. and xxiii. ); life of
st. nicholas, life of our lady, by wace (delius, ; stengel, cod.
digby, ); uhlemann, gram. krit. studien zu wace's conception
und nicolas, ; life of st. george by simon de fresne
(rom. x. ; j. e. matzke, public. of the mod. lang. ass. of
amer. xvii. ; rom. xxxiv. ); expurgatoire de ste.
patrice, by marie de france (jenkins, ; eckleben, aelteste
schilderung vom fegefeuer d.h. patricius, ; ph. de felice,
); la vie de st. edmund le rei, by denis pyramus, end of
th century (memorials of st. edmund's abbey, edited by t.
arnold, ii. ; rom. xxii. ); henri d'arci's life of
st. thais, poem on the antichrist, visio s. pauli (p. meyer,
not. et extr. xxxv. -); life of st. gregory the great by
frère angier, th of april  (rom. viii. -; ix. ;
xviii. ); life of st. modwenna, between  and  (suchier,
die dem matthäus paris zugeschriebene vie de st. auban, ,
pp. -); fragments of a life of st thomas becket, c.  (p.
meyer, soc. anc. text. fr., ); and another life of the same
by benoit of st. alban, th century (michel, chron. des ducs de
normandie; hist. lit. xxiii. ); a life of edward the confessor,
written before  (luard, lives of edward the confessor,
; hist. lit. xxvii. ), by an anonymous monk of
westminster; life of st. auban, c.  (suchier, op. cit.; uhlemann,
"über die vie de st. auban in bezug auf quelle," &c. rom. st.
iv. -; ed. by atkinson, ). the vision of tnudgal,
an anglo-norman fragment, is preserved in ms. , trinity college,
dublin; the ms. is of the th century; the author seems to belong to
the th (la vision de tondale, ed. by friedel and kuno meyer,
). in this category we may add the life of hugh of lincoln, th
century (hist. lit. xxiii. ; child, the english
and scottish popular ballads, , p. v; wolter, bibl.
anglo-norm., ii. ). other lives of saints were recognized to
be anglo-norman by paul meyer when examining the mss. of the welbeck
library (rom. xxxii.  and hist. lit. xxxiii.
lyric poetry.—the only extant songs of any importance are
the seventy-one ballads of gower (stengel, gower's
minnesang, ). the remaining songs are mostly of a religious
character. most of them have been discovered and published by paul
meyer (bulletin de la soc. anc. textes, ; not. et
extr. xxxiv; rom. xiii. , t. xiv. ; xv. p. ,
&c.). although so few have come down to us such songs must have
been numerous at one time, owing to the constant intercourse between
english, french and provençals of all classes. an interesting passage
in piers plowman furnishes us with a proof of the extent to
which these songs penetrated into england. we read of:
"... dykers and deluers that doth here dedes ille,
and dryuen forth the longe day with 'deu, vous saue,
dame emme!'" (prologue,  f.)
one of the finest productions of anglo-norman lyric poetry written in
the end of the th century, is the plainte d'amour (vising,
göteborg, ; romania xiii. , xv.  and xxix. ), and
we may mention, merely as literary curiosities, various works of
a lyrical character written in two languages, latin and french, or
english and french, or even in three languages, latin, english and
french. in early english lyrics (oxford, ) we have a poem
in which a lover sends to his mistress a love-greeting composed in
three languages, and his learned friend replies in the same style
(de amico ad amicam, responcio, viii and ix).
satire.—the popularity enjoyed by the roman de renart
and the anglo-norman version of the riote du monde (z. f.
rom. phil. viii. -) in england is proof enough that the
french spirit of satire was keenly appreciated. the clergy and the
fair sex presented the most attractive target for the shots of the
satirists. however, an englishman raised his voice in favour of
the ladies in a poem entitled la bonté des dames (meyer,
rom. xv. -), and nicole bozon, after having represented
"pride" as a feminine being whom he supposes to be the daughter of
lucifer, and after having fiercely attacked the women of his day in
the char d'orgueil (rom. xiii. ), also composed a
bounté des femmes (p. meyer, op. cit. ) in which he covers
them with praise, commending their courtesy, their humility, their
openness and the care with which they bring up their children. a
few pieces of political satire show us french and english exchanging
amenities on their mutual shortcomings. the roman des français,
by andré de coutances, was written on the continent, and cannot be
quoted as anglo-norman although it was composed before  (cf.
gaston paris: trois versions rimées de l'évangile de nicodème, soc.
anc. textes, ), it is a very spirited reply to french authors
who had attacked the english.
dramatic literature.—this must have had a considerable
influence on the development of the sacred drama in england, but none
of the french plays acted in england in the th and th centuries
has been preserved. adam, which is generally considered to be
an anglo-norman mystery of the th century, was probably written in
france at the beginning of the th century (romania xxxii.
), and the so-called anglo-norman resurrection belongs also
to continental french. it is necessary to state that the earliest
english moralities seem to have been imitations of the french ones.
bibliography.—apart from the works already mentioned see generally:
scheibner, "über die herrschaft der frz. sprache in england"
(annaberg, progr. der königlichen realschule, ,  f.); groeber,
grundr. der romanischen philologie, ii. iii. (strassburg,
); g. paris, la litt. fr. au moyen âge (); esquisse
historique de la litt. fr. au moyen âge (); la litt. norm,
avani l'annexion - (paris, ); "l'esprit normand en
angleterre," la poésie au moyen âge (nd series -,
paris, ); thomas wright, biographia britannica literaria
(anglo-norman period, london, ); ten brink, geschichte der
englischen litteratur (berlin, , i. ); j. j. jusserand,
hist. litt. du peuple anglais (nd ed. , vol. i.);
w. h. schofield, english literature from the norman conquest
to chaucer (london, ); johan vising, franska sprâket i
england (göteborg, , , ).
(l. br.)
anglo-saxon chronicle. it is usual to speak of "the anglo-saxon
chronicle"; it would be more correct to say that there are four
anglo-saxon chronicles. it is true that these all grow out of a common
stock, that in some even of their later entries two or more of them
use common materials; but the same
[v. p.]
may be said of several groups of medieval chronicles,
which no one dreams of treating as single chronicles. of this fourfold
chronicle there are seven mss. in existence; c. c. c. cant. 
(a); cott. tib. a vi. (b); cott. tib. b i. (c); cott.
tib. b iv. (d); bodl. laud. misc.  (e); cott.
domitian a viii. (f); cott. otho b xi. (g). of these g is
now a mere fragment, and it is known to have been a transcript of a.
f is bilingual, the entries being given both in saxon and latin. it
is interesting as a stage in the transition from the vernacular to
the latin chronicle; but it has little independent value, being a
mere epitome, made at canterbury in the th or th century, of a
chronicle akin to e. b, as far as it goes (to ), is identical with
c, both having been copied from a common original, but a, c, d, e have
every right to be treated as independent chronicles. the relations
between the four vary very greatly in different parts, and the neglect
of this consideration has led to much error and confusion. the common
stock, out of which all grow, extends to . the present writer sees
no reason to doubt that the idea of a national, as opposed to earlier
local chronicles, was inspired by alfred, who may even have dictated,
or at least revised, the entries relating to his own campaigns; while
for the earlier parts pre-existing materials, both oral and written,
were utilized. among the latter the chronological epitome appended to
bede's ecclesiastical history may be specially mentioned. but
even this common stock exists in two different recensions, in a, b, c,
on the one hand, and d, e on the other. the main points of
difference are that in d, e () a series of northern annals have
been incorporated; () the bede entries are taken, not from the
brief epitome, but from the main body of the eccl. hist. the
inference is that, shortly after the compiling of this alfredian
chronicle, a copy of it was sent to some northern monastery, probably
ripon, where it was expanded in the way indicated. copies of this
northernized chronicle afterwards found their way to the south. the
impulse given by alfred was continued under edward, and we have what
may be called an official continuation of the history of the danish
wars, which, in b, c, d extends to , and in a to . after  b,
c insert as a separate document a short register of mercian affairs
during the same period (-), which might be called the acts
of æthelflaed, the famous "lady of the mercians," while d has
incorporated it, not very skilfully, with the official continuation.
neither of these documents exists in e. from  to  all the
chronicles are very fragmentary; a few obits, three or four poems,
among them the famous ballad on the battle of brunanburh, make up
the meagre tale of their common materials, which each has tried to
supplement in its own way. a has inserted a number of winchester
entries, which prove that a is a winchester book. and this local and
scrappy character it retains to , where it practically ends. at
some subsequent time it was transferred bodily to canterbury, where it
received numerous interpolations in the earlier part, and a few later
local entries which finally tail off into the latin acts of lanfranc.
a may therefore be dismissed. c has added to the common stock one or
two abingdon entries, with which place the history of c is closely
connected; while d and e have a second group of northern annals
-, e being however much more fragmentary than d, omitting, or
not having access to, much both of the common and of the northern
material which is found in d. from  to  c, d and e are
practically identical, and give a connected history of the danish
struggles under æthelred ii. this section was probably composed at
canterbury. from  the relations of c, d, e become too complicated
to be expressed by any formula; sometimes all three agree together,
sometimes all three are independent; in other places each pair in
turn agree against the third. it may be noted that c is strongly
anti-godwinist, while e is equally pro-godwinist, d occupying an
intermediate position. c extends to , where it ends abruptly, and
probably mutilated. d ends at  and is certainly mutilated. in
its later history d is associated with some place in the diocese of
worcester, probably evesham. in its present form d is a comparatively
late ms., none of it probably much earlier, and some of it later, than
. in the case of entries in the earlier part of the chronicles,
which are peculiar to d, we cannot exclude the possibility that they
may be late interpolations. e is continued to . in its present
form it is unquestionably a peterborough book. the earlier part is
full of peterborough interpolations, to which place many of the later
entries also refer. but (apart from the interpolations) it is only the
entries after , where the first hand in the ms. ends, which were
actually composed at peterborough. the section -
certainly, and possibly also the section -, was composed at
st. augustine's, canterbury; and the former is of extreme interest
and value, the writer being in close contact with the events which he
describes. the later parts of e show a great degeneration in language,
and a querulous tone due to the sufferings of the native population
under the harsh norman rule; "but our debt to it is inestimable; and
we can hardly measure what the loss to english history would have
been, if it had not been written; or if, having been written, it had,
like so many another english chronicle, been lost."
bibliography.—the above account is based on the introduction in vol.
ii. of the rev. c. plummer's edition of two of the saxon chronicles
parallel (clarendon press, , ); to which the student may
be referred for detailed arguments. the editio princeps of the
anglo-saxon chronicle was by abraham wheloc, professor of arabic at
cambridge, where the work was printed (-). it was based mainly
on the ms. called g above, and is the chief source of our knowledge of
that ms. which perished, all but three leaves, in the cottonian fire
of . edmund gibson of queen's college, oxford, afterwards bishop
of london, published an edition in . he used wheloc's edition, and
e, with collations or transcripts of b and f. both wheloc and gibson
give latin translations. in  appeared an edition by dr. ingram, of
trinity college, oxford, with an english translation. besides a, b, e,
f, ingram used c and d for the first time. but both he and gibson made
the fatal error of trying to combine the disparate materials contained
in the various chronicles in a single text. an improvement in this
respect is seen in the edition made by richard price (d. ) for
the first (and only) volume of monumenta historica britannica
(folio ). there is still, however, too much conflation, and
owing to the plan of the volume, the edition only extends to . a
translation is appended. in  appeared benjamin thorpe's six-text
edition in the rolls series. though not free from defects, this
edition is absolutely indispensable for the study of the chronicles
and the mutual relations of the different mss. a second volume
contains the translation. in  the clarendon press published two
saxon chronicles (a and e) parallel, with supplementary extracts
from the others, by the rev. john earle. this edition has no
translation, but in the notes and introduction a very considerable
advance was made. on this edition is partly based the later edition
by the rev. c. plummer, already cited above. in addition to the
translations contained in the editions already mentioned, the
following have been issued separately. the first translation into
modern english was by miss anna gurney, privately printed in .
this was largely based on gibson's edition, and was in turn the basis
of dr. giles' translation, published in , and often reprinted. the
best translation is that by the rev. joseph stevenson, in his series
of church historians of england (). up to the conquest it
is a revision of the translation contained in mon. hist. brit.
from that point it is an independent translation.
(c. pl.)
anglo-saxon law. . the body of legal rules and customs which
obtained in england before the norman conquest constitutes, with
the scandinavian laws, the most genuine expression of teutonic legal
thought. while the so-called "barbaric laws" (leges barbarorum)
of the continent, not excepting those compiled in the territory now
called germany, were largely the product of roman influence, the
continuity of roman life was almost completely broken in the island,
and even the church, the direct heir of roman tradition, did not carry
on a continuous existence: canterbury was not a see formed in a roman
province in the same sense as tours or reims. one of the striking
expressions of this teutonism is presented by the language in which
the anglo-saxon laws were written. they are uniformly worded in
english, while continental laws, apart from the scandinavian, are all
in latin. the english dialect in which the anglo-saxon laws have been
handed down to us is in most cases a common speech derived from west
saxon—naturally enough as wessex became the predominant english
state, and the court of its kings the principal literary centre from
which most of the compilers and scribes derived their dialect and
spelling. traces of kentish speech may be detected, however, in the
textus roffensis, the ms. of the kentish laws, and northumbrian
dialectical peculiarities are also noticeable on some occasions,
[v. p.]
while danish words occur only as technical terms. at the
conquest, latin takes the place of english in the compilations made
to meet the demand for anglo-saxon law texts as still applied in
practice.
. it is easy to group the anglo-saxon laws according to the manner of
their publication. they would fall into three divisions: () laws and
collections of laws promulgated by public authority; () statements of
custom; () private compilations of legal rules and enactments. to
the first division belong the laws of the kentish kings, æthelberht,
hlothhere and eadric, withraed; those of ine of wessex, of alfred,
edward the elder, æthelstan,[] edmund, edgar, æthelred and canute;
the treaty between alfred and guthrum and the so-called treaty between
edward and guthrum. the second division is formed by the convention
between the english and the welsh dunsaetas, the law of the
northumbrian priests, the customs of the north people, the fragments
of local custumals entered in domesday book. the third division
would consist of the collections of the so-called pseudo-leges
canuti, the laws of edward the confessor, of henry i., and the
great compilation of the quadripartitus, then of a number of
short notices and extracts like the fragments on the "wedding of a
wife," on oaths, on ordeals, on the king's peace, on rural customs
(rectitudines singularum personarum), the treatises on the
reeve (gerefa) and on the judge (dema), formulae of
oaths, notions as to wergeld, &c. a fourth group might be made of the
charters, as they are based on old english private and public law
and supply us with most important materials in regard to it. looking
somewhat deeper at the sources from which old english law was derived,
we shall have to modify our classification to some extent, as the
external forms of publication, although important from the point of
view of historical criticism, are not sufficient standards as to
the juridical character of the various kinds of material. direct
statements of law would fall under the following heads, from the point
of view of their legal origins: i. customary rules followed by divers
communities capable of formulating law; ii. enactments of authorities,
especially of kings; iii. private arrangements made under recognized
legal rules. the first would comprise, besides most of the statements
of custom included in the second division according to the first
classification, a great many of the rules entered in collections
promulgated by kings; most of the paragraphs of æthelberht's,
hlothhere's, and eadric's and ine's laws, are popular legal customs
that have received the stamp of royal authority by their insertion in
official codes. on the other hand, from withraed's and alfred's laws
downwards, the element of enactment by central authority becomes more
and more prominent. the kings endeavour, with the help of secular
and clerical witan, to introduce new rules and to break the power
of long-standing customs (e.g. the precepts about the keeping of
holidays, the enactments of edmund restricting private vengeance,
and the solidarity of kindreds as to feuds, and the like). there are,
however, no outward signs enabling us to distinguish conclusively
between both categories of laws in the codes, nor is it possible to
draw a line between permanent laws and personal ordinances of single
sovereigns, as has been attempted in the case of frankish legislation.
. even in the course of a general survey of the legal lore at
our disposal, one cannot help being struck by peculiarities in the
distribution of legal subjects. matters which seem to us of primary
importance and occupy a wide place in our law-books are almost
entirely absent in anglo-saxon laws or relegated to the background.
while it is impossible to give here anything like a complete or
exact survey of the field—a task rendered almost impossible by the
arbitrary manner in which paragraphs are divided, by the difficulty
of making old english enactments fit into modern rubrics, and by the
necessity of counting several times certain paragraphs bearing on
different subjects—a brief statistical analysis of the contents of
royal codes and laws may be found instructive.
we find roughly  paragraphs devoted to criminal law and procedure
as against  concerned with questions of private law and civil
procedure. of the criminal law clauses, as many as  are taken
up with tariffs of fines, while  treat of capital and corporal
punishment, outlawry and confiscation, and  include rules of
procedure. on the private law side  clauses apply to rights of
property and possession,  to succession and family law,  to
contracts, including marriage when treated as an act of sale;  touch
on civil procedure. a subject which attracted special attention was
the law of status, and no less than  paragraphs contain disposition
dictated by the wish to discriminate between the classes of society.
questions of public law and administration are discussed in 
clauses, while  concern the church in one way or another, apart
from purely ecclesiastical collections. in the public law division it
is chiefly the power, interests and privileges of the king that are
dealt with, in roughly  paragraphs, while local administration comes
in for  and purely economic and fiscal matter for  clauses. police
regulations are very much to the fore and occupy no less than 
clauses of the royal legislation. as to church matters, the most
prolific group is formed by general precepts based on religious and
moral considerations, roughly , while secular privileges conferred
on the church hold about , and questions of organization some 
clauses.
the statistical contrasts are especially sharp and characteristic when
we take into account the chronological sequence in the elaboration of
laws. practically the entire code of æthelberht, for instance, is a
tariff of fines for crimes, and the same subject continues to occupy
a great place in the laws of hlothhere and eadric, ine and alfred,
whereas it appears only occasionally in the treaties with the danes,
the laws of withraed, edward the elder, æthelstan, edgar, edmund and
æthelred. it reappears in some strength in the code of canute, but the
latter is chiefly a recapitulation of former enactments. the system of
"compositions" or fines, paid in many cases with the help of kinsmen,
finds its natural place in the ancient, tribal period of english
history and loses its vitality later on in consequence of the growth
of central power and of the scattering of maegths. royalty and the
church, when they acquire the lead in social life, work out a
new penal system based on outlawry, death penalties and corporal
punishments, which make their first appearance in the legislation of
withraed and culminate in that of æthelred and canute.
as regards status, the most elaborate enactments fall into the period
preceding the danish settlements. after the treaties with the danes,
the tendency is to simplify distinctions on the lines of an opposition
between twelvehynd-men and twyhynd-men, paving the way towards
the feudal distinction between the free and the unfree. in the
arrangements of the commonwealth the clauses treating of royal
privileges are more or less evenly distributed over all reigns, but
the systematic development of police functions, especially in regard
to responsibility for crimes, the catching of thieves, the suppression
of lawlessness, is mainly the object of th and th century
legislation. the reign of æthelred, which witnessed the greatest
national humiliation and the greatest crime in english history, is
also marked by the most lavish expressions of religious feeling and
the most frequent appeals to morality. this sketch would, of course,
have to be modified in many ways if we attempted to treat the
unofficial fragments of customary law in the same way as the
paragraphs of royal codes, and even more so if we were able to
tabulate the indirect evidence as to legal rules. but, imperfect as
such statistics may be, they give us at any rate some insight into the
direction of governmental legislation.
. the next question to be approached concerns the pedigree of
anglo-saxon law and the latter's natural affinities. what is its
position in the legal history of germanic nations? how far has it been
influenced by non-germanic elements, especially by roman and canon
law? the oldest anglo-saxon codes, especially the kentish and the
west saxon ones, disclose a close relationship to the barbaric laws
of lower germany—those of saxons, frisians, thuringians. we find a
division of social ranks which reminds us of the threefold gradation
of lower germany
[v. p.]
(edelings, frilings, lazzen-eorls, ceorls, laets), and
not of the twofold frankish one (ingenui franci, romani), nor
of the minute differentiation of the upper germans and lombards. in
subsequent history there is a good deal of resemblance between the
capitularies' legislation of charlemagne and his successors on one
hand, the acts of alfred, edward the elder, æthelstan and edgar on the
other, a resemblance called forth less by direct borrowing of
frankish institutions than by the similarity of political problems
and condition. frankish law becomes a powerful modifying element
in english legal history after the conquest, when it was introduced
wholesale in royal and in feudal courts. the scandinavian invasions
brought in many northern legal customs, especially in the districts
thickly populated with danes. the domesday survey of lincolnshire,
nottinghamshire, yorkshire, norfolk, &c., shows remarkable deviations
in local organization and justice (lagmen, sokes), and great
peculiarities as to status (socmen, freemen), while from laws and
a few charters we can perceive some influence on criminal law
(nidings-vaerk), special usages as to fines (lahslit),
the keeping of peace, attestation and sureties of acts
(faestermen), &c. but, on the whole, the introduction of danish
and norse elements, apart from local cases, was more important owing
to the conflicts and compromises it called forth and its social
results,—than on account of any distinct trail of scandinavian
views in english law. the scandinavian newcomers coalesced easily and
quickly with the native population.
the direct influence of roman law was not great during the saxon
period: we notice neither the transmission of important legal
doctrines, chiefly through the medium of visigothic codes, nor the
continuous stream of roman tradition in local usage. but indirectly
roman law did exert a by no means insignificant influence through the
medium of the church, which, for all its insular character, was still
permeated with roman ideas and forms of culture. the old english
"books" are derived in a roundabout way from roman models, and the
tribal law of real property was deeply modified by the introduction of
individualistic notions as to ownership, donations, wills, rights of
women, &c. yet in this respect also the norman conquest increased the
store of roman conceptions by breaking the national isolation of the
english church and opening the way for closer intercourse with france
and italy.
. it would be useless to attempt to trace in a brief sketch
the history of the legal principles embodied in the documents of
anglo-saxon law. but it may be of some value to give an outline of a
few particularly characteristic subjects.
(a) the anglo-saxon legal system cannot be understood unless one
realizes the fundamental opposition between folk-right and privilege.
folk-right is the aggregate of rules, formulated or latent but
susceptible of formulation, which can be appealed to as the expression
of the juridical consciousness of the people at large or of the
communities of which it is composed. it is tribal in its origin, and
differentiated, not according to boundaries between states, but on
national and provincial lines. there may be the folk-right of west and
east saxons, of east angles, of kentish men, mercians, northumbrians,
danes, welshmen, and these main folk-right divisions remain even when
tribal kingdoms disappear and the people is concentrated in one or
two realms. the chief centres for the formulation and application of
folk-right were in the th and th centuries the shire-moots, while
the witan of the realm generally placed themselves on the higher
ground of state expediency, although occasionally using folk-right
ideas. the older law of real property, of succession, of contracts,
the customary tariffs of fines, were mainly regulated by folk-right;
the reeves employed by the king and great men were supposed to take
care of local and rural affairs according to folk-right. the law had
to be declared and applied by the people itself in its communities,
while the spokesmen of the people were neither democratic majorities
nor individual experts, but a few leading men—the twelve eldest
thanes or some similar quorum. folk-right could, however, be broken
or modified by special law or special grant, and the fountain of such
privileges was the royal power. alterations and exceptions were, as
a matter of fact, suggested by the interested parties themselves,
and chiefly by the church. thus a privileged land-tenure was
created—bookland; the rules as to the succession of kinsmen were set
at nought by concession of testamentary power and confirmations of
grants and wills; special exemptions from the jurisdiction of the
hundreds and special privileges as to levying fines were conferred.
in process of time the rights originating in royal grants of privilege
overbalanced, as it were, folk-right in many respects, and became
themselves the starting-point of a new legal system—the feudal one.
(b) another feature of vital importance in the history of anglo-saxon
law is its tendency towards the preservation of peace. society
is constantly struggling to ensure the main condition of its
existence—peace. already in æthelberht's legislation we find
characteristic fines inflicted for breach of the peace of householders
of different ranks—the ceorl, the eorl, and the king himself
appearing as the most exalted among them. peace is considered not so
much a state of equilibrium and friendly relations between parties,
but rather as the rule of a third within a certain region—a house,
an estate, a kingdom. this leads on one side to the recognition of
private authorities—the father's in his family, the master's as to
servants, the lord's as to his personal or territorial dependents.
on the other hand, the tendency to maintain peace naturally takes
its course towards the strongest ruler, the king, and we witness in
anglo-saxon law the gradual evolution of more and more stringent and
complete rules in respect of the king's peace and its infringements.
(c) the more ancient documents of anglo-saxon law show us the
individual not merely as the subject and citizen of a certain
commonwealth, but also as a member of some group, all the fellows
of which are closely allied in claims and responsibilities. the most
elementary of these groups is the maegth, the association
of agnatic and cognatic relations. personal protection and revenge,
oaths, marriage, wardship, succession, supervision over settlement,
and good behaviour, are regulated by the law of kinship. a man's
actions are considered not as exertions of his individual will, but
as acts of the kindred, and all the fellows of the maegth are held
responsible for them. what began as a natural alliance was used later
as a means of enforcing responsibility and keeping lawless individuals
in order. when the association of kinsmen failed, the voluntary
associations—guilds—appeared as substitutes. the gild brothers
associated in mutual defence and support, and they had to share in
the payment of fines. the township and the hundred came also in for
certain forms of collective responsibility, because they presented
groups of people associated in their economic and legal interests.
(d) in course of time the natural associations get loosened and
intermixed, and this calls forth the elaborate police legislation of
the later anglo-saxon kings. regulations are issued about the sale of
cattle in the presence of witnesses. enactments about the pursuit
of thieves, and the calling in of warrantors to justify sales of
chattels, are other expressions of the difficulties attending peaceful
intercourse. personal surety appears as a complement of and
substitute for collective responsibility. the hlaford and his
hiredmen are an institution not only of private patronage, but
also of police supervision for the sake of laying hands on malefactors
and suspected persons. the landrica assumes the same part in
a territorial district. ultimately the laws of the th and th
centuries show the beginnings of the frankpledge associations, which
came to act so important a part in the local police and administration
of the feudal age.
the points mentioned are not many, but, apart from their intrinsic
importance in any system of law, they are, as it were, made prominent
by the documents themselves, as they are constantly referred to in the
latter.
bibliography.—editions: liebermann, die gesetze der
angelsachsen (, ) is indispensable, and leaves nothing to
be desired as to the constitution of the texts. the translations and
notes are, of course, to be considered in the light of an instructive,
but not final, commentary. r. schmid, gesetze der angelsachsen
(nd ed., leipzig, ) is still valuable on account of its handiness
[v. p.]
and the fulness of its glossary. b. thorpe, ancient
laws and institutes of england () is not very trustworthy.
domesday book, i. ii. (rec. comm.); codex diplomaticus
aevi saxonici, i.-vi. ed. j. m. kemble (-); cartularium
saxonicum (up to ), ed. w. de gray birch (-); j.
earle, land charters (oxford, ); thorpe, diplomatarium
anglicanum; facsimiles of ancient charters, edited by the ordnance
survey and by the british museum; haddan and stubbs, councils of
great britain, i.-iii. (oxford, -).
modern works.—konrad maurer, über angelsachsische
rechtsverhaltnisse, kritische ueberschau (munich,  ff.),
still the best account of the history of anglo-saxon law; essays
on anglo-saxon law, by h. adams, h. c. lodge, j. l. laughlin and
e. young (); j. m. kemble, saxons in england; f. palgrave,
history of the english commonwealth; stubbs, constitutional
history of england, i.; pollock and maitland, history
of english law, i.; h. brunner, zur rechtsgeschichte der
romisch-germanischen urkunde (); sir f. pollock, the
king's peace (oxford lectures); f. seebohm; the english
village community; ibid. tribal custom in anglo-saxon law;
marquardsen, haft und burgschaft im angelsachsischen recht;
jastrow, "über die strafrechtliche stellung der sklaven," gierke's
untersuchungen, i.; steenstrup, normannerne, iv.; f. w.
maitland, domesday and beyond (cambridge, ); h. m. chadwick,
studies on anglo-saxon institutions (); p. vinogradoff,
"folcland" in the english historical review, ;
"romanistische einflusse im angelsächsischen recht: das buchland"
in the mélanges fitting, ; "the transfer of land in old
english law" in the harvard law review, .
(p. vi.)
[] the judicia civitatis lundoniae are a gild statute
confirmed by king æthelstan.
anglo-saxons. the term "anglo-saxon" is commonly applied to that
period of english history, language and literature which preceded the
norman conquest. it goes back to the time of king alfred, who seems to
have frequently used the title rex anglorum saxonum or rex
angul-saxonum. the origin of this title is not quite clear. it is
generally believed to have arisen from the final union of the various
kingdoms under alfred in . bede (hist. eccl. i. ) states
that the people of the more northern kingdoms (east anglia, mercia,
northumbria, &c.) belonged to the angli, while those of essex, sussex
and wessex were sprung from the saxons (q.v.), and those of
kent and southern hampshire from the jutes (q.v.). other early
writers, however, do not observe these distinctions, and neither
in language nor in custom do we find evidence of any appreciable
differences between the two former groups, though in custom kent
presents most remarkable contrasts with the other kingdoms. still more
curious is the fact that west saxon writers regularly speak of their
own nation as a part of the angelcyn and of their language as
englisc, while the west saxon royal family claimed to be of the
same stock as that of bernicia. on the other hand, it is by no means
impossible that the distinction drawn by bede was based solely on the
names essex (east seaxan), east anglia, &c. we need not doubt that the
angli and the saxons were different nations originally; but from the
evidence at our disposal it seems likely that they had practically
coalesced in very early times, perhaps even before the invasion. at
all events the term angli saxones seems to have first come
into use on the continent, where we find it, nearly a century before
alfred's time, in the writings of paulus diaconus (paul the deacon).
there can be little doubt, however, that there it was used to
distinguish the teutonic inhabitants of britain from the old saxons of
the continent.
see w. h. stevenson, asser's life of king alfred (oxford,
, pp.  ff.); h. munro chadwick, the origin of the english
nation (cambridge, ); also britain, anglo-saxon.
angola, the general name of the portuguese possessions on the west
coast of africa south of the equator. with the exception of the
enclave of kabinda (q.v.) the province lies wholly south of the
river congo. bounded on the w. by the atlantic ocean, it extends along
the coast from the southern bank of the congo (° s., ° e.) to the
mouth of the kunene river (° ' s., ° ' e.). the coast-line is
some  m. long. on the north the congo forms for  m. the boundary
separating angola from the congo free state. the frontier thence
(in ° ' s.) goes due east to the kwango river. the eastern
boundary—dividing the portuguese possessions from the congo state and
barotseland (n. w. rhodesia)—is a highly irregular line. on the south
angola borders german south-west africa, the frontier being drawn
somewhat s. of the th degree of s. latitude. the area of the
province is about , sq. m. the population is estimated () at
the name angola (a portuguese corruption of the bantu word
ngola) is sometimes confined to the  m. of coast, with its
hinterland, between the mouths of the rivers dande and kwanza, forming
the central portion of the portuguese dominions in west africa; in
a looser manner angola is used to designate all the western coast of
africa south of the congo in the possession of portugal; but the name
is now officially applied to the whole of the province. angola is
divided into five districts: four on the coast, the fifth, lunda,
wholly inland, being the n.e. part of the province. lunda is part
of the old bantu kingdom of muata yanvo, divided by international
agreement between portugal and the congo free state.
the coast divisions of angola are congo on the n. (from the river
congo to the river loje), corresponding roughly with the limits of the
"kingdom of congo" (see history below); loanda, which includes
angola in the most restricted sense mentioned above; benguella
and mossamedes to the south. mossamedes is again divided into two
portions—the coast region and the hinterland, known as huilla.
physical features.—the coast is for the most part flat, with
occasional low cliffs and bluffs of red sandstone. there is but one
deep inlet of the sea—great fish bay (or bahia dos tigres), a little
north of the portuguese-german frontier. farther north are port
alexander, little fish bay and lobito bay, while shallower bays are
numerous. lobito bay has water sufficient to allow large ships to
unload close inshore. the coast plain extends inland for a distance
varying from  to  m. this region is in general sparsely watered
and somewhat sterile. the approach to the great central plateau of
africa is marked by a series of irregular terraces. this intermediate
mountain belt is covered with luxuriant vegetation. water is fairly
abundant, though in the dry season obtainable only by digging in the
sandy beds of the rivers. the plateau has an altitude ranging from
 to  ft. it consists of well-watered, wide, rolling plains,
and low hills with scanty vegetation. in the east the tableland falls
away to the basins of the congo and zambezi, to the south it merges
into a barren sandy desert. a large number of rivers make their way
westward to the sea; they rise, mostly, in the mountain belt, and are
unimportant, the only two of any size being the kwanza and the kunene,
separately noticed. the mountain chains which form the edge of the
plateau, or diversify its surface, run generally parallel to the
coast, as tala mugongo ( ft.), chella and vissecua ( ft. to
 ft.). in the district of benguella are the highest points of the
province, viz. loviti ( ft.), in ° ' s., and mt. elonga (
ft.). south of the kwanza is the volcanic mountain caculo-cabaza (
ft.). from the tableland the kwango and many other streams flow north
to join the kasai (one of the largest affluents of the congo), which
in its upper course forms for fully  m. the boundary between angola
and the congo state. in the south-east part of the province the rivers
belong either to the zambezi system, or, like the okavango, drain to
lake ngami.
geology.—the rock formations of angola are met with in three
distinct regions: () the littoral zone, () the median zone formed
by a series of hills more or less parallel with the coast, () the
central plateau. the central plateau consists of ancient crystalline
rocks with granites overlain by unfossiliferous sandstones and
conglomerates considered to be of palaeozoic age. the outcrops are
largely hidden under laterite. the median zone is composed largely of
crystalline rocks with granites and some palaeozoic unfossiliferous
rocks. the littoral zone contains the only fossiliferous strata. these
are of tertiary and cretaceous ages, the latter rocks resting on a
reddish sandstone of older date. the cretaceous rocks of the dombe
grande region (near benguella) are of albian age and belong to
the acanthoceras mamillari zone. the beds containing
schloenbachia inflata are referable to the gault. rocks of
tertiary age are met with at dombe grande, mossamedes and near loanda.
the sandstones with gypsum, copper and sulphur of dombe are doubtfully
considered to be of triassic age. recent eruptive rocks, mainly
basalts, form a line
[v. p.]
of hills almost bare of vegetation between benguella and
mossamedes. nepheline basalts and liparites occur at dombe grande. the
presence of gum copal in considerable quantities in the superficial
rocks is characteristic of certain regions.
climate.—with the exception of the district of mossamedes, the
coast plains are unsuited to europeans. in the interior, above 
ft., the temperature and rainfall, together with malaria, decrease.
the plateau climate is healthy and invigorating. the mean annual
temperature at sao salvador do congo is .° f.; at loanda, .°;
and at caconda, .°. the climate is greatly influenced by the
prevailing winds, which arc w., s.w. and s.s.w. two seasons are
distinguished—the cool, from june to september; and the rainy,
from october to may. the heaviest rainfall occurs in april, and is
accompanied by violent storms.
flora and fauna.—both flora and fauna are those characteristic
of the greater part of tropical africa. as far south as benguella the
coast region is rich in oil-palms and mangroves. in the northern part
of the province are dense forests. in the south towards the kunene are
regions of dense thorn scrub. rubber vines and trees are abundant, but
in some districts their number has been considerably reduced by the
ruthless methods adopted by native collectors of rubber. the species
most common are various root rubbers, notably the carpodinus
chylorrhiza. this species and other varieties of carpodinus are
very widely distributed. landolphias are also found. the coffee,
cotton and guinea pepper plants are indigenous, and the tobacco plant
flourishes in several districts. among the trees are several
which yield excellent timber, such as the tacula (pterocarpus
tinctorius), which grows to an immense size, its wood being
blood-red in colour, and the angola mahogany. the bark of the musuemba
(albizzia coriaria) is largely used in the tanning of leather.
the mulundo bears a fruit about the size of a cricket ball
covered with a hard green shell and containing scarlet pips like a
pomegranate. the fauna includes the lion, leopard, cheetah, elephant,
giraffe, rhinoceros, hippopotamus, buffalo, zebra, kudu and many other
kinds of antelope, wild pig, ostrich and crocodile. among fish are the
barbel, bream and african yellow fish.
inhabitants.—the great majority of the inhabitants are of
bantu-negro stock with some admixture in the congo district with the
pure negro type. in the south-east are various tribes of bushmen. the
best-known of the bantu-negro tribes are the ba-kongo (ba-fiot), who
dwell chiefly in the north, and the abunda (mbunda, ba-bundo), who
occupy the central part of the province, which takes its name from the
ngola tribe of abunda. another of these tribes, the bangala, living
on the west bank of the upper kwango, must not be confounded with the
bangala of the middle congo. in the abunda is a considerable strain of
portuguese blood. the ba-lunda inhabit the lunda district. along the
upper kunene and in other districts of the plateau are settlements of
boers, the boer population being about . in the coast towns the
majority of the white inhabitants are portuguese. the mushi-kongo
and other divisions of the ba-kongo retain curious traces of the
christianity professed by them in the th and th centuries and
possibly later. crucifixes are used as potent fetish charms or as
symbols of power passing down from chief to chief; whilst every native
has a "santu" or christian name and is dubbed dom or dona.
fetishism is the prevailing religion throughout the province. the
dwelling-places of the natives are usually small huts of the simplest
construction, used chiefly as sleeping apartments; the day is spent in
an open space in front of the hut protected from the sun by a roof of
palm or other leaves.
chief towns.—the chief towns are sao paulo de loanda, the
capital, kabinda, benguella and mossamedes (q.v.). lobito, a
little north of benguella, is a town which dates from  and owes
its existence to the bay of the same name having been chosen as the
sea terminus of a railway to the far interior. noki is on the southern
bank of the congo at the head of navigation from the sea, and close
to the congo free state frontier. it is available for ships of large
tonnage, and through it passes the portuguese portion of the trade of
the lower congo. ambriz—the only seaport of consequence in the congo
district of the province—is at the mouth of the loje river, about 
m. n. of loanda. novo redondo and egito are small ports between loanda
and benguella. port alexander is in the district of mossamedes and s.
of the town of that name.
in the interior humpata, about  m. from mossamedes, is the chief
centre of the boer settlers; otherwise there are none but native towns
containing from  to  inhabitants and often enclosed by a ring
of sycamore trees. ambaca and malanje are the chief places in the
fertile agricultural district of the middle kwanza, s.e. of loanda,
with which they are in railway communication. sao salvador (pop. )
is the name given by the portuguese to bonza congo, the chief town
of the "kingdom of congo." it stands  ft. above sea-level and is
about  m. inland and  s.e. of the river port of noki, in °
' s. of the cathedral and other stone buildings erected in the th
century, there exist but scanty ruins. the city walls were destroyed
in the closing years of the th century and the stone used to build
government offices. there is a fort, built about , and a small
military force is at the disposal of the portuguese resident. bembe
and encoje are smaller towns in the congo district south of sao
salvador. bihe, the capital of the plateau district of the same
name forming the hinterland of benguella, is a large caravan centre.
kangomba, the residence of the king of bihe, is a large town. caconda
is in the hill country s.e. of benguella.
agriculture and trade.—angola is rich in both agricultural
and mineral resources. amongst the cultivated products are mealies
and manioc, the sugar-cane and cotton, coffee and tobacco plants.
the chief exports are coffee, rubber, wax, palm kernels and palm-oil,
cattle and hides and dried or salt fish. gold dust, cotton, ivory and
gum are also exported. the chief imports are food-stuffs, cotton and
woollen goods and hardware. considerable quantities of coal come
from south wales. oxen, introduced from europe and from south africa,
flourish. there are sugar factories, where rum is also distilled and a
few other manufactures, but the prosperity of the province depends
on the "jungle" products obtained through the natives and from the
plantations owned by portuguese and worked by indentured labour, the
labourers being generally "recruited" from the far interior. the trade
of the province, which had grown from about £, in  to
about £,, in , is largely with portugal and in portuguese
bottoms. between  and  the percentage of portuguese as
compared with foreign goods entering the province increased from  to
%, a result due to the preferential duties in force.
the minerals found include thick beds of copper at bembe, and deposits
on the m'brije and the cuvo and in various places in the southern
part of the province; iron at ociras (on the lucalla affluent of the
kwanza) and in bailundo; petroleum and asphalt in dande and quinzao;
gold in lombije and cassinga; and mineral salt in quissama. the native
blacksmiths are held in great repute.
communications.—there is a regular steamship communication
between portugal, england and germany, and loanda, which port is
within sixteen days' steam of lisbon. there is also a regular service
between cape town, lobito and lisbon and southampton. the portuguese
line is subsidized by the government. the railway from loanda to
ambaca and malanje is known as the royal trans-african railway. it
is of metre gauge, was begun in  and is some  m. long. it was
intended to carry the line across the continent to mozambique,
but when the line reached ambaca ( m.) in  that scheme
was abandoned. the railway had created a record in being the most
expensive built in tropical africa—£ per mile. a railway from
lobito bay,  m.n. of benguella, begun in , runs towards the
congo-rhodesia frontier. it is of standard african gauge ( ft. 
in.) and is worked by an english company. it is intended to serve the
katanga copper mines. besides these two main railways, there are other
short lines linking the seaports to their hinterland. apart from the
railways, [v. p.]
communication is by ancient caravan routes and by
ox-wagon tracks in the southern district. riding-oxen are also used.
the province is well supplied with telegraphic communication and is
connected with europe by submarine cables.
government and revenue.—the administration of the province
is carried on under a governor-general, resident at loanda, who acts
under the direction of the ministry of the colonies at lisbon. at the
head of each district is a local governor. legislative powers, save
those delegated to the governor-general, are exercised by the home
government. revenue is raised chiefly from customs, excise duties
and direct taxation. the revenue (in - about £,)
is generally insufficient to meet expenditure (in - over
£,)—the balance being met by a grant from the mother country.
part of the extra expenditure is, however, on railways and other
reproductive works.
history.—the portuguese established themselves on the west
coast of africa towards the close of the th century. the river congo
was discovered by diogo cam or cao in . he erected a stone pillar
at the mouth of the river, which accordingly took the title of rio
de padrao, and established friendly relations with the natives, who
reported that the country was subject to a great monarch, mwani congo
or lord of congo, resident at bonza congo. the portuguese were not
long in making themselves influential in the country. gonçalo de sousa
was despatched on a formal embassy in ; and the first missionaries
entered the country in his train. the king was soon afterwards
baptized and christianity was nominally established as the national
religion. in  a cathedral was founded at bonza congo (renamed sao
salvador), and in  the jesuits arrived with paulo diaz de novaes.
of the prosperity of the country the portuguese have left the most
glowing and indeed incredible accounts. it was, however, about this
time ravaged by cannibal invaders (bangala) from the interior,
and portuguese influence gradually declined. the attention of the
portuguese was, moreover, now turned more particularly to the southern
districts of angola. in  the bishop's seat was removed to sao
paulo de loanda and sao salvador declined in importance. in the th
century, in spite of hindrances from holland and france, steps were
taken towards re-establishing portuguese authority in the northern
regions; in  a settlement was formed at encoje; from  to 
the portuguese carried on a war against the natives of mussolo (the
district immediately south of ambriz); in  they built a fort at
quincollo on the loje, and for a time they worked the mines of
bembe. until, however, the "scramble for africa" began in , they
possessed no fort or settlement on the coast to the north of ambriz,
which was first occupied in . at sao salvador, however, the
portuguese continued to exercise influence. the last of the native
princes who had real authority was a potentate known as dom pedro
v. he was placed on the throne in  with the help of a portuguese
force, and reigned over thirty years. in  a portuguese resident
was stationed at salvador, and the kings of congo became pensioners of
the government.
angola proper, and the whole coast-line of what now constitutes the
province of that name, was discovered by diogo cam during  and
the three following years. the first governor sent to angola was paulo
diaz, a grandson of bartholomew diaz, who reduced to submission the
region south of the kwanza nearly as far as benguella. the city of
loanda was founded in , benguella in . from that date the
sovereignty of portugal over the coast-line, from its present southern
limit as far north as ambriz (° ' s.) has been undisputed save
between  and , during which time the dutch attempted to expel
the portuguese and held possession of the ports. whilst the economic
development of the country was not entirely neglected and many useful
food products were introduced, the prosperity of the province was
very largely dependent on the slave trade with brazil, which was not
legally abolished until  and in fact continued for many years
subsequently.
in  great britain, which up to that time had steadily refused
to acknowledge that portugal possessed territorial rights north of
ambriz, concluded a treaty recognizing portuguese sovereignty over
both banks of the lower congo; but the treaty, meeting with opposition
in england and germany, was not ratified. agreements concluded with
the congo free state, germany and france in - (modified in
details by subsequent arrangements) fixed the limits of the province,
except in the s.e., where the frontier between barotseland (n.w.
rhodesia) and angola was determined by an anglo-portuguese agreement
of  and the arbitration award of the king of italy in  (see
africa: history). up to the end of the th century the hold
of portugal over the interior of the province was slight, though its
influence extended to the congo and zambezi basins. the abolition of
the external slave trade proved very injurious to the trade of the
seaports, but from  onward the agricultural resources of the
country were developed with increasing energy, a work in which
brazilian merchants took the lead. after the definite partition of
africa among the european powers, portugal applied herself with some
seriousness to exploit angola and her other african possessions.
nevertheless, in comparison with its natural wealth the development
of the country has been slow. slavery and the slave trade continued
to flourish in the interior in the early years of the th century,
despite the prohibitions of the portuguese government. the extension
of authority over the inland tribes proceeded very slowly and was not
accomplished without occasional reverses. thus in september  a
portuguese column lost over  men killed, including  europeans,
in an encounter with the kunahamas on the kunene, not far from the
german frontier. the kunahamas are a wild, raiding tribe and
were probably largely influenced by the revolt of their southern
neighbours, the hereros, against the germans. in  and again in
 there was renewed fighting in the same region.
authorities.—e. de vasconcellos, as colonias
portuguesas (lisbon, -); j. j. monteiro, angola and
the river congo ( vols. london, ); viscount de paiva manso,
historia do congo.... (documentos) (lisbon, ); a report
of the kingdom of congo (london, ), an english translation,
with notes by margarite hutchinson, of filippo pigafetta's
relatione del reame di congo (rome, ), a book founded on
the statements and writings of duarte lopez; rev. thos. lewis, "the
ancient kingdom of kongo" in geographical journal, vol. xix.
and vol. xxxi. (london,  and ); the strange adventures
of andrew battell of leigh in angola and the adjoining regions
(london, ), a volume of the hakluyt society, edited by e. g.
ravenstein, who gives in appendices the history of the country from
its discovery to the end of the th century; j. c. feo cardozo,
memorias contendo ... a historia dos governadores e capitaens
generaes de angola, desde  até  (paris, ); h. w.
nevinson, a modern slavery (london, ), an examination of
the system of indentured labour and its recruitment; ornithologie
d'angola, by j. v. barboza du bocage (lisbon, ); "géologie des
colonies portugaises en afrique," by p. choffat, in com. d. service
géol. du portugal. see also the annual reports on the trade of
angola, issued by the british foreign office.
angora, or enguri. () a city of turkey (anc. ancyra) in asia,
capital of the vilayet of the same name, situated upon a steep, rocky
hill, which rises  ft. above the plain, on the left bank of the
enguri su, a tributary of the sakaria (sangarius), about  m.
e.s.e. of constantinople. the hill is crowned by the ruins of the old
citadel, which add to the picturesqueness of the view; but the town
is not well built, its streets being narrow and many of its houses
constructed of sun-dried mud bricks; there are, however, many
fine remains of graeco-roman and byzantine architecture, the most
remarkable being the temple of rome and augustus, on the walls of
which is the famous monumentum ancyranum (see ancyra). ancyra
was the centre of the tectosages, one of the three gaulish tribes
which settled in galatia in the rd century b.c., and became the
capital of the roman province of galatia when it was formally
constituted in  b.c. during the byzantine period, throughout
which it occupied a position of great importance, it was captured by
persians and arabs; then it fell into the hands of the seljuk turks,
was held for eighteen years by the latin crusaders, and finally passed
to the ottoman turks in . in  a great battle was fought in the
vicinity of angora, in which the turkish sultan bayezid was defeated
and made prisoner by the tatar conqueror timur. in  it was
recovered by the turks under mahommed i., and since that period has
[v. p.]
belonged to the ottoman empire. in  it was taken
by the egyptians under ibrahim pasha. angora is connected with
constantinople by railway, and exports wool, mohair, grain and yellow
berries. mohair cloth is manufactured, and the town is noted for its
honey and fruit. from  to  there was an agency of the levant
company here; there is now a british consul. pop. estimated at ,
(moslems, ,; christians, largely roman catholic armenians, about
; jews, ).
() a turkish vilayet in north-central asia minor, which includes most
of the ancient galatia. it is an agricultural country, depending for
its prosperity on its grain, wool (average annual export, ,,
ft), and the mohair obtained from the beautiful angora goats (average
annual clip, ,, lb). the fineness of the hair may perhaps be
ascribed to some peculiarity in the atmosphere, for it is remarkable
that the cats, dogs and other animals of the country are to a certain
extent affected in the same way, and that they all lose much of their
distinctive beauty when taken from their native districts. the only
important industry is carpet-weaving at kir-sheher and kaisarieh.
there are mines of silver, copper, lignite and salt, and many hot
springs, including some of great repute medicinally. average annual
exports -, £,; imports, £,. pop. about ,
(moslems, , to ,, the rest being christians, with a few
hundred jews).
see c. ritter, erdkunde van asien (vol. xviii., -); v.
cuinet, la turquie d'asie, t, i. (); murray's handbook
to asia minor (); and other works mentioned under ancyra.
angoulême, charles de valois, duke of (-), the natural son of
charles ix. of france and marie touchet, was born on the th of april
, at the castle of fayet in dauphiné. his father dying in the
following year, commended him to the care and favour of his brother
and successor, henry iii., who faithfully fulfilled the charge. his
mother married françois de balzac, marquis d'entragues, and one of her
daughters, henriette, marchioness of verneuil, afterwards became the
mistress of henry iv. charles of valois, was carefully educated, and
was destined for the order of malta. at the early age of sixteen he
attained one of the highest dignities of the order, being made grand
prior of france. shortly after he came into possession of large
estates left by catherine de' medici, from one of which he took his
title of count of auvergne. in  he obtained a dispensation from
the vows of the order of malta, and married charlotte, daughter of
henry, marshal d'amville, afterwards duke of montmorency. in 
henry iii. was assassinated, but on his deathbed he commended charles
to the good-will of his successor henry iv. by that monarch he was
made colonel of horse, and in that capacity served in the campaigns
during the early part of the reign. but the connexion between the king
and the marchioness of verneuil appears to have been very displeasing
to auvergne, and in  he engaged in the conspiracy formed by the
dukes of savoy, biron and bouillon, one of the objects of which was
to force henry to repudiate his wife and marry the marchioness. the
conspiracy was discovered; biron and auvergne were arrested and biron
was executed. auvergne after a few months' imprisonment was released,
chiefly through the influence of his half-sister, his aunt, the
duchess of angouleme and his father-in-law. he then entered into
fresh intrigues with the court of spain, acting in concert with
the marchioness of verneuil and her father d'entragues. in 
d'entragues and he were arrested and condemned to death; at the same
time the marchioness was condemned to perpetual imprisonment in a
convent. she easily obtained pardon, and the sentence of death against
the other two was commuted into perpetual imprisonment. auvergne
remained in the bastille for eleven years, from  to . a decree
of the parlement (), obtained by marguerite de valois, deprived
him of nearly all his possessions, including auvergne, though he still
retained the title. in  he was released, was restored to his
rank of colonel-general of horse, and despatched against one of the
disaffected nobles, the duke of longueville, who had taken péronne.
next year he commanded the forces collected in the île de france, and
obtained some successes. in  he received by bequest, ratified in
 by royal grant, the duchy of angoulême. soon after he was engaged
on an important embassy to germany, the result of which was the
treaty of ulm, signed july . in  he commanded the large forces
assembled at the siege of la rochelle; and some years after in ,
during the thirty years' war, he was general of the french army in
lorraine. in  he was made lieutenant-general of the army. he
appears to have retired from public life shortly after the death of
richelieu in . his first wife died in , and in  he married
francoise de narbonne, daughter of charles, baron of mareuil. she had
no children and survived her husband until . angouleme himself
died on the th of september . by his first wife he had three
children: henri, who became insane; louis emmanuel, who succeeded his
father as duke of angoulême and was colonel-general of light cavalry
and governor of provence; and françoise, who died in .
the duke was the author of the following works:—(i)mémoires,
from the assassination of henri iii. to the battle of arques
(-) published at paris by boneau, and reprinted by buchon
in his choix de chroniques () and by petitot in his
mémoires (st series, vol. xliv.); () les harangues,
prononcés en assemblée de mm. les princes protestants d'allemagne,
par monseigneur le duc d' angoulême (); () a translation of a
spanish work by diego de torres. to him has also been ascribed the
work, la générale et fidèle rélation de tout ce qui s'est passé
en l'isle de ré, envoyée par le roi à la royne sa mère (paris,
angoulême, a city of south-western france, capital of the department
of charente,  m. n.n.e. of bordeaux on the railway between bordeaux
and poitiers. pop. () ,. the town proper occupies an elevated
promontory, washed on the north by the charente and on the south
and west by the anguienne, a small tributary of that river. the more
important of the suburbs lie towards the east, where the promontory
joins the main plateau, of which it forms the north-western extremity.
the main line of the orleans railway passes through a tunnel beneath
the town. in place of its ancient fortifications angoulême is
encircled by boulevards known as the remparts, from which fine
views may be obtained in all directions. within the town the streets
are often dark and narrow, and, apart from the cathedral and the hôtel
de ville, the architecture is of little interest. the cathedral of
st. pierre (see cathedral), a church in the byzantine-romanesque style,
dates from the th and th centuries, but has undergone frequent
restoration, and was partly rebuilt in the latter half of the igth
century by the architect paul abadie. the façade, flanked by two
towers with cupolas, is decorated with arcades filled in with statuary
and sculpture, the whole representing the last judgment. the crossing
is surmounted by a dome, and the extremity of the north transept by
a fine square tower over  ft. high. the hôtel de ville, also by
abadie, is a handsome modern structure, but preserves two towers of
the chateau of the counts of angoulême, on the site of which it is
built. it contains museums of paintings and archaeology. angoulême is
the seat of a bishop, a prefect, and a court of assizes. its public
institutions include tribunals of first instance and of commerce, a
council of trade-arbitrators, a chamber of commerce and a branch of
the bank of france. it also has a lycée, training-colleges, a school
of artillery, a library and several learned societies. it is a centre
of the paper-making industry, with which the town has been connected
since the th century. most of the mills are situated on the banks
of the watercourses in the neighbourhood of the town. the subsidiary
industries, such as the manufacture of machinery and wire fabric,
are of considerable importance. iron and copper founding, brewing,
tanning, and the manufacture of gunpowder, confectionery, heavy iron
goods, gloves, boots and shoes and cotton goods are also carried on.
commerce is carried on in wine, brandy and building-stone.
angoulême (iculisma) was taken by clovis from the visigoths in
, and plundered by the normans in the th century. in  it
was surrendered by the peace of bretigny to the english; they were,
however, expelled in  by the troops of charles v., who granted
the town numerous privileges. it suffered much during the wars of
religion, especially in  after its capture by the protestants
under coligny.
[v. p.]
the countship of angoulême dated from the th century, the most
important of the early counts being william taillefer, whose
descendants held the title till the end of the th century. withdrawn
from them on more than one occasion by richard coeur-de-lion, it
passed to king john of england on his marriage with isabel, daughter
of count adhémar, and by her subsequent marriage in  to hugh x.
passed to the lusignan family, counts of marche. on the death of hugh
xiii. in  without issue, his possessions passed to the crown. in
 the countship came to the house of orleans, a member of which,
francis i., became king of france in  and raised it to the rank
of duchy in favour of his mother louise of savoy. the duchy afterwards
changed hands several times, one of its holders being charles of
valois, natural son of charles ix. the last duke was louis-antoine,
eldest son of charles x., who died in .
see a. f. lièvre, angoulême: histoire, institutions et monuments
(angoulême, ).
angoumois, an old province of france, nearly corresponding to-day to
the department of charente. its capital was angoulême.
see essai d'une bibliothèque historique de l'angoumois, by e.
castaigne ().
angra, or angra do heroismo ("bay of heroism," a name given it in
, to commemorate its successful defence against the miguelist
party), the former capital of the portuguese archipelago of the
azores, and chief town of an administrative district, comprising the
islands of terceira, st. george and graciosa. pop. () ,. angra
is built on the south coast of terceira in ° ' n. and in ° '
w. it is the headquarters of a military command, and the residence of
a roman catholic bishop; its principal buildings are the cathedral,
military college, arsenal and observatory. the harbour, now of little
commercial or strategic importance, but formerly a celebrated naval
station, is sheltered on the west and south-west by the promontory
of mt. brazil; but it is inferior to the neighbouring ports of ponta
delgada and horta. the foreign trade is not large, and consists
chiefly in the exportation of pineapples and other fruit. angra served
as a refuge for queen maria ii. of portugal from  to .
angra pequena, a bay in german south-west africa, in ° ' s.,
° e., discovered by bartholomew diaz in . f. a. e. lüderitz, of
bremen, established a trading station here in , and his agent
concluded treaties with the neighbouring chiefs, who ceded large
tracts of country to the newcomers. on the th of april  luderitz
transferred his rights to the german imperial government, and on the
following th of august a german protectorate over the district was
proclaimed. (see africa, §, and german south-west africa.) angra
pequena has been renamed by the germans lüderitz bay, and the adjacent
country is sometimes called lüderitzland. the harbour is poor. at the
head of the bay is a small town, whence a railway, begun in , runs
east in the direction of bechuanaland. the surrounding country
for many miles is absolute desert, except after rare but terrible
thunderstorms, when the dry bed of the little fish river is suddenly
filled with a turbulent stream, the water finding its way into the
bay.
the islands off the coast of angra pequena, together with others north
and south, were annexed to great britain in  and added to cape
colony in . seal island and penguin island are in the bay;
ichaboe, mercury, and hollam's bird islands are to the north; halifax,
long, possession, albatross, pomona, plumpudding, and roastbeef
islands are to the south. on these islands are guano deposits; the
most valuable is on ichaboe island.
angström, anders jonas (-), swedish physicist, was born on
the th of august  at lögdö, medelpad, sweden. he was educated
at upsala university, where in  he became privat docent
in physics. in  he went to stockholm observatory in order to gain
experience in practical astronomical work, and in the following year
ht became observer at upsala observatory. becoming interested in
terrestrial magnetism he made many observations of magnetic intensity
and declination in various parts of sweden, and was charged by the
stockholm academy of sciences with the task, not completed till
shortly before his death, of working out the magnetic data obtained
by the swedish frigate "eugénie" on her voyage round the world in
-. in  he succeeded adolph ferdinand svanberg (-)
in the chair of physics at upsala, and there he died on the st of
june . his most important work was concerned with the conduction
of heat and with spectroscopy. in his optical researches, optiska
undersökningar, presented to the stockholm academy in , he
not only pointed out that the electric spark yields two superposed
spectra, one from the metal of the electrode and the other from the
gas in which it passes, but deduced from euler's theory of
resonance that an incandescent gas emits luminous rays of the same
refrangibility as those which it can absorb. this statement, as sir
e. sabine remarked when awarding him the rumford medal of the
royal society in , contains a fundamental principle of spectrum
analysis, and though for a number of years it was overlooked it
entitles him to rank as one of the founders of spectroscopy. from 
onwards he paid special attention to the solar spectrum. he announced
the existence of hydrogen, among other elements, in the sun's
atmosphere in , and in  published his great map of the normal
solar spectrum which long remained authoritative in questions of
wave-length, although his measurements were inexact to the extent
of one part in  or  owing to the metre which he used as his
standard having been slightly too short. he was the first, in , to
examine the spectrum of the aurora borealis, and detected and measured
the characteristic bright line in its yellow green region; but he was
mistaken in supposing that this same line, which is often called by
his name, is also to be seen in the zodiacal light.
his son, knut johan ångström, was born at upsala on the th of
january , and studied at the university of that town from 
to . after spending a short time in strassburg he was appointed
lecturer in physics at stockholm university in , but in 
returned to upsala, where in  he became professor of physics. he
especially devoted himself to investigations of the radiation of heat
from the sun and its absorption by the earth's atmosphere, and to that
end devised various delicate methods and instruments, including his
electric compensation pyrheliometer, invented in , and apparatus
for obtaining a photographic representation of the infra-red spectrum
anguier, françois (c. -), and michel (-), french
sculptors, were two brothers, natives of eu in normandy. their
apprenticeship was served in the studio of simon guillain. the chief
works of françois are the monument to cardinal de bérulle, founder of
the carmelite order, in the chapel of the oratory at paris, of which
all but the bust has been destroyed, and the mausoleum of henri ii.,
last duc de montmorency, at moulins. to michel are due the sculptures
of the triumphal arch at the porte st. denis, begun in , to serve
as a memorial for the conquests of louis xiv. a marble group of the
nativity in the church of val de grâce was reckoned his masterpiece.
from  to  he directed the progress of the sculpture and
decoration in this church, and it was he who superintended the
decoration of the apartments of anne of austria in the old louvre. f.
fouquet also employed him for his chateau in vaux.
see henri stein, les frères anguier (), with catalogue of
works, and many references to original sources; armand sanson, deux
sculpteurs normands: les frères anguier ().
anguilla, or snake, a small island in the british indies, part of the
presidency of st. kitts-nevis, in the colony of the leeward islands.
pop. () , mostly negroes. it is situated in ° ' n. and °
' w., about  m. n.w. of st kitts, is  m. long and has an area of
 sq. m. the destruction of trees by charcoal-burners has resulted in
the almost complete deforestation of the island. nearly all the land
is in the hands of peasant proprietors, who cultivate sweet potatoes,
peas, beans, corn, &c., and rear sheep and goats. cattle, phosphate
of lime and salt, manufactured from a lake in the interior, are the
principal [v. p.]
 exports, the market for these being the neighbouring
island of st. thomas.
angulate (lat. angulus, an angle), shaped with corners or
angles; an adjective used in botany and zoology for the shape of
stems, leaves and wings.
angus, earls of. angus was one of the seven original earldoms of
the pictish kingdom of scotland, said to have been occupied by seven
brothers of whom angus was the eldest. the celtic line ended with
matilda (fl. ), countess of angus in her own right, who
married in  gilbert de umfravill and founded the norman line of
three earls, which ended in , the then holder of the title being
summoned to the english parliament. meanwhile john stewart of bonkyl,
co. berwick, had been created earl of angus in a new line. this third
creation ended with margaret stewart, countess of angus in her
own right, and widow of thomas, th earl of mar. by an irregular
connexion with william, st earl of douglas, who had married mar's
sister, she became the mother of george douglas, st earl of angus
(c. -), and secured a charter of her estates for her
son, to whom in  the title was granted by king robert ii. he was
taken prisoner at homildon hill and died in england. the th earl was
his great-grandson.
archibald douglas, th earl of angus (c. -c. ),
the famous "bell the cat," was born about  and succeeded his
father, george the th earl, in  or . in  he was made
warden of the east marches, but the next year he joined the league
against james iii. and his favourite robert cochrane at lauder, where
he earned his nickname by offering to bell the cat, i.e. to
deal with the latter, beginning the attack upon him by pulling his
gold chain off his neck and causing him with others of the king's
favourites to be hanged. subsequently he joined alexander stewart,
duke of albany, in league with edward iv. of england on the th
of february , signing the convention at westminster which
acknowledged the overlordship of the english king. in march however
they returned, outwardly at least, to their allegiance, and received
pardons for their treason. later angus was one of the leaders in the
rebellion against james in  and , which ended in the latter's
death. he was made one of the guardians of the young king james iv.
but soon lost influence, being superseded by the homes and hepburns,
and the wardenship of the marches was given to alexander home. though
outwardly on good terms with james, he treacherously made a treaty
with henry vii. about  or , by which he undertook to govern
his relations with james according to instructions from england, and
to hand over hermitage castle, commanding the pass through liddesdale
into scotland, on the condition of receiving english estates in
compensation. in october  he fortified his castle of tantallon
against james, but was obliged to submit and exchange his liddesdale
estate and hermitage castle for the lordship of bothwell. in  he
was again in favour, received various grants of lands, and was made
chancellor, which office he retained till . in  he was once
more in disgrace and confined to dumbarton castle. after the disaster
at flodden in , at which he was not present, but at which he lost
his two eldest sons, angus was appointed one of the counsellors of the
queen regent. he died at the close of this year, or in . he was
married three times, and by his first wife had four sons and several
daughters. his third son, gavin douglas, bishop of dunkeld, is
separately noticed.
archibald douglas, the th earl (c. -), son of george,
master of douglas, who was killed at flodden, succeeded on his
grandfather's death. in  he had married margaret (d. ),
daughter of patrick hepburn, st earl of bothwell; and in  he
married the queen dowager margaret of scotland, widow of james iv.,
and eldest sister of henry viii. by this latter act he stirred up the
jealousy of the nobles and the opposition of the french party, and
civil war broke out. he was superseded in the government on the
arrival of john stewart, duke of albany, who was made regent. angus
withdrew to his estates in forfarshire, while albany besieged the
queen at stirling and got possession of the royal children; then he
joined margaret after her flight at morpeth, and on her departure for
london returned and made his peace with albany in . he met her
once more at berwick in june , when margaret returned to scotland
on albany's departure in vain hopes of regaining the regency.
meanwhile, during margaret's absence, angus had formed a connexion
with a daughter of the laird of traquair. margaret avenged his neglect
of her by refusing to support his claims for power and by secretly
trying through albany to get a divorce. in edinburgh angus held his
own against the attempts of james hamilton, st earl of arran, to
dislodge him. but the return of albany in , with whom margaret now
sided against her husband, deprived him of power. the regent took the
government into his own hands; angus was charged with high treason in
december, and in march  was sent practically a prisoner to france,
whence he succeeded in escaping to london in . he returned to
scotland in november with promises of support from henry viii., with
whom he made a close alliance. margaret, however, refused to have
anything to do with her husband. on the rd, therefore, angus forced
his way into edinburgh, but was fired upon by margaret and retreated
to tantallon. he now organized a large party of nobles against
margaret with the support of henry viii., and in february  they
entered edinburgh and called a parliament. angus was made a lord of
the articles, was included in the council of regency, bore the king's
crown on the opening of the session, and with archbishop beaton held
the chief power. in march he was appointed lieutenant of the marches,
and suppressed the disorder and anarchy on the border. in july the
guardianship of the king was entrusted to him for a fixed period
till the st of november, but he refused at its close to retire, and
advancing to linlithgow put to flight margaret and his opponents. he
now with his followers engrossed all the power, succeeded in gaining
over some of his antagonists, including arran and the hamiltons,
and filled the public offices with douglases, he himself becoming
chancellor. "none that time durst strive against a douglas nor
douglas's man."[] the young king james, now fourteen, was far from
content under the tutelage of angus, but he was closely guarded,
and several attempts to effect his liberation were prevented, angus
completely defeating lennox, who had advanced towards edinburgh with
, men in august, and subsequently taking stirling. his successes
were consummated by a pacification with beaton, and in  and 
he was busy in restoring order through the country. in the latter
year, on the th of march, margaret succeeded in obtaining her
divorce from angus, and about the end of the month she and her lover,
henry stewart, were besieged at stirling. a few weeks later, however,
james succeeded in escaping from angus's custody, took refuge with
margaret and arran at stirling, and immediately proscribed angus and
all the douglases, forbidding them to come within seven miles of his
person. angus, having fortified himself in tantallon, was attainted
and his lands confiscated. repeated attempts of james to subdue
the fortress failed, and on one occasion angus captured the royal
artillery, but at length it was given up as a condition of the truce
between england and scotland, and in may  angus took refuge
with henry, obtained a pension and took an oath of allegiance, henry
engaging to make his restoration a condition of peace. angus had
been chiefly guided in his intrigues with england by his brother, sir
george douglas of pittendriech (d. ), master of angus, a
far cleverer diplomatist than himself. his life and lands were also
declared forfeit, as were those of his uncle, archibald douglas of
kilspindie (d. ), who had been a friend of james and was
known by the nickname of "greysteel." these took refuge in exile.
james avenged himself on such douglases as lay within his power.
angus's third sister janet, lady glamis, was summoned to answer the
charge of communicating with her brothers, and on her failure
to appear her estates were forfeited. in  she was tried for
conspiring against the king's life. she was found guilty and burnt on
the castle hill, edinburgh, on the th of july . her innocence
[v. p.]
has been generally assumed, but tytler (hist, of
scotland, iv. pp. , ) considered her guilty. angus remained
in england till , joining in the attacks upon his countrymen on
the border, while james refused all demands from henry viii. for
his restoration, and kept firm to his policy of suppressing and
extirpating the douglas faction. on james v.'s death in  angus
returned to scotland, with instructions from henry to accomplish the
marriage between mary and edward. his forfeiture was rescinded,
his estates restored, and he was made a privy councillor and
lieutenant-general. in  he negotiated the treaty of peace and
marriage, and the same year he himself married margaret, daughter of
robert, lord maxwell. shortly afterwards strife between angus and the
regent arran broke out, and in april  angus was taken prisoner.
the same year lord hertford's marauding expedition, which did not
spare the lands of angus, made him join the anti-english party. he
entered into a bond with arran and others to maintain their allegiance
to mary, and gave his support to the mission sent to france to offer
the latter's hand. in july  he was appointed lieutenant of the
south of scotland, and distinguished himself on the th of february
 in the victory over the english at ancrum moor. he still
corresponded with henry viii., but nevertheless signed in  the act
cancelling the marriage and peace treaty, and on the th of september
commanded the van in the great defeat of pinkie, when he again won
fame. in  the attempt by lennox and wharton to capture him and
punish him for his duplicity failed, angus escaping after his defeat
to edinburgh by sea, and wharton being driven back to carlisle. under
the regency of mary of lorraine his restless and ambitious character
and the number of his retainers gave cause for frequent alarms to
the government. on the st of august  he resigned his earldom,
obtaining a regrant sibi et suis haeredibus masculis et suis
assignatis quibuscumque. his career was a long struggle for power
and for the interests of his family, to which national considerations
were completely subordinate. he died in january . by margaret
tudor he had margaret, his only surviving legitimate child, who
married matthew, th earl of lennox, and was mother of lord darnley.
he was succeeded by his nephew david, son of sir george douglas of
pittendriech.
archibald douglas, th earl, and earl of morton (-), was the
son of david, th earl. he succeeded to the title and estates in ,
being brought up by his uncle, the th earl of morton, a presbyterian.
in  he was made a privy councillor and sheriff of berwick, in 
lieutenant-general of scotland, in  warden of the west marches and
steward of fife, and in  lieutenant-general of the realm. he gave
a strong support to morton during the attack upon the latter, made a
vain attempt to rescue him, and was declared guilty of high treason
on the nd of june . he now entered into correspondence with the
english government for an invasion of scotland to rescue morton,
and on the latter's execution in june went to london, where he
was welcomed by elizabeth. after the raid of ruthven in  angus
returned to scotland and was reconciled to james, but soon afterwards
the king shook off the control of the earls of mar and gowrie,
and angus was again banished from the court. in  he joined
the rebellion of mar and glamis, but the movement failed, and the
insurgents fled to berwick. later they took up their residence at
newcastle, which became a centre of presbyterianism and of projects
against the scottish government, encouraged by elizabeth, who regarded
the banished lords as friends of the english and antagonists of the
french interest. in february  they came to london, and cleared
themselves of the accusation of plotting against james's life; a plan
was prepared for their restoration and for the overthrow of james
stewart, earl of arran. in october they invaded scotland and gained
an easy victory over arran, captured stirling castle with the king in
november, and secured from james the restoration of their estates and
the control of the government. in  angus was appointed warden of
the marches and lieutenant-general on the border, and performed good
services in restoring order; but he was unable to overcome the king's
hostility to the establishment of presbyterian government. in january
 he was granted the earldom of morton with the lands entailed upon
him by his uncle. he died on the th of august . he was succeeded
in the earldom by his cousin william, a descendant of the th earl.
(for the morton title, see morton, james douglas, th earl of.)
william douglas, th earl (c. -), was the son of william, the
th earl (-). he studied at st. andrews university and joined
the household of the earl of morton. subsequently, while visiting the
french court, he became a roman catholic, and was in consequence, on
his return, disinherited and placed under restraint. nevertheless he
succeeded to his father's titles and estates in , and though in
 he was disgraced for his complicity in lord bothwell's plot,
he was soon liberated and performed useful services as the king's
lieutenant in the north of scotland. in july , however, he was
asking for help from elizabeth in a plot with erroll and other lords
against sir john maitland, the chancellor, and protesting his absolute
rejection of spanish offers, while in october he signed the spanish
blanks (see erroll, francis hay, th earl of) and was imprisoned (on
the discovery of the treason) in edinburgh castle on his return in
january . he succeeded on the th in escaping by the help of his
countess, joining the earls of huntly and erroll in the north.
they were offered an act of "oblivion" or "abolition" provided
they renounced their religion or quitted scotland. declining these
conditions they were declared traitors and "forfeited." they remained
in rebellion, and in july  an attack made by them on aberdeen
roused james's anger. huntly and erroll were subdued by james himself
in the north, and angus failed in an attempt upon edinburgh in concert
with the earl of bothwell. subsequently in  they all renounced
their religion, declared themselves presbyterians, and were restored
to their estates and honours. angus was again included in the privy
council, and in june  was appointed the king's lieutenant
in southern scotland, in which capacity he showed great zeal and
conducted the "raid of dumfries," as the campaign against the
johnstones was called. not long afterwards, angus, offended at the
advancement of huntly to a marquisate, recanted, resisted all the
arguments of the ministers to bring him to a "better mind," and was
again excommunicated in . in  he withdrew to france, and
died in paris on the rd of march . he was succeeded by his son
william, as th earl of angus, afterwards st marquis of douglas
(-). the title is now held by the dukes of hamilton.
authorities.—the douglas book, by sir w. fraser ();
history of the house of douglas and angus, by d. hume of
godscroft (, legendary in some respects); history of the house
of douglas, by sir h. maxwell ().
[] lindsay of pitscottie (), ii. .
angussola or angussciola, sophonisba, italian portrait painter of the
latter half of the th century, was born at cremona about , and
died at palermo in . in , at the invitation of philip ii.,
she visited the court of madrid, where her portraits elicited great
commendation. vandyck is said to have declared that he had derived
more knowledge of the true principles of his art from her conversation
than from any other source. she painted several fine portraits of
herself, one of which is at althorp. a few specimens of her painting
are to be seen at florence and madrid. she had three sisters, who were
also celebrated artists.
anhalt, a duchy of germany, and a constituent state of the german
empire, formed, in , by the amalgamation of the two duchies
anhalt-dessau-cöthen and anhalt-bernburg, and comprising all the
various anhalt territories which were sundered apart in . the
country now known as anhalt consists of two larger portions—eastern
and western anhalt, separated by the interposition of a part
of prussian saxony—and of five enclaves surrounded by prussian
territory, viz. alsleben, mühlingen, dornburg, gödnitz and
tilkerode-abberode. the eastern and larger portion of the duchy
is enclosed by the prussian government district of potsdam (in
the prussian province of brandenburg), and magdeburg and merseburg
(belonging to the prussian province of saxony). the western
[v. p.]
 or smaller portion (the so-called upper duchy or
ballenstedt) is also enclosed by the two latter districts and, for a
distance of  m. on the west, by the duchy of brunswick. the western
portion of the territory is undulating and in the extreme south-west,
where it forms part of the harz range, mountainous, the ramberg
peak attaining a height of  ft. from the harz the country gently
shelves down to the saale; and between this river and the elbe there
lies a fine tract of fertile country. the portion of the duchy lying
east of the elbe is mostly a flat sandy plain, with extensive pine
forests, though interspersed, at intervals, by bog-land and rich
pastures. the elbe is the chief river, and intersecting the eastern
portion of the duchy, from east to west, receives at rosslau the
waters of the mulde. the navigable saale takes a northerly direction
through the western portion of the eastern part of the territory and
receives, on the right, the fuhne and, on the left, the wipper and the
bode. the climate is on the whole mild, though somewhat inclement in
the higher regions to the south-west. the area of the duchy is  sq.
m., and the population in  amounted to ,, a ratio of about
 to the square mile. the country is divided into the districts of
dessau, cöthen, zerbst, bernburg and ballenstedt, of which that of
bernburg is the most, and that of ballenstedt the least, populated.
of the towns, four, viz. dessau, bernburg, cöthen and zerbst, have
populations exceeding ,. the inhabitants of the duchy, who mainly
belong to the upper saxon race, are, with the exception of about
, roman catholics and  jews, members of the evangelical
(union) church. the supreme ecclesiastical authority is the consistory
in dessau; while a synod of  members, elected for six years,
assembles at periods to deliberate on internal matters touching the
organization of the church. the roman catholics are under the
bishop of paderborn. there are within the duchy four grammar schools
(gymnasia), five semi-classical and modern schools, a teachers'
seminary and four high-grade girls' schools. of the whole surface,
land under tillage amounts to about , meadowland to  and forest to
%. the chief crops are corn (especially wheat), fruit, vegetables,
potatoes, beet, tobacco, flax, linseed and hops. the land is well
cultivated, and the husbandry on the royal domains and the large
estates especially so. the pastures on the banks of the elbe yield
cattle of excellent quality. the forests are well stocked with game,
such as deer and wild boar, and the open country is well supplied
with partridges. the rivers yield abundant fish, salmon (in the elbe),
sturgeon and lampreys. the country is rich in lignite, and salt works
are abundant. of the manufactures of anhalt, the chief are its sugar
factories, distilleries, breweries and chemical works. commerce is
brisk, especially in raw products—corn, cattle, timber or wool. coal
(lignite), guano, oil and bricks are also articles of export.
the trade of the country is furthered by its excellent roads, its
navigable rivers and its railways ( m.), which are worked in
connexion with the prussian system. there is a chamber of commerce in
dessau.
constitution.—the duchy, by virtue of a fundamental law,
proclaimed on the th of september  and subsequently modified by
various decrees, is a constitutional monarchy. the duke, who bears
the title of "highness," wields the executive power while sharing the
legislation with the estates. the diet (landtag) is composed of
thirty-six members, of whom two are appointed by the duke, eight are
representatives of landowners paying the highest taxes, two of the
highest assessed members of the commercial and manufacturing classes,
fourteen of the other electors of the towns and ten of the rural
districts. the representatives are chosen for six years by indirect
vote and must have completed their twenty-fifth year. the duke
governs through a minister of state, who is the praeses of all the
departments—finance, home affairs, education, public worship and
statistics. the budget estimates for the financial year -
placed the expenditure of the estate at £,,. the public debt
amounted on the th of june  to £,. by convention with
prussia of  the anhalt troops form a contingent of the prussian
army. appeal from the lower courts of the duchy lies to the appeal
court at naumburg in prussian saxony.
history.—during the th century the greater part of anhalt
was included in the duchy of saxony, and in the th century it came
under the rule of albert the bear, margrave of brandenburg. albert was
descended from albert, count of ballenstedt, whose son esico (d. 
or ) appears to have been the first to bear the title of count of
anhalt. esico's grandson, otto the rich, count of ballenstedt, was the
father of albert the bear, by whom anhalt was united with the mark of
brandenburg. when albert died in , his son bernard, who received
the title of duke of saxony in , became count of anhalt. bernard
died in , and anhalt, separated from saxony, passed to his son
henry, who in  took the title of prince and was the real founder
of the house of anhalt. on henry's death in  his three sons
partitioned the principality and founded respectively the lines of
aschersleben, bernburg and zerbst. the family ruling in aschersleben
became extinct in , and this district was subsequently
incorporated with the neighbouring bishopric of halberstadt. the last
prince of the line of anhalt-bernburg died in  and his lands
were inherited by the princes of the sole remaining line, that of
anhalt-zerbst. the territory belonging to this branch of the family
had been divided in , and after the acquisition of bernburg
prince george i. made a further partition of zerbst. early in the th
century, however, owing to the death or abdication of several
princes, the family had become narrowed down to the two branches
of anhalt-cöthen and anhalt-dessau. wolfgang, who became prince of
anhalt-cöthen in , was a stalwart adherent of the reformation,
and after the battle of mühlberg in  was placed under the ban and
deprived of his lands by the emperor charles v. after the peace
of passau in  he bought back his principality, but as he was
childless he surrendered it in  to his kinsmen the princes of
anhalt-dessau. ernest i. of anhalt-dessau (d. ) left three sons,
john ii., george iii., and joachim, who ruled their lands together
for many years, and who, like prince wolfgang, favoured the reformed
doctrines, which thus became dominant in anhalt. about  the three
brothers divided their principality and founded the lines of zerbst,
plötzkau and dessau. this division, however, was only temporary, as
the acquisition of cöthen, and a series of deaths among the ruling
princes, enabled joachim ernest, a son of john ii., to unite the whole
of anhalt under his rule in .
joachim ernest died in  and his five sons ruled the land in common
until , when anhalt was again divided, and the lines of dessau,
bernburg, plötzkau, zerbst and cöthen were refounded. the principality
was ravaged during the thirty years' war, and in the earlier part of
this struggle christian i. of anhalt-bernburg took an important part.
in  an arrangement was made by the various princes of anhalt,
which gave a certain authority to the eldest member of the family,
who was thus able to represent the principality as a whole. this
proceeding was probably due to the necessity of maintaining an
appearance of unity in view of the disturbed state of european
politics. in  the branch of anhalt-cöthen became extinct, and
according to a family compact this district was inherited by lebrecht
of anhalt-plötzkau, who surrendered plötzkau to bernburg, and took
the title of prince of anhalt-cöthen. in the same year the princes
of anhalt decided that if any branch of the family became extinct its
lands should be equally divided between the remaining branches. this
arrangement was carried out after the death of frederick augustus
of anhalt-zerbst in , and zerbst was divided between the three
remaining princes. during these years the policy of the different
princes was marked, perhaps intentionally, by considerable uniformity.
once or twice calvinism was favoured by a prince, but in general the
house was loyal to the doctrines of luther. the growth of prussia
provided anhalt with a formidable neighbour, and the establishment
and practice of primogeniture by all branches of the family
prevented further divisions of the principality. in  alexius of
anhalt-bernburg was created a duke by the emperor francis ii., and
after the dissolution of the empire each of the three princes
[v. p.]
took this title. joining the confederation of the rhine
in , they supported napoleon until , when they transferred
their allegiance to the allies; in  they became members of the
germanic confederation, and in  joined, somewhat reluctantly, the
prussian zollverein.
anhalt-cöthen was ruled without division by a succession of princes,
prominent among whom was louis (d. ), who was both a soldier and a
scholar; and after the death of prince charles at the battle of
semlin in  it passed to his son augustus ii. this prince sought to
emulate the changes which had recently been made in france by dividing
cöthen into two departments and introducing the code napoléon. owing
to his extravagance he left a large amount of debt to his nephew and
successor, louis ii., and on this account the control of the finances
was transferred from the prince to the estates. under louis's
successor ferdinand, who was a roman catholic and brought the jesuits
into anhalt, the state of the finances grew worse and led to the
interference of the king of prussia and to the appointment of a
prussian official. when the succeeding prince, henry, died in ,
this family became extinct, and according to an arrangement between
the lines of anhalt-dessau and anhalt-bernburg, cöthen was added to
dessau.
anhalt-bernburg had been weakened by partitions, but its princes had
added several districts to their lands; and in , on the extinction
of a cadet branch, it was again united under a single ruler. the
feeble rule of alexander charles, who became duke in , and the
disturbed state of europe in the following decade, led to considerable
unrest, and in  bernburg was occupied by prussian troops. a
number of abortive attempts were made to change the government, and
as alexander charles was unlikely to leave any children, leopold of
anhalt-dessau took some part in the affairs of bernburg. eventually
in  a new constitution was established for bernburg and dessau
jointly, and when alexander charles died in  both were united
under the rule of leopold.
anhalt-dessau had been divided in , but was quickly reunited;
and in  it came under the rule of leopold i. (see anhalt-dessau,
leopold i., prince of), the famous soldier who was generally known
as the "old dessauer." the sons of leopold's eldest son were excluded
from the succession on account of the marriage of their father being
morganatic, and the principality passed in  to his second son,
leopold ii. the unrest of  spread to dessau, and led to the
interference of the prussians and to the establishment of the new
constitution in . leopold iv., who reigned from  to , had
the satisfaction in  of reuniting the whole of anhalt under his
rule. he took the title of duke of anhalt, summoned one landtag
for the whole of the duchy, and in  fought for prussia against
austria. subsequently a quarrel over the possession of the ducal
estates between the duke and the landtag broke the peace of the
duchy, but this was settled in . in  anhalt became a state of
the german empire. leopold iv. was followed by his son frederick i.,
and on the death of this prince in  his son frederick ii. became
duke of anhalt.
authorities.—f. knoke, anhaltische geschichte (dessau, );
g. krause, urkunden, aktenstucke und briefe zur geschichte der
anhaltischen lande und ihrer fürsten unter dem drucke des 
jahrigen krieges (leipzig, -); o. von heinemann, codex
diplomaticus anhaltinus (dessau, -); siebigk, das
herzogthum anhalt historisch, geographisch und statistisch
dargestellt (dessau, ).
anhalt-dessau, leopold i., prince of (-), called the "old
dessauer" (alter dessauer), general field marshal in the prussian
army, was the only surviving son of john george ii., prince of
anhalt-dessau, and was born on the rd of july  at dessau. from
his earliest youth he was devoted to the profession of arms, for which
he educated himself physically and mentally. he became colonel of a
prussian regiment in , and in the same year his father's death
placed him at the head of his own principality; thereafter, during the
whole of his long life, he performed the duties of a sovereign prince
and a prussian officer. his first campaign was that of  in
the netherlands, in which he was present at the siege of namur. he
remained in the field to the end of the war of , the affairs
of the principality being managed chiefly by his mother, princess
henriette catherine of orange. in  he married anna luise föse,
an apothecary's daughter of dessau, in spite of his mother's long and
earnest opposition, and subsequently he procured for her the rank of
a princess from the emperor (). their married life was long and
happy, and the princess acquired an influence over the stern nature of
her husband which she never ceased to exert on behalf of his subjects,
and after the death of leopold's mother she performed the duties of
regent when he was absent on campaign. often, too, she accompanied him
into the field. leopold's career as a soldier in important commands
begins with the outbreak of the war of the spanish succession. he had
made many improvements in the prussian army, notably the introduction
of the iron ramrod about , and he now took the field at the
head of a prussian corps on the rhine, serving at the sieges of
kaiserswerth and venlo. in the following year (), having obtained
the rank of lieutenant-general, leopold took part in the siege of bonn
and distinguished himself very greatly in the battle of höchstädt, in
which the austrians and their allies were defeated by the french under
marshal villars (september , ). in the campaign of 
the prussian contingent served under prince louis of baden and
subsequently under eugene, and leopold himself won great glory by his
conduct at blenheim. in  he was sent with a prussian corps to join
prince eugene in italy, and on the th of august he displayed his
bravery at the hard-fought battle of cassano. in the following year he
added to his reputation in the battle of turin, where he was the first
to enter the hostile entrenchments (september , ). he served
in one more campaign in italy, and then went with eugene to join
marlborough in the netherlands, being present in  at the siege
of tournay and the battle of malplaquet. in  he succeeded to the
command of the whole prussian contingent at the front, and in , at
the particular desire of the crown prince, frederick william, who had
served with him as a volunteer, he was made a general field marshal.
shortly before this he had executed a coup de main on the
castle of mörs, which was held by the dutch in defiance of the claims
of the king of prussia to the possession. the operation was effected
with absolute precision and the castle was seized without a shot being
fired. in the earlier part of the reign of frederick william i.,
the prince of dessau was one of the most influential members of
the prussian governing circle. in the war with sweden () he
accompanied the king to the front, commanded an army of , men,
and met and defeated charles xii. in a severe battle on the island
of rügen (november ). his conduct of the siege of stralsund which
followed was equally skilful, and the great results of the war
to prussia were largely to be attributed to his leadership in the
campaign. in the years of peace, and especially after a court quarrel
() and duel with general von grumbkow, he devoted himself to the
training of the prussian army. the reputation it had gained in the
wars of  to , though good, gave no hint of its coming glory,
and it was even in  accounted one of the minor armies of europe.
that it proved, when put to the test, to be by far the best military
force existing, may be taken as the summary result of leopold's work.
the "old dessauer" was one of the sternest disciplinarians in an age
of stern discipline, and the technical training of the infantry, under
his hand, made them superior to all others in the proportion of five
to three (see austrian succession, war of the). he was essentially an
infantry soldier; in his time artillery did not decide battles, but he
suffered the cavalry service, in which he felt little interest, to
be comparatively neglected, with results which appeared at mollwitz.
frederick the great formed the cavalry of hohenfriedberg and leuthen
himself, but had it not been for the incomparable infantry trained by
the "old dessauer" he would never have had the opportunity of doing
so. thus leopold, heartily supported by frederick william, who was
himself called the great drill-master of europe, turned to good
account the twenty years following the peace with sweden. during this
time two incidents in his career call for special mention: first,
his intervention in the case of the crown prince frederick, who
was condemned to death for desertion, and his continued and finally
successful efforts to
[v. p.]
secure frederick's reinstatement in the prussian army;
and secondly, his part in the war of the polish succession on the
rhine, where he served under his old chief eugene and held the office
of field marshal of the empire.
with the death of frederick william in , frederick succeeded to
the prussian throne, and a few months later took place the invasion
and conquest of silesia, the first act in the long silesian wars and
the test of the work of the "old dessauer's" lifetime. the prince
himself was not often employed in the king's own army, though his sons
held high commands under frederick. the king, indeed, found leopold,
who was reputed, since the death of eugene, the greatest of living
soldiers, somewhat difficult to manage, and the prince spent most of
the campaigning years up to  in command of an army of observation
on the saxon frontier. early in that year his wife died. he was
now over seventy, but his last campaign was destined to be the most
brilliant of his long career. a combined effort of the austrians and
saxons to retrieve the disasters of the summer by a winter campaign
towards berlin itself led to a hurried concentration of the prussians.
frederick from silesia checked the austrian main army and hastened
towards dresden. but before he had arrived, leopold, no longer in
observation, had decided the war by his overwhelming victory of
kesselsdorf (december , ). it was his habit to pray before
battle, for he was a devout lutheran. on this last field his words
were, "o lord god, let me not be disgraced in my old days. or if thou
wilt not help me, do not help these scoundrels, but leave us to try it
ourselves." with this great victory leopold's career ended. he retired
from active service, and the short remainder of his life was spent at
dessau, where he died on the th of april .
he was succeeded by his son, leopold ii., maximilian, prince of
anhalt-dessau (-), who was one of the best of frederick's
subordinate generals, and especially distinguished himself by the
capture of glogau in , and his generalship at mollwitz, chotusitz
(where he was made general field marshal on the field of battle),
hohenfriedberg and soor.
another son, prince dietrich of anhalt-dessau (d. ), was also a
distinguished prussian general.
but the most famous of the sons was prince moritz of anhalt-dessau
(-), who entered the prussian army in , saw his first
service as a volunteer in the war of the polish succession (-),
and in the latter years of the reign of frederick william held
important commands. in the silesian wars of frederick ii., moritz,
the ablest of the old leopold's sons, greatly distinguished himself,
especially at the battle of hohenfriedberg (striegau), . at
kesselsdorf it was the wing led by the young prince moritz that
carried the austrian lines and won the "old dessauer's" last fight. in
the years of peace preceding the seven years' war, moritz was employed
by frederick the great in the colonizing of the waste lands of
pomerania and the oder valley. when the king took the field again in
, moritz was in command of one of the columns which hemmed in the
saxon army in the lines of pirna, and he received the surrender of
rutowski's force after the failure of the austrian attempts at relief.
next year moritz underwent changes of fortune. at the battle of kolin
he led the left wing, which, through a misunderstanding with the
king, was prematurely drawn into action and failed hopelessly. in
the disastrous days which followed, moritz was under the cloud of
frederick's displeasure. but the glorious victory of leuthen (december
, ) put an end to this. at the close of that day, frederick
rode down the lines and called out to general prince moritz,
"i congratulate you, herr feldmarschall!" at zorndorf he again
distinguished himself, but at the surprise of hochkirch fell wounded
into the hands of the austrians. two years later, soon after his
release, his wound proved mortal.
authorities.—varnhagen von ense, preuss. biographische
denkmale, vol. ii. (rd ed., ); militar
konversations-lexikon, vol. ii. (leipzig, ); anon., fürst
leopold i. von anhalt und seine sohne (dessau, ); g. pauli,
leben grosser helden, vol. vi.; von orlich, prinz moritz
von anhalt-dessau (berlin, ); crousatz, militarische
denkwurdigkeiten des fürsten leopold von anhalt-dessau ();
supplements to militär wochenblatt ( and ); siebigk,
selbstbiographie des fürsten leopold von anhalt-dessau (dessau,
 and ); hosäus, zur biographie des fürsten leopold von
anhalt-dessau (dessau, ); würdig, des alten dessauers
leben und taten (rd ed., dessau, ); briefe konig friedrich
wilhelms i. an den fürsten l. (berlin, ).
anhydrite, a mineral, differing chemically from the more commonly
occurring gypsum in containing no water of crystallization, being
anhydrous calcium sulphate, caso. it crystallizes in the
orthorhombic system, and has three directions of perfect cleavage
parallel to the three planes of symmetry. it is not isomorphous with
the orthorhombic barium and strontium sulphates, as might be expected
from the chemical formulae. distinctly developed crystals are somewhat
rare, the mineral usually presenting the form of cleavage masses. the
hardness is ½ and the specific gravity .. the colour is white,
sometimes greyish, bluish or reddish. on the best developed of the
three cleavages the lustre is pearly, on other surfaces it is of the
ordinary vitreous type.
anhydrite is most frequently found in salt deposits with gypsum; it
was, for instance, first discovered, in , in a salt mine near
hall in tirol. other localities which produce typical specimens of the
mineral, and where the mode of occurrence is the same, are stassfurt
in germany, aussee in styria and bex in switzerland. at all these
places it is only met with at some depth; nearer the surface of the
ground it has been altered to gypsum owing to absorption of water.
from an aqueous solution calcium sulphate is deposited as crystals
of gypsum, but when the solution contains an excess of sodium or
potassium chloride anhydrite is deposited. this is one of the several
methods by which the mineral has been prepared artificially, and
is identical with its mode of origin in nature, the mineral having
crystallized out in salt basins.
the name anhydrite was given by a. g. werner in , because of the
absence of water, as contrasted with the presence of water in gypsum.
other names for the species are muriacite and karstenite; the former,
an earlier name, being given under the impression that the substance
was a chloride (muriate). a peculiar variety occurring as contorted
concretionary masses is known as tripe-stone, and a scaly granular
variety, from vulpino, near bergamo, in lombardy, as vulpinite; the
latter is cut and polished for ornamental purposes.
ani (anc. abnicum), an ancient and ruined armenian city, in
russian transcaucasia, government erivan, situated at an altitude of
 ft., between the arpa-chai (harpasus) and a deep ravine.
in  it became the capital of the bagratid kings of armenia, and
when yielded to the byzantine emperor () it was a populous city,
known traditionally as the "city with the  churches." it was taken
eighteen years later by the seljuk turks, five times by the georgians
between  and , in  by the mongols, and its ruin was
completed by an earthquake in . it is still surrounded by a double
wall partly in ruins, and amongst the remains are a "patriarchal"
church finished in , two other churches, both of the th century,
a fourth built in , and a palace of large size.
see brosset, les ruines d'ani (-).
anicetus, pope c. -. it was during his pontificate that
st. polycarp visited the roman church.
anichini, luigi, italian engraver of seals and medals, a native of
ferrara, lived at venice about . michelangelo pronounced his
"interview of alexander the great with the high-priest at jerusalem,"
"the perfection of the art." his medals of henry ii. of france and
pope paul iii. are greatly valued.
aniline, phenylamine, or aminobenzene, (chnh), an organic
base first obtained from the destructive distillation of indigo in
 by o. unverdorben (pogg. ann., , , p. ), who named
it crystalline. in , f. runge (pogg. ann., , , p.
; , p. ) isolated from coal-tar a substance which produced
a beautiful blue colour on treatment with chloride of lime; this
he named kyanol or cyanol. in , c. j. fritzsche showed that by
treating indigo with caustic potash it yielded an oil, which he named
aniline, from the specific name of one of the
[v. p.]
indigo-yielding plants, indigofera anil,
anil being derived from the sanskrit nīla, dark-blue,
and nīlā, the indigo plant. about the same time n.n.
zinin found that on reducing nitrobenzene, a base was formed which he
named benzidam. a. w. von hofmann investigated these variously prepared
substances, and proved them to be identical, and thenceforth they took
their place as one body, under the name aniline or phenylamine. pure
aniline is a basic substance of an oily consistence, colourless,
melting at -° and boiling at ° c. on exposure to air it absorbs
oxygen and resinifies, becoming deep brown in colour; it ignites
readily, burning with a large smoky flame. it possesses a somewhat
pleasant vinous odour and a burning aromatic taste; it is a highly
acrid poison.
aniline is a weak base and forms salts with the mineral acids. aniline
hydrochloride forms large colourless tables, which become greenish
on exposure; it is the "aniline salt" of commerce. the sulphate forms
beautiful white plates. although aniline is but feebly basic, it
precipitates zinc, aluminium and ferric salts, and on warming expels
ammonia from its salts. aniline combines directly with alkyl iodides
to form secondary and tertiary amines; boiled with carbon disulphide
it gives sulphocarbanilide (diphenyl thio-urea), cs(nhch),
which may be decomposed into phenyl mustard-oil, chcns, and
triphenyl guanidine, chn: c(nhch). sulphuric acid
at ° gives sulphanilic acid, nh.ch.soh. anilides, compounds
in which the amino group is substituted by an acid radical, are
prepared by heating aniline with certain acids; antifebrin or
acetanilide is thus obtained from acetic acid and aniline. the
oxidation of aniline has been carefully investigated. in alkaline
solution azobenzene results, while arsenic acid produces the
violet-colouring matter violaniline. chromic acid converts it into
quinone, while chlorates, in the presence of certain metallic salts
(especially of vanadium), give aniline black. hydrochloric acid and
potassium chlorate give chloranil. potassium permanganate in neutral
solution oxidizes it to nitrobenzene, in alkaline solution to
azobenzene, ammonia and oxalic acid, in acid solution to aniline
black. hypochlorous acid gives para-amino phenol and para-amino
diphenylamine (e. bamberger, ber., , , p. ).
the great commercial value of aniline is due to the readiness with
which it yields, directly or indirectly, valuable dyestuffs. the
discovery of mauve in  by sir w. h. perkin was the first of
a series of dyestuffs which are now to be numbered by hundreds.
reference should be made to the articles dyeing, fuchsine, safranine,
indulines, for more details on this subject. in addition to dyestuffs,
it is a starting-product for the manufacture of many drugs, such
as antipyrine, antifebrin, &c. aniline is manufactured by reducing
nitrobenzene with iron and hydrochloric acid and steam-distilling the
product. the purity of the product depends upon the quality of the
benzene from which the nitrobenzene was prepared. in commerce three
brands of aniline are distinguished—aniline oil for blue, which
is pure aniline; aniline oil for red, a mixture of equimolecular
quantities of aniline and ortho- and para-toluidines; and aniline
oil for safranine, which contains aniline and ortho-toluidine, and is
obtained from the distillate (échappés) of the fuchsine fusion.
monomethyl and dimethyl aniline are colourless liquids prepared by
heating aniline, aniline hydro-chloride and methyl alcohol in
an autoclave at °. they are of great importance in the colour
industry. monomethyl aniline boils at -°; dimethyl aniline at
animal (lat. animalis, from anima, breath, soul), a term
first used as a noun or adjective to denote a living thing, but now
used to designate one branch of living things as opposed to the other
branch known as plants. until the discovery of protoplasm, and the
series of investigations by which it was established that the cell was
a fundamental structure essentially alike in both animals and plants
(see cytology), there was a vague belief that plants, if they could
really be regarded as animated creatures, exhibited at the most a
lower grade of life. we know now that in so far as life and living
matter can be investigated by science, animals and plants cannot be
described as being alive in different degrees. animals and plants
are extremely closely related organisms, alike in their fundamental
characters, and each grading into organisms which possess some of
the characters of both classes or kingdoms (see protista). the actual
boundaries between animals and plants are artificial; they are
rather due to the ingenious analysis of the systematist than actually
resident in objective nature. the most obvious distinction is that
the animal cell-wall is either absent or composed of a nitrogenous
material, whereas the plant cell-wall is composed of a carbohydrate
material—cellulose. the animal and the plant alike require food to
repair waste, to build up new tissue and to provide material which,
by chemical change, may liberate the energy which appears in the
processes of life. the food is alike in both cases; it consists of
water, certain inorganic salts, carbohydrate material and proteid
material. both animals and plants take their water and inorganic salts
directly as such. the animal cell can absorb its carbohydrate and
proteid food only in the form of carbohydrate and proteid; it is
dependent, in fact, on the pre-existence of these organic substances,
themselves the products of living matter, and in this respect the
animal is essentially a parasite on existing animal and plant life.
the plant, on the other hand, if it be a green plant, containing
chlorophyll, is capable, in the presence of light, of building up both
carbohydrate material and proteid material from inorganic salts; if
it be a fungus, devoid of chlorophyll, whilst it is dependent on
pre-existing carbohydrate material and is capable of absorbing,
like an animal, proteid material as such, it is able to build up its
proteid food from material chemically simpler than proteid. on these
basal differences are founded most of the characters which make the
higher forms of animal and plant life so different. the animal body,
if it be composed of many cells, follows a different architectural
plan; the compact nature of its food, and the yielding nature of its
cell-walls, result in a form of structure consisting essentially of
tubular or spherical masses of cells arranged concentrically round the
food-cavity. the relatively rigid nature of the plant cell-wall, and
the attenuated inorganic food-supply of plants, make possible and
necessary a form of growth in which the greatest surface is exposed to
the exterior, and thus the plant body is composed of flattened laminae
and elongated branching growths. the distinctions between animals and
plants are in fact obviously secondary and adaptive, and point clearly
towards the conception of a common origin for the two forms of life, a
conception which is made still more probable by the existence of many
low forms in which the primary differences between animals and plants
fade out.
an animal may be defined as a living organism, the protoplasm of which
does not secrete a cellulose cell-wall, and which requires for its
existence proteid material obtained from the living or dead bodies of
existing plants or animals. the common use of the word animal as
the equivalent of mammal, as opposed to bird or reptile or fish, is
erroneous.
the classification of the animal kingdom is dealt with in the article
animal heat. under this heading is discussed the physiology of the
temperature of the animal body.
the higher animals have within their bodies certain sources of heat,
and also some mechanism by means of which both the production and loss
of heat can be regulated. this is conclusively shown by the fact that
both in summer and winter their mean temperature remains the same. but
it was not until the introduction of thermometers that any exact data
on the temperature of animals could be obtained. it was then found
that local differences were present, since heat production and heat
loss vary considerably in different parts of the body, although the
circulation of the blood tends to bring about a mean temperature of
the internal parts. hence it is important to determine the temperature
of those parts which most nearly approaches to that of the internal
organs. also for such results to be comparable they must be made in
the same situation. the rectum gives most accurately the temperature
of internal parts, or in women and some animals the vagina, uterus or
bladder.
[v. p.]
occasionally that of the urine as it leaves the urethra
may be of use. more usually the temperature is taken in the mouth,
axilla or groin.
warm and cold blooded animals.—by numerous observations upon
men and animals, john hunter showed that the essential difference
between the so-called warm-blooded and cold-blooded animals lies in
the constancy of the temperature of the former, and the variability
of the temperature of the latter. those animals high in the scale
of evolution, as birds and mammals, have a high temperature almost
constant and independent of that of the surrounding air, whereas
among the lower animals there is much variation of body temperature,
dependent entirely on their surroundings. there are, however, certain
mammals which are exceptions, being warm-blooded during the summer,
but cold-blooded during the winter when they hibernate; such are the
hedgehog, bat and dormouse. john hunter suggested that two groups
should be known as "animals of permanent heat at all atmospheres" and
"animals of a heat variable with every atmosphere," but later
bergmann suggested that they should be known as "homoiothermic" and
"poikilothermic" animals. but it must be remembered there is no hard
and fast line between the two groups. also, from work recently done
by j. o. wakelin barratt, it has been shown that under certain
pathological conditions a warm-blooded (homoiothermic) animal
may become for a time cold-blooded (poikilothermic). he has shown
conclusively that this condition exists in rabbits suffering from
rabies during the last period of their life, the rectal temperature
being then within a few degrees of the room temperature and varying
with it. he explains this condition by the assumption that the nervous
mechanism of heat regulation has become paralysed. the respiration and
heart-rate being also retarded during this period, the resemblance
to the condition of hibernation is considerable. again, sutherland
simpson has shown that during deep anaesthesia a warm-blooded animal
tends to take the same temperature as that of its environment. he
demonstrated that when a monkey is kept deeply anaesthetized with
ether and is placed in a cold chamber, its temperature gradually
falls, and that when it has reached a sufficiently low point (about
° c. in the monkey), the employment of an anaesthetic is no longer
necessary, the animal then being insensible to pain and incapable of
being roused by any form of stimulus; it is, in fact, narcotized
by cold, and is in a state of what may be called "artificial
hibernation." once again this is explained by the fact that the
heat-regulating mechanism has been interfered with. similar results
have been obtained from experiments on cats. these facts—with
many others—tend to show that the power of maintaining a constant
temperature has been a gradual development, as darwin's theory of
evolution suggests, and that anything that interferes with the due
working of the higher nerve-centres puts the animal back again, for
the time being, on to a lower plane of evolution.
chart showing diurnal variation in body temperature,
ranging from about .° c. from  a.m. to  p.m., and falling to
about .° c. from  a.m to  a.m.
variations in the temperature of man and some other
animals.—as stated above, the temperature of warm-blooded animals
is maintained with but slight variation. in health under normal
conditions the temperature of man varies between ° c. and ° c.,
or if the thermometer be placed in the axilla, between .° c. and
.° c. in the mouth the reading would be from .° c. to .° c.
higher than this; and in the rectum some .° c. higher still. the
temperature of infants and young children has a much greater range
than this, and is susceptible of wide divergencies from comparatively
slight causes.
of the lower warm-blooded animals, there are some that appear to be
cold-blooded at birth. kittens, rabbits and puppies, if removed from
their surroundings shortly after birth, lose their body heat until
their temperature has fallen to within a few degrees of that of the
surrounding air. but such animals are at birth blind, helpless and in
some cases naked. animals who are born when in a condition of greater
development can maintain their temperature fairly constant. in strong,
healthy infants a day or two old the temperature rises slightly, but
in that of weakly, ill-developed children it either remains stationary
or falls. the cause of the variable temperature in infants and
young immature animals is the imperfect development of the nervous
regulating mechanism.
the average temperature falls slightly from infancy to puberty and
again from puberty to middle age, but after that stage is passed the
temperature begins to rise again, and by about the eightieth year is
as high as in infancy. a diurnal variation has been observed dependent
on the periods of rest and activity, the maximum ranging from  a.m.
to  p.m., the minimum from  p.m. to  a.m. sutherland simpson and
j. j. galbraith have recently done much work on this subject. in their
first experiments they showed that in a monkey there is a well-marked
and regular diurnal variation of the body temperature, and that by
reversing the daily routine this diurnal variation is also reversed.
the diurnal temperature curve follows the periods of rest and
activity, and is not dependent on the incidence of day and night; in
monkeys which are active during the night and resting during the day,
the body temperature is highest at night and lowest through the day.
they then made observations on the temperature of animals and birds of
nocturnal habit, where the periods of rest and activity are naturally
the reverse of the ordinary through habit and not from outside
interference. they found that in nocturnal birds the temperature
is highest during the natural period of activity (night) and lowest
during the period of rest (day), but that the mean temperature is
lower and the range less than in diurnal birds of the same size. that
the temperature curve of diurnal birds is essentially similar to that
of man and other homoiothermal animals, except that the maximum occurs
earlier in the afternoon and the minimum earlier in the morning. also
that the curves obtained from rabbit, guinea-pig and dog were quite
similar to those from man. the mean temperature of the female was
higher than that of the male in all the species examined whose sex had
been determined.
meals sometimes cause a slight elevation, sometimes a slight
depression—alcohol seems always to produce a fall. exercise
[v. p.]
and variations of external temperature within ordinary
limits cause very slight change, as there are many compensating
influences at work, which are discussed later. even from very active
exercise the temperature does not rise more than one degree, and if
carried to exhaustion a fall is observed. in travelling from very cold
to very hot regions a variation of less than one degree occurs,
and the temperature of those living in the tropics is practically
identical with those dwelling in the arctic regions.
limits compatible with life.—there are limits both of heat and
cold that a warm-blooded animal can bear, and other far wider limits
that a cold-blooded animal may endure and yet live. the effect of
too extreme a cold is to lessen metabolism, and hence to lessen the
production of heat. both katabolic and anabolic changes share in the
depression, and though less energy is used up, still less energy
is generated. this diminished metabolism tells first on the central
nervous system, especially the brain and those parts concerned
in consciousness. both heart-beat and respiration-number become
diminished, drowsiness supervenes, becoming steadily deeper until it
passes into the sleep of death. occasionally, however, convulsions
may set in towards the end, and a death somewhat similar to that of
asphyxia takes place. in some recent experiments on cats performed
by sutherland simpson and percy t. herring, they found them unable to
survive when the rectal temperature was reduced below ° c. at
this low temperature respiration became increasingly feeble, the
heart-impulse usually continued after respiration had ceased, the
beats becoming very irregular, apparently ceasing, then beginning
again. death appeared to be mainly due to asphyxia, and the only
certain sign that it had taken place was the loss of knee jerks. on
the other hand, too high a temperature hurries on the metabolism
of the various tissues at such a rate that their capital is soon
exhausted. blood that is too warm produces dyspnoea and soon exhausts
the metabolic capital of the respiratory centre. the rate of the heart
is quickened, the beats then become irregular and finally cease. the
central nervous system is also profoundly affected, consciousness may
be lost, and the patient falls into a comatose condition, or delirium
and convulsions may set in. all these changes can be watched in any
patient suffering from an acute fever. the lower limit of temperature
that man can endure depends on many things, but no one can survive
a temperature of ° c. (° f.) or above for very long. mammalian
muscle becomes rigid with heat rigor at about ° c., and obviously
should this temperature be reached the sudden rigidity of the whole
body would render life impossible. h. m. vernon has recently done work
on the death temperature and paralysis temperature (temperature of
heat rigor) of various animals. he found that animals of the same
class of the animal kingdom showed very similar temperature values,
those from the amphibia examined being .° c., fishes °, reptilia
°, and various molluscs °. also in the case of pelagic animals he
showed a relation between death temperature and the quantity of
solid constituents of the body, cestus having lowest death
temperature and least amount of solids in its body. but in the higher
animals his experiments tend to show that there is greater variation
in both the chemical and physical characters of the protoplasm, and
hence greater variation in the extreme temperature compatible with
life.
regulation of temperature.—the heat of the body is generated
by the chemical changes—those of oxidation—undergone not by any
particular substance or in any one place, but by the tissues at large.
wherever destructive metabolism (katabolism) is going on, heat is
being set free. when a muscle does work it also gives rise to heat,
and if this is estimated it can be shown that the muscles alone during
their contractions provide far more heat than the whole amount given
out by the body. also it must be remembered that the heart—also a
muscle,—never resting, does in the  hours no inconsiderable amount
of work, and hence must give rise to no inconsiderable amount of heat.
from this it is clear that the larger proportion of total heat of
the body is supplied by the muscles. these are essentially the
"thermogenic tissues." next to the muscles as heat generators come the
various secretory glands, especially the liver, which appears never to
rest in this respect. the brain also must be a source of heat, since
its temperature is higher than that of the arterial blood with which
it is supplied. also a certain amount of heat is produced by the
changes which the food undergoes in the alimentary canal before it
really enters the body. but heat while continually being produced is
also continually being lost by the skin, lungs, urine and faeces.
and it is by the constant modification of these two factors, ()
heat production and () heat loss, that the constant temperature of
a warm-blooded animal is maintained. heat is lost to the body through
the faeces and urine, respiration, conduction and radiation from
the skin, and by evaporation of perspiration. the following are
approximately the relative amounts of heat lost through these
various channels (different authorities give somewhat different
figures):—faeces and urine about , respiration about , skin
(conduction, radiation and evaporation) about . hence it is clear
the chief means of loss are the skin and the lungs. the more air that
passes in and out of the lungs in a given time, the greater the loss
of heat. and in such animals as the dog, who do not perspire easily by
the skin, respiration becomes far more important.
but for man the great heat regulator is undoubtedly the skin, which
regulates heat loss by its vasomotor mechanism, and also by the
nervous mechanism of perspiration. dilatation of the cutaneous
vascular areas leads to a larger flow of blood through the skin, and
so tends to cool the body, and vice versa. also the special
nerves of perspiration can increase or lessen heat loss by promoting
or diminishing the secretions of the skin. there are greater
difficulties in the exact determination in the amount of heat
produced, but there are certain well-known facts in connexion with it.
a larger living body naturally produces more heat than a smaller one
of the same nature, but the surface of the smaller, being greater in
proportion to its bulk than that of the larger, loses heat at a more
rapid rate. hence to maintain the same constant bodily temperature,
the smaller animal must produce a relatively larger amount of heat.
and in the struggle for existence this has become so.
food temporarily increases the production of heat, the rate of
production steadily rising after a meal until a maximum is reached
from about the th to the th hour. if sugar be included in the meal
the maximum is reached earlier; if mainly fat, later. muscular work
very largely increases the production of heat, and hence the more
active the body the greater the production of heat.
but all the arrangements in the animal economy for the production and
loss of heat are themselves probably regulated by the central nervous
system, there being a thermogenic centre—situated above the spinal
cord, and according to some observers in the optic thalamus.
authorities.—m. s. pembrey, "animal heat," in schafer's textbook of
physiology (); c. r. richet, "chaleur," in dictionnaire
de physiologie (paris, ); hale white, croonian lectures,
lancet, london, ; pembrey and nicol, journal of
physiology, vol. xxiii., -; h. m. vernon, "heat rigor,"
journal of physiology, xxiv., ; h. m. vernon, "death
temperatures," journal of physiology, xxv., ; f. c. eve,
"temperature on nerve cells," journal of physiology, xxvi.,
; g. weiss, comptes rendus, soc. de biol., lii., ;
swale vincent and thomas lewis, "heat rigor of muscle," journal of
physiology, ; sutherland simpson and percy herring, "cold
and reflex action," journal of physiology, ; sutherland simpson,
proceedings of physiological soc., july , ; sutherland
simpson and j. j. galbraith, "diurnal variation of body temperature,"
journal of physiology, ; transactions royal society
edinburgh, ; proc. physiological society, p. xx., ;
a. e. boycott and j. s. haldane, effects of high temperatures on
man.
animal worship, an ill-defined term, covering facts ranging from the
worship of the real divine animal, commonly conceived as a "god-body,"
at one end of the scale, to respect for the bones of a slain animal or
even the use of a respectful name for the living animal at the other
end. added to this, in many works on the subject we find reliance
placed, especially for the african facts, on reports of travellers who
were merely visitors to the regions on which they wrote.
[v. p.]
classification.—animal cults may be classified in two ways:
(a) according to their outward form; (b) according to their inward
meaning, which may of course undergo transformations.
(a) there are two broad divisions: () all animals of a given species
are sacred, perhaps owing to the impossibility of distinguishing the
sacred few from the profane crowd; () one or a fixed number of a
species are sacred. it is probable that the first of these forms is
the primary one and the second in most cases a development from it due
to (i.) the influence of other individual cults, (ii.) anthropomorphic
tendencies, (iii.) the influence of chieftainship, hereditary and
otherwise, (iv.) annual sacrifice of the sacred animal and mystical
ideas connected therewith, (v.) syncretism, due either to unity of
function or to a philosophic unification, (vi.) the desire to do
honour to the species in the person of one of its members, and
possibly other less easily traceable causes.
(b) treating cults according to their meaning, which is not
necessarily identical with the cause which first led to the
deification of the animal in question, we can classify them under ten
specific heads: (i.) pastoral cults; (ii.) hunting cults; (iii.) cults
of dangerous or noxious animals; (iv.) cults of animals regarded as
human souls or their embodiment; (v.) totemistic cults; (vi.) cults
of secret societies, and individual cults of tutelary animals;
(vii.) cults of tree and vegetation spirits; (viii.) cults of ominous
animals; (ix.) cults, probably derivative, of animals associated with
certain deities; (x.) cults of animals used in magic.
(i.) the pastoral type falls into two sub-types, in which the species
(a) is spared and (b) sometimes receives special
honour at intervals in the person of an individual. (see cattle,
buffalo, below.)
(ii.) in hunting cults the species is habitually killed, but
(a) occasionally honoured in the person of a single individual,
or (b) each slaughtered animal receives divine honours. (see
bear, below.)
(iii.) the cult of dangerous animals is due (a) to the fear
that the soul of the slain beast may take vengeance on the hunter,
(b) to a desire to placate the rest of the species. (see
leopard, below.)
(iv.) animals are frequently regarded as the abode, temporary or
permanent, of the souls of the dead, sometimes as the actual souls of
the dead. respect for them is due to two main reasons: (a)
the kinsmen of the dead desire to preserve the goodwill of their dead
relatives; (b) they wish at the same time to secure that their
kinsmen are not molested and caused to undergo unnecessary suffering.
(see serpent, below.)
(v.) one of the most widely found modes of showing respect to animals
is known as totemism (see totem and totemism), but except in decadent
forms there is but little positive worship; in central australia,
however, the rites of the wollunqua totem group are directed towards
placating this mythical animal, and cannot be termed anything but
religious ceremonies.
(vi.) in secret societies we find bodies of men grouped together with
a single tutelary animal; the individual, in the same way, acquires
the nagual or individual totem, sometimes by ceremonies of the nature
of the bloodbond.
(vii.) spirits of vegetation in ancient and modern europe and in china
are conceived in animal form. (see goat, below.)
(viii.) the ominous animal or bird may develop into a deity. (see
hawk, below.)
(ix.) it is commonly assumed that the animals associated with certain
deities are sacred because the god was originally theriomorphic; this
is doubtless the case in certain instances; but apollo smintheus,
dionysus bassareus and other examples seem to show that the god may
have been appealed to for help and thus become associated with the
animals from whom he protected the crops, &c.
(x.) the use of animals in magic may sometimes give rise to a kind
of respect for them, but this is of a negative nature. see, however,
articles by preuss in globus, vol. lxvii., in which he
maintains that animals of magical influence are elevated into
divinities.
animal cults.
bear.—the bear enjoys a large measure of respect from all
savage races that come in contact with it, which shows itself
in apologies and in festivals in its honour. the most important
developments of the cult are in east asia among the siberian tribes;
among the ainu of sakhalin a young bear is caught at the end of winter
and fed for some nine months; then after receiving honours it is
killed, and the people, who previously show marks of grief at its
approaching fate, dance merrily and feast on its body. among the
gilyaks a similar festival is found, but here it takes the form of a
celebration in honour of a recently dead kinsman, to whom the spirit
of the bear is sent. whether this feature or a cult of the hunting
type was the primary form, is so far an open question. there is a good
deal of evidence to connect the greek goddess artemis with a cult of
the bear; girls danced as "bears" in her honour, and might not marry
before undergoing this ceremony. the bear is traditionally associated
with bern in switzerland, and in  a statue of artio, a bear
goddess, was dug up there.
buffalo.—the todas of s. india abstain from the flesh of their
domestic animal, the buffalo; but once a year they sacrifice a bull
calf, which is eaten in the forest by the adult males.
cattle.—cattle are respected by many pastoral peoples; they
live on milk or game, and the killing of an ox is a sacrificial
function. conspicuous among egyptian animal cults was that of the
bull, apis. it was distinguished by certain marks, and when the old
apis died a new one was sought; the finder was rewarded, and the
bull underwent four months' education at nilopolis. its birthday
was celebrated once a year; oxen, which had to be pure white, were
sacrificed to it; women were forbidden to approach it when once its
education was finished. oracles were obtained from it in various
ways. after death it was mummified and buried in a rock-tomb. less
widespread was the cult of the mnevis, also consecrated to osiris.
similar observances are found in our own day on the upper nile; the
nuba and nuer worship the bull; the angoni of central africa and the
sakalava of madagascar keep sacred bulls. in india respect for the
cow is widespread, but is of post-vedic origin; there is little actual
worship, but the products of the cow are important in magic.
crow.—the crow is the chief deity of the thlinkit indians of
n.w. america; and all over that region it is the chief figure in a
group of myths, fulfilling the office of a culture hero who brings
the light, gives fire to mankind, &c. together with the eagle-hawk the
crow plays a great part in the mythology of s.e. australia.
dog.—actual dog-worship is uncommon; the nosarii of western
asia are said to worship a dog; the kalangs of java had a cult of
the red dog, each family keeping one in the house; according to one
authority the dogs are images of wood which are worshipped after the
death of a member of the family and burnt after a thousand days.
in nepal it is said that dogs are worshipped at the festival called
khicha puja. among the harranians dogs were sacred, but this was
rather as brothers of the mystae.
elephant.—in siam it is believed that a white elephant may
contain the soul of a dead person, perhaps a buddha; when one is taken
the capturer is rewarded and the animal brought to the king to be kept
ever afterwards; it cannot be bought or sold. it is baptized and fêted
and mourned for like a human being at its death. in some parts of
indo-china the belief is that the soul of the elephant may injure
people after death; it is therefore fêted by a whole village. in
cambodia it is held to bring luck to the kingdom. in sumatra the
elephant is regarded as a tutelary spirit. the cult of the white
elephant is also found at ennarea, southern abyssinia.
fish.—dagon seems to have been a fish-god with human head and
hands; his worshippers wore fish-skins. in the temples of apollo and
aphrodite were sacred fish, which may point to a fish cult. atargatis
is said to have had sacred fish at askelon, and from xenophon we read
that the fish of the chalus were regarded as gods.
goat.—dionysus was believed to take the form of a goat,
probably as a divinity of vegetation. pan, silenus, the satyrs and the
fauns were either capriform or had some part of their bodies shaped
like that of a goat. in northern europe the wood spirit, ljesche, is
believed to have a goat's horns, ears and legs. in africa the bijagos
are said to have a goat as their principal divinity.
hare.—in north america the algonquin tribes had as their chief
deity a "mighty great hare" to whom they went at death. according to
one account he lived in the east, according to another in the north.
in his anthropomorphized form he was known as menabosho or michabo.
hawk.—in north borneo we seem to see the evolution of a
[v. p.]
god in the three stages of the cult of the hawk among
the kenyahs, the kayans and the sea dyaks. the kenyahs will not kill
it, address to it thanks for assistance, and formally consult it
before leaving home on an expedition; it seems, however, to be
regarded as the messenger of the supreme god balli penyalong. the
kayans have a hawk-god, laki neho, but seem to regard the hawk as
the servant of the chief god, laki tenangan. singalang burong, the
hawk-god of the dyaks, is completely anthropomorphized. he is god of
omens and ruler of the omen birds; but the hawk is not his messenger,
for he never leaves his house; stories are, however, told of his
attending feasts in human form and flying away in hawk form when all
was over.
horse.—there is some reason to believe that poseidon, like
other water gods, was originally conceived under the form of a horse.
in the cave of phigalia demeter was, according to popular tradition,
represented with the head and mane of a horse, possibly a relic of the
time when a non-specialized corn-spirit bore this form. her priests
were called poloi (colts) in laconia. in gaul we find a horse-goddess,
epona; there are also traces of a horse-god, rudiobus. the gonds in
india worship a horse-god, koda pen, in the form of a shapeless stone;
but it is not clear that the horse is regarded as divine. the horse or
