dyrrachium dyrrhachium peiræum piræum
eetioneia eetionea phyle phylæ
egypt ægyptus pisa pisæ
eresus eressus pylus pylos
erytheia erythia thessaly thessalia
helus helos thrace thracia
by comparing in the same way the place-names in gibbon's and other
histories, the reader will need no glossarist in using the atlas to
lighten their geographical allusions. it is not only when he comes
to actual wars, campaigns and sieges that he will find a working
chart of advantage. when he reads in grote of the ionic colonization
of asia minor, and wishes to relate the later view of its complex
process to the much simpler account given by herodotus, he gains
equally by having a map of the region before him.
we realize how grote himself worked over his topographical notes,
eking out his own observations with map, scale and compass, when we
read his preliminary survey of greece, in the second volume of his
history. “greece proper lies between the th and th parallels
of north latitude and between the st and th degrees of east
longitude. its greatest length, from mount olympus to cape tænarus,
may be stated at  english miles; its greatest breadth, from the
western coast of akarnania to marathon in attica, at  miles; and
the distance eastward from ambrakia across pindus to the magnesian
mountain homolê and the mouth of
the peneius is about  miles. altogether its area is somewhat less
than that of portugal.” but as to the exact limits of greece
proper, he points out that these limits seem not to have been very
precisely defined even among the greeks themselves.
the chain called olympus and the cambunian mountains, ranging east
and west and commencing with the ægean
sea or the gulf of therma near the fortieth degree of north latitude,
grote continues, “is prolonged under the name of mount lingon until
it touches the adriatic at the akrokeraunian promontory. the country
south of this chain comprehended all that in ancient times was
regarded as greece or hellas proper, but it also comprehended
something more. hellas proper (or continuous hellas, to use
the language of skylax and dikæarchus)
was understood to begin with the town and gulf of ambrakia : from
thence northward to the akrokeraunian promontory lay the land called
by the greeks epirus — occupied by the chaonians, molossians, and
thesprotians, who were termed epirots and were not esteemed to belong
to the hellenic aggregate.”
beside this survey of hellas proper or continuous hellas, as grote
presented it, he set the word-map of italy that gibbon draws —
 italy changing its face under the roman civilization: “before the
roman conquest, the country which is now
called lombardy was not considered as a part of italy. it had
been occupied by a powerful colony of gauls, who, settling
themselves along the banks of the po, from piedmont to
romagna, carried their arms and diffused their name from
the alps to the apennine. the ligurians dwelt on the
rocky coast, which now forms the republic of genoa. venice
was yet unborn; but the territories of that state, which lie to
the east of the adige, were habited by the venetians. the
middle part of the peninsula, that now composes the duchy
of tuscany and the ecclesiastical state, was the ancient seat of
the etruscans and umbrians; to the former of whom italy
was indebted for the first rudiments of a civilized life. the
tiber rolled at the foot of the seven hills of rome, and the
country of the sabines, the latins, and the volsci, from that
river to the frontiers of naples, was the theatre of her infant
victories. on that celebrated ground the first consuls deserved
triumphs, their successors adorned villas, and their posterity
have erected convents. capua and campania possessed the
immediate territory of naples; the rest of the kingdom was
inhabited by many warlike nations, the marsi, the samnites,
the apulians, and the lucanians; and the sea-coasts had been
covered by the flourishing colonies of the greeks. we may
remark, that when augustus divided italy into eleven regions,
the little province of istria was annexed to that seat of roman
sovereignty."
as we see by this topical extract, gibbon's practice in the
use of latin place-names is very much freer than grote's in
the use of the greek. a few comparative instances from
the atlas will suffice:
gibbon's spelling classical atlas gibbon's spelling classical atlas
antioch antiochia naples neapolis prius
apennines apenninus parthenope
dardenellcs hellespontus osrhoene osroene
ctesiphon ctesipon thrace thracia
egypt ægyptus ostia ostia
gau gaula cordova corduba
genoa genua
among other works which the present atlas will help to
illustrate, editions of gibbon's "decline and fall of the
roman empire," and of merivale's roman history which
leads up to it, are already in preparation; it is hoped to
publish in the series also an edition of herodotus, the father
of the recorders of history and geography, who realized almost
as well as did freeman the application of the two records, one
to another. the good service of the classical atlas, however
is not defined by any possible extension of everyman's
library. the maps of palestine in the time of our lord
and under the older jewish dispensation, of africa and of
egypt, and that, now newly added, of the migrations of the
barbarians, and the full index, give it the value of a gazetteer
in brief of the ancient world, well adapted to come into the
general use of schools where an inexpensive work of the kind
in compact form has long been needed.
the present atlas has the advantage of being the result
of the successive labour of many hands. its original author
was dr. samuel butler, sometime head-master of shrewsbury
school and afterwards bishop of lichfield and coventry. he
edited aeschylus, and was in his way a famous geographer.
the work was at a later date twice revised, and its maps were
re-drawn, under the editorship of his son. it has now been
again revised and enlarged to suit the special needs of this
series.
index to the classical atlas
abacænum to acimincum
iolcos to lactodorum
acinasis, fl. to ægiale
lactura to leusaba
ægialus to aliso
leusinum to macomada syrtium
alisontia, fl. to angitula, fl.
macomades to mastusia, pr.
angli to aquæ neri
masulibium horrea to methora
aquæ originis to ariolica
methydrium to naharvali
ariolica to atlas montes
naharvali, l. to noviodunum
atræ to bandrobrica
noviodunum to orcynius saltus
bandusiæ, fons to bythinia
ordessus vel ardiscus, fl. to paran, desert of
bythinium to cæc metellæ, sep.
paran vel faran to pharnacotus, fl.
cæciliana to carasa
pharpar, r. to platanistus, pr.
caravis to celenderis
platanodes, pr. to purpurariæ, i
celetrum to chrysas, fl.
putea nigra to rubricatus, fl.
chrysopolis to combretonium
rucantii to sanetio
combria to crissæus sinus
sanigæ to segusio
crithote, pr. to deba
segustero to sinnus, fl.
debeltus to duria minor, fl.
sinonia, i. to suinas, fl.
durius, fl. to eristum
suindinum to taxila
erite to forum egurrorum
taygetus, m. to thuria
forum fulvii vel valentinum to germanicus oceanus
thuria to tricornium
geronthræ to helicea
tricrana, i. to uscosium
helicon, m. to horrea cælia
uscudama to viminacium
horrea publica to inui castrum
viminalis, m. to zyrinæ
end of the project gutenberg ebook of the atlas of ancient and classical
geography, by samuel butler
***** this file should be named -h.htm or -h.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
 http://www.gutenberg.org//////
produced by mike calder-smith
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).
section . general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph .e..
.b. "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph .c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works. see paragraph .e below.
.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
.e.. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs .e.
through .e. or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs .e. or
.e.. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs .e. through .e. and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
.e.. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
.e.. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .e. with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
.e.. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph .e..
.e.. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph .e. or .e..
.e.. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- you pay a royalty fee of % of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is
 owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
 has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
 project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments
 must be paid within  days following each date on which you
 prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
 returns. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
 sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
 address specified in section , "information about donations to
 the project gutenberg literary archive foundation."
- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
 you in writing (or by e-mail) within  days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
 license. you must require such a user to return or
 destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
 and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
 project gutenberg-tm works.
- you provide, in accordance with paragraph .f., a full refund of any
 money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within  days
 of receipt of the work.
- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.
.e.. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the
foundation as set forth in section  below.
.f.. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
.f.. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right
of replacement or refund" described in paragraph .f., the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
.f.. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within  days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
.f.. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph .f., this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
.f.. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
.f.. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.
section . information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm
project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in , the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations.
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections  and 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
section . information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
(c)() educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification
number is -. its (c)() letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state's laws.
the foundation's principal office is located at  melan dr. s.
fairbanks, ak, ., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at
 north  west, salt lake city, ut , () -, email
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official
