 “what are we to do, then?”
 “get down, pass through the footmen and lackeys, and enter the tailor’s
 house, which i will answer for our doing, if you go first.”
 “come along, then,” said porthos.
 they accordingly alighted and made their way on foot towards the
 establishment. the cause of the confusion was that m. percerin’s doors
 were closed, while a servant, standing before them, was explaining to the
 illustrious customers of the illustrious tailor that just then m. percerin
 could not receive anybody. it was bruited about outside still, on the
 authority of what the great lackey had told some great noble whom he
 favored, in confidence, that m. percerin was engaged on five costumes for
 the king, and that, owing to the urgency of the case, he was meditating in
 his office on the ornaments, colors, and cut of these five suits. some,
 contented with this reason, went away again, contented to repeat the tale
 to others, but others, more tenacious, insisted on having the doors
 opened, and among these last three blue ribbons, intended to take parts in
 a ballet, which would inevitably fail unless the said three had their
 costumes shaped by the very hand of the great percerin himself.
 d’artagnan, pushing on porthos, who scattered the groups of people right
 and left, succeeded in gaining the counter, behind which the journeyman
 tailors were doing their best to answer queries. (we forgot to mention
 that at the door they wanted to put off porthos like the rest, but
 d’artagnan, showing himself, pronounced merely these words, “the king’s
 order,” and was let in with his friend.) the poor fellows had enough to
 do, and did their best, to reply to the demands of the customers in the
 absence of their master, leaving off drawing a stitch to knit a sentence;
 and when wounded pride, or disappointed expectation, brought down upon
 them too cutting a rebuke, he who was attacked made a dive and disappeared
 under the counter. the line of discontented lords formed a truly
 remarkable picture. our captain of musketeers, a man of sure and rapid
 observation, took it all in at a glance; and having run over the groups,
 his eye rested on a man in front of him. this man, seated upon a stool,
 scarcely showed his head above the counter that sheltered him. he was
 about forty years of age, with a melancholy aspect, pale face, and soft
 luminous eyes. he was looking at d’artagnan and the rest, with his chin
 resting upon his hand, like a calm and inquiring amateur. only on
 perceiving, and doubtless recognizing, our captain, he pulled his hat down
 over his eyes. it was this action, perhaps, that attracted d’artagnan’s
 attention. if so, the gentleman who had pulled down his hat produced an
 effect entirely different from what he had desired. in other respects his
 costume was plain, and his hair evenly cut enough for customers, who were
 not close observers, to take him for a mere tailor’s apprentice, perched
 behind the board, and carefully stitching cloth or velvet. nevertheless,
 this man held up his head too often to be very productively employed with
 his fingers. d’artagnan was not deceived,—not he; and he saw at once
 that if this man was working at anything, it certainly was not at velvet.
 “eh!” said he, addressing this man, “and so you have become a tailor’s
 boy, monsieur moliere!”
 “hush, m. d’artagnan!” replied the man, softly, “you will make them
 recognize me.”
 “well, and what harm?”
 “the fact is, there is no harm, but—”
 “you were going to say there is no good in doing it either, is it not so?”
 “alas! no; for i was occupied in examining some excellent figures.”
 “go on—go on, monsieur moliere. i quite understand the interest you
 take in the plates—i will not disturb your studies.”
 “thank you.”
 “but on one condition; that you tell me where m. percerin really is.”
 “oh! willingly; in his own room. only—”
 “only that one can’t enter it?”
 “unapproachable.”
 “for everybody?”
 “everybody. he brought me here so that i might be at my ease to make my
 observations, and then he went away.”
 “well, my dear monsieur moliere, but you will go and tell him i am here.”
 “i!” exclaimed moliere, in the tone of a courageous dog, from which you
 snatch the bone it has legitimately gained; “i disturb myself! ah!
 monsieur d’artagnan, how hard you are upon me!”
 “if you don’t go directly and tell m. percerin that i am here, my dear
 moliere,” said d’artagnan, in a low tone, “i warn you of one thing: that i
 won’t exhibit to you the friend i have brought with me.”
 moliere indicated porthos by an imperceptible gesture, “this gentleman, is
 it not?”
 “yes.”
 moliere fixed upon porthos one of those looks which penetrate the minds
 and hearts of men. the subject doubtless appeared a very promising one,
 for he immediately rose and led the way into the adjoining chamber.
 chapter iv. the patterns.
 during all this time the noble mob was slowly heaving away, leaving at
 every angle of the counter either a murmur or a menace, as the waves leave
 foam or scattered seaweed on the sands, when they retire with the ebbing
 tide. in about ten minutes moliere reappeared, making another sign to
 d’artagnan from under the hangings. the latter hurried after him, with
 porthos in the rear, and after threading a labyrinth of corridors,
 introduced him to m. percerin’s room. the old man, with his sleeves turned
 up, was gathering up in folds a piece of gold-flowered brocade, so as the
 better to exhibit its luster. perceiving d’artagnan, he put the silk
 aside, and came to meet him, by no means radiant with joy, and by no means
 courteous, but, take it altogether, in a tolerably civil manner.
 “the captain of the king’s musketeers will excuse me, i am sure, for i am
 engaged.”
 “eh! yes, on the king’s costumes; i know that, my dear monsieur percerin.
 you are making three, they tell me.”
 “five, my dear sir, five.”
 “three or five, ‘tis all the same to me, my dear monsieur; and i know that
 you will make them most exquisitely.”
 “yes, i know. once made they will be the most beautiful in the world, i do
 not deny it; but that they may be the most beautiful in the word, they
 must first be made; and to do this, captain, i am pressed for time.”
 “oh, bah! there are two days yet; ‘tis much more than you require,
 monsieur percerin,” said d’artagnan, in the coolest possible manner.
 percerin raised his head with the air of a man little accustomed to be
 contradicted, even in his whims; but d’artagnan did not pay the least
 attention to the airs which the illustrious tailor began to assume.
 “my dear m. percerin,” he continued, “i bring you a customer.”
 “ah! ah!” exclaimed percerin, crossly.
 “m. le baron du vallon de bracieux de pierrefonds,” continued d’artagnan.
 percerin attempted a bow, which found no favor in the eyes of the terrible
 porthos, who, from his first entry into the room, had been regarding the
 tailor askance.
 “a very good friend of mine,” concluded d’artagnan.
 “i will attend to monsieur,” said percerin, “but later.”
 “later? but when?”
 “when i have time.”
 “you have already told my valet as much,” broke in porthos,
 discontentedly.
 “very likely,” said percerin; “i am nearly always pushed for time.”
 “my friend,” returned porthos, sententiously, “there is always time to be
 found when one chooses to seek it.”
 percerin turned crimson; an ominous sign indeed in old men blanched by
 age.
 “monsieur is quite at liberty to confer his custom elsewhere.”
 “come, come, percerin,” interposed d’artagnan, “you are not in a good
 temper to-day. well, i will say one more word to you, which will bring you
 on your knees; monsieur is not only a friend of mine, but more, a friend
 of m. fouquet’s.”
 “ah! ah!” exclaimed the tailor, “that is another thing.” then turning to
 porthos, “monsieur le baron is attached to the superintendent?” he
 inquired.
 “i am attached to myself,” shouted porthos, at the very moment that the
 tapestry was raised to introduce a new speaker in the dialogue. moliere
 was all observation, d’artagnan laughed, porthos swore.
 “my dear percerin,” said d’artagnan, “you will make a dress for the baron.
 ‘tis i who ask you.”
 “to you i will not say nay, captain.”
 “but that is not all; you will make it for him at once.”
 “‘tis impossible within eight days.”
 “that, then, is as much as to refuse, because the dress is wanted for the
 fete at vaux.”
 “i repeat that it is impossible,” returned the obstinate old man.
 “by no means, dear monsieur percerin, above all if i ask you,” said
 a mild voice at the door, a silvery voice which made d’artagnan prick up
 his ears. it was the voice of aramis.
 “monsieur d’herblay!” cried the tailor.
 “aramis,” murmured d’artagnan.
 “ah! our bishop!” said porthos.
 “good morning, d’artagnan; good morning, porthos; good-morning, my dear
 friends,” said aramis. “come, come, m. percerin, make the baron’s dress;
 and i will answer for it you will gratify m. fouquet.” and he accompanied
 the words with a sign, which seemed to say, “agree, and dismiss them.”
 it appeared that aramis had over master percerin an influence superior
 even to d’artagnan’s, for the tailor bowed in assent, and turning round
 upon porthos, said, “go and get measured on the other side.”
 porthos colored in a formidable manner. d’artagnan saw the storm coming,
 and addressing moliere, said to him, in an undertone, “you see before you,
 my dear monsieur, a man who considers himself disgraced, if you measure
 the flesh and bones that heaven has given him; study this type for me,
 master aristophanes, and profit by it.”
 moliere had no need of encouragement, and his gaze dwelt long and keenly
 on the baron porthos. “monsieur,” he said, “if you will come with me, i
 will make them take your measure without touching you.”
 “oh!” said porthos, “how do you make that out, my friend?”
 “i say that they shall apply neither line nor rule to the seams of your
 dress. it is a new method we have invented for measuring people of
 quality, who are too sensitive to allow low-born fellows to touch them. we
 know some susceptible persons who will not put up with being measured, a
 process which, as i think, wounds the natural dignity of a man; and if
 perchance monsieur should be one of these—”
 “corboeuf! i believe i am too!”
 “well, that is a capital and most consolatory coincidence, and you shall
 have the benefit of our invention.”
 “but how in the world can it be done?” asked porthos, delighted.
 “monsieur,” said moliere, bowing, “if you will deign to follow me, you
 will see.”
 aramis observed this scene with all his eyes. perhaps he fancied from
 d’artagnan’s liveliness that he would leave with porthos, so as not to
 lose the conclusion of a scene well begun. but, clear-sighted as he was,
 aramis deceived himself. porthos and moliere left together: d’artagnan
 remained with percerin. why? from curiosity, doubtless; probably to enjoy
 a little longer the society of his good friend aramis. as moliere and
 porthos disappeared, d’artagnan drew near the bishop of vannes, a
 proceeding which appeared particularly to disconcert him.
 “a dress for you, also, is it not, my friend?”
 aramis smiled. “no,” said he.
 “you will go to vaux, however?”
 “i shall go, but without a new dress. you forget, dear d’artagnan, that a
 poor bishop of vannes is not rich enough to have new dresses for every fete.”
 “bah!” said the musketeer, laughing, “and do we write no more poems now,
 either?”
 “oh! d’artagnan,” exclaimed aramis, “i have long ago given up all such
 tomfoolery.”
 “true,” repeated d’artagnan, only half convinced. as for percerin, he was
 once more absorbed in contemplation of the brocades.
 “don’t you perceive,” said aramis, smiling, “that we are greatly boring
 this good gentleman, my dear d’artagnan?”
 “ah! ah!” murmured the musketeer, aside; “that is, i am boring you, my
 friend.” then aloud, “well, then, let us leave; i have no further business
 here, and if you are as disengaged as i, aramis—”
 “no, not i—i wished—”
 “ah! you had something particular to say to m. percerin? why did you not
 tell me so at once?”
 “something particular, certainly,” repeated aramis, “but not for you,
 d’artagnan. but, at the same time, i hope you will believe that i can
 never have anything so particular to say that a friend like you may not
 hear it.”
 “oh, no, no! i am going,” said d’artagnan, imparting to his voice an
 evident tone of curiosity; for aramis’s annoyance, well dissembled as it
 was, had not a whit escaped him; and he knew that, in that impenetrable
 mind, every thing, even the most apparently trivial, was designed to some
 end; an unknown one, but an end that, from the knowledge he had of his
 friend’s character, the musketeer felt must be important.
 on his part, aramis saw that d’artagnan was not without suspicion, and
 pressed him. “stay, by all means,” he said, “this is what it is.” then
 turning towards the tailor, “my dear percerin,” said he,—“i am even
 very happy that you are here, d’artagnan.”
 “oh, indeed,” exclaimed the gascon, for the third time, even less deceived
 this time than before.
 percerin never moved. aramis roused him violently, by snatching from his
 hands the stuff upon which he was engaged. “my dear percerin,” said he, “i
 have, near hand, m. lebrun, one of m. fouquet’s painters.”
 “ah, very good,” thought d’artagnan; “but why lebrun?”
 aramis looked at d’artagnan, who seemed to be occupied with an engraving
 of mark antony. “and you wish that i should make him a dress, similar to
 those of the epicureans?” answered percerin. and while saying this, in an
 absent manner, the worthy tailor endeavored to recapture his piece of
 brocade.
 “an epicurean’s dress?” asked d’artagnan, in a tone of inquiry.
 “i see,” said aramis, with a most engaging smile, “it is written that our
 dear d’artagnan shall know all our secrets this evening. yes, friend, you
 have surely heard speak of m. fouquet’s epicureans, have you not?”
 “undoubtedly. is it not a kind of poetical society, of which la fontaine,
 loret, pelisson, and moliere are members, and which holds its sittings at
 saint-mande?”
 “exactly so. well, we are going to put our poets in uniform, and enroll
 them in a regiment for the king.”
 “oh, very well, i understand; a surprise m. fouquet is getting up for the
 king. be at ease; if that is the secret about m. lebrun, i will not
 mention it.”
 “always agreeable, my friend. no, monsieur lebrun has nothing to do with
 this part of it; the secret which concerns him is far more important than
 the other.”
 “then, if it is so important as all that, i prefer not to know it,” said
 d’artagnan, making a show of departure.
 “come in, m. lebrun, come in,” said aramis, opening a side-door with his
 right hand, and holding back d’artagnan with his left.
 “i’faith, i too, am quite in the dark,” quoth percerin.
 aramis took an “opportunity,” as is said in theatrical matters.
 “my dear m. de percerin,” aramis continued, “you are making five dresses
 for the king, are you not? one in brocade; one in hunting-cloth; one in
 velvet; one in satin; and one in florentine stuffs.”
 “yes; but how—do you know all that, monseigneur?” said percerin,
 astounded.
 “it is all very simple, my dear monsieur; there will be a hunt, a banquet,
 concert, promenade and reception; these five kinds of dress are required
 by etiquette.”
 “you know everything, monseigneur!”
 “and a thing or two in addition,” muttered d’artagnan.
 “but,” cried the tailor, in triumph, “what you do not know, monseigneur—prince
 of the church though you are—what nobody will know—what only
 the king, mademoiselle de la valliere, and myself do know, is the color of
 the materials and nature of the ornaments, and the cut, the ensemble,
 the finish of it all!”
 “well,” said aramis, “that is precisely what i have come to ask you, dear
 percerin.”
 “ah, bah!” exclaimed the tailor, terrified, though aramis had pronounced
 these words in his softest and most honeyed tones. the request appeared,
 on reflection, so exaggerated, so ridiculous, so monstrous to m. percerin
 that first he laughed to himself, then aloud, and finished with a shout.
 d’artagnan followed his example, not because he found the matter so “very
 funny,” but in order not to allow aramis to cool.
 “at the outset, i appear to be hazarding an absurd question, do i not?”
 said aramis. “but d’artagnan, who is incarnate wisdom itself, will tell
 you that i could not do otherwise than ask you this.”
 “let us see,” said the attentive musketeer; perceiving with his wonderful
 instinct that they had only been skirmishing till now, and that the hour
 of battle was approaching.
 “let us see,” said percerin, incredulously.
 “why, now,” continued aramis, “does m. fouquet give the king a fete?—is
 it not to please him?”
 “assuredly,” said percerin. d’artagnan nodded assent.
 “by delicate attentions? by some happy device? by a succession of
 surprises, like that of which we were talking?—the enrolment of our
 epicureans.”
 “admirable.”
 “well, then; this is the surprise we intend. m. lebrun here is a man who
 draws most excellently.”
 “yes,” said percerin; “i have seen his pictures, and observed that his
 dresses were highly elaborated. that is why i at once agreed to make him a
 costume—whether to agree with those of the epicureans, or an
 original one.”
 “my dear monsieur, we accept your offer, and shall presently avail
 ourselves of it; but just now, m. lebrun is not in want of the dresses you
 will make for himself, but of those you are making for the king.”
 percerin made a bound backwards, which d’artagnan—calmest and most
 appreciative of men, did not consider overdone, so many strange and
 startling aspects wore the proposal which aramis had just hazarded. “the
 king’s dresses! give the king’s dresses to any mortal whatever! oh! for
 once, monseigneur, your grace is mad!” cried the poor tailor in extremity.
 “help me now, d’artagnan,” said aramis, more and more calm and smiling.
 “help me now to persuade monsieur, for you understand; do you not?”
 “eh! eh!—not exactly, i declare.”
 “what! you do not understand that m. fouquet wishes to afford the king the
 surprise of finding his portrait on his arrival at vaux; and that the
 portrait, which be a striking resemblance, ought to be dressed exactly as
 the king will be on the day it is shown?”
 “oh! yes, yes,” said the musketeer, nearly convinced, so plausible was
 this reasoning. “yes, my dear aramis, you are right; it is a happy idea. i
 will wager it is one of your own, aramis.”
 “well, i don’t know,” replied the bishop; “either mine or m. fouquet’s.”
 then scanning percerin, after noticing d’artagnan’s hesitation, “well,
 monsieur percerin,” he asked, “what do you say to this?”
 “i say, that—”
 “that you are, doubtless, free to refuse. i know well—and i by no
 means count upon compelling you, my dear monsieur. i will say more, i even
 understand all the delicacy you feel in taking up with m. fouquet’s idea;
 you dread appearing to flatter the king. a noble spirit, m. percerin, a
 noble spirit!” the tailor stammered. “it would, indeed, be a very pretty
 compliment to pay the young prince,” continued aramis; “but as the
 surintendant told me, ‘if percerin refuse, tell him that it will not at
 all lower him in my opinion, and i shall always esteem him, only—‘”
 “‘only?’” repeated percerin, rather troubled.
 “‘only,’” continued aramis, “‘i shall be compelled to say to the king,’—you
 understand, my dear monsieur percerin, that these are m. fouquet’s words,—‘i
 shall be constrained to say to the king, “sire, i had intended to present
 your majesty with your portrait, but owing to a feeling of delicacy,
 slightly exaggerated perhaps, although creditable, m. percerin opposed the
 project.”’”
 “opposed!” cried the tailor, terrified at the responsibility which would
 weigh upon him; “i to oppose the desire, the will of m. fouquet when he is
 seeking to please the king! oh, what a hateful word you have uttered,
 monseigneur. oppose! oh, ‘tis not i who said it, heaven have mercy on me.
 i call the captain of the musketeers to witness it! is it not true,
 monsieur d’artagnan, that i have opposed nothing?”
 d’artagnan made a sign indicating that he wished to remain neutral. he
 felt that there was an intrigue at the bottom of it, whether comedy or
 tragedy; he was at his wit’s end at not being able to fathom it, but in
 the meanwhile wished to keep clear.
 but already percerin, goaded by the idea that the king was to be told he
 stood in the way of a pleasant surprise, had offered lebrun a chair, and
 proceeded to bring from a wardrobe four magnificent dresses, the fifth
 being still in the workmen’s hands; and these masterpieces he successively
 fitted upon four lay figures, which, imported into france in the time of
 concini, had been given to percerin ii. by marshal d’onore, after the
 discomfiture of the italian tailors ruined in their competition. the
 painter set to work to draw and then to paint the dresses. but aramis, who
 was closely watching all the phases of his toil, suddenly stopped him.
 “i think you have not quite got it, my dear lebrun,” he said; “your colors
 will deceive you, and on canvas we shall lack that exact resemblance which
 is absolutely requisite. time is necessary for attentively observing the
 finer shades.”
 “quite true,” said percerin, “but time is wanting, and on that head, you
 will agree with me, monseigneur, i can do nothing.”
 “then the affair will fail,” said aramis, quietly, “and that because of a
 want of precision in the colors.”
 nevertheless lebrun went on copying the materials and ornaments with the
 closest fidelity—a process which aramis watched with ill-concealed
 impatience.
 “what in the world, now, is the meaning of this imbroglio?” the musketeer
 kept saying to himself.
 “that will never do,” said aramis: “m. lebrun, close your box, and roll up
 your canvas.”
 “but, monsieur,” cried the vexed painter, “the light is abominable here.”
 “an idea, m. lebrun, an idea! if we had a pattern of the materials, for
 example, and with time, and a better light—”
 “oh, then,” cried lebrun, “i would answer for the effect.”
 “good!” said d’artagnan, “this ought to be the knotty point of the whole
 thing; they want a pattern of each of the materials. mordioux! will
 this percerin give in now?”
 percerin, beaten from his last retreat, and duped, moreover, by the
 feigned good-nature of aramis, cut out five patterns and handed them to
 the bishop of vannes.
 “i like this better. that is your opinion, is it not?” said aramis to
 d’artagnan.
 “my dear aramis,” said d’artagnan, “my opinion is that you are always the
 same.”
 “and, consequently, always your friend,” said the bishop in a charming
 tone.
 “yes, yes,” said d’artagnan, aloud; then, in a low voice, “if i am your
 dupe, double jesuit that you are, i will not be your accomplice; and to
 prevent it, ‘tis time i left this place.—adieu, aramis,” he added
 aloud, “adieu; i am going to rejoin porthos.”
 “then wait for me,” said aramis, pocketing the patterns, “for i have done,
 and shall be glad to say a parting word to our dear old friend.”
 lebrun packed up his paints and brushes, percerin put back the dresses
 into the closet, aramis put his hand on his pocket to assure himself the
 patterns were secure,—and they all left the study.
 chapter v. where, probably, moliere obtained his first idea of the
 bourgeois gentilhomme.
 d’artagnan found porthos in the adjoining chamber; but no longer an
 irritated porthos, or a disappointed porthos, but porthos radiant,
 blooming, fascinating, and chattering with moliere, who was looking upon
 him with a species of idolatry, and as a man would who had not only never
 seen anything greater, but not even ever anything so great. aramis went
 straight up to porthos and offered him his white hand, which lost itself
 in the gigantic clasp of his old friend,—an operation which aramis
 never hazarded without a certain uneasiness. but the friendly pressure
 having been performed not too painfully for him, the bishop of vannes
 passed over to moliere.
 “well, monsieur,” said he, “will you come with me to saint-mande?”
 “i will go anywhere you like, monseigneur,” answered moliere.
 “to saint-mande!” cried porthos, surprised at seeing the proud bishop of
 vannes fraternizing with a journeyman tailor. “what, aramis, are you going
 to take this gentleman to saint-mande?”
 “yes,” said aramis, smiling, “our work is pressing.”
 “and besides, my dear porthos,” continued d’artagnan, “m. moliere is not
 altogether what he seems.”
 “in what way?” asked porthos.
 “why, this gentleman is one of m. percerin’s chief clerks, and is expected
 at saint-mande to try on the dresses which m. fouquet has ordered for the
 epicureans.”
 “‘tis precisely so,” said moliere.
 “yes, monsieur.”
 “come, then, my dear m. moliere,” said aramis, “that is, if you have done
 with m. du vallon.”
 “we have finished,” replied porthos.
 “and you are satisfied?” asked d’artagnan.
 “completely so,” replied porthos.
 moliere took his leave of porthos with much ceremony, and grasped the hand
 which the captain of the musketeers furtively offered him.
 “pray, monsieur,” concluded porthos, mincingly, “above all, be exact.”
 “you will have your dress the day after to-morrow, monsieur le baron,”
 answered moliere. and he left with aramis.
 then d’artagnan, taking porthos’s arm, “what has this tailor done for you,
 my dear porthos,” he asked, “that you are so pleased with him?”
 “what has he done for me, my friend! done for me!” cried porthos,
 enthusiastically.
 “yes, i ask you, what has he done for you?”
 “my friend, he has done that which no tailor ever yet accomplished: he has
 taken my measure without touching me!”
 “ah, bah! tell me how he did it.”
 “first, then, they went, i don’t know where, for a number of lay figures,
 of all heights and sizes, hoping there would be one to suit mine, but the
 largest—that of the drum-major of the swiss guard—was two
 inches too short, and a half foot too narrow in the chest.”
 “indeed!”
 “it is exactly as i tell you, d’artagnan; but he is a great man, or at the
 very least a great tailor, is this m. moliere. he was not at all put at
 fault by the circumstance.”
 “what did he do, then?”
 “oh! it is a very simple matter. i’faith, ‘tis an unheard-of thing that
 people should have been so stupid as not to have discovered this method
 from the first. what annoyance and humiliation they would have spared me!”
 “not to mention of the costumes, my dear porthos.”
 “yes, thirty dresses.”
 “well, my dear porthos, come, tell me m. moliere’s plan.”
 “moliere? you call him so, do you? i shall make a point of recollecting
 his name.”
 “yes; or poquelin, if you prefer that.”
 “no; i like moliere best. when i wish to recollect his name, i shall think
 of voliere [an aviary]; and as i have one at pierrefonds—”
 “capital!” returned d’artagnan. “and m. moliere’s plan?”
 “‘tis this: instead of pulling me to pieces, as all these rascals do—of
 making me bend my back, and double my joints—all of them low and
 dishonorable practices—” d’artagnan made a sign of approbation with
 his head. “‘monsieur,’ he said to me,” continued porthos, “‘a gentleman
 ought to measure himself. do me the pleasure to draw near this glass;’ and
 i drew near the glass. i must own i did not exactly understand what this
 good m. voliere wanted with me.”
 “moliere!”
 “ah! yes, moliere—moliere. and as the fear of being measured still
 possessed me, ‘take care,’ said i to him, ‘what you are going to do with
 me; i am very ticklish, i warn you.’ but he, with his soft voice (for he
 is a courteous fellow, we must admit, my friend), he with his soft voice,
 ‘monsieur,’ said he, ‘that your dress may fit you well, it must be made
 according to your figure. your figure is exactly reflected in this mirror.
 we shall take the measure of this reflection.’”
 “in fact,” said d’artagnan, “you saw yourself in the glass; but where did
 they find one in which you could see your whole figure?”
 “my good friend, it is the very glass in which the king is used to look to
 see himself.”
 “yes; but the king is a foot and a half shorter than you are.”
 “ah! well, i know not how that may be; it is, no doubt, a cunning way of
 flattering the king; but the looking-glass was too large for me. ‘tis true
 that its height was made up of three venetian plates of glass, placed one
 above another, and its breadth of three similar parallelograms in
 juxtaposition.”
 “oh, porthos! what excellent words you have command of. where in the word
 did you acquire such a voluminous vocabulary?”
 “at belle-isle. aramis and i had to use such words in our strategic
 studies and castramentative experiments.”
 d’artagnan recoiled, as though the sesquipedalian syllables had knocked
 the breath out of his body.
 “ah! very good. let us return to the looking-glass, my friend.”
 “then, this good m. voliere—”
 “moliere.”
 “yes—moliere—you are right. you will see now, my dear friend,
 that i shall recollect his name quite well. this excellent m. moliere set
 to work tracing out lines on the mirror, with a piece of spanish chalk,
 following in all the make of my arms and my shoulders, all the while
 expounding this maxim, which i thought admirable: ‘it is advisable that a
 dress should not incommode its wearer.’”
 “in reality,” said d’artagnan, “that is an excellent maxim, which is,
 unfortunately, seldom carried out in practice.”
 “that is why i found it all the more astonishing, when he expatiated upon
 it.”
 “ah! he expatiated?”
 “parbleu!”
 “let me hear his theory.”
 “‘seeing that,’ he continued, ‘one may, in awkward circumstances, or in a
 troublesome position, have one’s doublet on one’s shoulder, and not desire
 to take one’s doublet off—‘”
 “true,” said d’artagnan.
 “‘and so,’ continued m. voliere—”
 “moliere.”
 “moliere, yes. ‘and so,’ went on m. moliere, ‘you want to draw your sword,
 monsieur, and you have your doublet on your back. what do you do?’
 “‘i take it off,’ i answered.
 “‘well, no,’ he replied.
 “‘how no?’
 “‘i say that the dress should be so well made, that it will in no way
 encumber you, even in drawing your sword.’
 “‘ah, ah!’
 “‘throw yourself on guard,’ pursued he.
 “i did it with such wondrous firmness, that two panes of glass burst out
 of the window.
 “‘’tis nothing, nothing,’ said he. ‘keep your position.’
 “i raised my left arm in the air, the forearm gracefully bent, the ruffle
 drooping, and my wrist curved, while my right arm, half extended, securely
 covered my wrist with the elbow, and my breast with the wrist.”
 “yes,” said d’artagnan, “‘tis the true guard—the academic guard.”
 “you have said the very word, dear friend. in the meanwhile, voliere—”
 “moliere.”
 “hold! i should certainly, after all, prefer to call him—what did
 you say his other name was?”
 “poquelin.”
 “i prefer to call him poquelin.”
 “and how will you remember this name better than the other?”
 “you understand, he calls himself poquelin, does he not?”
 “yes.”
 “if i were to call to mind madame coquenard.”
 “good.”
 “and change coc into poc, nard into lin; and
 instead of coquenard i shall have poquelin.”
 “‘tis wonderful,” cried d’artagnan, astounded. “go on, my friend, i am
 listening to you with admiration.”
 “this coquelin sketched my arm on the glass.”
 “i beg your pardon—poquelin.”
 “what did i say, then?”
 “you said coquelin.”
 “ah! true. this poquelin, then, sketched my arm on the glass; but he took
 his time over it; he kept looking at me a good deal. the fact is, that i
 must have been looking particularly handsome.”
 “‘does it weary you?’ he asked.
 “‘a little,’ i replied, bending a little in my hands, ‘but i could hold
 out for an hour or so longer.’
 “‘no, no, i will not allow it; the willing fellows will make it a duty to
 support your arms, as of old, men supported those of the prophet.’
 “‘very good,’ i answered.
 “‘that will not be humiliating to you?’
 “‘my friend,’ said i, ‘there is, i think, a great difference between being
 supported and being measured.’”
 “the distinction is full of the soundest sense,” interrupted d’artagnan.
 “then,” continued porthos, “he made a sign: two lads approached; one
 supported my left arm, while the other, with infinite address, supported
 my right.”
 “‘another, my man,’ cried he. a third approached. ‘support monsieur by the
 waist,’ said he. the garcon complied.”
 “so that you were at rest?” asked d’artagnan.
 “perfectly; and pocquenard drew me on the glass.”
 “poquelin, my friend.”
 “poquelin—you are right. stay, decidedly i prefer calling him
 voliere.”
 “yes; and then it was over, wasn’t it?”
 “during that time voliere drew me as i appeared in the mirror.”
 “‘twas delicate in him.”
 “i much like the plan; it is respectful, and keeps every one in his
 place.”
 “and there it ended?”
 “without a soul having touched me, my friend.”
 “except the three garcons who supported you.”
 “doubtless; but i have, i think, already explained to you the difference
 there is between supporting and measuring.”
 “‘tis true,” answered d’artagnan; who said afterwards to himself,
 “i’faith, i greatly deceive myself, or i have been the means of a good
 windfall to that rascal moliere, and we shall assuredly see the scene hit
 off to the life in some comedy or other.” porthos smiled.
 “what are you laughing at?” asked d’artagnan.
 “must i confess? well, i was laughing over my good fortune.”
 “oh, that is true; i don’t know a happier man than you. but what is this
 last piece of luck that has befallen you?’
 “well, my dear fellow, congratulate me.”
 “i desire nothing better.”
 “it seems that i am the first who has had his measure taken in that
 manner.”
 “are you so sure of it?’
 “nearly so. certain signs of intelligence which passed between voliere and
 the other garcons showed me the fact.”
 “well, my friend, that does not surprise me from moliere,” said
 d’artagnan.
 “voliere, my friend.”
 “oh, no, no, indeed! i am very willing to leave you to go on saying
 voliere; but, as for me, i shall continued to say moliere. well, this, i
 was saying, does not surprise me, coming from moliere, who is a very
 ingenious fellow, and inspired you with this grand idea.”
 “it will be of great use to him by and by, i am sure.”
 “won’t it be of use to him, indeed? i believe you, it will, and that in
 the highest degree;—for you see my friend moliere is of all known
 tailors the man who best clothes our barons, comtes, and marquises—according
 to their measure.”
 on this observation, neither the application nor depth of which we shall
 discuss, d’artagnan and porthos quitted m. de percerin’s house and
 rejoined their carriages, wherein we will leave them, in order to look
 after moliere and aramis at saint-mande.
 chapter vi. the bee-hive, the bees, and the honey.
 the bishop of vannes, much annoyed at having met d’artagnan at m.
 percerin’s, returned to saint-mande in no very good humor. moliere, on the
 other hand, quite delighted at having made such a capital rough sketch,
 and at knowing where to find his original again, whenever he should desire
 to convert his sketch into a picture, moliere arrived in the merriest of
 moods. all the first story of the left wing was occupied by the most
 celebrated epicureans in paris, and those on the freest footing in the
 house—every one in his compartment, like the bees in their cells,
 employed in producing the honey intended for that royal cake which m.
 fouquet proposed to offer his majesty louis xiv. during the fete at
 vaux. pelisson, his head leaning on his hand, was engaged in drawing out
 the plan of the prologue to the “facheux,” a comedy in three acts, which
 was to be put on the stage by poquelin de moliere, as d’artagnan called
 him, or coquelin de voliere, as porthos styled him. loret, with all the
 charming innocence of a gazetteer,—the gazetteers of all ages have
 always been so artless!—loret was composing an account of the fetes
 at vaux, before those fetes had taken place. la fontaine sauntered
 about from one to the other, a peripatetic, absent-minded, boring,
 unbearable dreamer, who kept buzzing and humming at everybody’s elbow a
 thousand poetic abstractions. he so often disturbed pelisson, that the
 latter, raising his head, crossly said, “at least, la fontaine, supply me
 with a rhyme, since you have the run of the gardens at parnassus.”
 “what rhyme do you want?” asked the fabler as madame de sevigne
 used to call him.
 “i want a rhyme to lumiere.”
 “orniere,” answered la fontaine.
 “ah, but, my good friend, one cannot talk of wheel-ruts when
 celebrating the delights of vaux,” said loret.
 “besides, it doesn’t rhyme,” answered pelisson.
 “what! doesn’t rhyme!” cried la fontaine, in surprise.
 “yes; you have an abominable habit, my friend,—a habit which will
 ever prevent your becoming a poet of the first order. you rhyme in a
 slovenly manner.”
 “oh, oh, you think so, do you, pelisson?”
 “yes, i do, indeed. remember that a rhyme is never good so long as one can
 find a better.”
 “then i will never write anything again save in prose,” said la fontaine,
 who had taken up pelisson’s reproach in earnest. “ah! i often suspected i
 was nothing but a rascally poet! yes, ‘tis the very truth.”
 “do not say so; your remark is too sweeping, and there is much that is
 good in your ‘fables.’”
 “and to begin,” continued la fontaine, following up his idea, “i will go
 and burn a hundred verses i have just made.”
 “where are your verses?”
 “in my head.”
 “well, if they are in your head you cannot burn them.”
 “true,” said la fontaine; “but if i do not burn them—”
 “well, what will happen if you do not burn them?”
 “they will remain in my mind, and i shall never forget them!”
 “the deuce!” cried loret; “what a dangerous thing! one would go mad with
 it!”
 “the deuce! the deuce!” repeated la fontaine; “what can i do?”
 “i have discovered the way,” said moliere, who had entered just at this
 point of the conversation.
 “what way?”
 “write them first and burn them afterwards.”
 “how simple! well, i should never have discovered that. what a mind that
 devil of a moliere has!” said la fontaine. then, striking his forehead,
 “oh, thou wilt never be aught but an ass, jean la fontaine!” he added.
 “what are you saying there, my friend?” broke in moliere,
 approaching the poet, whose aside he had heard.
 “i say i shall never be aught but an ass,” answered la fontaine, with a
 heavy sigh and swimming eyes. “yes, my friend,” he added, with increasing
 grief, “it seems that i rhyme in a slovenly manner.”
 “oh, ‘tis wrong to say so.”
 “nay, i am a poor creature!”
 “who said so?”
 “parbleu! ‘twas pelisson; did you not, pelisson?”
 pelisson, again absorbed in his work, took good care not to answer.
 “but if pelisson said you were so,” cried moliere, “pelisson has seriously
 offended you.”
 “do you think so?”
 “ah! i advise you, as you are a gentleman, not to leave an insult like
 that unpunished.”
 “what!” exclaimed la fontaine.
 “did you ever fight?”
 “once only, with a lieutenant in the light horse.”
 “what wrong had he done you?”
 “it seems he ran away with my wife.”
 “ah, ah!” said moliere, becoming slightly pale; but as, at la fontaine’s
 declaration, the others had turned round, moliere kept upon his lips the
 rallying smile which had so nearly died away, and continuing to make la
 fontaine speak—
 “and what was the result of the duel?”
 “the result was, that on the ground my opponent disarmed me, and then made
 an apology, promising never again to set foot in my house.”
 “and you considered yourself satisfied?” said moliere.
 “not at all! on the contrary, i picked up my sword. ‘i beg your pardon,
 monsieur,’ i said, ‘i have not fought you because you were my wife’s
 friend, but because i was told i ought to fight. so, as i have never known
 any peace save since you made her acquaintance, do me the pleasure to
 continue your visits as heretofore, or morbleu! let us set to
 again.’ and so,” continued la fontaine, “he was compelled to resume his
 friendship with madame, and i continue to be the happiest of husbands.”
 all burst out laughing. moliere alone passed his hand across his eyes.
 why? perhaps to wipe away a tear, perhaps to smother a sigh. alas! we know
 that moliere was a moralist, but he was not a philosopher. “‘tis all one,”
 he said, returning to the topic of the conversation, “pelisson has
 insulted you.”
 “ah, truly! i had already forgotten it.”
 “and i am going to challenge him on your behalf.”
 “well, you can do so, if you think it indispensable.”
 “i do think it indispensable, and i am going to—”
 “stay,” exclaimed la fontaine, “i want your advice.”
 “upon what? this insult?”
 “no; tell me really now whether lumiere does not rhyme with orniere.”
 “i should make them rhyme.”
 “ah! i knew you would.”
 “and i have made a hundred thousand such rhymes in my time.”
 “a hundred thousand!” cried la fontaine. “four times as many as ‘la
 pucelle,’ which m. chaplain is meditating. is it also on this subject,
 too, that you have composed a hundred thousand verses?”
 “listen to me, you eternally absent-minded creature,” said moliere.
 “it is certain,” continued la fontaine, “that legume, for instance,
 rhymes with posthume.”
 “in the plural, above all.”
 “yes, above all in the plural, seeing that then it rhymes not with three
 letters, but with four; as orniere does with lumiere.”
 “but give me ornieres and lumieres in the plural, my dear
 pelisson,” said la fontaine, clapping his hand on the shoulder of his
 friend, whose insult he had quite forgotten, “and they will rhyme.”
 “hem!” coughed pelisson.
 “moliere says so, and moliere is a judge of such things; he declares he
 has himself made a hundred thousand verses.”
 “come,” said moliere, laughing, “he is off now.”
 “it is like rivage, which rhymes admirably with herbage. i
 would take my oath of it.”
 “but—” said moliere.
 “i tell you all this,” continued la fontaine, “because you are preparing a
 divertissement for vaux, are you not?”
 “yes, the ‘facheux.’”
 “ah, yes, the ‘facheux;’ yes, i recollect. well, i was thinking a prologue
 would admirably suit your divertissement.”
 “doubtless it would suit capitally.”
 “ah! you are of my opinion?”
 “so much so, that i have asked you to write this very prologue.”
 “you asked me to write it?”
 “yes, you, and on your refusal begged you to ask pelisson, who is engaged
 upon it at this moment.”
 “ah! that is what pelisson is doing, then? i’faith, my dear moliere, you
 are indeed often right.”
 “when?”
 “when you call me absent-minded. it is a monstrous defect; i will cure
 myself of it, and do your prologue for you.”
 “but inasmuch as pelisson is about it!—”
 “ah, true, miserable rascal that i am! loret was indeed right in saying i
 was a poor creature.”
 “it was not loret who said so, my friend.”
 “well, then, whoever said so, ‘tis the same to me! and so your divertissement
 is called the ‘facheux?’ well, can you make heureux rhyme with facheux?”
 “if obliged, yes.”
 “and even with capriceux.”
 “oh, no, no.”
 “it would be hazardous, and yet why so?”
 “there is too great a difference in the cadences.”
 “i was fancying,” said la fontaine, leaving moliere for loret—“i was
 fancying—”
 “what were you fancying?” said loret, in the middle of a sentence. “make
 haste.”
 “you are writing the prologue to the ‘facheux,’ are you not?”
 “no! mordieu! it is pelisson.”
 “ah, pelisson,” cried la fontaine, going over to him, “i was fancying,” he
 continued, “that the nymph of vaux—”
 “ah, beautiful!” cried loret. “the nymph of vaux! thank you, la fontaine;
 you have just given me the two concluding verses of my paper.”
 “well, if you can rhyme so well, la fontaine,” said pelisson, “tell me now
 in what way you would begin my prologue?”
 “i should say, for instance, ‘oh! nymph, who—’ after ‘who’ i should
 place a verb in the second person singular of the present indicative; and
 should go on thus: ‘this grot profound.’”
 “but the verb, the verb?” asked pelisson.
 “to admire the greatest king of all kings round,” continued la fontaine.
 “but the verb, the verb,” obstinately insisted pelisson. “this second
 person singular of the present indicative?”
 “well, then; quittest:
 “oh, nymph, who quittest now this grot profound, to admire the greatest
 king of all kings round.”
 “you would not put ‘who quittest,’ would you?”
 “why not?”
 “‘quittest,’ after ‘you who’?”
 “ah! my dear fellow,” exclaimed la fontaine, “you are a shocking pedant!”
 “without counting,” said moliere, “that the second verse, ‘king of all
 kings round,’ is very weak, my dear la fontaine.”
 “then you see clearly i am nothing but a poor creature,—a shuffler,
 as you said.”
 “i never said so.”
 “then, as loret said.”
 “and it was not loret either; it was pelisson.”
 “well, pelisson was right a hundred times over. but what annoys me more
 than anything, my dear moliere, is, that i fear we shall not have our
 epicurean dresses.”
 “you expected yours, then, for the fete?”
 “yes, for the fete, and then for after the fete. my
 housekeeper told me that my own is rather faded.”
 “diable! your housekeeper is right; rather more than faded.”
 “ah, you see,” resumed la fontaine, “the fact is, i left it on the floor
 in my room, and my cat—”
 “well, your cat—”
 “she made her nest upon it, which has rather changed its color.”
 moliere burst out laughing; pelisson and loret followed his example. at
 this juncture, the bishop of vannes appeared, with a roll of plans and
 parchments under his arm. as if the angel of death had chilled all gay and
 sprightly fancies—as if that wan form had scared away the graces to
 whom xenocrates sacrificed—silence immediately reigned through the
 study, and every one resumed his self-possession and his pen. aramis
 distributed the notes of invitation, and thanked them in the name of m.
 fouquet. “the superintendent,” he said, “being kept to his room by
 business, could not come and see them, but begged them to send him some of
 the fruits of their day’s work, to enable him to forget the fatigue of his
 labor in the night.”
 at these words, all settled down to work. la fontaine placed himself at a
 table, and set his rapid pen an endless dance across the smooth white
 vellum; pelisson made a fair copy of his prologue; moliere contributed
 fifty fresh verses, with which his visit to percerin had inspired him;
 loret, an article on the marvelous fetes he predicted; and aramis,
 laden with his booty like the king of the bees, that great black drone,
 decked with purple and gold, re-entered his apartment, silent and busy.
 but before departing, “remember, gentlemen,” said he, “we leave to-morrow
 evening.”
 “in that case, i must give notice at home,” said moliere.
 “yes; poor moliere!” said loret, smiling; “he loves his home.”
 “‘he loves,’ yes,” replied moliere, with his sad, sweet smile. “‘he
 loves,’ that does not mean, they love him.”
 “as for me,” said la fontaine, “they love me at chateau thierry, i am very
 sure.”
 aramis here re-entered after a brief disappearance.
 “will any one go with me?” he asked. “i am going by paris, after having
 passed a quarter of an hour with m. fouquet. i offer my carriage.”
 “good,” said moliere, “i accept it. i am in a hurry.”
 “i shall dine here,” said loret. “m. de gourville has promised me some
 craw-fish.”
 “he has promised me some whitings. find a rhyme for that, la fontaine.”
 aramis went out laughing, as only he could laugh, and moliere followed
 him. they were at the bottom of the stairs, when la fontaine opened the
 door, and shouted out:
 “he has promised us some whitings, in return for these our writings.”
 the shouts of laughter reached the ears of fouquet at the moment aramis
 opened the door of the study. as to moliere, he had undertaken to order
 the horses, while aramis went to exchange a parting word with the
 superintendent. “oh, how they are laughing there!” said fouquet, with a
 sigh.
 “do you not laugh, monseigneur?”
 “i laugh no longer now, m. d’herblay. the fete is approaching;
 money is departing.”
 “have i not told you that was my business?”
 “yes, you promised me millions.”
 “you shall have them the day after the king’s entree into vaux.”
 fouquet looked closely at aramis, and passed the back of his icy hand
 across his moistened brow. aramis perceived that the superintendent either
 doubted him, or felt he was powerless to obtain the money. how could
 fouquet suppose that a poor bishop, ex-abbe, ex-musketeer, could find any?
 “why doubt me?” said aramis. fouquet smiled and shook his head.
 “man of little faith!” added the bishop.
 “my dear m. d’herblay,” answered fouquet, “if i fall—”
 “well; if you ‘fall’?”
 “i shall, at least, fall from such a height, that i shall shatter myself
 in falling.” then giving himself a shake, as though to escape from
 himself, “whence came you,” said he, “my friend?”
 “from paris—from percerin.”
 “and what have you been doing at percerin’s, for i suppose you attach no
 great importance to our poets’ dresses?”
 “no; i went to prepare a surprise.”
 “surprise?”
 “yes; which you are going to give to the king.”
 “and will it cost much?”
 “oh! a hundred pistoles you will give lebrun.”
 “a painting?—ah! all the better! and what is this painting to
 represent?”
 “i will tell you; then at the same time, whatever you may say or think of
 it, i went to see the dresses for our poets.”
 “bah! and they will be rich and elegant?”
 “splendid! there will be few great monseigneurs with so good. people will
 see the difference there is between the courtiers of wealth and those of
 friendship.”
 “ever generous and grateful, dear prelate.”
 “in your school.”
 fouquet grasped his hand. “and where are you going?” he said.
 “i am off to paris, when you shall have given a certain letter.”
 “for whom?”
 “m. de lyonne.”
 “and what do you want with lyonne?”
 “i wish to make him sign a lettre de cachet.”
 “‘lettre de cachet!’ do you desire to put somebody in the bastile?”
 “on the contrary—to let somebody out.”
 “and who?”
 “a poor devil—a youth, a lad who has been bastiled these ten years,
 for two latin verses he made against the jesuits.”
 “‘two latin verses!’ and, for ‘two latin verses,’ the miserable being has
 been in prison for ten years!”
 “yes!”
 “and has committed no other crime?”
 “beyond this, he is as innocent as you or i.”
 “on your word?”
 “on my honor!”
 “and his name is—”
 “seldon.”
 “yes.—but it is too bad. you knew this, and you never told me!”
 “‘twas only yesterday his mother applied to me, monseigneur.”
 “and the woman is poor!”
 “in the deepest misery.”
 “heaven,” said fouquet, “sometimes bears with such injustice on earth,
 that i hardly wonder there are wretches who doubt of its existence. stay,
 m. d’herblay.” and fouquet, taking a pen, wrote a few rapid lines to his
 colleague lyonne. aramis took the letter and made ready to go.
 “wait,” said fouquet. he opened his drawer, and took out ten government
 notes which were there, each for a thousand francs. “stay,” he said; “set
 the son at liberty, and give this to the mother; but, above all, do not
 tell her—”
 “what, monseigneur?”
 “that she is ten thousand livres richer than i. she would say i am but a
 poor superintendent! go! and i pray that god will bless those who are
 mindful of his poor!”
 “so also do i pray,” replied aramis, kissing fouquet’s hand.
 and he went out quickly, carrying off the letter for lyonne and the notes
 for seldon’s mother, and taking up moliere, who was beginning to lose
 patience.
 chapter vii. another supper at the bastile.
 seven o’clock sounded from the great clock of the bastile, that famous
 clock, which, like all the accessories of the state prison, the very use
 of which is a torture, recalled to the prisoners’ minds the destination of
 every hour of their punishment. the time-piece of the bastile, adorned
 with figures, like most of the clocks of the period, represented st. peter
 in bonds. it was the supper hour of the unfortunate captives. the doors,
 grating on their enormous hinges, opened for the passage of the baskets
 and trays of provisions, the abundance and the delicacy of which, as m. de
 baisemeaux has himself taught us, was regulated by the condition in life
 of the prisoner. we understand on this head the theories of m. de
 baisemeaux, sovereign dispenser of gastronomic delicacies, head cook of
 the royal fortress, whose trays, full-laden, were ascending the steep
 staircases, carrying some consolation to the prisoners in the shape of
 honestly filled bottles of good vintages. this same hour was that of m. le
 gouverneur’s supper also. he had a guest to-day, and the spit turned more
 heavily than usual. roast partridges, flanked with quails and flanking a
 larded leveret; boiled fowls; hams, fried and sprinkled with white wine,
 cardons of guipuzcoa and la bisque ecrevisses: these,
 together with soups and hors d’oeuvres, constituted the governor’s
 bill of fare. baisemeaux, seated at table, was rubbing his hands and
 looking at the bishop of vannes, who, booted like a cavalier, dressed in
 gray and sword at side, kept talking of his hunger and testifying the
 liveliest impatience. m. de baisemeaux de montlezun was not accustomed to
 the unbending movements of his greatness my lord of vannes, and this
 evening aramis, becoming sprightly, volunteered confidence on confidence.
 the prelate had again a little touch of the musketeer about him. the
 bishop just trenched on the borders only of license in his style of
 conversation. as for m. de baisemeaux, with the facility of vulgar people,
 he gave himself up entirely upon this point of his guest’s freedom.
 “monsieur,” said he, “for indeed to-night i dare not call you
 monseigneur.”
 “by no means,” said aramis; “call me monsieur; i am booted.”
 “do you know, monsieur, of whom you remind me this evening?”
 “no! faith,” said aramis, taking up his glass; “but i hope i remind you of
 a capital guest.”
 “you remind me of two, monsieur. francois, shut the window; the wind may
 annoy his greatness.”
 “and let him go,” added aramis. “the supper is completely served, and we
 shall eat it very well without waiters. i like exceedingly to be tete-a-tete
 when i am with a friend.” baisemeaux bowed respectfully.
 “i like exceedingly,” continued aramis, “to help myself.”
 “retire, francois,” cried baisemeaux. “i was saying that your greatness
 puts me in mind of two persons; one very illustrious, the late cardinal,
 the great cardinal de la rochelle, who wore boots like you.”
 “indeed,” said aramis; “and the other?”
 “the other was a certain musketeer, very handsome, very brave, very
 adventurous, very fortunate, who, from being abbe, turned musketeer, and
 from musketeer turned abbe.” aramis condescended to smile. “from abbe,”
 continued baisemeaux, encouraged by aramis’s smile—“from abbe,
 bishop—and from bishop—”
 “ah! stay there, i beg,” exclaimed aramis.
 “i have just said, monsieur, that you gave me the idea of a cardinal.”
 “enough, dear m. baisemeaux. as you said, i have on the boots of a
 cavalier, but i do not intend, for all that, to embroil myself with the
 church this evening.”
 “but you have wicked intentions, nevertheless, monseigneur.”
 “oh, yes, wicked, i own, as everything mundane is.”
 “you traverse the town and the streets in disguise?”
 “in disguise, as you say.”
 “and you still make use of your sword?”
 “yes, i should think so; but only when i am compelled. do me the pleasure
 to summon francois.”
 “have you no wine there?”
 “‘tis not for wine, but because it is hot here, and the window is shut.”
 “i shut the windows at supper-time so as not to hear the sounds or the
 arrival of couriers.”
 “ah, yes. you hear them when the window is open?”
 “but too well, and that disturbs me. you understand?”
 “nevertheless i am suffocated. francois.” francois entered. “open the
 windows, i pray you, master francois,” said aramis. “you will allow him,
 dear m. baisemeaux?”
 “you are at home here,” answered the governor. the window was opened. “do
 you not think,” said m. de baisemeaux, “that you will find yourself very
 lonely, now m. de la fere has returned to his household gods at blois? he
 is a very old friend, is he not?”
 “you know it as i do, baisemeaux, seeing that you were in the musketeers
 with us.”
 “bah! with my friends i reckon neither bottles of wine nor years.”
 “and you are right. but i do more than love m. de la fere, dear
 baisemeaux; i venerate him.”
 “well, for my part, though ‘tis singular,” said the governor, “i prefer m.
 d’artagnan to him. there is a man for you, who drinks long and well! that
 kind of people allow you at least to penetrate their thoughts.”
 “baisemeaux, make me tipsy to-night; let us have a merry time of it as of
 old, and if i have a trouble at the bottom of my heart, i promise you, you
 shall see it as you would a diamond at the bottom of your glass.”
 “bravo!” said baisemeaux, and he poured out a great glass of wine and
 drank it off at a draught, trembling with joy at the idea of being, by
 hook or by crook, in the secret of some high archiepiscopal misdemeanor.
 while he was drinking he did not see with what attention aramis was noting
 the sounds in the great court. a courier came in about eight o’clock as
 francois brought in the fifth bottle, and, although the courier made a
 great noise, baisemeaux heard nothing.
 “the devil take him,” said aramis.
 “what! who?” asked baisemeaux. “i hope ‘tis neither the wine you drank nor
 he who is the cause of your drinking it.”
 “no; it is a horse, who is making noise enough in the court for a whole
 squadron.”
 “pooh! some courier or other,” replied the governor, redoubling his
 attention to the passing bottle. “yes; and may the devil take him, and so
 quickly that we shall never hear him speak more. hurrah! hurrah!”
 “you forget me, baisemeaux! my glass is empty,” said aramis, lifting his
 dazzling venetian goblet.
 “upon my honor, you delight me. francois, wine!” francois entered. “wine,
 fellow! and better.”
 “yes, monsieur, yes; but a courier has just arrived.”
 “let him go to the devil, i say.”
 “yes, monsieur, but—”
 “let him leave his news at the office; we will see to it to-morrow.
 to-morrow, there will be time to-morrow; there will be daylight,” said
 baisemeaux, chanting the words.
 “ah, monsieur,” grumbled the soldier francois, in spite of himself,
 “monsieur.”
 “take care,” said aramis, “take care!”
 “of what? dear m. d’herblay,” said baisemeaux, half intoxicated.
 “the letter which the courier brings to the governor of a fortress is
 sometimes an order.”
 “nearly always.”
 “do not orders issue from the ministers?”
 “yes, undoubtedly; but—”
 “and what to these ministers do but countersign the signature of the
 king?”
 “perhaps you are right. nevertheless, ‘tis very tiresome when you are
 sitting before a good table, tete-a-tete with a friend—ah! i
 beg your pardon, monsieur; i forgot it is i who engage you at supper, and
 that i speak to a future cardinal.”
 “let us pass over that, dear baisemeaux, and return to our soldier, to
 francois.”
 “well, and what has francois done?”
 “he has demurred!”
 “he was wrong, then?”
 “however, he has demurred, you see; ‘tis because there is something
 extraordinary in this matter. it is very possible that it was not francois
 who was wrong in demurring, but you, who are in the wrong in not listening
 to him.”
 “wrong? i to be wrong before francois? that seems rather hard.”
 “pardon me, merely an irregularity. but i thought it my duty to make an
 observation which i deem important.”
 “oh! perhaps you are right,” stammered baisemeaux. “the king’s order is
 sacred; but as to orders that arrive when one is at supper, i repeat that
 the devil—”
 “if you had said as much to the great cardinal—hem! my dear
 baisemeaux, and if his order had any importance.”
 “i do it that i may not disturb a bishop. mordioux! am i not, then,
 excusable?”
 “do not forget, baisemeaux, that i have worn the soldier’s coat, and i am
 accustomed to obedience everywhere.”
 “you wish, then—”
 “i wish that you would do your duty, my friend; yes, at least before this
 soldier.”
 “‘tis mathematically true,” exclaimed baisemeaux. francois still waited:
 “let them send this order of the king’s up to me,” he repeated, recovering
 himself. and he added in a low tone, “do you know what it is? i will tell
 you something about as interesting as this. ‘beware of fire near the
 powder magazine;’ or, ‘look close after such and such a one, who is clever
 at escaping,’ ah! if you only knew, monseigneur, how many times i have
 been suddenly awakened from the very sweetest, deepest slumber, by
 messengers arriving at full gallop to tell me, or rather, bring me a slip
 of paper containing these words: ‘monsieur de baisemeaux, what news?’ ‘tis
 clear enough that those who waste their time writing such orders have
 never slept in the bastile. they would know better; they have never
 considered the thickness of my walls, the vigilance of my officers, the
 number of rounds we go. but, indeed, what can you expect, monseigneur? it
 is their business to write and torment me when i am at rest, and to
 trouble me when i am happy,” added baisemeaux, bowing to aramis. “then let
 them do their business.”
 “and do you do yours,” added the bishop, smiling.
 francois re-entered; baisemeaux took from his hands the minister’s order.
 he slowly undid it, and as slowly read it. aramis pretended to be
 drinking, so as to be able to watch his host through the glass. then,
 baisemeaux, having read it: “what was i just saying?” he exclaimed.
 “what is it?” asked the bishop.
 “an order of release! there, now; excellent news indeed to disturb us!”
 “excellent news for him whom it concerns, you will at least agree, my dear
 governor!”
 “and at eight o’clock in the evening!”
 “it is charitable!”
 “oh! charity is all very well, but it is for that fellow who says he is so
 weary and tired, but not for me who am amusing myself,” said baisemeaux,
 exasperated.
 “will you lose by him, then? and is the prisoner who is to be set at
 liberty a good payer?”
 “oh, yes, indeed! a miserable, five-franc rat!”
 “let me see it,” asked m. d’herblay. “it is no indiscretion?”
 “by no means; read it.”
 “there is ‘urgent,’ on the paper; you have seen that, i suppose?”
 “oh, admirable! ‘urgent!’—a man who has been there ten years! it is
 urgent to set him free to-day, this very evening, at eight o’clock!—urgent!”
 and baisemeaux, shrugging his shoulders with an air of supreme disdain,
 flung the order on the table and began eating again.
 “they are fond of these tricks!” he said, with his mouth full; “they seize
 a man, some fine day, keep him under lock and key for ten years, and write
 to you, ‘watch this fellow well,’ or ‘keep him very strictly.’ and then,
 as soon as you are accustomed to look upon the prisoner as a dangerous
 man, all of a sudden, without rhyme or reason they write—‘set him at
 liberty,’ and actually add to their missive—‘urgent.’ you will own,
 my lord, ‘tis enough to make a man at dinner shrug his shoulders!”
 “what do you expect? it is for them to write,” said aramis, “for you to
 execute the order.”
 “good! good! execute it! oh, patience! you must not imagine that i am a
 slave.”
 “gracious heaven! my very good m. baisemeaux, who ever said so? your
 independence is well known.”
 “thank heaven!”
 “but your goodness of heart is also known.”
 “ah! don’t speak of it!”
 “and your obedience to your superiors. once a soldier, you see,
 baisemeaux, always a soldier.”
 “and i shall directly obey; and to-morrow morning, at daybreak, the
 prisoner referred to shall be set free.”
 “to-morrow?”
 “at dawn.”
 “why not this evening, seeing that the lettre de cachet bears, both
 on the direction and inside, ‘urgent’?”
 “because this evening we are at supper, and our affairs are urgent, too!”
 “dear baisemeaux, booted though i be, i feel myself a priest, and charity
 has higher claims upon me than hunger and thirst. this unfortunate man has
 suffered long enough, since you have just told me that he has been your
 prisoner these ten years. abridge his suffering. his good time has come;
 give him the benefit quickly. god will repay you in paradise with years of
 felicity.”
 “you wish it?”
 “i entreat you.”
 “what! in the very middle of our repast?”
 “i implore you; such an action is worth ten benedicites.”
 “it shall be as you desire, only our supper will get cold.”
 “oh! never heed that.”
 baisemeaux leaned back to ring for francois, and by a very natural motion
 turned round towards the door. the order had remained on the table; aramis
 seized the opportunity when baisemeaux was not looking to change the paper
 for another, folded in the same manner, which he drew swiftly from his
 pocket. “francois,” said the governor, “let the major come up here with
 the turnkeys of the bertaudiere.” francois bowed and quitted the room,
 leaving the two companions alone.
 chapter viii. the general of the order.
 there was now a brief silence, during which aramis never removed his eyes
 from baisemeaux for a moment. the latter seemed only half decided to
 disturb himself thus in the middle of supper, and it was clear he was
 trying to invent some pretext, whether good or bad, for delay, at any rate
 till after dessert. and it appeared also that he had hit upon an excuse at
 last.
 “eh! but it is impossible!” he cried.
 “how impossible?” said aramis. “give me a glimpse of this impossibility.”
 “‘tis impossible to set a prisoner at liberty at such an hour. where can
 he go to, a man so unacquainted with paris?”
 “he will find a place wherever he can.”
 “you see, now, one might as well set a blind man free!”
 “i have a carriage, and will take him wherever he wishes.”
 “you have an answer for everything. francois, tell monsieur le major to go
 and open the cell of m. seldon, no. , bertaudiere.”
 “seldon!” exclaimed aramis, very naturally. “you said seldon, i think?”
 “i said seldon, of course. ‘tis the name of the man they set free.”
 “oh! you mean to say marchiali?” said aramis.
 “marchiali? oh! yes, indeed. no, no, seldon.”
 “i think you are making a mistake, monsieur baisemeaux.”
 “i have read the order.”
 “and i also.”
 “and i saw ‘seldon’ in letters as large as that,” and baisemeaux held up
 his finger.
 “and i read ‘marchiali’ in characters as large as this,” said aramis, also
 holding up two fingers.
 “to the proof; let us throw a light on the matter,” said baisemeaux,
 confident he was right. “there is the paper, you have only to read it.”
 “i read ‘marchiali,’” returned aramis, spreading out the paper. “look.”
 baisemeaux looked, and his arms dropped suddenly. “yes, yes,” he said,
 quite overwhelmed; “yes, marchiali. ‘tis plainly written marchiali! quite
 true!”
 “ah!—”
 “how? the man of whom we have talked so much? the man whom they are every
 day telling me to take such care of?”
 “there is ‘marchiali,’” repeated the inflexible aramis.
 “i must own it, monseigneur. but i understand nothing about it.”
 “you believe your eyes, at any rate.”
 “to tell me very plainly there is ‘marchiali.’”
 “and in a good handwriting, too.”
 “‘tis a wonder! i still see this order and the name of seldon, irishman. i
 see it. ah! i even recollect that under this name there was a blot of
 ink.”
 “no, there is no ink; no, there is no blot.”
 “oh! but there was, though; i know it, because i rubbed my finger—this
 very one—in the powder that was over the blot.”
 “in a word, be it how it may, dear m. baisemeaux,” said aramis, “and
 whatever you may have seen, the order is signed to release marchiali, blot
 or no blot.”
 “the order is signed to release marchiali,” replied baisemeaux,
 mechanically, endeavoring to regain his courage.
 “and you are going to release this prisoner. if your heart dictates you to
 deliver seldon also, i declare to you i will not oppose it the least in
 the world.” aramis accompanied this remark with a smile, the irony of
 which effectually dispelled baisemeaux’s confusion of mind, and restored
 his courage.
 “monseigneur,” he said, “this marchiali is the very same prisoner whom the
 other day a priest confessor of our order came to visit in so
 imperious and so secret a manner.”
 “i don’t know that, monsieur,” replied the bishop.
 “‘tis no such long time ago, dear monsieur d’herblay.”
 “it is true. but with us, monsieur, it is good that the man of
 to-day should no longer know what the man of yesterday did.”
 “in any case,” said baisemeaux, “the visit of the jesuit confessor must
 have given happiness to this man.”
 aramis made no reply, but recommenced eating and drinking. as for
 baisemeaux, no longer touching anything that was on the table, he again
 took up the order and examined it every way. this investigation, under
 ordinary circumstances, would have made the ears of the impatient aramis
 burn with anger; but the bishop of vannes did not become incensed for so
 little, above all, when he had murmured to himself that to do so was
 dangerous. “are you going to release marchiali?” he said. “what mellow,
 fragrant and delicious sherry this is, my dear governor.”
 “monseigneur,” replied baisemeaux, “i shall release the prisoner marchiali
 when i have summoned the courier who brought the order, and above all,
 when, by interrogating him, i have satisfied myself.”
 “the order is sealed, and the courier is ignorant of the contents. what do
 you want to satisfy yourself about?”
 “be it so, monseigneur; but i shall send to the ministry, and m. de lyonne
 will either confirm or withdraw the order.”
 “what is the good of all that?” asked aramis, coldly.
 “what good?”
 “yes; what is your object, i ask?”
 “the object of never deceiving oneself, monseigneur; nor being wanting in
 the respect which a subaltern owes to his superior officers, nor
 infringing the duties of a service one has accepted of one’s own free
 will.”
 “very good; you have just spoken so eloquently, that i cannot but admire
 you. it is true that a subaltern owes respect to his superiors; he is
 guilty when he deceives himself, and he should be punished if he infringed
 either the duties or laws of his office.”
 baisemeaux looked at the bishop with astonishment.
 “it follows,” pursued aramis, “that you are going to ask advice, to put
 your conscience at ease in the matter?”
 “yes, monseigneur.”
 “and if a superior officer gives you orders, you will obey?”
 “never doubt it, monseigneur.”
 “you know the king’s signature well, m. de baisemeaux?”
 “yes, monseigneur.”
 “is it not on this order of release?”
 “it is true, but it may—”
 “be forged, you mean?”
 “that is evident, monseigneur.”
 “you are right. and that of m. de lyonne?”
 “i see it plain enough on the order; but for the same reason that the
 king’s signature may have been forged, so also, and with even greater
 probability, may m. de lyonne’s.”
 “your logic has the stride of a giant, m. de baisemeaux,” said aramis;
 “and your reasoning is irresistible. but on what special grounds do you
 base your idea that these signatures are false?”
 “on this: the absence of counter-signatures. nothing checks his majesty’s
 signature; and m. de lyonne is not there to tell me he has signed.”
 “well, monsieur de baisemeaux,” said aramis, bending an eagle glance on
 the governor, “i adopt so frankly your doubts, and your mode of clearing
 them up, that i will take a pen, if you will give me one.”
 baisemeaux gave him a pen.
 “and a sheet of white paper,” added aramis.
 baisemeaux handed him some paper.
 “now, i—i, also—i, here present—incontestably, i—am
 going to write an order to which i am certain you will give credence,
 incredulous as you are!”
 baisemeaux turned pale at this icy assurance of manner. it seemed to him
 that the voice of the bishop’s, but just now so playful and gay, had
 become funereal and sad; that the wax lights changed into the tapers of a
 mortuary chapel, the very glasses of wine into chalices of blood.
 aramis took a pen and wrote. baisemeaux, in terror, read over his
 shoulder.
 “a. m. d. g.,” wrote the bishop; and he drew a cross under these four
 letters, which signify ad majorem dei gloriam, “to the greater
 glory of god;” and thus he continued: “it is our pleasure that the order
 brought to m. de baisemeaux de montlezun, governor, for the king, of the
 castle of the bastile, be held by him good and effectual, and be
 immediately carried into operation.”
 (signed) d’herblay
 “general of the order, by the grace of god.”
 baisemeaux was so profoundly astonished, that his features remained
 contracted, his lips parted, and his eyes fixed. he did not move an inch,
 nor articulate a sound. nothing could be heard in that large chamber but
 the wing-whisper of a little moth, which was fluttering to its death about
 the candles. aramis, without even deigning to look at the man whom he had
 reduced to so miserable a condition, drew from his pocket a small case of
 black wax; he sealed the letter, and stamped it with a seal suspended at
 his breast, beneath his doublet, and when the operation was concluded,
 presented—still in silence—the missive to m. de baisemeaux.
 the latter, whose hands trembled in a manner to excite pity, turned a dull
 and meaningless gaze upon the letter. a last gleam of feeling played over
 his features, and he fell, as if thunder-struck, on a chair.
 “come, come,” said aramis, after a long silence, during which the governor
 of the bastile had slowly recovered his senses, “do not lead me to
 believe, dear baisemeaux, that the presence of the general of the order is
 as terrible as his, and that men die merely from having seen him. take
 courage, rouse yourself; give me your hand—obey.”
 baisemeaux, reassured, if not satisfied, obeyed, kissed aramis’s hand, and
 rose. “immediately?” he murmured.
 “oh, there is no pressing haste, my host; take your place again, and do
 the honors over this beautiful dessert.”
 “monseigneur, i shall never recover such a shock as this; i who have
 laughed, who have jested with you! i who have dared to treat you on a
 footing of equality!”
 “say nothing about it, old comrade,” replied the bishop, who perceived how
 strained the cord was and how dangerous it would have been to break it;
 “say nothing about it. let us each live in our own way; to you, my
 protection and my friendship; to me, your obedience. having exactly
 fulfilled these two requirements, let us live happily.”
 baisemeaux reflected; he perceived, at a glance, the consequence of this
 withdrawal of a prisoner by means of a forged order; and, putting in the
 scale the guarantee offered him by the official order of the general, did
 not consider it of any value.
 aramis divined this. “my dear baisemeaux,” said he, “you are a simpleton.
 lose this habit of reflection when i give myself the trouble to think for
 you.”
 and at another gesture he made, baisemeaux bowed again. “how shall i set
 about it?” he said.
 “what is the process for releasing a prisoner?”
 “i have the regulations.”
 “well, then, follow the regulations, my friend.”
 “i go with my major to the prisoner’s room, and conduct him, if he is a
 personage of importance.”
 “but this marchiali is not an important personage,” said aramis
 carelessly.
 “i don’t know,” answered the governor, as if he would have said, “it is
 for you to instruct me.”
 “then if you don’t know it, i am right; so act towards marchiali as you
 act towards one of obscure station.”
 “good; the regulations so provide. they are to the effect that the
 turnkey, or one of the lower officials, shall bring the prisoner before
 the governor, in the office.”
 “well, ‘tis very wise, that; and then?”
 “then we return to the prisoner the valuables he wore at the time of his
 imprisonment, his clothes and papers, if the minister’s orders have not
 otherwise dictated.”
 “what was the minister’s order as to this marchiali?”
 “nothing; for the unhappy man arrived here without jewels, without papers,
 and almost without clothes.”
 “see how simple, then, all is. indeed, baisemeaux, you make a mountain of
 everything. remain here, and make them bring the prisoner to the
 governor’s house.”
 baisemeaux obeyed. he summoned his lieutenant, and gave him an order,
 which the latter passed on, without disturbing himself about it, to the
 next whom it concerned.
 half an hour afterwards they heard a gate shut in the court; it was the
 door to the dungeon, which had just rendered up its prey to the free air.
 aramis blew out all the candles which lighted the room but one, which he
 left burning behind the door. this flickering glare prevented the sight
 from resting steadily on any object. it multiplied tenfold the changing
 forms and shadows of the place, by its wavering uncertainty. steps drew
 near.
 “go and meet your men,” said aramis to baisemeaux.
 the governor obeyed. the sergeant and turnkeys disappeared. baisemeaux
 re-entered, followed by a prisoner. aramis had placed himself in the
 shade; he saw without being seen. baisemeaux, in an agitated tone of
 voice, made the young man acquainted with the order which set him at
 liberty. the prisoner listened, without making a single gesture or saying
 a word.
 “you will swear (‘tis the regulation that requires it),” added the
 governor, “never to reveal anything that you have seen or heard in the
 bastile.”
 the prisoner perceived a crucifix; he stretched out his hands and swore
 with his lips. “and now, monsieur, you are free. whither do you intend
 going?”
 the prisoner turned his head, as if looking behind him for some
 protection, on which he ought to rely. then was it that aramis came out of
 the shade: “i am here,” he said, “to render the gentleman whatever service
 he may please to ask.”
 the prisoner slightly reddened, and, without hesitation, passed his arm
 through that of aramis. “god have you in his holy keeping,” he said, in a
 voice the firmness of which made the governor tremble as much as the form
 of the blessing astonished him.
 aramis, on shaking hands with baisemeaux, said to him; “does my order
 trouble you? do you fear their finding it here, should they come to
 search?”
 “i desire to keep it, monseigneur,” said baisemeaux. “if they found it
 here, it would be a certain indication i should be lost, and in that case
 you would be a powerful and a last auxiliary for me.”
 “being your accomplice, you mean?” answered aramis, shrugging his
 shoulders. “adieu, baisemeaux,” said he.
 the horses were in waiting, making each rusty spring reverberate the
 carriage again with their impatience. baisemeaux accompanied the bishop to
 the bottom of the steps. aramis caused his companion to mount before him,
 then followed, and without giving the driver any further order, “go on,”
 said he. the carriage rattled over the pavement of the courtyard. an
 officer with a torch went before the horses, and gave orders at every post
 to let them pass. during the time taken in opening all the barriers,
 aramis barely breathed, and you might have heard his “sealed heart knock
 against his ribs.” the prisoner, buried in a corner of the carriage, made
 no more sign of life than his companion. at length, a jolt more sever than
 the others announced to them that they had cleared the last watercourse.
 behind the carriage closed the last gate, that in the rue st. antoine. no
 more walls either on the right or the left; heaven everywhere, liberty
 everywhere, and life everywhere. the horses, kept in check by a vigorous
 hand, went quietly as far as the middle of the faubourg. there they began
 to trot. little by little, whether they were warming to their work, or
 whether they were urged, they gained in swiftness, and once past bercy,
 the carriage seemed to fly, so great was the ardor of the coursers. the
 horses galloped thus as far as villeneuve st. george’s, where relays were
 waiting. then four instead of two whirled the carriage away in the
 direction of melun, and pulled up for a moment in the middle of the forest
 of senart. no doubt the order had been given the postilion beforehand, for
 aramis had no occasion even to make a sign.
 “what is the matter?” asked the prisoner, as if waking from a long dream.
 “the matter is, monseigneur,” said aramis, “that before going further, it
 is necessary your royal highness and i should converse.”
 “i will await an opportunity, monsieur,” answered the young prince.
 “we could not have a better, monseigneur. we are in the middle of a
 forest, and no one can hear us.”
 “the postilion?”
 “the postilion of this relay is deaf and dumb, monseigneur.”
 “i am at your service, m. d’herblay.”
 “is it your pleasure to remain in the carriage?”
 “yes; we are comfortably seated, and i like this carriage, for it has
 restored me to liberty.”
 “wait, monseigneur; there is yet a precaution to be taken.”
 “what?”
 “we are here on the highway; cavaliers or carriages traveling like
 ourselves might pass, and seeing us stopping, deem us in some difficulty.
 let us avoid offers of assistance, which would embarrass us.”
 “give the postilion orders to conceal the carriage in one of the side
 avenues.”
 “‘tis exactly what i wished to do, monseigneur.”
 aramis made a sign to the deaf and dumb driver of the carriage, whom he
 touched on the arm. the latter dismounted, took the leaders by the bridle,
 and led them over the velvet sward and the mossy grass of a winding alley,
 at the bottom of which, on this moonless night, the deep shades formed a
 curtain blacker than ink. this done, the man lay down on a slope near his
 horses, who, on either side, kept nibbling the young oak shoots.
 “i am listening,” said the young prince to aramis; “but what are you doing
 there?”
 “i am disarming myself of my pistols, of which we have no further need,
 monseigneur.”
 chapter ix. the tempter.
 “my prince,” said aramis, turning in the carriage towards his companion,
 “weak creature as i am, so unpretending in genius, so low in the scale of
 intelligent beings, it has never yet happened to me to converse with a man
 without penetrating his thoughts through that living mask which has been
 thrown over our mind, in order to retain its expression. but to-night, in
 this darkness, in the reserve which you maintain, i can read nothing on
 your features, and something tells me that i shall have great difficulty
 in wresting from you a sincere declaration. i beseech you, then, not for
 love of me, for subjects should never weigh as anything in the balance
 which princes hold, but for love of yourself, to retain every syllable,
 every inflexion which, under the present most grave circumstances, will
 all have a sense and value as important as any every uttered in the
 world.”
 “i listen,” replied the young prince, “decidedly, without either eagerly
 seeking or fearing anything you are about to say to me.” and he buried
 himself still deeper in the thick cushions of the carriage, trying to
 deprive his companion not only of the sight of him, but even of the very
 idea of his presence.
 black was the darkness which fell wide and dense from the summits of the
 intertwining trees. the carriage, covered in by this prodigious roof,
 would not have received a particle of light, not even if a ray could have
 struggled through the wreaths of mist that were already rising in the
 avenue.
 “monseigneur,” resumed aramis, “you know the history of the government
 which to-day controls france. the king issued from an infancy imprisoned
 like yours, obscure as yours, and confined as yours; only, instead of
 ending, like yourself, this slavery in a prison, this obscurity in
 solitude, these straightened circumstances in concealment, he was fain to
 bear all these miseries, humiliations, and distresses, in full daylight,
 under the pitiless sun of royalty; on an elevation flooded with light,
 where every stain appears a blemish, every glory a stain. the king has
 suffered; it rankles in his mind; and he will avenge himself. he will be a
 bad king. i say not that he will pour out his people’s blood, like louis
 xi., or charles ix.; for he has no mortal injuries to avenge; but he will
 devour the means and substance of his people; for he has himself undergone
 wrongs in his own interest and money. in the first place, then, i acquit
 my conscience, when i consider openly the merits and the faults of this
 great prince; and if i condemn him, my conscience absolves me.”
 aramis paused. it was not to listen if the silence of the forest remained
 undisturbed, but it was to gather up his thoughts from the very bottom of
 his soul—to leave the thoughts he had uttered sufficient time to eat
 deeply into the mind of his companion.
 “all that heaven does, heaven does well,” continued the bishop of vannes;
 “and i am so persuaded of it that i have long been thankful to have been
 chosen depositary of the secret which i have aided you to discover. to a
 just providence was necessary an instrument, at once penetrating,
 persevering, and convinced, to accomplish a great work. i am this
 instrument. i possess penetration, perseverance, conviction; i govern a
 mysterious people, who has taken for its motto, the motto of god, ‘patiens
 quia oeternus.’” the prince moved. “i divine, monseigneur, why you are
 raising your head, and are surprised at the people i have under my
 command. you did not know you were dealing with a king—oh!
 monseigneur, king of a people very humble, much disinherited; humble
 because they have no force save when creeping; disinherited, because
 never, almost never in this world, do my people reap the harvest they sow,
 nor eat the fruit they cultivate. they labor for an abstract idea; they
 heap together all the atoms of their power, so from a single man; and
 round this man, with the sweat of their labor, they create a misty halo,
 which his genius shall, in turn, render a glory gilded with the rays of
 all the crowns in christendom. such is the man you have beside you,
 monseigneur. it is to tell you that he has drawn you from the abyss for a
 great purpose, to raise you above the powers of the earth—above
 himself.” 
 the prince lightly touched aramis’s arm. “you speak to me,” he said, “of
 that religious order whose chief you are. for me, the result of your words
 is, that the day you desire to hurl down the man you shall have raised,
 the event will be accomplished; and that you will keep under your hand
 your creation of yesterday.”
 “undeceive yourself, monseigneur,” replied the bishop. “i should not take
 the trouble to play this terrible game with your royal highness, if i had
 not a double interest in gaining it. the day you are elevated, you are
 elevated forever; you will overturn the footstool, as you rise, and will
 send it rolling so far, that not even the sight of it will ever again
 recall to you its right to simple gratitude.”
 “oh, monsieur!”
 “your movement, monseigneur, arises from an excellent disposition. i thank
 you. be well assured, i aspire to more than gratitude! i am convinced
 that, when arrived at the summit, you will judge me still more worthy to
 be your friend; and then, monseigneur, we two will do such great deeds,
 that ages hereafter shall long speak of them.”
 “tell me plainly, monsieur—tell me without disguise—what i am
 to-day, and what you aim at my being to-morrow.”
 “you are the son of king louis xiii., brother of louis xiv., natural and
 legitimate heir to the throne of france. in keeping you near him, as
 monsieur has been kept—monsieur, your younger brother—the king
 reserved to himself the right of being legitimate sovereign. the doctors
 only could dispute his legitimacy. but the doctors always prefer the king
 who is to the king who is not. providence has willed that you should be
 persecuted; this persecution to-day consecrates you king of france. you
 had, then, a right to reign, seeing that it is disputed; you had a right
 to be proclaimed seeing that you have been concealed; and you possess
 royal blood, since no one has dared to shed yours, as that of your
 servants has been shed. now see, then, what this providence, which you
 have so often accused of having in every way thwarted you, has done for
 you. it has given you the features, figure, age, and voice of your
 brother; and the very causes of your persecution are about to become those
 of your triumphant restoration. to-morrow, after to-morrow—from the
 very first, regal phantom, living shade of louis xiv., you will sit upon
 his throne, whence the will of heaven, confided in execution to the arm of
 man, will have hurled him, without hope of return.”
 “i understand,” said the prince, “my brother’s blood will not be shed,
 then.”
 “you will be sole arbiter of his fate.”
 “the secret of which they made an evil use against me?”
 “you will employ it against him. what did he do to conceal it? he
 concealed you. living image of himself, you will defeat the conspiracy of
 mazarin and anne of austria. you, my prince, will have the same interest
 in concealing him, who will, as a prisoner, resemble you, as you will
 resemble him as a king.”
 “i fall back on what i was saying to you. who will guard him?”
 “who guarded you?”
 “you know this secret—you have made use of it with regard to myself.
 who else knows it?”
 “the queen-mother and madame de chevreuse.”
 “what will they do?”
 “nothing, if you choose.”
 “how is that?”
 “how can they recognize you, if you act in such a manner that no one can
 recognize you?”
 “‘tis true; but there are grave difficulties.”
 “state them, prince.”
 “my brother is married; i cannot take my brother’s wife.”
 “i will cause spain to consent to a divorce; it is in the interest of your
 new policy; it is human morality. all that is really noble and really
 useful in this world will find its account therein.”
 “the imprisoned king will speak.”
 “to whom do you think he will speak—to the walls?”
 “you mean, by walls, the men in whom you put confidence.”
 “if need be, yes. and besides, your royal highness—”
 “besides?”
 “i was going to say, that the designs of providence do not stop on such a
 fair road. every scheme of this caliber is completed by its results, like
 a geometrical calculation. the king, in prison, will not be for you the
 cause of embarrassment that you have been for the king enthroned. his soul
 is naturally proud and impatient; it is, moreover, disarmed and enfeebled,
 by being accustomed to honors, and by the license of supreme power. the
 same providence which has willed that the concluding step in the
 geometrical calculation i have had the honor of describing to your royal
 highness should be your ascension to the throne, and the destruction of
 him who is hurtful to you, has also determined that the conquered one
 shall soon end both his own and your sufferings. therefore, his soul and
 body have been adapted for but a brief agony. put into prison as a private
 individual, left alone with your doubts, deprived of everything, you have
 exhibited the most sublime, enduring principle of life in withstanding all
 this. but your brother, a captive, forgotten, and in bonds, will not long
 endure the calamity; and heaven will resume his soul at the appointed time—that
 is to say, soon.”
 at this point in aramis’s gloomy analysis, a bird of night uttered from
 the depths of the forest that prolonged and plaintive cry which makes
 every creature tremble.
 “i will exile the deposed king,” said philippe, shuddering; “‘twill be
 more human.”
 “the king’s good pleasure will decide the point,” said aramis. “but has
 the problem been well put? have i brought out of the solution according to
 the wishes or the foresight of your royal highness?”
 “yes, monsieur, yes; you have forgotten nothing—except, indeed, two
 things.”
 “the first?”
 “let us speak of it at once, with the same frankness we have already
 conversed in. let us speak of the causes which may bring about the ruin of
 all the hopes we have conceived. let us speak of the risks we are
 running.”
 “they would be immense, infinite, terrific, insurmountable, if, as i have
 said, all things did not concur to render them of absolutely no account.
 there is no danger either for you or for me, if the constancy and
 intrepidity of your royal highness are equal to that perfection of
 resemblance to your brother which nature has bestowed upon you. i repeat
 it, there are no dangers, only obstacles; a word, indeed, which i find in
 all languages, but have always ill-understood, and, were i king, would
 have obliterated as useless and absurd.”
 “yes, indeed, monsieur; there is a very serious obstacle, an
 insurmountable danger, which you are forgetting.”
 “ah!” said aramis.
 “there is conscience, which cries aloud; remorse, that never dies.”
 “true, true,” said the bishop; “there is a weakness of heart of which you
 remind me. you are right, too, for that, indeed, is an immense obstacle.
 the horse afraid of the ditch, leaps into the middle of it, and is killed!
 the man who trembling crosses his sword with that of another leaves
 loopholes whereby his enemy has him in his power.”
 “have you a brother?” said the young man to aramis.
 “i am alone in the world,” said the latter, with a hard, dry voice.
 “but, surely, there is some one in the world whom you love?” added
 philippe.
 “no one!—yes, i love you.”
 the young man sank into so profound a silence, that the mere sound of his
 respiration seemed like a roaring tumult for aramis. “monseigneur,” he
 resumed, “i have not said all i had to say to your royal highness; i have
 not offered you all the salutary counsels and useful resources which i
 have at my disposal. it is useless to flash bright visions before the eyes
 of one who seeks and loves darkness: useless, too, is it to let the
 magnificence of the cannon’s roar make itself heard in the ears of one who
 loves repose and the quiet of the country. monseigneur, i have your
 happiness spread out before me in my thoughts; listen to my words;
 precious they indeed are, in their import and their sense, for you who
 look with such tender regard upon the bright heavens, the verdant meadows,
 the pure air. i know a country instinct with delights of every kind, an
 unknown paradise, a secluded corner of the world—where alone,
 unfettered and unknown, in the thick covert of the woods, amidst flowers,
 and streams of rippling water, you will forget all the misery that human
 folly has so recently allotted you. oh! listen to me, my prince. i do not
 jest. i have a heart, and mind, and soul, and can read your own,—aye,
 even to its depths. i will not take you unready for your task, in order to
 cast you into the crucible of my own desires, of my caprice, or my
 ambition. let it be all or nothing. you are chilled and galled, sick at
 heart, overcome by excess of the emotions which but one hour’s liberty has
 produced in you. for me, that is a certain and unmistakable sign that you
 do not wish to continue at liberty. would you prefer a more humble life, a
 life more suited to your strength? heaven is my witness, that i wish your
 happiness to be the result of the trial to which i have exposed you.”
 “speak, speak,” said the prince, with a vivacity which did not escape
 aramis.
 “i know,” resumed the prelate, “in the bas-poitou, a canton, of which no
 one in france suspects the existence. twenty leagues of country is
 immense, is it not? twenty leagues, monseigneur, all covered with water
 and herbage, and reeds of the most luxuriant nature; the whole studded
 with islands covered with woods of the densest foliage. these large
 marshes, covered with reeds as with a thick mantle, sleep silently and
 calmly beneath the sun’s soft and genial rays. a few fishermen with their
 families indolently pass their lives away there, with their great
 living-rafts of poplar and alder, the flooring formed of reeds, and the
 roof woven out of thick rushes. these barks, these floating-houses, are
 wafted to and fro by the changing winds. whenever they touch a bank, it is
 but by chance; and so gently, too, that the sleeping fisherman is not
 awakened by the shock. should he wish to land, it is merely because he has
 seen a large flight of landrails or plovers, of wild ducks, teal, widgeon,
 or woodchucks, which fall an easy pray to net or gun. silver shad, eels,
 greedy pike, red and gray mullet, swim in shoals into his nets; he has but
 to choose the finest and largest, and return the others to the waters.
 never yet has the food of the stranger, be he soldier or simple citizen,
 never has any one, indeed, penetrated into that district. the sun’s rays
 there are soft and tempered: in plots of solid earth, whose soil is swart
 and fertile, grows the vine, nourishing with generous juice its purple,
 white, and golden grapes. once a week, a boat is sent to deliver the bread
 which has been baked at an oven—the common property of all. there—like
 the seigneurs of early days—powerful in virtue of your dogs, your
 fishing-lines, your guns, and your beautiful reed-built house, would you
 live, rich in the produce of the chase, in plentitude of absolute secrecy.
 there would years of your life roll away, at the end of which, no longer
 recognizable, for you would have been perfectly transformed, you would
 have succeeded in acquiring a destiny accorded to you by heaven. there are
 a thousand pistoles in this bag, monseigneur—more, far more, than
 sufficient to purchase the whole marsh of which i have spoken; more than
 enough to live there as many years as you have days to live; more than
 enough to constitute you the richest, the freest, and the happiest man in
 the country. accept it, as i offer it you—sincerely, cheerfully.
 forthwith, without a moment’s pause, i will unharness two of my horses,
 which are attached to the carriage yonder, and they, accompanied by my
 servant—my deaf and dumb attendant—shall conduct you—traveling
 throughout the night, sleeping during the day—to the locality i have
 described; and i shall, at least, have the satisfaction of knowing that i
 have rendered to my prince the major service he himself preferred. i shall
 have made one human being happy; and heaven for that will hold me in
 better account than if i had made one man powerful; the former task is far
 more difficult. and now, monseigneur, your answer to this proposition?
 here is the money. nay, do not hesitate. at poitou, you can risk nothing,
 except the chance of catching the fevers prevalent there; and even of
 them, the so-called wizards of the country will cure you, for the sake of
 your pistoles. if you play the other game, you run the chance of being
 assassinated on a throne, strangled in a prison-cell. upon my soul, i
 assure you, now i begin to compare them together, i myself should hesitate
 which lot i should accept.”
 “monsieur,” replied the young prince, “before i determine, let me alight
 from this carriage, walk on the ground, and consult that still voice
 within me, which heaven bids us all to hearken to. ten minutes is all i
 ask, and then you shall have your answer.”
 “as you please, monseigneur,” said aramis, bending before him with
 respect, so solemn and august in tone and address had sounded these
 strange words.
 chapter x. crown and tiara.
 aramis was the first to descend from the carriage; he held the door open
 for the young man. he saw him place his foot on the mossy ground with a
 trembling of the whole body, and walk round the carriage with an unsteady
 and almost tottering step. it seemed as if the poor prisoner was
 unaccustomed to walk on god’s earth. it was the th of august, about
 eleven o’clock at night; thick clouds, portending a tempest, overspread
 the heavens, and shrouded every light and prospect underneath their heavy
 folds. the extremities of the avenues were imperceptibly detached from the
 copse, by a lighter shadow of opaque gray, which, upon closer examination,
 became visible in the midst of the obscurity. but the fragrance which
 ascended from the grass, fresher and more penetrating than that which
 exhaled from the trees around him; the warm and balmy air which enveloped
 him for the first time for many years past; the ineffable enjoyment of
 liberty in an open country, spoke to the prince in so seductive a
 language, that notwithstanding the preternatural caution, we would almost
 say dissimulation of his character, of which we have tried to give an
 idea, he could not restrain his emotion, and breathed a sigh of ecstasy.
 then, by degrees, he raised his aching head and inhaled the softly scented
 air, as it was wafted in gentle gusts to his uplifted face. crossing his
 arms on his chest, as if to control this new sensation of delight, he
 drank in delicious draughts of that mysterious air which interpenetrates
 at night the loftiest forests. the sky he was contemplating, the murmuring
 waters, the universal freshness—was not all this reality? was not
 aramis a madman to suppose that he had aught else to dream of in this
 world? those exciting pictures of country life, so free from fears and
 troubles, the ocean of happy days that glitters incessantly before all
 young imaginations, are real allurements wherewith to fascinate a poor,
 unhappy prisoner, worn out by prison cares, emaciated by the stifling air
 of the bastile. it was the picture, it will be remembered, drawn by
 aramis, when he offered the thousand pistoles he had with him in the
 carriage to the prince, and the enchanted eden which the deserts of
 bas-poitou hid from the eyes of the world. such were the reflections of
 aramis as he watched, with an anxiety impossible to describe, the silent
 progress of the emotions of philippe, whom he perceived gradually becoming
 more and more absorbed in his meditations. the young prince was offering
 up an inward prayer to heaven, to be divinely guided in this trying
 moment, upon which his life or death depended. it was an anxious time for
 the bishop of vannes, who had never before been so perplexed. his iron
 will, accustomed to overcome all obstacles, never finding itself inferior
 or vanquished on any occasion, to be foiled in so vast a project from not
 having foreseen the influence which a view of nature in all its luxuriance
 would have on the human mind! aramis, overwhelmed by anxiety, contemplated
 with emotion the painful struggle that was taking place in philippe’s
 mind. this suspense lasted the whole ten minutes which the young man had
 requested. during this space of time, which appeared an eternity, philippe
 continued gazing with an imploring and sorrowful look towards the heavens;
 aramis did not remove the piercing glance he had fixed on philippe.
 suddenly the young man bowed his head. his thought returned to the earth,
 his looks perceptibly hardened, his brow contracted, his mouth assuming an
 expression of undaunted courage; again his looks became fixed, but this
 time they wore a worldly expression, hardened by covetousness, pride, and
 strong desire. aramis’s look immediately became as soft as it had before
 been gloomy. philippe, seizing his hand in a quick, agitated manner,
 exclaimed:
 “lead me to where the crown of france is to be found.”
 “is this your decision, monseigneur?” asked aramis.
 “it is.”
 “irrevocably so?”
 philippe did not even deign to reply. he gazed earnestly at the bishop, as
 if to ask him if it were possible for a man to waver after having once
 made up his mind.
 “such looks are flashes of the hidden fire that betrays men’s character,”
 said aramis, bowing over philippe’s hand; “you will be great, monseigneur,
 i will answer for that.”
 “let us resume our conversation. i wished to discuss two points with you;
 in the first place the dangers, or the obstacles we may meet with. that
 point is decided. the other is the conditions you intend imposing on me.
 it is your turn to speak, m. d’herblay.”
 “the conditions, monseigneur?”
 “doubtless. you will not allow so mere a trifle to stop me, and you will
 not do me the injustice to suppose that i think you have no interest in
 this affair. therefore, without subterfuge or hesitation, tell me the
 truth—”
 “i will do so, monseigneur. once a king—”
 “when will that be?”
 “to-morrow evening—i mean in the night.”
 “explain yourself.”
 “when i shall have asked your highness a question.”
 “do so.”
 “i sent to your highness a man in my confidence with instructions to
 deliver some closely written notes, carefully drawn up, which will
 thoroughly acquaint your highness with the different persons who compose
 and will compose your court.”
 “i perused those notes.”
 “attentively?”
 “i know them by heart.”
 “and understand them? pardon me, but i may venture to ask that question of
 a poor, abandoned captive of the bastile? in a week’s time it will not be
 requisite to further question a mind like yours. you will then be in full
 possession of liberty and power.”
 “interrogate me, then, and i will be a scholar representing his lesson to
 his master.”
 “we will begin with your family, monseigneur.”
 “my mother, anne of austria! all her sorrows, her painful malady. oh! i
 know her—i know her.”
 “your second brother?” asked aramis, bowing.
 “to these notes,” replied the prince, “you have added portraits so
 faithfully painted, that i am able to recognize the persons whose
 characters, manners, and history you have so carefully portrayed.
 monsieur, my brother, is a fine, dark young man, with a pale face; he does
 not love his wife, henrietta, whom i, louis xiv., loved a little, and
 still flirt with, even although she made me weep on the day she wished to
 dismiss mademoiselle de la valliere from her service in disgrace.”
 “you will have to be careful with regard to the watchfulness of the
 latter,” said aramis; “she is sincerely attached to the actual king. the
 eyes of a woman who loves are not easily deceived.”
 “she is fair, has blue eyes, whose affectionate gaze reveals her identity.
 she halts slightly in her gait; she writes a letter every day, to which i
 have to send an answer by m. de saint-aignan.”
 “do you know the latter?”
 “as if i saw him, and i know the last verses he composed for me, as well
 as those i composed in answer to his.”
 “very good. do you know your ministers?”
 “colbert, an ugly, dark-browed man, but intelligent enough, his hair
 covering his forehead, a large, heavy, full head; the mortal enemy of m.
 fouquet.”
 “as for the latter, we need not disturb ourselves about him.”
 “no; because necessarily you will not require me to exile him, i suppose?”
 aramis, struck with admiration at the remark, said, “you will become very
 great, monseigneur.”
 “you see,” added the prince, “that i know my lesson by heart, and with
 heaven’s assistance, and yours afterwards, i shall seldom go wrong.”
 “you have still an awkward pair of eyes to deal with, monseigneur.”
 “yes, the captain of the musketeers, m. d’artagnan, your friend.”
 “yes; i can well say ‘my friend.’”
 “he who escorted la valliere to le chaillot; he who delivered up monk,
 cooped in an iron box, to charles ii.; he who so faithfully served my
 mother; he to whom the crown of france owes so much that it owes
 everything. do you intend to ask me to exile him also?”
 “never, sire. d’artagnan is a man to whom, at a certain given time, i will
 undertake to reveal everything; but be on your guard with him, for if he
 discovers our plot before it is revealed to him, you or i will certainly
 be killed or taken. he is a bold and enterprising man.”
 “i will think it over. now tell me about m. fouquet; what do you wish to
 be done with regard to him?”
 “one moment more, i entreat you, monseigneur; and forgive me, if i seem to
 fail in respect to questioning you further.”
 “it is your duty to do so, nay, more than that, your right.”
 “before we pass to m. fouquet, i should very much regret forgetting
 another friend of mine.”
 “m. du vallon, the hercules of france, you mean; oh! as far as he is
 concerned, his interests are more than safe.”
 “no; it is not he whom i intended to refer to.”
 “the comte de la fere, then?”
 “and his son, the son of all four of us.”
 “that poor boy who is dying of love for la valliere, whom my brother so
 disloyally bereft him of? be easy on that score. i shall know how to
 rehabilitate his happiness. tell me only one thing, monsieur d’herblay; do
 men, when they love, forget the treachery that has been shown them? can a
 man ever forgive the woman who has betrayed him? is that a french custom,
 or is it one of the laws of the human heart?”
 “a man who loves deeply, as deeply as raoul loves mademoiselle de la
 valliere, finishes by forgetting the fault or crime of the woman he loves;
 but i do not yet know whether raoul will be able to forget.”
 “i will see after that. have you anything further to say about your
 friend?”
 “no; that is all.”
 “well, then, now for m. fouquet. what do you wish me to do for him?”
 “to keep him on as surintendant, in the capacity in which he has hitherto
 acted, i entreat you.”
 “be it so; but he is the first minister at present.”
 “not quite so.”
 “a king, ignorant and embarrassed as i shall be, will, as a matter of
 course, require a first minister of state.”
 “your majesty will require a friend.”
 “i have only one, and that is yourself.”
 “you will have many others by and by, but none so devoted, none so zealous
 for your glory.”
 “you shall be my first minister of state.”
 “not immediately, monseigneur, for that would give rise to too much
 suspicion and astonishment.”
 “m. de richelieu, the first minister of my grandmother, marie de medici,
 was simply bishop of lucon, as you are bishop of vannes.”
 “i perceive that your royal highness has studied my notes to great
 advantage; your amazing perspicacity overpowers me with delight.”
 “i am perfectly aware that m. de richelieu, by means of the queen’s
 protection, soon became cardinal.”
 “it would be better,” said aramis, bowing, “that i should not be appointed
 first minister until your royal highness has procured my nomination as
 cardinal.”
 “you shall be nominated before two months are past, monsieur d’herblay.
 but that is a matter of very trifling moment; you would not offend me if
 you were to ask more than that, and you would cause me serious regret if
 you were to limit yourself to that.”
 “in that case, i have something still further to hope for, monseigneur.”
 “speak! speak!”
 “m. fouquet will not keep long at the head of affairs, he will soon get
 old. he is fond of pleasure, consistently, i mean, with all his labors,
 thanks to the youthfulness he still retains; but this protracted youth
 will disappear at the approach of the first serious annoyance, or at the
 first illness he may experience. we will spare him the annoyance, because
 he is an agreeable and noble-hearted man; but we cannot save him from
 ill-health. so it is determined. when you shall have paid all m. fouquet’s
 debts, and restored the finances to a sound condition, m. fouquet will be
 able to remain the sovereign ruler in his little court of poets and
 painters,—we shall have made him rich. when that has been done, and
 i have become your royal highness’s prime minister, i shall be able to
 think of my own interests and yours.”
 the young man looked at his interrogator.
 “m. de richelieu, of whom we were speaking just now, was very much to
 blame in the fixed idea he had of governing france alone, unaided. he
 allowed two kings, king louis xiii. and himself, to be seated on the
 self-same throne, whilst he might have installed them more conveniently
 upon two separate and distinct thrones.”
 “upon two thrones?” said the young man, thoughtfully.
 “in fact,” pursued aramis, quietly, “a cardinal, prime minister of france,
 assisted by the favor and by the countenance of his most christian majesty
 the king of france, a cardinal to whom the king his master lends the
 treasures of the state, his army, his counsel, such a man would be acting
 with twofold injustice in applying these mighty resources to france alone.
 besides,” added aramis, “you will not be a king such as your father was,
 delicate in health, slow in judgment, whom all things wearied; you will be
 a king governing by your brain and by your sword; you will have in the
 government of the state no more than you will be able to manage unaided; i
 should only interfere with you. besides, our friendship ought never to be,
 i do not say impaired, but in any degree affected, by a secret thought. i
 shall have given you the throne of france, you will confer on me the
 throne of st. peter. whenever your loyal, firm, and mailed hand should
 joined in ties of intimate association the hand of a pope such as i shall
 be, neither charles v., who owned two-thirds of the habitable globe, nor
 charlemagne, who possessed it entirely, will be able to reach to half your
 stature. i have no alliances, i have no predilections; i will not throw
 you into persecutions of heretics, nor will i cast you into the troubled
 waters of family dissension; i will simply say to you: the whole universe
 is our own; for me the minds of men, for you their bodies. and as i shall
 be the first to die, you will have my inheritance. what do you say of my
 plan, monseigneur?”
 “i say that you render me happy and proud, for no other reason than that
 of having comprehended you thoroughly. monsieur d’herblay, you shall be
 cardinal, and when cardinal, my prime minister; and then you will point
 out to me the necessary steps to be taken to secure your election as pope,
 and i will take them. you can ask what guarantees from me you please.”
 “it is useless. never shall i act except in such a manner that you will be
 the gainer; i shall never ascend the ladder of fortune, fame, or position,
 until i have first seen you placed upon the round of the ladder
 immediately above me; i shall always hold myself sufficiently aloof from
 you to escape incurring your jealousy, sufficiently near to sustain your
 personal advantage and to watch over your friendship. all the contracts in
 the world are easily violated because the interests included in them
 incline more to one side than to another. with us, however, this will
 never be the case; i have no need of any guarantees.”
 “and so—my dear brother—will disappear?”
 “simply. we will remove him from his bed by means of a plank which yields
 to the pressure of the finger. having retired to rest a crowned sovereign,
 he will awake a captive. alone you will rule from that moment, and you
 will have no interest dearer and better than that of keeping me near you.”
 “i believe it. there is my hand on it, monsieur d’herblay.”
 “allow me to kneel before you, sire, most respectfully. we will embrace
 each other on the day we shall have upon our temples, you the crown, i the
 tiara.”
 “still embrace me this very day also, and be, for and towards me, more
 than great, more than skillful, more than sublime in genius; be kind and
 indulgent—be my father!”
 aramis was almost overcome as he listened to his voice; he fancied he
 detected in his own heart an emotion hitherto unknown; but this impression
 was speedily removed. “his father!” he thought; “yes, his holy father.”
 and they resumed their places in the carriage, which sped rapidly along
 the road leading to vaux-le-vicomte.
 chapter xi. the chateau de vaux-le-vicomte.
 the chateau of vaux-le-vicomte, situated about a league from melun, had
 been built by fouquet in , at a time when there was a scarcity of
 money in france; mazarin had taken all that there was, and fouquet
 expended the remainder. however, as certain men have fertile, false, and
 useful vices, fouquet, in scattering broadcast millions of money in the
 construction of this palace, had found a means of gathering, as the result
 of his generous profusion, three illustrious men together: levau, the
 architect of the building; lenotre, the designer of the gardens; and
 lebrun, the decorator of the apartments. if the chateau de vaux possessed
 a single fault with which it could be reproached, it was its grand,
 pretentious character. it is even at the present day proverbial to
 calculate the number of acres of roofing, the restoration of which would,
 in our age, be the ruin of fortunes cramped and narrowed as the epoch
 itself. vaux-le-vicomte, when its magnificent gates, supported by
 caryatides, have been passed through, has the principal front of the main
 building opening upon a vast, so-called, court of honor, inclosed by deep
 ditches, bordered by a magnificent stone balustrade. nothing could be more
 noble in appearance than the central forecourt raised upon the flight of
 steps, like a king upon his throne, having around it four pavilions at the
 angles, the immense ionic columns of which rose majestically to the whole
 height of the building. the friezes ornamented with arabesques, and the
 pediments which crowned the pilasters, conferred richness and grace on
 every part of the building, while the domes which surmounted the whole
 added proportion and majesty. this mansion, built by a subject, bore a far
 greater resemblance to those royal residences which wolsey fancied he was
 called upon to construct, in order to present them to his master from the
 fear of rendering him jealous. but if magnificence and splendor were
 displayed in any one particular part of this palace more than another,—if
 anything could be preferred to the wonderful arrangement of the interior,
 to the sumptuousness of the gilding, and to the profusion of the paintings
 and statues, it would be the park and gardens of vaux. the jets d’eau,
 which were regarded as wonderful in , are still so, even at the
 present time; the cascades awakened the admiration of kings and princes;
 and as for the famous grotto, the theme of so many poetical effusions, the
 residence of that illustrious nymph of vaux, whom pelisson made converse
 with la fontaine, we must be spared the description of all its beauties.
 we will do as despreaux did,—we will enter the park, the trees of
 which are of eight years’ growth only—that is to say, in their
 present position—and whose summits even yet, as they proudly tower
 aloft, blushingly unfold their leaves to the earliest rays of the rising
 sun. lenotre had hastened the pleasure of the maecenas of his period; all
 the nursery-grounds had furnished trees whose growth had been accelerated
 by careful culture and the richest plant-food. every tree in the
 neighborhood which presented a fair appearance of beauty or stature had
 been taken up by its roots and transplanted to the park. fouquet could
 well afford to purchase trees to ornament his park, since he had bought up
 three villages and their appurtenances (to use a legal word) to increase
 its extent. m. de scudery said of this palace, that, for the purpose of
 keeping the grounds and gardens well watered, m. fouquet had divided a
 river into a thousand fountains, and gathered the waters of a thousand
 fountains into torrents. this same monsieur de scudery said a great many
 other things in his “clelie,” about this palace of valterre, the charms of
 which he describes most minutely. we should be far wiser to send our
 curious readers to vaux to judge for themselves, than to refer them to
 “clelie;” and yet there are as many leagues from paris to vaux, as there
 are volumes of the “clelie.”
 this magnificent palace had been got ready for the reception of the
 greatest reigning sovereign of the time. m. fouquet’s friends had
 transported thither, some their actors and their dresses, others their
 troops of sculptors and artists; not forgetting others with their
 ready-mended pens,—floods of impromptus were contemplated. the
 cascades, somewhat rebellious nymphs though they were, poured forth their
 waters brighter and clearer than crystal: they scattered over the bronze
 triton and nereids their waves of foam, which glistened like fire in the
 rays of the sun. an army of servants were hurrying to and fro in squadrons
 in the courtyard and corridors; while fouquet, who had only that morning
 arrived, walked all through the palace with a calm, observant glance, in
 order to give his last orders, after his intendants had inspected
 everything.
 it was, as we have said, the th of august. the sun poured down its
 burning rays upon the heathen deities of marble and bronze: it raised the
 temperature of the water in the conch shells, and ripened, on the walls,
 those magnificent peaches, of which the king, fifty years later, spoke so
 regretfully, when, at marly, on an occasion of a scarcity of the finer
 sorts of peaches being complained of, in the beautiful gardens there—gardens
 which had cost france double the amount that had been expended on vaux—the
 great king observed to some one: “you are far too young to have
 eaten any of m. fouquet’s peaches.”
 oh, fame! oh, blazon of renown! oh, glory of this earth! that very man
 whose judgment was so sound and accurate where merit was concerned—he
 who had swept into his coffers the inheritance of nicholas fouquet, who
 had robbed him of lenotre and lebrun, and had sent him to rot for the
 remainder of his life in one of the state prisons—merely remembered
 the peaches of that vanquished, crushed, forgotten enemy! it was to little
 purpose that fouquet had squandered thirty millions of francs in the
 fountains of his gardens, in the crucibles of his sculptors, in the
 writing-desks of his literary friends, in the portfolios of his painters;
 vainly had he fancied that thereby he might be remembered. a peach—a
 blushing, rich-flavored fruit, nestling in the trellis work on the
 garden-wall, hidden beneath its long, green leaves,—this little
 vegetable production, that a dormouse would nibble up without a thought,
 was sufficient to recall to the memory of this great monarch the mournful
 shade of the last surintendant of france.
 with a perfect reliance that aramis had made arrangements fairly to
 distribute the vast number of guests throughout the palace, and that he
 had not omitted to attend to any of the internal regulations for their
 comfort, fouquet devoted his entire attention to the ensemble
 alone. in one direction gourville showed him the preparations which had
 been made for the fireworks; in another, moliere led him over the theater;
 at last, after he had visited the chapel, the salons, and the
 galleries, and was again going downstairs, exhausted with fatigue, fouquet
 saw aramis on the staircase. the prelate beckoned to him. the surintendant
 joined his friend, and, with him, paused before a large picture scarcely
 finished. applying himself, heart and soul, to his work, the painter
 lebrun, covered with perspiration, stained with paint, pale from fatigue
 and the inspiration of genius, was putting the last finishing touches with
 his rapid brush. it was the portrait of the king, whom they were
 expecting, dressed in the court suit which percerin had condescended to
 show beforehand to the bishop of vannes. fouquet placed himself before
 this portrait, which seemed to live, as one might say, in the cool
 freshness of its flesh, and in its warmth of color. he gazed upon it long
 and fixedly, estimated the prodigious labor that had been bestowed upon
 it, and, not being able to find any recompense sufficiently great for this
 herculean effort, he passed his arm round the painter’s neck and embraced
 him. the surintendant, by this action, had utterly ruined a suit of
 clothes worth a thousand pistoles, but he had satisfied, more than
 satisfied, lebrun. it was a happy moment for the artist; it was an unhappy
 moment for m. percerin, who was walking behind fouquet, and was engaged in
 admiring, in lebrun’s painting, the suit that he had made for his majesty,
 a perfect objet d’art, as he called it, which was not to be matched
 except in the wardrobe of the surintendant. his distress and his
 exclamations were interrupted by a signal which had been given from the
 summit of the mansion. in the direction of melun, in the still empty, open
 plain, the sentinels of vaux had just perceived the advancing procession
 of the king and the queens. his majesty was entering melun with his long
 train of carriages and cavaliers.
 “in an hour—” said aramis to fouquet.
 “in an hour!” replied the latter, sighing.
 “and the people who ask one another what is the good of these royal fetes!”
 continued the bishop of vannes, laughing, with his false smile.
 “alas! i, too, who am not the people, ask myself the same thing.”
 “i will answer you in four and twenty hours, monseigneur. assume a
 cheerful countenance, for it should be a day of true rejoicing.”
 “well, believe me or not, as you like, d’herblay,” said the surintendant,
 with a swelling heart, pointing at the cortege of louis, visible in
 the horizon, “he certainly loves me but very little, and i do not care
 much more for him; but i cannot tell you how it is, that since he is
 approaching my house—”
 “well, what?”
 “well, since i know he is on his way here, as my guest, he is more sacred
 than ever for me; he is my acknowledged sovereign, and as such is very
 dear to me.”
 “dear? yes,” said aramis, playing upon the word, as the abbe terray did,
 at a later period, with louis xv.
 “do not laugh, d’herblay; i feel that, if he really seemed to wish it, i
 could love that young man.”
 “you should not say that to me,” returned aramis, “but rather to m.
 colbert.”
 “to m. colbert!” exclaimed fouquet. “why so?”
 “because he would allow you a pension out of the king’s privy purse, as
 soon as he becomes surintendant,” said aramis, preparing to leave as soon
 as he had dealt this last blow.
 “where are you going?” returned fouquet, with a gloomy look.
 “to my own apartment, in order to change my costume, monseigneur.”
 “whereabouts are you lodging, d’herblay?”
 “in the blue room on the second story.”
 “the room immediately over the king’s room?”
 “precisely.”
 “you will be subject to very great restraint there. what an idea to
 condemn yourself to a room where you cannot stir or move about!”
 “during the night, monseigneur, i sleep or read in my bed.”
 “and your servants?”
 “i have but one attendant with me. i find my reader quite sufficient.
 adieu, monseigneur; do not overfatigue yourself; keep yourself fresh for
 the arrival of the king.”
 “we shall see you by and by, i suppose, and shall see your friend du
 vallon also?”
 “he is lodging next to me, and is at this moment dressing.”
 and fouquet, bowing, with a smile, passed on like a commander-in-chief who
 pays the different outposts a visit after the enemy has been signaled in
 sight. 
 chapter xii. the wine of melun.
 the king had, in point of fact, entered melun with the intention of merely
 passing through the city. the youthful monarch was most eagerly anxious
 for amusements; only twice during the journey had he been able to catch a
 glimpse of la valliere, and, suspecting that his only opportunity of
 speaking to her would be after nightfall, in the gardens, and after the
 ceremonial of reception had been gone through, he had been very desirous
 to arrive at vaux as early as possible. but he reckoned without his
 captain of the musketeers, and without m. colbert. like calypso, who could
 not be consoled at the departure of ulysses, our gascon could not console
 himself for not having guessed why aramis had asked percerin to show him
 the king’s new costumes. “there is not a doubt,” he said to himself, “that
 my friend the bishop of vannes had some motive in that;” and then he began
 to rack his brains most uselessly. d’artagnan, so intimately acquainted
 with all the court intrigues, who knew the position of fouquet better than
 even fouquet himself did, had conceived the strangest fancies and
 suspicions at the announcement of the fete, which would have ruined
 a wealthy man, and which became impossible, utter madness even, for a man
 so poor as he was. and then, the presence of aramis, who had returned from
 belle-isle, and been nominated by monsieur fouquet inspector-general of
 all the arrangements; his perseverance in mixing himself up with all the
 surintendant’s affairs; his visits to baisemeaux; all this suspicious
 singularity of conduct had excessively troubled and tormented d’artagnan
 during the last two weeks.
 “with men of aramis’s stamp,” he said, “one is never the stronger except
 sword in hand. so long as aramis continued a soldier, there was hope of
 getting the better of him; but since he has covered his cuirass with a
 stole, we are lost. but what can aramis’s object possibly be?” and
 d’artagnan plunged again into deep thought. “what does it matter to me,
 after all,” he continued, “if his only object is to overthrow m. colbert?
 and what else can he be after?” and d’artagnan rubbed his forehead—that
 fertile land, whence the plowshare of his nails had turned up so many and
 such admirable ideas in his time. he, at first, thought of talking the
 matter over with colbert, but his friendship for aramis, the oath of
 earlier days, bound him too strictly. he revolted at the bare idea of such
 a thing, and, besides, he hated the financier too cordially. then, again,
 he wished to unburden his mind to the king; but yet the king would not be
 able to understand the suspicions which had not even a shadow of reality
 at their base. he resolved to address himself to aramis, direct, the first
 time he met him. “i will get him,” said the musketeer, “between a couple
 of candles, suddenly, and when he least expects it, i will place my hand
 upon his heart, and he will tell me—what will he tell me? yes, he
 will tell me something, for mordioux! there is something in it, i
 know.”
 somewhat calmer, d’artagnan made every preparation for the journey, and
 took the greatest care that the military household of the king, as yet
 very inconsiderable in numbers, should be well officered and well
 disciplined in its meager and limited proportions. the result was that,
 through the captain’s arrangements, the king, on arriving at melun, saw
 himself at the head of both the musketeers and swiss guards, as well as a
 picket of the french guards. it might almost have been called a small
 army. m. colbert looked at the troops with great delight: he even wished
 they had been a third more in number.
 “but why?” said the king.
 “in order to show greater honor to m. fouquet,” replied colbert.
 “in order to ruin him the sooner,” thought d’artagnan.
 when this little army appeared before melun, the chief magistrates came
 out to meet the king, and to present him with the keys of the city, and
 invited him to enter the hotel de ville, in order to partake of the wine
 of honor. the king, who expected to pass through the city and to proceed
 to vaux without delay, became quite red in the face from vexation.
 “who was fool enough to occasion this delay?” muttered the king, between
 his teeth, as the chief magistrate was in the middle of a long address.
 “not i, certainly,” replied d’artagnan, “but i believe it was m. colbert.”
 colbert, having heard his name pronounced, said, “what was m. d’artagnan
 good enough to say?”
 “i was good enough to remark that it was you who stopped the king’s
 progress, so that he might taste the vin de brie. was i right?”
 “quite so, monsieur.”
 “in that case, then, it was you whom the king called some name or other.”
 “what name?”
 “i hardly know; but wait a moment—idiot, i think it was—no,
 no, it was fool or dolt. yes; his majesty said that the man who had
 thought of the vin de melun was something of the sort.”
 d’artagnan, after this broadside, quietly caressed his mustache; m.
 colbert’s large head seemed to become larger and larger than ever.
 d’artagnan, seeing how ugly anger made him, did not stop half-way. the
 orator still went on with his speech, while the king’s color was visibly
 increasing.
 “mordioux!” said the musketeer, coolly, “the king is going to have
 an attack of determination of blood to the head. where the deuce did you
 get hold of that idea, monsieur colbert? you have no luck.”
 “monsieur,” said the financier, drawing himself up, “my zeal for the
 king’s service inspired me with the idea.”
 “bah!”
 “monsieur, melun is a city, an excellent city, which pays well, and which
 it would be imprudent to displease.”
 “there, now! i, who do not pretend to be a financier, saw only one idea in
 your idea.”
 “what was that, monsieur?”
 “that of causing a little annoyance to m. fouquet, who is making himself
 quite giddy on his donjons yonder, in waiting for us.”
 this was a home-stroke, hard enough in all conscience. colbert was
 completely thrown out of the saddle by it, and retired, thoroughly
 discomfited. fortunately, the speech was now at an end; the king drank the
 wine which was presented to him, and then every one resumed the progress
 through the city. the king bit his lips in anger, for the evening was
 closing in, and all hope of a walk with la valliere was at an end. in
 order that the whole of the king’s household should enter vaux, four hours
 at least were necessary, owing to the different arrangements. the king,
 therefore, who was boiling with impatience, hurried forward as much as
 possible, in order to reach it before nightfall. but, at the moment he was
 setting off again, other and fresh difficulties arose.
 “is not the king going to sleep at melun?” said colbert, in a low tone of
 voice, to d’artagnan.
 m. colbert must have been badly inspired that day, to address himself in
 that manner to the chief of the musketeers; for the latter guessed that
 the king’s intention was very far from that of remaining where he was.
 d’artagnan would not allow him to enter vaux except he were well and
 strongly accompanied; and desired that his majesty would not enter except
 with all the escort. on the other hand, he felt that these delays would
 irritate that impatient monarch beyond measure. in what way could he
 possibly reconcile these difficulties? d’artagnan took up colbert’s
 remark, and determined to repeated it to the king.
 “sire,” he said, “m. colbert has been asking me if your majesty does not
 intend to sleep at melun.”
 “sleep at melun! what for?” exclaimed louis xiv. “sleep at melun! who, in
 heaven’s name, can have thought of such a thing, when m. fouquet is
 expecting us this evening?”
 “it was simply,” replied colbert, quickly, “the fear of causing your
 majesty the least delay; for, according to established etiquette, you
 cannot enter any place, with the exception of your own royal residences,
 until the soldiers’ quarters have been marked out by the quartermaster,
 and the garrison properly distributed.”
 d’artagnan listened with the greatest attention, biting his mustache to
 conceal his vexation; and the queens were not less interested. they were
 fatigued, and would have preferred to go to rest without proceeding any
 farther; more especially, in order to prevent the king walking about in
 the evening with m. de saint-aignan and the ladies of the court, for, if
 etiquette required the princesses to remain within their own rooms, the
 ladies of honor, as soon as they had performed the services required of
 them, had no restrictions placed upon them, but were at liberty to walk
 about as they pleased. it will easily be conjectured that all these rival
 interests, gathering together in vapors, necessarily produced clouds, and
 that the clouds were likely to be followed by a tempest. the king had no
 mustache to gnaw, and therefore kept biting the handle of his whip
 instead, with ill-concealed impatience. how could he get out of it?
 d’artagnan looked as agreeable as possible, and colbert as sulky as he
 could. who was there he could get in a passion with?
 “we will consult the queen,” said louis xiv., bowing to the royal ladies.
 and this kindness of consideration softened maria theresa’s heart, who,
 being of a kind and generous disposition, when left to her own free-will,
 replied:
 “i shall be delighted to do whatever your majesty wishes.”
 “how long will it take us to get to vaux?” inquired anne of austria, in
 slow and measured accents, placing her hand upon her bosom, where the seat
 of her pain lay.
 “an hour for your majesty’s carriages,” said d’artagnan; “the roads are
 tolerably good.”
 the king looked at him. “and a quarter of an hour for the king,” he
 hastened to add.
 “we should arrive by daylight?” said louis xiv.
 “but the billeting of the king’s military escort,” objected colbert,
 softly, “will make his majesty lose all the advantage of his speed,
 however quick he may be.”
 “double ass that you are!” thought d’artagnan; “if i had any interest or
 motive in demolishing your credit with the king, i could do it in ten
 minutes. if i were in the king’s place,” he added aloud, “i should, in
 going to m. fouquet, leave my escort behind me; i should go to him as a
 friend; i should enter accompanied only by my captain of the guards; i
 should consider that i was acting more nobly, and should be invested with
 a still more sacred character by doing so.”
 delight sparkled in the king’s eyes. “that is indeed a very sensible
 suggestion. we will go to see a friend as friends; the gentlemen who are
 with the carriages can go slowly: but we who are mounted will ride on.”
 and he rode off, accompanied by all those who were mounted. colbert hid
 his ugly head behind his horse’s neck.
 “i shall be quits,” said d’artagnan, as he galloped along, “by getting a
 little talk with aramis this evening. and then, m. fouquet is a man of
 honor. mordioux! i have said so, and it must be so.”
 and this was the way how, towards seven o’clock in the evening, without
 announcing his arrival by the din of trumpets, and without even his
 advanced guard, without out-riders or musketeers, the king presented
 himself before the gate of vaux, where fouquet, who had been informed of
 his royal guest’s approach, had been waiting for the last half-hour, with
 his head uncovered, surrounded by his household and his friends.
 chapter xiii. nectar and ambrosia.
 m. fouquet held the stirrup of the king, who, having dismounted, bowed
 most graciously, and more graciously still held out his hand to him, which
 fouquet, in spite of a slight resistance on the king’s part, carried
 respectfully to his lips. the king wished to wait in the first courtyard
 for the arrival of the carriages, nor had he long to wait, for the roads
 had been put into excellent order by the superintendent, and a stone would
 hardly have been found of the size of an egg the whole way from melun to
 vaux; so that the carriages, rolling along as though on a carpet, brought
 the ladies to vaux, without jolting or fatigue, by eight o’clock. they
 were received by madame fouquet, and at the moment they made their
 appearance, a light as bright as day burst forth from every quarter,
 trees, vases, and marble statues. this species of enchantment lasted until
 their majesties had retired into the palace. all these wonders and magical
 effects which the chronicler has heaped up, or rather embalmed, in his
 recital, at the risk of rivaling the brain-born scenes of romancers; these
 splendors whereby night seemed vanquished and nature corrected, together
 with every delight and luxury combined for the satisfaction of all the
 senses, as well as the imagination, fouquet did in real truth offer to his
 sovereign in that enchanting retreat of which no monarch could at that
 time boast of possessing an equal. we do not intend to describe the grand
 banquet, at which the royal guests were present, nor the concerts, nor the
 fairy-like and more than magic transformations and metamorphoses; it will
 be enough for our purpose to depict the countenance the king assumed,
 which, from being gay, soon wore a very gloomy, constrained, and irritated
 expression. he remembered his own residence, royal though it was, and the
 mean and indifferent style of luxury that prevailed there, which comprised
 but little more than what was merely useful for the royal wants, without
 being his own personal property. the large vases of the louvre, the older
 furniture and plate of henry ii., of francis i., and of louis xi., were
 but historic monuments of earlier days; nothing but specimens of art, the
 relics of his predecessors; while with fouquet, the value of the article
 was as much in the workmanship as in the article itself. fouquet ate from
 a gold service, which artists in his own employ had modeled and cast for
 him alone. fouquet drank wines of which the king of france did not even
 know the name, and drank them out of goblets each more valuable than the
 entire royal cellar.
 what, too, was to be said of the apartments, the hangings, the pictures,
 the servants and officers, of every description, of his household? what of
 the mode of service in which etiquette was replaced by order; stiff
 formality by personal, unrestrained comfort; the happiness and contentment
 of the guest became the supreme law of all who obeyed the host? the
 perfect swarm of busily engaged persons moving about noiselessly; the
 multitude of guests,—who were, however, even less numerous than the
 servants who waited on them,—the myriad of exquisitely prepared
 dishes, of gold and silver vases; the floods of dazzling light, the masses
 of unknown flowers of which the hot-houses had been despoiled, redundant
 with luxuriance of unequaled scent and beauty; the perfect harmony of the
 surroundings, which, indeed, was no more than the prelude of the promised
 fete, charmed all who were there; and they testified their
 admiration over and over again, not by voice or gesture, but by deep
 silence and rapt attention, those two languages of the courtier which
 acknowledge the hand of no master powerful enough to restrain them.
 as for the king, his eyes filled with tears; he dared not look at the
 queen. anne of austria, whose pride was superior to that of any creature
 breathing, overwhelmed her host by the contempt with which she treated
 everything handed to her. the young queen, kind-hearted by nature and
 curious by disposition, praised fouquet, ate with an exceedingly good
 appetite, and asked the names of the strange fruits as they were placed
 upon the table. fouquet replied that he was not aware of their names. the
 fruits came from his own stores; he had often cultivated them himself,
 having an intimate acquaintance with the cultivation of exotic fruits and
 plants. the king felt and appreciated the delicacy of the replies, but was
 only the more humiliated; he thought the queen a little too familiar in
 her manners, and that anne of austria resembled juno a little too much, in
 being too proud and haughty; his chief anxiety, however, was himself, that
 he might remain cold and distant in his behavior, bordering lightly the
 limits of supreme disdain or simple admiration.
 but fouquet had foreseen all this; he was, in fact, one of those men who
 foresee everything. the king had expressly declared that, so long as he
 remained under fouquet’s roof, he did not wish his own different repasts
 to be served in accordance with the usual etiquette, and that he would,
 consequently, dine with the rest of society; but by the thoughtful
 attention of the surintendant, the king’s dinner was served up separately,
 if one may so express it, in the middle of the general table; the dinner,
 wonderful in every respect, from the dishes of which was composed,
 comprised everything the king liked and generally preferred to anything
 else. louis had no excuse—he, indeed, who had the keenest appetite
 in his kingdom—for saying that he was not hungry. nay, m. fouquet
 did even better still; he certainly, in obedience to the king’s expressed
 desire, seated himself at the table, but as soon as the soups were served,
 he arose and personally waited on the king, while madame fouquet stood
 behind the queen-mother’s armchair. the disdain of juno and the sulky fits
 of temper of jupiter could not resist this excess of kindly feeling and
 polite attention. the queen ate a biscuit dipped in a glass of san-lucar
 wine; and the king ate of everything, saying to m. fouquet: “it is
 impossible, monsieur le surintendant, to dine better anywhere.” whereupon
 the whole court began, on all sides, to devour the dishes spread before
 them with such enthusiasm that it looked as though a cloud of egyptian
 locusts was settling down on green and growing crops.
 as soon, however, as his hunger was appeased, the king became morose and
 overgloomed again; the more so in proportion to the satisfaction he
 fancied he had previously manifested, and particularly on account of the
 deferential manner which his courtiers had shown towards fouquet.
 d’artagnan, who ate a good deal and drank but little, without allowing it
 to be noticed, did not lose a single opportunity, but made a great number
 of observations which he turned to good profit.
 when the supper was finished, the king expressed a wish not to lose the
 promenade. the park was illuminated; the moon, too, as if she had placed
 herself at the orders of the lord of vaux, silvered the trees and lake
 with her own bright and quasi-phosphorescent light. the air was strangely
 soft and balmy; the daintily shell-gravelled walks through the thickly set
 avenues yielded luxuriously to the feet. the fete was complete in
 every respect, for the king, having met la valliere in one of the winding
 paths of the wood, was able to press her hand and say, “i love you,”
 without any one overhearing him except m. d’artagnan, who followed, and m.
 fouquet, who preceded him.
 the dreamy night of magical enchantments stole smoothly on. the king
 having requested to be shown to his room, there was immediately a movement
 in every direction. the queens passed to their own apartments, accompanied
 by them music of theorbos and lutes; the king found his musketeers
 awaiting him on the grand flight of steps, for m. fouquet had brought them
 on from melun and had invited them to supper. d’artagnan’s suspicions at
 once disappeared. he was weary, he had supped well, and wished, for once
 in his life, thoroughly to enjoy a fete given by a man who was in
 every sense of the word a king. “m. fouquet,” he said, “is the man for
 me.”
 the king was conducted with the greatest ceremony to the chamber of
 morpheus, of which we owe some cursory description to our readers. it was
 the handsomest and largest in the palace. lebrun had painted on the
 vaulted ceiling the happy as well as the unhappy dreams which morpheus
 inflicts on kings as well as on other men. everything that sleep gives
 birth to that is lovely, its fairy scenes, its flowers and nectar, the
 wild voluptuousness or profound repose of the senses, had the painter
 elaborated on his frescoes. it was a composition as soft and pleasing in
 one part as dark and gloomy and terrible in another. the poisoned chalice,
 the glittering dagger suspended over the head of the sleeper; wizards and
 phantoms with terrific masks, those half-dim shadows more alarming than
 the approach of fire or the somber face of midnight, these, and such as
 these, he had made the companions of his more pleasing pictures. no sooner
 had the king entered his room than a cold shiver seemed to pass through
 him, and on fouquet asking him the cause of it, the king replied, as pale
 as death:
 “i am sleepy, that is all.”
 “does your majesty wish for your attendants at once?”
 “no; i have to talk with a few persons first,” said the king. “will you
 have the goodness to tell m. colbert i wish to see him.”
 fouquet bowed and left the room.
 chapter xiv. a gascon, and a gascon and a half.
 d’artagnan had determined to lose no time, and in fact he never was in the
 habit of doing so. after having inquired for aramis, he had looked for him
 in every direction until he had succeeded in finding him. besides, no
 sooner had the king entered vaux, than aramis had retired to his own room,
 meditating, doubtless, some new piece of gallant attention for his
 majesty’s amusement. d’artagnan desired the servants to announce him, and
 found on the second story (in a beautiful room called the blue chamber, on
 account of the color of its hangings) the bishop of vannes in company with
 porthos and several of the modern epicureans. aramis came forward to
 embrace his friend, and offered him the best seat. as it was after awhile
 generally remarked among those present that the musketeer was reserved,
 and wished for an opportunity for conversing secretly with aramis, the
 epicureans took their leave. porthos, however, did not stir; for true it
 is that, having dined exceedingly well, he was fast asleep in his
 armchair; and the freedom of conversation therefore was not interrupted by
 a third person. porthos had a deep, harmonious snore, and people might
 talk in the midst of its loud bass without fear of disturbing him.
 d’artagnan felt that he was called upon to open the conversation.
 “well, and so we have come to vaux,” he said.
 “why, yes, d’artagnan. and how do you like the place?”
 “very much, and i like m. fouquet, also.”
 “is he not a charming host?”
 “no one could be more so.”
 “i am told that the king began by showing great distance of manner towards
 m. fouquet, but that his majesty grew much more cordial afterwards.”
 “you did not notice it, then, since you say you have been told so?”
 “no; i was engaged with the gentlemen who have just left the room about
 the theatrical performances and the tournaments which are to take place
 to-morrow.”
 “ah, indeed! you are the comptroller-general of the fetes here,
 then?”
 “you know i am a friend of all kinds of amusement where the exercise of
 the imagination is called into activity; i have always been a poet in one
 way or another.”
 “yes, i remember the verses you used to write, they were charming.”
 “i have forgotten them, but i am delighted to read the verses of others,
 when those others are known by the names of moliere, pelisson, la
 fontaine, etc.”
 “do you know what idea occurred to me this evening, aramis?”
 “no; tell me what it was, for i should never be able to guess it, you have
 so many.”
 “well, the idea occurred to me, that the true king of france is not louis
 “what!” said aramis, involuntarily, looking the musketeer full in
 the eyes.
 “no, it is monsieur fouquet.”
 aramis breathed again, and smiled. “ah! you are like all the rest,
 jealous,” he said. “i would wager that it was m. colbert who turned that
 pretty phrase.” d’artagnan, in order to throw aramis off his guard,
 related colbert’s misadventures with regard to the vin de melun.
 “he comes of a mean race, does colbert,” said aramis.
 “quite true.”
 “when i think, too,” added the bishop, “that that fellow will be your
 minister within four months, and that you will serve him as blindly as you
 did richelieu or mazarin—”
 “and as you serve m. fouquet,” said d’artagnan.
 “with this difference, though, that m. fouquet is not m. colbert.”
 “true, true,” said d’artagnan, as he pretended to become sad and full of
 reflection; and then, a moment after, he added, “why do you tell me that
 m. colbert will be minister in four months?”
 “because m. fouquet will have ceased to be so,” replied aramis.
 “he will be ruined, you mean?” said d’artagnan.
 “completely so.”
 “why does he give these fetes, then?” said the musketeer, in a tone
 so full of thoughtful consideration, and so well assumed, that the bishop
 was for the moment deceived by it. “why did you not dissuade him from it?”
 the latter part of the phrase was just a little too much, and aramis’s
 former suspicions were again aroused. “it is done with the object of
 humoring the king.”
 “by ruining himself?”
 “yes, by ruining himself for the king.”
 “a most eccentric, one might say, sinister calculation, that.”
 “necessity, necessity, my friend.”
 “i don’t see that, dear aramis.”
 “do you not? have you not remarked m. colbert’s daily increasing
 antagonism, and that he is doing his utmost to drive the king to get rid
 of the superintendent?”
 “one must be blind not to see it.”
 “and that a cabal is already armed against m. fouquet?”
 “that is well known.”
 “what likelihood is there that the king would join a party formed against
 a man who will have spent everything he had to please him?”
 “true, true,” said d’artagnan, slowly, hardly convinced, yet curious to
 broach another phase of the conversation. “there are follies, and
 follies,” he resumed, “and i do not like those you are committing.”
 “what do you allude to?”
 “as for the banquet, the ball, the concert, the theatricals, the
 tournaments, the cascades, the fireworks, the illuminations, and the
 presents—these are well and good, i grant; but why were not these
 expenses sufficient? why was it necessary to have new liveries and
 costumes for your whole household?”
 “you are quite right. i told m. fouquet that myself; he replied, that if
 he were rich enough he would offer the king a newly erected chateau, from
 the vanes at the houses to the very sub-cellars; completely new inside and
 out; and that, as soon as the king had left, he would burn the whole
 building and its contents, in order that it might not be made use of by
 any one else.”
 “how completely spanish!”
 “i told him so, and he then added this: ‘whoever advises me to spare
 expense, i shall look upon as my enemy.’”
 “it is positive madness; and that portrait, too!”
 “what portrait?” said aramis.
 “that of the king, and the surprise as well.”
 “what surprise?”
 “the surprise you seem to have in view, and on account of which you took
 some specimens away, when i met you at percerin’s.” d’artagnan paused. the
 shaft was discharged, and all he had to do was to wait and watch its
 effect.
 “that is merely an act of graceful attention,” replied aramis.
 d’artagnan went up to his friend, took hold of both his hands, and looking
 him full in the eyes, said, “aramis, do you still care for me a very
 little?”
 “what a question to ask!”
 “very good. one favor, then. why did you take some patterns of the king’s
 costumes at percerin’s?”
 “come with me and ask poor lebrun, who has been working upon them for the
 last two days and nights.”
 “aramis, that may be truth for everybody else, but for me—”
 “upon my word, d’artagnan, you astonish me.”
 “be a little considerate. tell me the exact truth; you would not like
 anything disagreeable to happen to me, would you?”
 “my dear friend, you are becoming quite incomprehensible. what suspicion
 can you have possibly got hold of?”
 “do you believe in my instinctive feelings? formerly you used to have
 faith in them. well, then, an instinct tells me that you have some
 concealed project on foot.”
 “i—a project?”
 “i am convinced of it.”
 “what nonsense!”
 “i am not only sure of it, but i would even swear it.”
 “indeed, d’artagnan, you cause me the greatest pain. is it likely, if i
 have any project in hand that i ought to keep secret from you, i should
 tell you about it? if i had one that i could and ought to have revealed,
 should i not have long ago divulged it?”
 “no, aramis, no. there are certain projects which are never revealed until
 the favorable opportunity arrives.”
 “in that case, my dear fellow,” returned the bishop, laughing, “the only
 thing now is, that the ‘opportunity’ has not yet arrived.”
 d’artagnan shook his head with a sorrowful expression. “oh, friendship,
 friendship!” he said, “what an idle word you are! here is a man who, if i
 were but to ask it, would suffer himself to be cut in pieces for my sake.”
 “you are right,” said aramis, nobly.
 “and this man, who would shed every drop of blood in his veins for me,
 will not open up before me the least corner in his heart. friendship, i
 repeat, is nothing but an unsubstantial shadow—a lure, like
 everything else in this bright, dazzling world.”
 “it is not thus you should speak of our friendship,” replied the
 bishop, in a firm, assured voice; “for ours is not of the same nature as
 those of which you have been speaking.”
 “look at us, aramis; three out of the old ‘four.’ you are deceiving me; i
 suspect you; and porthos is fast asleep. an admirable trio of friends,
 don’t you think so? what an affecting relic of the former dear old times!”
 “i can only tell you one thing, d’artagnan, and i swear it on the bible: i
 love you just as i used to do. if i ever suspect you, it is on account of
 others, and not on account of either of us. in everything i may do, and
 should happen to succeed in, you will find your fourth. will you promise
 me the same favor?”
 “if i am not mistaken, aramis, your words—at the moment you
 pronounce them—are full of generous feeling.”
 “such a thing is very possible.”
 “you are conspiring against m. colbert. if that be all, mordioux,
 tell me so at once. i have the instrument in my own hand, and will pull
 out the tooth easily enough.”
 aramis could not conceal a smile of disdain that flitted over his haughty
 features. “and supposing that i were conspiring against colbert, what harm
 would there be in that?”
 “no, no; that would be too trifling a matter for you to take in hand, and
 it was not on that account you asked percerin for those patterns of the
 king’s costumes. oh! aramis, we are not enemies, remember—we are
 brothers. tell me what you wish to undertake, and, upon the word of a
 d’artagnan, if i cannot help you, i will swear to remain neuter.”
 “i am undertaking nothing,” said aramis.
 “aramis, a voice within me speaks and seems to trickle forth a rill of
 light within my darkness: it is a voice that has never yet deceived me. it
 is the king you are conspiring against.”
 “the king?” exclaimed the bishop, pretending to be annoyed.
 “your face will not convince me; the king, i repeat.”
 “will you help me?” said aramis, smiling ironically.
 “aramis, i will do more than help you—i will do more than remain
 neuter—i will save you.”
 “you are mad, d’artagnan.”
 “i am the wiser of the two, in this matter.”
 “you to suspect me of wishing to assassinate the king!”
 “who spoke of such a thing?” smiled the musketeer.
 “well, let us understand one another. i do not see what any one can do to
 a legitimate king as ours is, if he does not assassinate him.” d’artagnan
 did not say a word. “besides, you have your guards and your musketeers
 here,” said the bishop.
 “true.”
 “you are not in m. fouquet’s house, but in your own.”
 “true; but in spite of that, aramis, grant me, for pity’s sake, one single
 word of a true friend.”
 “a true friend’s word is ever truth itself. if i think of touching, even
 with my finger, the son of anne of austria, the true king of this realm of
 france—if i have not the firm intention of prostrating myself before
 his throne—if in every idea i may entertain to-morrow, here at vaux,
 will not be the most glorious day my king ever enjoyed—may heaven’s
 lightning blast me where i stand!” aramis had pronounced these words with
 his face turned towards the alcove of his own bedroom, where d’artagnan,
 seated with his back towards the alcove, could not suspect that any one
 was lying concealed. the earnestness of his words, the studied slowness
 with which he pronounced them, the solemnity of his oath, gave the
 musketeer the most complete satisfaction. he took hold of both aramis’s
 hands, and shook them cordially. aramis had endured reproaches without
 turning pale, and had blushed as he listened to words of praise.
 d’artagnan, deceived, did him honor; but d’artagnan, trustful and reliant,
 made him feel ashamed. “are you going away?” he said, as he embraced him,
 in order to conceal the flush on his face.
 “yes. duty summons me. i have to get the watch-word. it seems i am to be
 lodged in the king’s ante-room. where does porthos sleep?”
 “take him away with you, if you like, for he rumbles through his sleepy
 nose like a park of artillery.”
 “ah! he does not stay with you, then?” said d’artagnan.
 “not the least in the world. he has a chamber to himself, but i don’t know
 where.”
 “very good!” said the musketeer; from whom this separation of the two
 associates removed his last suspicion, and he touched porthos lightly on
 the shoulder; the latter replied by a loud yawn. “come,” said d’artagnan.
 “what, d’artagnan, my dear fellow, is that you? what a lucky chance! oh,
 yes—true; i have forgotten; i am at the fete at vaux.”
 “yes; and your beautiful dress, too.”
 “yes, it was very attentive on the part of monsieur coquelin de voliere,
 was it not?”
 “hush!” said aramis. “you are walking so heavily you will make the
 flooring give way.”
 “true,” said the musketeer; “this room is above the dome, i think.”
 “and i did not choose it for a fencing-room, i assure you,” added the
 bishop. “the ceiling of the king’s room has all the lightness and calm of
 wholesome sleep. do not forget, therefore, that my flooring is merely the
 covering of his ceiling. good night, my friends, and in ten minutes i
 shall be asleep myself.” and aramis accompanied them to the door, laughing
 quietly all the while. as soon as they were outside, he bolted the door,
 hurriedly; closed up the chinks of the windows, and then called out,
 “monseigneur!—monseigneur!” philippe made his appearance from the
 alcove, as he pushed aside a sliding panel placed behind the bed.
 “m. d’artagnan entertains a great many suspicions, it seems,” he said.
 “ah!—you recognized m. d’artagnan, then?”
 “before you called him by his name, even.”
 “he is your captain of musketeers.”
 “he is very devoted to me,” replied philippe, laying a stress upon
 the personal pronoun.
 “as faithful as a dog; but he bites sometimes. if d’artagnan does not
 recognize you before the other has disappeared, rely upon
 d’artagnan to the end of the world; for in that case, if he has seen
 nothing, he will keep his fidelity. if he sees, when it is too late, he is
 a gascon, and will never admit that he has been deceived.”
 “i thought so. what are we to do, now?”
 “sit in this folding-chair. i am going to push aside a portion of the
 flooring; you will look through the opening, which answers to one of the
 false windows made in the dome of the king’s apartment. can you see?”
 “yes,” said philippe, starting as at the sight of an enemy; “i see the
 king!”
 “what is he doing?”
 “he seems to wish some man to sit down close to him.”
 “m. fouquet?”
 “no, no; wait a moment—”
 “look at the notes and the portraits, my prince.”
 “the man whom the king wishes to sit down in his presence is m. colbert.”
 “colbert sit down in the king’s presence!” exclaimed aramis. “it is
 impossible.”
 “look.”
 aramis looked through the opening in the flooring. “yes,” he said.
 “colbert himself. oh, monseigneur! what can we be going to hear—and
 what can result from this intimacy?”
 “nothing good for m. fouquet, at all events.”
 the prince did not deceive himself.
 we have seen that louis xiv. had sent for colbert, and colbert had
 arrived. the conversation began between them by the king according to him
 one of the highest favors that he had ever done; it was true the king was
 alone with his subject. “colbert,” said he, “sit down.”
 the intendant, overcome with delight, for he feared he was about to be
 dismissed, refused this unprecedented honor.
 “does he accept?” said aramis.
 “no, he remains standing.”
 “let us listen, then.” and the future king and the future pope listened
 eagerly to the simple mortals they held under their feet, ready to crush
 them when they liked.
 “colbert,” said the king, “you have annoyed me exceedingly to-day.”
 “i know it, sire.”
 “very good; i like that answer. yes, you knew it, and there was courage
in the doing of it.”
 “i ran the risk of displeasing your majesty, but i risked, also, the
 concealment of your best interests.”
 “what! you were afraid of something on my account?”
 “i was, sire, even if it were nothing more than an indigestion,” said
 colbert; “for people do not give their sovereigns such banquets as the one
 of to-day, unless it be to stifle them beneath the burden of good living.”
 colbert awaited the effect this coarse jest would produce upon the king;
 and louis xiv., who was the vainest and the most fastidiously delicate man
 in his kingdom, forgave colbert the joke.
 “the truth is,” he said, “that m. fouquet has given me too good a meal.
 tell me, colbert, where does he get all the money required for this
 enormous expenditure,—can you tell?”
 “yes, i do know, sire.”
 “will you be able to prove it with tolerable certainty?”
 “easily; and to the utmost farthing.”
 “i know you are very exact.”
 “exactitude is the principal qualification required in an intendant of
 finances.”
 “but all are not so.”
 “i thank you majesty for so flattering a compliment from your own lips.”
 “m. fouquet, therefore, is rich—very rich, and i suppose every man
 knows he is so.”
 “every one, sire; the living as well as the dead.”
 “what does that mean, monsieur colbert?”
 “the living are witnesses of m. fouquet’s wealth,—they admire and
 applaud the result produced; but the dead, wiser and better informed than
 we are, know how that wealth was obtained—and they rise up in
 accusation.”
 “so that m. fouquet owes his wealth to some cause or other.”
 “the occupation of an intendant very often favors those who practice it.”
 “you have something to say to me more confidentially, i perceive; do not
 be afraid, we are quite alone.”
 “i am never afraid of anything under the shelter of my own conscience, and
 under the protection of your majesty,” said colbert, bowing.
 “if the dead, therefore, were to speak—”
 “they do speak sometimes, sire,—read.”
 “ah!” murmured aramis, in the prince’s ear, who, close beside him,
 listened without losing a syllable, “since you are placed here,
 monseigneur, in order to learn your vocation of a king, listen to a piece
 of infamy—of a nature truly royal. you are about to be a witness of
 one of those scenes which the foul fiend alone conceives and executes.
 listen attentively,—you will find your advantage in it.”
 the prince redoubled his attention, and saw louis xiv. take from colbert’s
 hands a letter the latter held out to him.
 “the late cardinal’s handwriting,” said the king.
 “your majesty has an excellent memory,” replied colbert, bowing; “it is an
 immense advantage for a king who is destined for hard work to recognize
 handwritings at the first glance.”
 the king read mazarin’s letter, and, as its contents are already known to
 the reader, in consequence of the misunderstanding between madame de
 chevreuse and aramis, nothing further would be learned if we stated them
 here again.
 “i do not quite understand,” said the king, greatly interested.
 “your majesty has not acquired the utilitarian habit of checking the
 public accounts.”
 “i see that it refers to money that had been given to m. fouquet.”
 “thirteen millions. a tolerably good sum.”
 “yes. well, these thirteen millions are wanting to balance the total of
 the account. that is what i do not very well understand. how was this
 deficit possible?”
 “possible i do not say; but there is no doubt about fact that it is really
 so.”
 “you say that these thirteen millions are found to be wanting in the
 accounts?”
 “i do not say so, but the registry does.”
 “and this letter of m. mazarin indicates the employment of that sum and
 the name of the person with whom it was deposited?”
 “as your majesty can judge for yourself.”
 “yes; and the result is, then, that m. fouquet has not yet restored the
 thirteen millions.”
 “that results from the accounts, certainly, sire.”
 “well, and, consequently—”
 “well, sire, in that case, inasmuch as m. fouquet has not yet given back
 the thirteen millions, he must have appropriated them to his own purpose;
 and with those thirteen millions one could incur four times and a little
 more as much expense, and make four times as great a display, as your
 majesty was able to do at fontainebleau, where we only spent three
 millions altogether, if you remember.”
 for a blunderer, the souvenir he had evoked was a rather skillfully
 contrived piece of baseness; for by the remembrance of his own fete
 he, for the first time, perceived its inferiority compared with that of
 fouquet. colbert received back again at vaux what fouquet had given him at
 fontainebleau, and, as a good financier, returned it with the best
 possible interest. having once disposed the king’s mind in this artful
 way, colbert had nothing of much importance to detain him. he felt that
 such was the case, for the king, too, had again sunk into a dull and
 gloomy state. colbert awaited the first words from the king’s lips with as
 much impatience as philippe and aramis did from their place of
 observation.
 “are you aware what is the usual and natural consequence of all this,
 monsieur colbert?” said the king, after a few moments’ reflection.
 “no, sire, i do not know.”
 “well, then, the fact of the appropriation of the thirteen millions, if it
 can be proved—”
 “but it is so already.”
 “i mean if it were to be declared and certified, m. colbert.”
 “i think it will be to-morrow, if your majesty—”
 “were we not under m. fouquet’s roof, you were going to say, perhaps,”
 replied the king, with something of nobility in his demeanor.
 “the king is in his own palace wherever he may be—especially in
 houses which the royal money has constructed.”
 “i think,” said philippe in a low tone to aramis, “that the architect who
 planned this dome ought, anticipating the use it could be put to at a
 future opportunity, so to have contrived that it might be made to fall
 upon the heads of scoundrels such as m. colbert.”
 “i think so too,” replied aramis; “but m. colbert is so very near the
 king at this moment.”
 “that is true, and that would open the succession.”
 “of which your younger brother would reap all the advantage, monseigneur.
 but stay, let us keep quiet, and go on listening.”
 “we shall not have long to listen,” said the young prince.
 “why not, monseigneur?”
 “because, if i were king, i should make no further reply.”
 “and what would you do?”
 “i should wait until to-morrow morning to give myself time for
 reflection.”
 louis xiv. at last raised his eyes, and finding colbert attentively
 waiting for his next remarks, said, hastily, changing the conversation,
 “m. colbert, i perceive it is getting very late, and i shall now retire to
 bed. by to-morrow morning i shall have made up my mind.”
 “very good, sire,” returned colbert, greatly incensed, although he
 restrained himself in the presence of the king.
 the king made a gesture of adieu, and colbert withdrew with a respectful
 bow. “my attendants!” cried the king; and, as they entered the apartment,
 philippe was about to quit his post of observation.
 “a moment longer,” said aramis to him, with his accustomed gentleness of
 manner; “what has just now taken place is only a detail, and to-morrow we
 shall have no occasion to think anything more about it; but the ceremony
 of the king’s retiring to rest, the etiquette observed in addressing the
 king, that indeed is of the greatest importance. learn, sire, and study
 well how you ought to go to bed of a night. look! look!”
 chapter xv. colbert.
 history will tell us, or rather history has told us, of the various events
 of the following day, of the splendid fetes given by the
 surintendant to his sovereign. nothing but amusement and delight was
 allowed to prevail throughout the whole of the following day; there was a
 promenade, a banquet, a comedy to be acted, and a comedy, too, in which,
 to his great amazement, porthos recognized “m. coquelin de voliere” as one
 of the actors, in the piece called “les facheux.” full of preoccupation,
 however, from the scene of the previous evening, and hardly recovered from
 the effects of the poison which colbert had then administered to him, the
 king, during the whole of the day, so brilliant in its effects, so full of
 unexpected and startling novelties, in which all the wonders of the
 “arabian night’s entertainments” seemed to be reproduced for his especial
 amusement—the king, we say, showed himself cold, reserved, and
 taciturn. nothing could smooth the frowns upon his face; every one who
 observed him noticed that a deep feeling of resentment, of remote origin,
 increased by slow degrees, as the source becomes a river, thanks to the
 thousand threads of water that increase its body, was keenly alive in the
 depths of the king’s heart. towards the middle of the day only did he
 begin to resume a little serenity of manner, and by that time he had, in
 all probability, made up his mind. aramis, who followed him step by step
 in his thoughts, as in his walk, concluded that the event he was expecting
 would not be long before it was announced. this time colbert seemed to
 walk in concert with the bishop of vannes, and had he received for every
 annoyance which he inflicted on the king a word of direction from aramis,
 he could not have done better. during the whole of the day the king, who,
 in all probability, wished to free himself from some of the thoughts which
 disturbed his mind, seemed to seek la valliere’s society as actively as he
 seemed to show his anxiety to flee that of m. colbert or m. fouquet. the
 evening came. the king had expressed a wish not to walk in the park until
 after cards in the evening. in the interval between supper and the
 promenade, cards and dice were introduced. the king won a thousand
 pistoles, and, having won them, put them in his pocket, and then rose,
 saying, “and now, gentlemen, to the park.” he found the ladies of the
 court were already there. the king, we have before observed, had won a
 thousand pistoles, and had put them in his pocket; but m. fouquet had
 somehow contrived to lose ten thousand, so that among the courtiers there
 was still left a hundred and ninety thousand francs’ profit to divide, a
 circumstance which made the countenances of the courtiers and the officers
 of the king’s household the most joyous countenances in the world. it was
 not the same, however, with the king’s face; for, notwithstanding his
 success at play, to which he was by no means insensible, there still
 remained a slight shade of dissatisfaction. colbert was waiting for or
 upon him at the corner of one of the avenues; he was most probably waiting
 there in consequence of a rendezvous which had been given him by the king,
 as louis xiv., who had avoided him, or who had seemed to avoid him,
 suddenly made him a sign, and they then struck into the depths of the park
 together. but la valliere, too, had observed the king’s gloomy aspect and
 kindling glances; she had remarked this—and as nothing which lay
 hidden or smoldering in his heart was hidden from the gaze of her
 affection, she understood that this repressed wrath menaced some one; she
 prepared to withstand the current of his vengeance, and intercede like an
 angel of mercy. overcome by sadness, nervously agitated, deeply distressed
 at having been so long separated from her lover, disturbed at the sight of
 the emotion she had divined, she accordingly presented herself to the king
 with an embarrassed aspect, which in his then disposition of mind the king
 interpreted unfavorably. then, as they were alone—nearly alone,
 inasmuch as colbert, as soon as he perceived the young girl approaching,
 had stopped and drawn back a dozen paces—the king advanced towards
 la valliere and took her by the hand. “mademoiselle,” he said to her,
 “should i be guilty of an indiscretion if i were to inquire if you were
 indisposed? for you seem to breathe as if you were oppressed by some
 secret cause of uneasiness, and your eyes are filled with tears.”
 “oh! sire, if i be indeed so, and if my eyes are indeed full of tears, i
 am sorrowful only at the sadness which seems to oppress your majesty.”
 “my sadness? you are mistaken, mademoiselle; no, it is not sadness i
 experience.”
 “what is it, then, sire?”
 “humiliation.”
 “humiliation? oh! sire, what a word for you to use!”
 “i mean, mademoiselle, that wherever i may happen to be, no one else ought
 to be the master. well, then, look round you on every side, and judge
 whether i am not eclipsed—i, the king of france—before the
 monarch of these wide domains. oh!” he continued, clenching his hands and
 teeth, “when i think that this king—”
 “well, sire?” said louise, terrified.
 “—that this king is a faithless, unworthy servant, who grows proud
 and self-sufficient upon the strength of property that belongs to me, and
 which he has stolen. and therefore i am about to change this impudent
 minister’s fete into sorrow and mourning, of which the nymph of
 vaux, as the poets say, shall not soon lose the remembrance.”
 “oh! your majesty—”
 “well, mademoiselle, are you about to take m. fouquet’s part?” said louis,
 impatiently.
 “no, sire; i will only ask whether you are well informed. your majesty has
 more than once learned the value of accusations made at court.”
 louis xiv. made a sign for colbert to approach. “speak, monsieur colbert,”
 said the young prince, “for i almost believe that mademoiselle de la
 valliere has need of your assistance before she can put any faith in the
 king’s word. tell mademoiselle what m. fouquet has done; and you,
 mademoiselle, will perhaps have the kindness to listen. it will not be
 long.”
 why did louis xiv. insist upon it in such a manner? a very simple reason—his
 heart was not at rest, his mind was not thoroughly convinced; he imagined
 there lay some dark, hidden, tortuous intrigue behind these thirteen
 millions of francs; and he wished that the pure heart of la valliere,
 which had revolted at the idea of theft or robbery, should approve—even
 were it only by a single word—the resolution he had taken, and
 which, nevertheless, he hesitated before carrying into execution.
 “speak, monsieur,” said la valliere to colbert, who had advanced; “speak,
 since the king wishes me to listen to you. tell me, what is the crime with
 which m. fouquet is charged?”
 “oh! not very heinous, mademoiselle,” he returned, “a mere abuse of
 confidence.”
 “speak, speak, colbert; and when you have related it, leave us, and go and
 inform m. d’artagnan that i have certain orders to give him.”
 “m. d’artagnan, sire!” exclaimed la valliere; “but why send for m.
 d’artagnan? i entreat you to tell me.”
 “pardieu! in order to arrest this haughty, arrogant titan who, true
 to his menace, threatens to scale my heaven.”
 “arrest m. fouquet, do you say?”
 “ah! does that surprise you?”
 “in his own house!”
 “why not? if he be guilty, he is as guilty in his own house as anywhere
 else.”
 “m. fouquet, who at this moment is ruining himself for his sovereign.”
 “in plain truth, mademoiselle, it seems as if you were defending this
 traitor.”
 colbert began to chuckle silently. the king turned round at the sound of
 this suppressed mirth.
 “sire,” said la valliere, “it is not m. fouquet i am defending; it is
 yourself.”
 “me! you are defending me?”
 “sire, you would dishonor yourself if you were to give such an order.”
 “dishonor myself!” murmured the king, turning pale with anger. “in plain
 truth, mademoiselle, you show a strange persistence in what you say.”
 “if i do, sire, my only motive is that of serving your majesty,” replied
 the noble-hearted girl: “for that i would risk, i would sacrifice my very
 life, without the least reserve.”
 colbert seemed inclined to grumble and complain. la valliere, that timid,
 gentle lamb, turned round upon him, and with a glance like lightning
 imposed silence upon him. “monsieur,” she said, “when the king acts well,
 whether, in doing so, he does either myself or those who belong to me an
 injury, i have nothing to say; but were the king to confer a benefit
 either upon me or mine, and if he acted badly, i should tell him so.”
 “but it appears to me, mademoiselle,” colbert ventured to say, “that i too
 love the king.”
 “yes, monseigneur, we both love him, but each in a different manner,”
 replied la valliere, with such an accent that the heart of the young king
 was powerfully affected by it. “i love him so deeply, that the whole world
 is aware of it; so purely, that the king himself does not doubt my
 affection. he is my king and my master; i am the least of all his
 servants. but whoso touches his honor assails my life. therefore, i
 repeat, that they dishonor the king who advise him to arrest m. fouquet
 under his own roof.”
 colbert hung down his head, for he felt that the king had abandoned him.
 however, as he bent his head, he murmured, “mademoiselle, i have only one
 word to say.”
 “do not say it, then, monsieur; for i would not listen to it. besides,
 what could you have to tell me? that m. fouquet has been guilty of certain
 crimes? i believe he has, because the king has said so; and, from the
 moment the king said, ‘i think so,’ i have no occasion for other lips to
 say, ‘i affirm it.’ but, were m. fouquet the vilest of men, i should say
 aloud, ‘m. fouquet’s person is sacred to the king because he is the guest
 of m. fouquet. were his house a den of thieves, were vaux a cave of
 coiners or robbers, his home is sacred, his palace is inviolable, since
 his wife is living in it; and that is an asylum which even executioners
 would not dare to violate.’”
 la valliere paused, and was silent. in spite of himself the king could not
 but admire her; he was overpowered by the passionate energy of her voice;
 by the nobleness of the cause she advocated. colbert yielded, overcome by
 the inequality of the struggle. at last the king breathed again more
 freely, shook his head, and held out his hand to la valliere.
 “mademoiselle,” he said, gently, “why do you decide against me? do you
 know what this wretched fellow will do, if i give him time to breathe
 again?”
 “is he not a prey which will always be within your grasp?”
 “should he escape, and take to flight?” exclaimed colbert.
 “well, monsieur, it will always remain on record, to the king’s eternal
 honor, that he allowed m. fouquet to flee; and the more guilty he may have
 been, the greater will the king’s honor and glory appear, compared with
 such unnecessary misery and shame.”
 louis kissed la valliere’s hand, as he knelt before her.
 “i am lost,” thought colbert; then suddenly his face brightened up again.
 “oh! no, no, aha, old fox!—not yet,” he said to himself.
 and while the king, protected from observation by the thick covert of an
 enormous lime, pressed la valliere to his breast, with all the ardor of
 ineffable affection, colbert tranquilly fumbled among the papers in his
 pocket-book and drew out of it a paper folded in the form of a letter,
 somewhat yellow, perhaps, but one that must have been most precious, since
 the intendant smiled as he looked at it; he then bent a look, full of
 hatred, upon the charming group which the young girl and the king formed
 together—a group revealed but for a moment, as the light of the
 approaching torches shone upon it. louis noticed the light reflected upon
 la valliere’s white dress. “leave me, louise,” he said, “for some one is
 coming.”
 “mademoiselle, mademoiselle, some one is coming,” cried colbert, to
 expedite the young girl’s departure.
 louise disappeared rapidly among the trees; and then, as the king, who had
 been on his knees before the young girl, was rising from his humble
 posture, colbert exclaimed, “ah! mademoiselle de la valliere has let
 something fall.”
 “what is it?” inquired the king.
 “a paper—a letter—something white; look there, sire.”
 the king stooped down immediately and picked up the letter, crumpling it
 in his hand, as he did so; and at the same moment the torches arrived,
 inundating the blackness of the scene with a flood of light as bight as
 day.
 chapter xvi. jealousy.
 the torches we have just referred to, the eager attention every one
 displayed, and the new ovation paid to the king by fouquet, arrived in
 time to suspend the effect of a resolution which la valliere had already
 considerably shaken in louis xiv.‘s heart. he looked at fouquet with a
 feeling almost of gratitude for having given la valliere an opportunity of
 showing herself so generously disposed, so powerful in the influence she
 exercised over his heart. the moment of the last and greatest display had
 arrived. hardly had fouquet conducted the king towards the chateau, when a
 mass of fire burst from the dome of vaux, with a prodigious uproar,
 pouring a flood of dazzling cataracts of rays on every side, and
 illumining the remotest corners of the gardens. the fireworks began.
 colbert, at twenty paces from the king, who was surrounded and feted
 by the owner of vaux, seemed, by the obstinate persistence of his gloomy
 thoughts, to do his utmost to recall louis’s attention, which the
 magnificence of the spectacle was already, in his opinion, too easily
 diverting. suddenly, just as louis was on the point of holding it out to
 fouquet, he perceived in his hand the paper which, as he believed, la
 valliere had dropped at his feet as she hurried away. the still stronger
 magnet of love drew the young prince’s attention towards the souvenir
 of his idol; and, by the brilliant light, which increased momentarily in
 beauty, and drew from the neighboring villages loud cheers of admiration,
 the king read the letter, which he supposed was a loving and tender
 epistle la valliere had destined for him. but as he read it, a death-like
 pallor stole over his face, and an expression of deep-seated wrath,
 illumined by the many-colored fire which gleamed so brightly, soaringly
 around the scene, produced a terrible spectacle, which every one would
 have shuddered at, could they only have read into his heart, now torn by
 the most stormy and most bitter passions. there was no truce for him now,
 influenced as he was by jealousy and mad passion. from the very moment
 when the dark truth was revealed to him, every gentler feeling seemed to
 disappear; pity, kindness of consideration, the religion of hospitality,
 all were forgotten. in the bitter pang which wrung his heart, he, still
 too weak to hide his sufferings, was almost on the point of uttering a cry
 of alarm, and calling his guards to gather round him. this letter which
 colbert had thrown down at the king’s feet, the reader has doubtlessly
 guessed, was the same that had disappeared with the porter toby at
 fontainebleau, after the attempt which fouquet had made upon la valliere’s
 heart. fouquet saw the king’s pallor, and was far from guessing the evil;
 colbert saw the king’s anger, and rejoiced inwardly at the approach of the
 storm. fouquet’s voice drew the young prince from his wrathful reverie.
 “what is the matter, sire?” inquired the superintendent, with an
 expression of graceful interest.
 louis made a violent effort over himself, as he replied, “nothing.”
 “i am afraid your majesty is suffering?”
 “i am suffering, and have already told you so, monsieur; but it is
 nothing.”
 and the king, without waiting for the termination of the fireworks, turned
 towards the chateau. fouquet accompanied him, and the whole court
 followed, leaving the remains of the fireworks consuming for their own
 amusement. the superintendent endeavored again to question louis xiv., but
 did not succeed in obtaining a reply. he imagined there had been some
 misunderstanding between louis and la valliere in the park, which had
 resulted in a slight quarrel; and that the king, who was not ordinarily
 sulky by disposition, but completely absorbed by his passion for la
 valliere, had taken a dislike to every one because his mistress had shown
 herself offended with him. this idea was sufficient to console him; he had
 even a friendly and kindly smile for the young king, when the latter
 wished him good night. this, however, was not all the king had to submit
 to; he was obliged to undergo the usual ceremony, which on that evening
 was marked by close adherence to the strictest etiquette. the next day was
 the one fixed for the departure; it was but proper that the guests should
 thank their host, and show him a little attention in return for the
 expenditure of his twelve millions. the only remark, approaching to
 amiability, which the king could find to say to m. fouquet, as he took
 leave of him, were in these words, “m. fouquet, you shall hear from me. be
 good enough to desire m. d’artagnan to come here.”
 but the blood of louis xiv., who had so profoundly dissimulated his
 feelings, boiled in his veins; and he was perfectly willing to order m.
 fouquet to be put an end to with the same readiness, indeed, as his
 predecessor had caused the assassination of le marechal d’ancre; and so he
 disguised the terrible resolution he had formed beneath one of those royal
 smiles which, like lightning-flashes, indicated coups d’etat.
 fouquet took the king’s hand and kissed it; louis shuddered throughout his
 whole frame, but allowed m. fouquet to touch his hand with his lips. five
 minutes afterwards, d’artagnan, to whom the royal order had been
 communicated, entered louis xiv.‘s apartment. aramis and philippe were in
 theirs, still eagerly attentive, and still listening with all their ears.
 the king did not even give the captain of the musketeers time to approach
 his armchair, but ran forward to meet him. “take care,” he exclaimed,
 “that no one enters here.”
 “very good, sire,” replied the captain, whose glance had for a long time
 past analyzed the stormy indications on the royal countenance. he gave the
 necessary order at the door; but, returning to the king, he said, “is
 there something fresh the matter, your majesty?”
 “how many men have you here?” inquired the king, without making any other
 reply to the question addressed to him.
 “what for, sire?”
 “how many men have you, i say?” repeated the king, stamping upon the
 ground with his foot.
 “i have the musketeers.”
 “well; and what others?”
 “twenty guards and thirteen swiss.”
 “how many men will be required to—”
 “to do what, sire?” replied the musketeer, opening his large, calm eyes.
 “to arrest m. fouquet.”
 d’artagnan fell back a step.
 “to arrest m. fouquet!” he burst forth.
 “are you going to tell me that it is impossible?” exclaimed the king, in
 tones of cold, vindictive passion.
 “i never say that anything is impossible,” replied d’artagnan, wounded to
 the quick.
 “very well; do it, then.”
 d’artagnan turned on his heel, and made his way towards the door; it was
 but a short distance, and he cleared it in half a dozen paces; when he
 reached it he suddenly paused, and said, “your majesty will forgive me,
 but, in order to effect this arrest, i should like written directions.”
 “for what purpose—and since when has the king’s word been
 insufficient for you?”
 “because the word of a king, when it springs from a feeling of anger, may
 possibly change when the feeling changes.”
 “a truce to set phrases, monsieur; you have another thought besides that?”
 “oh, i, at least, have certain thoughts and ideas, which, unfortunately,
 others have not,” d’artagnan replied, impertinently.
 the king, in the tempest of his wrath, hesitated, and drew back in the
 face of d’artagnan’s frank courage, just as a horse crouches on his
 haunches under the strong hand of a bold and experienced rider. “what is
 your thought?” he exclaimed.
 “this, sire,” replied d’artagnan: “you cause a man to be arrested when you
 are still under his roof; and passion is alone the cause of that. when
 your anger shall have passed, you will regret what you have done; and then
 i wish to be in a position to show you your signature. if that, however,
 should fail to be a reparation, it will at least show us that the king was
 wrong to lose his temper.”
 “wrong to lose his temper!” cried the king, in a loud, passionate voice.
 “did not my father, my grandfathers, too, before me, lose their temper at
 times, in heaven’s name?”
 “the king your father and the king your grandfather never lost their
 temper except when under the protection of their own palace.”
 “the king is master wherever he may be.”
 “that is a flattering, complimentary phrase which cannot proceed from any
 one but m. colbert; but it happens not to be the truth. the king is at
 home in every man’s house when he has driven its owner out of it.”
 the king bit his lips, but said nothing.
 “can it be possible?” said d’artagnan; “here is a man who is positively
 ruining himself in order to please you, and you wish to have him arrested!
 mordioux! sire, if my name was fouquet, and people treated me in
 that manner, i would swallow at a single gulp all sorts of fireworks and
 other things, and i would set fire to them, and send myself and everybody
 else in blown-up atoms to the sky. but it is all the same; it is your
 wish, and it shall be done.”
 “go,” said the king; “but have you men enough?”
 “do you suppose i am going to take a whole host to help me? arrest m.
 fouquet! why, that is so easy that a very child might do it! it is like
 drinking a glass of wormwood; one makes an ugly face, and that is all.”
 “if he defends himself?”
 “he! it is not at all likely. defend himself when such extreme harshness
 as you are going to practice makes the man a very martyr! nay, i am sure
 that if he has a million of francs left, which i very much doubt, he would
 be willing enough to give it in order to have such a termination as this.
 but what does that matter? it shall be done at once.”
 “stay,” said the king; “do not make his arrest a public affair.”
 “that will be more difficult.”
 “why so?”
 “because nothing is easier than to go up to m. fouquet in the midst of a
 thousand enthusiastic guests who surround him, and say, ‘in the king’s
 name, i arrest you.’ but to go up to him, to turn him first one way and
 then another, to drive him up into one of the corners of the chess-board,
 in such a way that he cannot escape; to take him away from his guests, and
 keep him a prisoner for you, without one of them, alas! having heard
 anything about it; that, indeed, is a genuine difficulty, the greatest of
 all, in truth; and i hardly see how it is to be done.”
 “you had better say it is impossible, and you will have finished much
 sooner. heaven help me, but i seem to be surrounded by people who prevent
 me doing what i wish.”
 “i do not prevent your doing anything. have you indeed decided?”
 “take care of m. fouquet, until i shall have made up my mind by to-morrow
 morning.”
 “that shall be done, sire.”
 “and return, when i rise in the morning, for further orders; and now leave
 me to myself.”
 “you do not even want m. colbert, then?” said the musketeer, firing his
 last shot as he was leaving the room. the king started. with his whole
 mind fixed on the thought of revenge, he had forgotten the cause and
 substance of the offense.
 “no, no one,” he said; “no one here! leave me.”
 d’artagnan quitted the room. the king closed the door with his own hands,
 and began to walk up and down his apartment at a furious pace, like a
 wounded bull in an arena, trailing from his horn the colored streamers and
 the iron darts. at last he began to take comfort in the expression of his
 violent feelings.
 “miserable wretch that he is! not only does he squander my finances, but
 with his ill-gotten plunder he corrupts secretaries, friends, generals,
 artists, and all, and tries to rob me of the one to whom i am most
 attached. this is the reason that perfidious girl so boldly took his part!
 gratitude! and who can tell whether it was not a stronger feeling—love
 itself?” he gave himself up for a moment to the bitterest reflections. “a
 satyr!” he thought, with that abhorrent hate with which young men regard
 those more advanced in life, who still think of love. “a man who has never
 found opposition or resistance in any one, who lavishes his gold and
 jewels in every direction, and who retains his staff of painters in order
 to take the portraits of his mistresses in the costume of goddesses.” the
 king trembled with passion as he continued, “he pollutes and profanes
 everything that belongs to me! he destroys everything that is mine. he
 will be my death at last, i know. that man is too much for me; he is my
 mortal enemy, but he shall forthwith fall! i hate him—i hate him—i
 hate him!” and as he pronounced these words, he struck the arm of the
 chair in which he was sitting violently, over and over again, and then
 rose like one in an epileptic fit. “to-morrow! to-morrow! oh, happy day!”
 he murmured, “when the sun rises, no other rival shall that brilliant king
 of space possess but me. that man shall fall so low that when people look
 at the abject ruin my anger shall have wrought, they will be forced to
 confess at last and at least that i am indeed greater than he.” the king,
 who was incapable of mastering his emotions any longer, knocked over with
 a blow of his fist a small table placed close to his bedside, and in the
 very bitterness of anger, almost weeping, and half-suffocated, he threw
 himself on his bed, dressed as he was, and bit the sheets in his extremity
 of passion, trying to find repose of body at least there. the bed creaked
 beneath his weight, and with the exception of a few broken sounds,
 emerging, or, one might say, exploding, from his overburdened chest,
 absolute silence soon reigned in the chamber of morpheus.
 chapter xvii. high treason.
 the ungovernable fury which took possession of the king at the sight and
 at the perusal of fouquet’s letter to la valliere by degrees subsided into
 a feeling of pain and extreme weariness. youth, invigorated by health and
 lightness of spirits, requiring soon that what it loses should be
 immediately restored—youth knows not those endless, sleepless nights
 which enable us to realize the fable of the vulture unceasingly feeding on
 prometheus. in cases where the man of middle life, in his acquired
 strength of will and purpose, and the old, in their state of natural
 exhaustion, find incessant augmentation of their bitter sorrow, a young
 man, surprised by the sudden appearance of misfortune, weakens himself in
 sighs, and groans, and tears, directly struggling with his grief, and is
 thereby far sooner overthrown by the inflexible enemy with whom he is
 engaged. once overthrown, his struggles cease. louis could not hold out
 more than a few minutes, at the end of which he had ceased to clench his
 hands, and scorch in fancy with his looks the invisible objects of his
 hatred; he soon ceased to attack with his violent imprecations not m.
 fouquet alone, but even la valliere herself; from fury he subsided into
 despair, and from despair to prostration. after he had thrown himself for
 a few minutes to and fro convulsively on his bed, his nerveless arms fell
 quietly down; his head lay languidly on his pillow; his limbs, exhausted
 with excessive emotion, still trembled occasionally, agitated by muscular
 contractions; while from his breast faint and infrequent sighs still
 issued. morpheus, the tutelary deity of the apartment, towards whom louis
 raised his eyes, wearied by his anger and reconciled by his tears,
 showered down upon him the sleep-inducing poppies with which his hands are
 ever filled; so presently the monarch closed his eyes and fell asleep.
 then it seemed to him, as it often happens in that first sleep, so light
 and gentle, which raises the body above the couch, and the soul above the
 earth—it seemed to him, we say, as if the god morpheus, painted on
 the ceiling, looked at him with eyes resembling human eyes; that something
 shone brightly, and moved to and fro in the dome above the sleeper; that
 the crowd of terrible dreams which thronged together in his brain, and
 which were interrupted for a moment, half revealed a human face, with a
 hand resting against the mouth, and in an attitude of deep and absorbed
 meditation. and strange enough, too, this man bore so wonderful a
 resemblance to the king himself, that louis fancied he was looking at his
 own face reflected in a mirror; with the exception, however, that the face
 was saddened by a feeling of the profoundest pity. then it seemed to him
 as if the dome gradually retired, escaping from his gaze, and that the
 figures and attributes painted by lebrun became darker and darker as the
 distance became more and more remote. a gentle, easy movement, as regular
 as that by which a vessel plunges beneath the waves, had succeeded to the
 immovableness of the bed. doubtless the king was dreaming, and in this
 dream the crown of gold, which fastened the curtains together, seemed to
 recede from his vision, just as the dome, to which it remained suspended,
 had done, so that the winged genius which, with both its hand, supported
 the crown, seemed, though vainly so, to call upon the king, who was fast
 disappearing from it. the bed still sunk. louis, with his eyes open, could
 not resist the deception of this cruel hallucination. at last, as the
 light of the royal chamber faded away into darkness and gloom, something
 cold, gloomy, and inexplicable in its nature seemed to infect the air. no
 paintings, nor gold, nor velvet hangings, were visible any longer, nothing
 but walls of a dull gray color, which the increasing gloom made darker
 every moment. and yet the bed still continued to descend, and after a
 minute, which seemed in its duration almost an age to the king, it reached
 a stratum of air, black and chill as death, and then it stopped. the king
 could no longer see the light in his room, except as from the bottom of a
 well we can see the light of day. “i am under the influence of some
 atrocious dream,” he thought. “it is time to awaken from it. come! let me
 wake.”
 every one has experienced the sensation the above remark conveys; there is
 hardly a person who, in the midst of a nightmare whose influence is
 suffocating, has not said to himself, by the help of that light which
 still burns in the brain when every human light is extinguished, “it is
 nothing but a dream, after all.” this was precisely what louis xiv. said
 to himself; but when he said, “come, come! wake up,” he perceived that not
 only was he already awake, but still more, that he had his eyes open also.
 and then he looked all round him. on his right hand and on his left two
 armed men stood in stolid silence, each wrapped in a huge cloak, and the
 face covered with a mask; one of them held a small lamp in his hand, whose
 glimmering light revealed the saddest picture a king could look upon.
 louis could not help saying to himself that his dream still lasted, and
 that all he had to do to cause it to disappear was to move his arms or to
 say something aloud; he darted from his bed, and found himself upon the
 damp, moist ground. then, addressing himself to the man who held the lamp
 in his hand, he said:
 “what is this, monsieur, and what is the meaning of this jest?”
 “it is no jest,” replied in a deep voice the masked figure that held the
 lantern.
 “do you belong to m. fouquet?” inquired the king, greatly astonished at
 his situation.
 “it matters very little to whom we belong,” said the phantom; “we are your
 masters now, that is sufficient.”
 the king, more impatient than intimidated, turned to the other masked
 figure. “if this is a comedy,” he said, “you will tell m. fouquet that i
 find it unseemly and improper, and that i command it should cease.”
 the second masked person to whom the king had addressed himself was a man
 of huge stature and vast circumference. he held himself erect and
 motionless as any block of marble. “well!” added the king, stamping his
 foot, “you do not answer!”
 “we do not answer you, my good monsieur,” said the giant, in a stentorian
 voice, “because there is nothing to say.”
 “at least, tell me what you want,” exclaimed louis, folding his arms with
 a passionate gesture.
 “you will know by and by,” replied the man who held the lamp.
 “in the meantime tell me where i am.”
 “look.”
 louis looked all round him; but by the light of the lamp which the masked
 figure raised for the purpose, he could perceive nothing but the damp
 walls which glistened here and there with the slimy traces of the snail.
 “oh—oh!—a dungeon,” cried the king.
 “no, a subterranean passage.”
 “which leads—?”
 “will you be good enough to follow us?”
 “i shall not stir from hence!” cried the king.
 “if you are obstinate, my dear young friend,” replied the taller of the
 two, “i will lift you up in my arms, and roll you up in your own cloak,
 and if you should happen to be stifled, why—so much the worse for
 you.”
 as he said this, he disengaged from beneath his cloak a hand of which milo
 of crotona would have envied him the possession, on the day when he had
 that unhappy idea of rending his last oak. the king dreaded violence, for
 he could well believe that the two men into whose power he had fallen had
 not gone so far with any idea of drawing back, and that they would
 consequently be ready to proceed to extremities, if necessary. he shook
 his head and said: “it seems i have fallen into the hands of a couple of
 assassins. move on, then.”
 neither of the men answered a word to this remark. the one who carried the
 lantern walked first, the king followed him, while the second masked
 figure closed the procession. in this manner they passed along a winding
 gallery of some length, with as many staircases leading out of it as are
 to be found in the mysterious and gloomy palaces of ann radcliffe’s
 creation. all these windings and turnings, during which the king heard the
 sound of running water over his head, ended at last in a long
 corridor closed by an iron door. the figure with the lamp opened the door
 with one of the keys he wore suspended at his girdle, where, during the
 whole of the brief journey, the king had heard them rattle. as soon as the
 door was opened and admitted the air, louis recognized the balmy odors
 that trees exhale in hot summer nights. he paused, hesitatingly, for a
 moment or two; but the huge sentinel who followed him thrust him out of
 the subterranean passage.
 “another blow,” said the king, turning towards the one who had just had
 the audacity to touch his sovereign; “what do you intend to do with the
 king of france?”
 “try to forget that word,” replied the man with the lamp, in a tone which
 as little admitted of a reply as one of the famous decrees of minos.
 “you deserve to be broken on the wheel for the words that you have just
 made use of,” said the giant, as he extinguished the lamp his companion
 handed to him; “but the king is too kind-hearted.”
 louis, at that threat, made so sudden a movement that it seemed as if he
 meditated flight; but the giant’s hand was in a moment placed on his
 shoulder, and fixed him motionless where he stood. “but tell me, at least,
 where we are going,” said the king.
 “come,” replied the former of the two men, with a kind of respect in his
 manner, and leading his prisoner towards a carriage which seemed to be in
 waiting.
 the carriage was completely concealed amid the trees. two horses, with
 their feet fettered, were fastened by a halter to the lower branches of a
 large oak.
 “get in,” said the same man, opening the carriage-door and letting down
 the step. the king obeyed, seated himself at the back of the carriage, the
 padded door of which was shut and locked immediately upon him and his
 guide. as for the giant, he cut the fastenings by which the horses were
 bound, harnessed them himself, and mounted on the box of the carriage,
 which was unoccupied. the carriage set off immediately at a quick trot,
 turned into the road to paris, and in the forest of senart found a relay
 of horses fastened to the trees in the same manner the first horses had
 been, and without a postilion. the man on the box changed the horses, and
 continued to follow the road towards paris with the same rapidity, so that
 they entered the city about three o’clock in the morning. they carriage
 proceeded along the faubourg saint-antoine, and, after having called out
 to the sentinel, “by the king’s order,” the driver conducted the horses
 into the circular inclosure of the bastile, looking out upon the
 courtyard, called la cour du gouvernement. there the horses drew up,
 reeking with sweat, at the flight of steps, and a sergeant of the guard
 ran forward. “go and wake the governor,” said the coachman in a voice of
 thunder.
 with the exception of this voice, which might have been heard at the
 entrance of the faubourg saint-antoine, everything remained as calm in the
 carriage as in the prison. ten minutes afterwards, m. de baisemeaux
 appeared in his dressing-gown on the threshold of the door. “what is the
 matter now?” he asked; “and whom have you brought me there?”
 the man with the lantern opened the carriage-door, and said two or three
 words to the one who acted as driver, who immediately got down from his
 seat, took up a short musket which he kept under his feet, and placed its
 muzzle on his prisoner’s chest.
 “and fire at once if he speaks!” added aloud the man who alighted from the
 carriage.
 “very good,” replied his companion, without another remark.
 with this recommendation, the person who had accompanied the king in the
 carriage ascended the flight of steps, at the top of which the governor
 was awaiting him. “monsieur d’herblay!” said the latter.
 “hush!” said aramis. “let us go into your room.”
 “good heavens! what brings you here at this hour?”
 “a mistake, my dear monsieur de baisemeaux,” aramis replied, quietly. “it
 appears that you were quite right the other day.”
 “what about?” inquired the governor.
 “about the order of release, my dear friend.”
 “tell me what you mean, monsieur—no, monseigneur,” said the
 governor, almost suffocated by surprise and terror.
 “it is a very simple affair: you remember, dear m. de baisemeaux, that an
 order of release was sent to you.”
 “yes, for marchiali.”
 “very good! we both thought that it was for marchiali?”
 “certainly; you will recollect, however, that i would not credit it, but
 that you compelled me to believe it.”
 “oh! baisemeaux, my good fellow, what a word to make use of!—strongly
 recommended, that was all.”
 “strongly recommended, yes; strongly recommended to give him up to you;
 and that you carried him off with you in your carriage.”
 “well, my dear monsieur de baisemeaux, it was a mistake; it was discovered
 at the ministry, so that i now bring you an order from the king to set at
 liberty seldon,—that poor seldon fellow, you know.”
 “seldon! are you sure this time?”
 “well, read it yourself,” added aramis, handing him the order.
 “why,” said baisemeaux, “this order is the very same that has already
 passed through my hands.”
 “indeed?”
 “it is the very one i assured you i saw the other evening. parbleu!
 i recognize it by the blot of ink.”
 “i do not know whether it is that; but all i know is, that i bring it for
 you.”
 “but then, what about the other?”
 “what other?”
 “marchiali.”
 “i have got him here with me.”
 “but that is not enough for me. i require a new order to take him back
 again.”
 “don’t talk such nonsense, my dear baisemeaux; you talk like a child!
 where is the order you received respecting marchiali?”
 baisemeaux ran to his iron chest and took it out. aramis seized hold of
 it, coolly tore it in four pieces, held them to the lamp, and burnt them.
 “good heavens! what are you doing?” exclaimed baisemeaux, in an extremity
 of terror.
 “look at your position quietly, my good governor,” said aramis, with
 imperturbable self-possession, “and you will see how very simple the whole
 affair is. you no longer possess any order justifying marchiali’s
 release.”
 “i am a lost man!”
 “far from it, my good fellow, since i have brought marchiali back to you,
 and all accordingly is just the same as if he had never left.”
 “ah!” said the governor, completely overcome by terror.
 “plain enough, you see; and you will go and shut him up immediately.”
 “i should think so, indeed.”
 “and you will hand over this seldon to me, whose liberation is authorized
 by this order. do you understand?”
 “you do understand, i see,” said aramis. “very good.” baisemeaux clapped
 his hands together.
 “but why, at all events, after having taken marchiali away from me, do you
 bring him back again?” cried the unhappy governor, in a paroxysm of
 terror, and completely dumbfounded.
 “for a friend such as you are,” said aramis—“for so devoted a
 servant, i have no secrets;” and he put his mouth close to baisemeaux’s
 ear, as he said, in a low tone of voice, “you know the resemblance between
 that unfortunate fellow, and—”
 “and the king?—yes!”
 “very good; the first use that marchiali made of his liberty was to
 persist—can you guess what?”
 “how is it likely i should guess?”
 “to persist in saying that he was king of france; to dress himself up in
 clothes like those of the king; and then pretend to assume that he was the
 king himself.”
 “gracious heavens!”
 “that is the reason why i have brought him back again, my dear friend. he
 is mad and lets every one see how mad he is.”
 “what is to be done, then?”
 “that is very simple; let no one hold any communication with him. you
 understand that when his peculiar style of madness came to the king’s
 ears, the king, who had pitied his terrible affliction, and saw that all
 his kindness had been repaid by black ingratitude, became perfectly
 furious; so that, now—and remember this very distinctly, dear
 monsieur de baisemeaux, for it concerns you most closely—so that
 there is now, i repeat, sentence of death pronounced against all those who
 may allow him to communicate with any one else but me or the king himself.
 you understand, baisemeaux, sentence of death!”
 “you need not ask me whether i understand.”
 “and now, let us go down, and conduct this poor devil back to his dungeon
 again, unless you prefer he should come up here.”
 “what would be the good of that?”
 “it would be better, perhaps, to enter his name in the prison-book at
 once!”
 “of course, certainly; not a doubt of it.”
 “in that case, have him up.”
 baisemeaux ordered the drums to be beaten and the bell to be rung, as a
 warning to every one to retire, in order to avoid meeting a prisoner,
 about whom it was desired to observe a certain mystery. then, when the
 passages were free, he went to take the prisoner from the carriage, at
 whose breast porthos, faithful to the directions which had been given him,
 still kept his musket leveled. “ah! is that you, miserable wretch?” cried
 the governor, as soon as he perceived the king. “very good, very good.”
 and immediately, making the king get out of the carriage, he led him,
 still accompanied by porthos, who had not taken off his mask, and aramis,
 who again resumed his, up the stairs, to the second bertaudiere, and
 opened the door of the room in which philippe for six long years had
 bemoaned his existence. the king entered the cell without pronouncing a
 single word: he faltered in as limp and haggard as a rain-struck lily.
 baisemeaux shut the door upon him, turned the key twice in the lock, and
 then returned to aramis. “it is quite true,” he said, in a low tone, “that
 he bears a striking resemblance to the king; but less so than you said.”
 “so that,” said aramis, “you would not have been deceived by the
 substitution of the one for the other?”
 “what a question!”
 “you are a most valuable fellow, baisemeaux,” said aramis; “and now, set
 seldon free.”
 “oh, yes. i was going to forget that. i will go and give orders at once.”
 “bah! to-morrow will be time enough.”
 “to-morrow!—oh, no. this very minute.”
 “well; go off to your affairs, i will go away to mine. but it is quite
 understood, is it not?”
 “what ‘is quite understood’?”
 “that no one is to enter the prisoner’s cell, expect with an order from
 the king; an order which i will myself bring.”
 “quite so. adieu, monseigneur.”
 aramis returned to his companion. “now, porthos, my good fellow, back
 again to vaux, and as fast as possible.”
 “a man is light and easy enough, when he has faithfully served his king;
 and, in serving him, saved his country,” said porthos. “the horses will be
 as light as if our tissues were constructed of the wind of heaven. so let
 us be off.” and the carriage, lightened of a prisoner, who might well be—as
 he in fact was—very heavy in the sight of aramis, passed across the
 drawbridge of the bastile, which was raised again immediately behind it.
 chapter xviii. a night at the bastile.
 pain, anguish, and suffering in human life are always in proportion to the
 strength with which a man is endowed. we will not pretend to say that
 heaven always apportions to a man’s capability of endurance the anguish
 with which he afflicts him; for that, indeed, would not be true, since
 heaven permits the existence of death, which is, sometimes, the only
 refuge open to those who are too closely pressed—too bitterly
 afflicted, as far as the body is concerned. suffering is in proportion to
 the strength which has been accorded; in other words, the weak suffer
 more, where the trial is the same, than the strong. and what are the
 elementary principles, we may ask, that compose human strength? is it not—more
 than anything else—exercise, habit, experience? we shall not even
 take the trouble to demonstrate this, for it is an axiom in morals, as in
 physics. when the young king, stupefied and crushed in every sense and
 feeling, found himself led to a cell in the bastile, he fancied death
 itself is but a sleep; that it, too, has its dreams as well; that the bed
 had broken through the flooring of his room at vaux; that death had
 resulted from the occurrence; and that, still carrying out his dream, the
 king, louis xiv., now no longer living, was dreaming one of those horrors,
 impossible to realize in life, which is termed dethronement, imprisonment,
 and insult towards a sovereign who formerly wielded unlimited power. to be
 present at—an actual witness, too—of this bitterness of death;
 to float, indecisively, in an incomprehensible mystery, between
 resemblance and reality; to hear everything, to see everything, without
 interfering in a single detail of agonizing suffering, was—so the
 king thought within himself—a torture far more terrible, since it
 might last forever. “is this what is termed eternity—hell?” he
 murmured, at the moment the door was closed upon him, which we remember
 baisemeaux had shut with his own hands. he did not even look round him;
 and in the room, leaning with his back against the wall, he allowed
 himself to be carried away by the terrible supposition that he was already
 dead, as he closed his eyes, in order to avoid looking upon something even
 worse still. “how can i have died?” he said to himself, sick with terror.
 “the bed might have been let down by some artificial means? but no! i do
 not remember to have felt a bruise, nor any shock either. would they not
 rather have poisoned me at my meals, or with the fumes of wax, as they did
 my ancestress, jeanne d’albret?” suddenly, the chill of the dungeons
 seemed to fall like a wet cloak upon louis’s shoulders. “i have seen,” he
 said, “my father lying dead upon his funeral couch, in his regal robes.
 that pale face, so calm and worn; those hands, once so skillful, lying
 nerveless by his side; those limbs stiffened by the icy grasp of death;
 nothing there betokened a sleep that was disturbed by dreams. and yet, how
 numerous were the dreams which heaven might have sent that royal corpse—him
 whom so many others had preceded, hurried away by him into eternal death!
 no, that king was still the king: he was enthroned still upon that funeral
 couch, as upon a velvet armchair; he had not abdicated one title of his
 majesty. god, who had not punished him, cannot, will not punish me, who
 have done nothing.” a strange sound attracted the young man’s attention.
 he looked round him, and saw on the mantel-shelf, just below an enormous
 crucifix, coarsely painted in fresco on the wall, a rat of enormous size
 engaged in nibbling a piece of dry bread, but fixing all the time, an
 intelligent and inquiring look upon the new occupant of the cell. the king
 could not resist a sudden impulse of fear and disgust: he moved back
 towards the door, uttering a loud cry; and as if he but needed this cry,
 which escaped from his breast almost unconsciously, to recognize himself,
 louis knew that he was alive and in full possession of his natural senses.
 “a prisoner!” he cried. “i—i, a prisoner!” he looked round him for a
 bell to summon some one to him. “there are no bells in the bastile,” he
 said, “and it is in the bastile i am imprisoned. in what way can i have
 been made a prisoner? it must have been owing to a conspiracy of m.
 fouquet. i have been drawn to vaux, as to a snare. m. fouquet cannot be
 acting alone in this affair. his agent—that voice that i but just
 now heard was m. d’herblay’s; i recognized it. colbert was right, then.
 but what is fouquet’s object? to reign in my place and stead?—impossible.
 yet who knows!” thought the king, relapsing into gloom again. “perhaps my
 brother, the duc d’orleans, is doing that which my uncle wished to do
 during the whole of his life against my father. but the queen?—my
 mother, too? and la valliere? oh! la valliere, she will have been
 abandoned to madame. dear, dear girl! yes, it is—it must be so. they
 have shut her up as they have me. we are separated forever!” and at this
 idea of separation the poor lover burst into a flood of tears and sobs and
 groans.
 “there is a governor in this place,” the king continued, in a fury of
 passion; “i will speak to him, i will summon him to me.”
 he called—no voice replied to his. he seized hold of his chair, and
 hurled it against the massive oaken door. the wood resounded against the
 door, and awakened many a mournful echo in the profound depths of the
 staircase; but from a human creature, none.
 this was a fresh proof for the king of the slight regard in which he was
 held at the bastile. therefore, when his first fit of anger had passed
 away, having remarked a barred window through which there passed a stream
 of light, lozenge-shaped, which must be, he knew, the bright orb of
 approaching day, louis began to call out, at first gently enough, then
 louder and louder still; but no one replied. twenty other attempts which
 he made, one after another, obtained no other or better success. his blood
 began to boil within him, and mount to his head. his nature was such,
 that, accustomed to command, he trembled at the idea of disobedience. the
 prisoner broke the chair, which was too heavy for him to lift, and made
 use of it as a battering ram to strike against the door. he struck so
 loudly, and so repeatedly, that the perspiration soon began to pour down
 his face. the sound became tremendous and continuous; certain stifled,
 smothered cries replied in different directions. this sound produced a
 strange effect upon the king. he paused to listen; it was the voice of the
 prisoners, formerly his victims, now his companions. the voices ascended
 like vapors through the thick ceilings and the massive walls, and rose in
 accusations against the author of this noise, as doubtless their sighs and
 tears accused, in whispered tones, the author of their captivity. after
 having deprived so many people of their liberty, the king came among them
 to rob them of their rest. this idea almost drove him mad; it redoubled
 his strength, or rather his will, bent upon obtaining some information, or
 a conclusion to the affair. with a portion of the broken chair he
 recommenced the noise. at the end of an hour, louis heard something in the
 corridor, behind the door of his cell, and a violent blow, which was
 returned upon the door itself, made him cease his own.
 “are you mad?” said a rude, brutal voice. “what is the matter with you
 this morning?”
 “this morning!” thought the king; but he said aloud, politely, “monsieur,
 are you the governor of the bastile?”
 “my good fellow, your head is out of sorts,” replied the voice; “but that
 is no reason why you should make such a terrible disturbance. be quiet; mordioux!”
 “are you the governor?” the king inquired again.
 he heard a door on the corridor close; the jailer had just left, not
 condescending to reply a single word. when the king had assured himself of
 his departure, his fury knew no longer any bounds. as agile as a tiger, he
 leaped from the table to the window, and struck the iron bars with all his
 might. he broke a pane of glass, the pieces of which fell clanking into
 the courtyard below. he shouted with increasing hoarseness, “the governor,
 the governor!” this excess lasted fully an hour, during which time he was
 in a burning fever. with his hair in disorder and matted on his forehead,
 his dress torn and covered with dust and plaster, his linen in shreds, the
 king never rested until his strength was utterly exhausted, and it was not
 until then that he clearly understood the pitiless thickness of the walls,
 the impenetrable nature of the cement, invincible to every influence but
 that of time, and that he possessed no other weapon but despair. he leaned
 his forehead against the door, and let the feverish throbbings of his
 heart calm by degrees; it had seemed as if one single additional pulsation
 would have made it burst.
 “a moment will come when the food which is given to the prisoners will be
 brought to me. i shall then see some one, i shall speak to him, and get an
 answer.”
 and the king tried to remember at what hour the first repast of the
 prisoners was served at the bastile; he was ignorant even of this detail.
 the feeling of remorse at this remembrance smote him like the thrust of a
 dagger, that he should have lived for five and twenty years a king, and in
 the enjoyment of every happiness, without having bestowed a moment’s
 thought on the misery of those who had been unjustly deprived of their
 liberty. the king blushed for very shame. he felt that heaven, in
 permitting this fearful humiliation, did no more than render to the man
 the same torture as had been inflicted by that man upon so many others.
 nothing could be more efficacious for reawakening his mind to religious
 influences than the prostration of his heart and mind and soul beneath the
 feeling of such acute wretchedness. but louis dared not even kneel in
 prayer to god to entreat him to terminate his bitter trial.
 “heaven is right,” he said; “heaven acts wisely. it would be cowardly to
 pray to heaven for that which i have so often refused my own
 fellow-creatures.”
 he had reached this stage of his reflections, that is, of his agony of
 mind, when a similar noise was again heard behind his door, followed this
 time by the sound of the key in the lock, and of the bolts being withdrawn
 from their staples. the king bounded forward to be nearer to the person
 who was about to enter, but, suddenly reflecting that it was a movement
 unworthy of a sovereign, he paused, assumed a noble and calm expression,
 which for him was easy enough, and waited with his back turned towards the
 window, in order, to some extent, to conceal his agitation from the eyes
 of the person who was about to enter. it was only a jailer with a basket
 of provisions. the king looked at the man with restless anxiety, and
 waited until he spoke.
 “ah!” said the latter, “you have broken your chair. i said you had done
 so! why, you have gone quite mad.”
 “monsieur,” said the king, “be careful what you say; it will be a very
 serious affair for you.”
 the jailer placed the basket on the table, and looked at his prisoner
 steadily. “what do you say?” he said.
 “desire the governor to come to me,” added the king, in accents full of
 calm and dignity.
 “come, my boy,” said the turnkey, “you have always been very quiet and
 reasonable, but you are getting vicious, it seems, and i wish you to know
 it in time. you have broken your chair, and made a great disturbance; that
 is an offense punishable by imprisonment in one of the lower dungeons.
 promise me not to begin over again, and i will not say a word about it to
 the governor.”
 “i wish to see the governor,” replied the king, still governing his
 passions.
 “he will send you off to one of the dungeons, i tell you; so take care.”
 “i insist upon it, do you hear?”
 “ah! ah! your eyes are becoming wild again. very good! i shall take away
 your knife.”
 and the jailer did what he said, quitted the prisoner, and closed the
 door, leaving the king more astounded, more wretched, more isolated than
 ever. it was useless, though he tried it, to make the same noise again on
 his door, and equally useless that he threw the plates and dishes out of
 the window; not a single sound was heard in recognition. two hours
 afterwards he could not be recognized as a king, a gentleman, a man, a
 human being; he might rather be called a madman, tearing the door with his
 nails, trying to tear up the flooring of his cell, and uttering such wild
 and fearful cries that the old bastile seemed to tremble to its very
 foundations for having revolted against its master. as for the governor,
 the jailer did not even think of disturbing him; the turnkeys and the
 sentinels had reported the occurrence to him, but what was the good of it?
 were not these madmen common enough in such a prison? and were not the
 walls still stronger? m. de baisemeaux, thoroughly impressed with what
 aramis had told him, and in perfect conformity with the king’s order,
 hoped only that one thing might happen; namely, that the madman marchiali
 might be mad enough to hang himself to the canopy of his bed, or to one of
 the bars of the window. in fact, the prisoner was anything but a
 profitable investment for m. baisemeaux, and became more annoying than
 agreeable to him. these complications of seldon and marchiali—the
 complications first of setting at liberty and then imprisoning again, the
 complications arising from the strong likeness in question—had at
 last found a very proper denouement. baisemeaux even thought he had
 remarked that d’herblay himself was not altogether dissatisfied with the
 result.
 “and then, really,” said baisemeaux to his next in command, “an ordinary
 prisoner is already unhappy enough in being a prisoner; he suffers quite
 enough, indeed, to induce one to hope, charitably enough, that his death
 may not be far distant. with still greater reason, accordingly, when the
 prisoner has gone mad, and might bite and make a terrible disturbance in
 the bastile; why, in such a case, it is not simply an act of mere charity
 to wish him dead; it would be almost a good and even commendable action,
 quietly to have him put out of his misery.”
 and the good-natured governor thereupon sat down to his late breakfast.
 chapter xix. the shadow of m. fouquet.
 d’artagnan, still confused and oppressed by the conversation he had just
 had with the king, could not resist asking himself if he were really in
 possession of his senses, if he were really and truly at vaux; if he,
 d’artagnan, were really the captain of the musketeers, and m. fouquet the
 owner of the chateau in which louis xiv. was at that moment partaking of
 his hospitality. these reflections were not those of a drunken man,
 although everything was in prodigal profusion at vaux, and the
 surintendant’s wines had met with a distinguished reception at the fete.
 the gascon, however, was a man of calm self-possession; and no sooner did
 he touch his bright steel blade, than he knew how to adopt morally the
 cold, keen weapon as his guide of action.
 “well,” he said, as he quitted the royal apartment, “i seem now to be
 mixed up historically with the destinies of the king and of the minister;
 it will be written, that m. d’artagnan, a younger son of a gascon family,
 placed his hand on the shoulder of m. nicolas fouquet, the surintendant of
 the finances of france. my descendants, if i have any, will flatter
 themselves with the distinction which this arrest will confer, just as the
 members of the de luynes family have done with regard to the estates of
 the poor marechal d’ancre. but the thing is, how best to execute the
 king’s directions in a proper manner. any man would know how to say to m.
 fouquet, ‘your sword, monsieur.’ but it is not every one who would be able
 to take care of m. fouquet without others knowing anything about it. how
 am i to manage, then, so that m. le surintendant pass from the height of
 favor to the direst disgrace; that vaux be turned into a dungeon for him;
 that after having been steeped to his lips, as it were, in all the
 perfumes and incense of ahasuerus, he is transferred to the gallows of
 haman; in other words, of enguerrand de marigny?” and at this reflection,
 d’artagnan’s brow became clouded with perplexity. the musketeer had
 certain scruples on the matter, it must be admitted. to deliver up to
 death (for not a doubt existed that louis hated fouquet mortally) the man
 who had just shown himself so delightful and charming a host in every way,
 was a real insult to one’s conscience. “it almost seems,” said d’artagnan
 to himself, “that if i am not a poor, mean, miserable fellow, i should let
 m. fouquet know the opinion the king has about him. yet, if i betray my
 master’s secret, i shall be a false-hearted, treacherous knave, a traitor,
 too, a crime provided for and punishable by military laws—so much
 so, indeed, that twenty times, in former days when wars were rife, i have
 seen many a miserable fellow strung up to a tree for doing, in but a small
 degree, what my scruples counsel me to undertake upon a great scale now.
 no, i think that a man of true readiness of wit ought to get out of this
 difficulty with more skill than that. and now, let us admit that i do
 possess a little readiness of invention; it is not at all certain, though,
 for, after having for forty years absorbed so large a quantity, i shall be
 lucky if there were to be a pistole’s-worth left.” d’artagnan buried his
 head in his hands, tore at his mustache in sheer vexation, and added,
 “what can be the reason of m. fouquet’s disgrace? there seem to be three
 good ones: the first, because m. colbert doesn’t like him; the second,
 because he wished to fall in love with mademoiselle de la valliere; and
 lastly, because the king likes m. colbert and loves mademoiselle de la
 valliere. oh! he is lost! but shall i put my foot on his neck, i, of all
 men, when he is falling a prey to the intrigues of a pack of women and
 clerks? for shame! if he be dangerous, i will lay him low enough; if,
 however, he be only persecuted, i will look on. i have come to such a
 decisive determination, that neither king nor living man shall change my
 mind. if athos were here, he would do as i have done. therefore, instead
 of going, in cold blood, up to m. fouquet, and arresting him off-hand and
 shutting him up altogether, i will try and conduct myself like a man who
 understands what good manners are. people will talk about it, of course;
 but they shall talk well of it, i am determined.” and d’artagnan, drawing
 by a gesture peculiar to himself his shoulder-belt over his shoulder, went
 straight off to m. fouquet, who, after he had taken leave of his guests,
 was preparing to retire for the night and to sleep tranquilly after the
 triumphs of the day. the air was still perfumed, or infected, whichever
 way it may be considered, with the odors of the torches and the fireworks.
 the wax-lights were dying away in their sockets, the flowers fell
 unfastened from the garlands, the groups of dancers and courtiers were
 separating in the salons. surrounded by his friends, who complimented him
 and received his flattering remarks in return, the surintendant
 half-closed his wearied eyes. he longed for rest and quiet; he sank upon
 the bed of laurels which had been heaped up for him for so many days past;
 it might almost have been said that he seemed bowed beneath the weight of
 the new debts which he had incurred for the purpose of giving the greatest
 possible honor to this fete. fouquet had just retired to his room,
 still smiling, but more than half-asleep. he could listen to nothing more,
 he could hardly keep his eyes open; his bed seemed to possess a
 fascinating and irresistible attraction for him. the god morpheus, the
 presiding deity of the dome painted by lebrun, had extended his influence
 over the adjoining rooms, and showered down his most sleep-inducing
 poppies upon the master of the house. fouquet, almost entirely alone, was
 being assisted by his valet de chambre to undress, when m.
 d’artagnan appeared at the entrance of the room. d’artagnan had never been
 able to succeed in making himself common at the court; and notwithstanding
 he was seen everywhere and on all occasions, he never failed to produce an
 effect wherever and whenever he made his appearance. such is the happy
 privilege of certain natures, which in that respect resemble either
 thunder or lightning; every one recognizes them; but their appearance
 never fails to arouse surprise and astonishment, and whenever they occur,
 the impression is always left that the last was the most conspicuous or
 most important.
 “what! m. d’artagnan?” said fouquet, who had already taken his right arm
 out of the sleeve of his doublet.
 “at your service,” replied the musketeer.
 “come in, my dear m. d’artagnan.”
 “thank you.”
 “have you come to criticise the fete? you are ingenious enough in
 your criticisms, i know.”
 “by no means.”
 “are not your men looked after properly?”
 “in every way.”
 “you are not comfortably lodged, perhaps?”
 “nothing could be better.”
 “in that case, i have to thank you for being so amiably disposed, and i
 must not fail to express my obligations to you for all your flattering
 kindness.”
 these words were as much as to say, “my dear d’artagnan, pray go to bed,
 since you have a bed to lie down on, and let me do the same.”
 d’artagnan did not seem to understand it.
 “are you going to bed already?” he said to the superintendent.
 “yes; have you anything to say to me?”
 “nothing, monsieur, nothing at all. you sleep in this room, then?”
 “yes; as you see.”
 “you have given a most charming fete to the king.”
 “do you think so?”
 “oh! beautiful!”
 “is the king pleased?”
 “enchanted.”
 “did he desire you to say as much to me?”
 “he would not choose so unworthy a messenger, monseigneur.”
 “you do not do yourself justice, monsieur d’artagnan.”
 “is that your bed, there?”
 “yes; but why do you ask? are you not satisfied with your own?”
 “my i speak frankly to you?”
 “most assuredly.”
 “well, then, i am not.”
 fouquet started; and then replied, “will you take my room, monsieur
 d’artagnan?”
 “what! deprive you of it, monseigneur? never!”
 “what am i to do, then?”
 “allow me to share yours with you.”
 fouquet looked at the musketeer fixedly. “ah! ah!” he said, “you have just
 left the king.”
 “i have, monseigneur.”
 “and the king wishes you to pass the night in my room?”
 “monseigneur—”
 “very well, monsieur d’artagnan, very well. you are the master here.”
 “i assure you, monseigneur, that i do not wish to abuse—”
 fouquet turned to his valet, and said, “leave us.” when the man had left,
 he said to d’artagnan, “you have something to say to me?”
 “a man of your superior intelligence cannot have come to talk with a man
 like myself, at such an hour as the present, without grave motives.”
 “do not interrogate me.”
 “on the contrary. what do you want with me?”
 “nothing more than the pleasure of your society.”
 “come into the garden, then,” said the superintendent suddenly, “or into
 the park.”
 “no,” replied the musketeer, hastily, “no.”
 “why?”
 “the fresh air—”
 “come, admit at once that you arrest me,” said the superintendent to the
 captain.
 “never!” said the latter.
 “you intend to look after me, then?”
 “yes, monseigneur, i do, upon my honor.”
 “upon your honor—ah! that is quite another thing! so i am to be
 arrested in my own house.”
 “do not say such a thing.”
 “on the contrary, i will proclaim it aloud.”
 “if you do so, i shall be compelled to request you to be silent.”
 “very good! violence towards me, and in my own house, too.”
 “we do not seem to understand one another at all. stay a moment; there is
 a chess-board there; we will have a game, if you have no objections.”
 “monsieur d’artagnan, i am in disgrace, then?”
 “not at all; but—”
 “i am prohibited, i suppose, from withdrawing from your sight.”
 “i do not understand a word you are saying, monseigneur; and if you wish
 me to withdraw, tell me so.”
 “my dear monsieur d’artagnan, your mode of action is enough to drive me
 mad; i was almost sinking for want of sleep, but you have completely
 awakened me.”
 “i shall never forgive myself, i am sure; and if you wish to reconcile me
 with myself, why, go to sleep in your bed in my presence; and i shall be
 delighted.”
 “i am under surveillance, i see.”
 “i will leave the room if you say any such thing.”
 “you are beyond my comprehension.”
 “good night, monseigneur,” said d’artagnan, as he pretended to withdraw.
 fouquet ran after him. “i will not lie down,” he said. “seriously, and
 since you refuse to treat me as a man, and since you finesse with me, i
 will try and set you at bay, as a hunter does a wild boar.”
 “bah!” cried d’artagnan, pretending to smile.
 “i shall order my horses, and set off for paris,” said fouquet, sounding
 the captain of the musketeers.
 “if that be the case, monseigneur, it is very difficult.”
 “you will arrest me, then?”
 “no, but i shall go along with you.”
 “that is quite sufficient, monsieur d’artagnan,” returned fouquet, coldly.
 “it was not for nothing you acquired your reputation as a man of
 intelligence and resource; but with me all this is quite superfluous. let
 us come to the point. do me a service. why do you arrest me? what have i
 done?”
 “oh! i know nothing about what you may have done; but i do not arrest you—this
 evening, at least!”
 “this evening!” said fouquet, turning pale, “but to-morrow?”
 “it is not to-morrow just yet, monseigneur. who can ever answer for the
 morrow?”
 “quick, quick, captain! let me speak to m. d’herblay.”
 “alas! that is quite impossible, monseigneur. i have strict orders to see
 that you hold no communication with any one.”
 “with m. d’herblay, captain—with your friend!”
 “monseigneur, is m. d’herblay the only person with whom you ought to be
 prevented holding any communication?”
 fouquet colored, and then assuming an air of resignation, he said: “you
 are right, monsieur; you have taught me a lesson i ought not to have
 evoked. a fallen man cannot assert his right to anything, even from those
 whose fortunes he may have made; for a still stronger reason, he cannot
 claim anything from those to whom he may never have had the happiness of
 doing a service.”
 “monseigneur!”
 “it is perfectly true, monsieur d’artagnan; you have always acted in the
 most admirable manner towards me—in such a manner, indeed, as most
 becomes the man who is destined to arrest me. you, at least, have never
 asked me anything.”
 “monsieur,” replied the gascon, touched by his eloquent and noble tone of
 grief, “will you—i ask it as a favor—pledge me your word as a
 man of honor that you will not leave this room?”
 “what is the use of it, dear monsieur d’artagnan, since you keep watch and
 ward over me? do you suppose i should contend against the most valiant
 sword in the kingdom?”
 “it is not that, at all, monseigneur; but that i am going to look for m.
 d’herblay, and, consequently, to leave you alone.”
 fouquet uttered a cry of delight and surprise.
 “to look for m. d’herblay! to leave me alone!” he exclaimed, clasping his
 hands together.
 “which is m. d’herblay’s room? the blue room is it not?”
 “yes, my friend, yes.”
 “your friend! thank you for that word, monseigneur; you confer it upon me
 to-day, at least, if you have never done so before.”
 “ah! you have saved me.”
 “it will take a good ten minutes to go from hence to the blue room, and to
 return?” said d’artagnan.
 “nearly so.”
 “and then to wake aramis, who sleeps very soundly, when he is asleep, i
 put that down at another five minutes; making a total of fifteen minutes’
 absence. and now, monseigneur, give me your word that you will not in any
 way attempt to make your escape, and that when i return i shall find you
 here again.”
 “i give it, monsieur,” replied fouquet, with an expression of the warmest
 and deepest gratitude.
 d’artagnan disappeared. fouquet looked at him as he quitted the room,
 waited with a feverish impatience until the door was closed behind him,
 and as soon as it was shut, flew to his keys, opened two or three secret
 doors concealed in various articles of furniture in the room, looked
 vainly for certain papers, which doubtless he had left at saint-mande, and
 which he seemed to regret not having found in them; then hurriedly seizing
 hold of letters, contracts, papers, writings, he heaped them up into a
 pile, which he burnt in the extremest haste upon the marble hearth of the
 fireplace, not even taking time to draw from the interior of it the vases
 and pots of flowers with which it was filled. as soon as he had finished,
 like a man who has just escaped an imminent danger, and whose strength
 abandons him as soon as the danger is past, he sank down, completely
 overcome, on a couch. when d’artagnan returned, he found fouquet in the
 same position; the worthy musketeer had not the slightest doubt that
 fouquet, having given his word, would not even think of failing to keep
 it, but he had thought it most likely that fouquet would turn his
 (d’artagnan’s) absence to the best advantage in getting rid of all the
 papers, memorandums, and contracts, which might possibly render his
 position, which was even now serious enough, more dangerous than ever. and
 so, lifting up his head like a dog who has regained the scent, he
 perceived an odor resembling smoke he had relied on finding in the
 atmosphere, and having found it, made a movement of his head in token of
 satisfaction. as d’artagnan entered, fouquet, on his side, raised his
 head, and not one of d’artagnan’s movements escaped him. and then the
 looks of the two men met, and they both saw that they had understood each
 other without exchanging a syllable.
 “well!” asked fouquet, the first to speak, “and m. d’herblay?”
 “upon my word, monseigneur,” replied d’artagnan, “m. d’herblay must be
 desperately fond of walking out at night, and composing verses by
 moonlight in the park of vaux, with some of your poets, in all
 probability, for he is not in his own room.”
 “what! not in his own room?” cried fouquet, whose last hope thus escaped
 him; for unless he could ascertain in what way the bishop of vannes could
 assist him, he perfectly well knew that he could expect assistance from no
 other quarter.
 “or, indeed,” continued d’artagnan, “if he is in his own room, he has very
 good reasons for not answering.”
 “but surely you did not call him in such a manner that he could have heard
 you?”
 “you can hardly suppose, monseigneur, that having already exceeded my
 orders, which forbade me leaving you a single moment—you can hardly
 suppose, i say, that i should have been mad enough to rouse the whole
 house and allow myself to be seen in the corridor of the bishop of vannes,
 in order that m. colbert might state with positive certainty that i gave
 you time to burn your papers.”
 “my papers?”
 “of course; at least that is what i should have done in your place. when
 any one opens a door for me i always avail myself of it.”
 “yes, yes, and i thank you, for i have availed myself of it.”
 “and you have done perfectly right. every man has his own peculiar secrets
 with which others have nothing to do. but let us return to aramis,
 monseigneur.”
 “well, then, i tell you, you could not have called loud enough, or aramis
 would have heard you.”
 “however softly any one may call aramis, monseigneur, aramis always hears
 when he has an interest in hearing. i repeat what i said before—aramis
 was not in his own room, or aramis had certain reasons for not recognizing
 my voice, of which i am ignorant, and of which you may be even ignorant
 yourself, notwithstanding your liege-man is his greatness the lord bishop
 of vannes.”
 fouquet drew a deep sigh, rose from his seat, took three or four turns in
 his room, and finished by seating himself, with an expression of extreme
 dejection, upon his magnificent bed with velvet hangings, and costliest
 lace. d’artagnan looked at fouquet with feelings of the deepest and
 sincerest pity.
 “i have seen a good many men arrested in my life,” said the musketeer,
 sadly; “i have seen both m. de cinq-mars and m. de chalais arrested,
 though i was very young then. i have seen m. de conde arrested with the
 princes; i have seen m. de retz arrested; i have seen m. broussel
 arrested. stay a moment, monseigneur, it is disagreeable to have to say,
 but the very one of all those whom you most resemble at this moment was
 that poor fellow broussel. you were very near doing as he did, putting
 your dinner napkin in your portfolio, and wiping your mouth with your
 papers. mordioux! monseigneur fouquet, a man like you ought not to
 be dejected in this manner. suppose your friends saw you?”
 “monsieur d’artagnan,” returned the surintendant, with a smile full of
 gentleness, “you do not understand me; it is precisely because my friends
 are not looking on, that i am as you see me now. i do not live, exist
 even, isolated from others; i am nothing when left to myself. understand
 that throughout my whole life i have passed every moment of my time in
 making friends, whom i hoped to render my stay and support. in times of
 prosperity, all these cheerful, happy voices—rendered so through and
 by my means—formed in my honor a concert of praise and kindly
 actions. in the least disfavor, these humbler voices accompanied in
 harmonious accents the murmur of my own heart. isolation i have never yet
 known. poverty (a phantom i have sometimes beheld, clad in rags, awaiting
 me at the end of my journey through life)—poverty has been the
 specter with which many of my own friends have trifled for years past,
 which they poetize and caress, and which has attracted me towards them.
 poverty! i accept it, acknowledge it, receive it, as a disinherited
 sister; for poverty is neither solitude, nor exile, nor imprisonment. is
 it likely i shall ever be poor, with such friends as pelisson, as la
 fontaine, as moliere? with such a mistress as—oh! if you knew how
 utterly lonely and desolate i feel at this moment, and how you, who
 separate me from all i love, seem to resemble the image of solitude, of
 annihilation—death itself.”
 “but i have already told you, monsieur fouquet,” replied d’artagnan, moved
 to the depths of his soul, “that you are woefully exaggerating. the king
 likes you.”
 “no, no,” said fouquet, shaking his head.
 “m. colbert hates you.”
 “m. colbert! what does that matter to me?”
 “he will ruin you.”
 “ah! i defy him to do that, for i am ruined already.”
 at this singular confession of the superintendent, d’artagnan cast his
 glance all round the room; and although he did not open his lips, fouquet
 understood him so thoroughly, that he added: “what can be done with such
 wealth of substance as surrounds us, when a man can no longer cultivate
 his taste for the magnificent? do you know what good the greater part of
 the wealth and the possessions which we rich enjoy, confer upon us? merely
 to disgust us, by their very splendor even, with everything which does not
 equal it! vaux! you will say, and the wonders of vaux! what of it? what
 boot these wonders? if i am ruined, how shall i fill with water the urns
 which my naiads bear in their arms, or force the air into the lungs of my
 tritons? to be rich enough, monsieur d’artagnan, a man must be too rich.”
 d’artagnan shook his head.
 “oh! i know very well what you think,” replied fouquet, quickly. “if vaux
 were yours, you would sell it, and would purchase an estate in the
 country; an estate which should have woods, orchards, and land attached,
 so that the estate should be made to support its master. with forty
 millions you might—”
 “ten millions,” interrupted d’artagnan.
 “not a million, my dear captain. no one in france is rich enough to give
 two millions for vaux, and to continue to maintain it as i have done; no
 one could do it, no one would know how.”
 “well,” said d’artagnan, “in any case, a million is not abject misery.”
 “it is not far from it, my dear monsieur. but you do not understand me.
 no; i will not sell my residence at vaux; i will give it to you, if you
 like;” and fouquet accompanied these words with a movement of the
 shoulders to which it would be impossible to do justice.
 “give it to the king; you will make a better bargain.”
 “the king does not require me to give it to him,” said fouquet; “he will
 take it away from me with the most absolute ease and grace, if it pleases
 him to do so; and that is the very reason i should prefer to see it
 perish. do you know, monsieur d’artagnan, that if the king did not happen
 to be under my roof, i would take this candle, go straight to the dome,
 and set fire to a couple of huge chests of fusees and fireworks which are
 in reserve there, and would reduce my palace to ashes.”
 “bah!” said the musketeer, negligently. “at all events, you would not be
 able to burn the gardens, and that is the finest feature of the place.”
 “and yet,” resumed fouquet, thoughtfully, “what was i saying? great
 heavens! burn vaux! destroy my palace! but vaux is not mine; these
 wonderful creations are, it is true, the property, as far as sense of
 enjoyment goes, of the man who has paid for them; but as far as duration
 is concerned, they belong to those who created them. vaux belongs to
 lebrun, to lenotre, to pelisson, to levau, to la fontaine, to moliere;
 vaux belongs to posterity, in fact. you see, monsieur d’artagnan, that my
 very house has ceased to be my own.”
 “that is all well and good,” said d’artagnan; “the idea is agreeable
 enough, and i recognize m. fouquet himself in it. that idea, indeed, makes
 me forget that poor fellow broussel altogether; and i now fail to
 recognize in you the whining complaints of that old frondeur. if you are
 ruined, monsieur, look at the affair manfully, for you too, mordioux!
 belong to posterity, and have no right to lessen yourself in any way. stay
 a moment; look at me, i who seem to exercise in some degree a kind of
 superiority over you, because i am arresting you; fate, which distributes
 their different parts to the comedians of this world, accorded me a less
 agreeable and less advantageous part to fill than yours has been. i am one
 of those who think that the parts which kings and powerful nobles are
 called upon to act are infinitely of more worth than the parts of beggars
 or lackeys. it is far better on the stage—on the stage, i mean, of
 another theater than the theater of this world—it is far better to
 wear a fine coat and to talk a fine language, than to walk the boards shod
 with a pair of old shoes, or to get one’s backbone gently polished by a
 hearty dressing with a stick. in one word, you have been a prodigal with
 money, you have ordered and been obeyed—have been steeped to the
 lips in enjoyment; while i have dragged my tether after me, have been
 commanded and have obeyed, and have drudged my life away. well, although i
 may seem of such trifling importance beside you, monseigneur, i do declare
 to you, that the recollection of what i have done serves me as a spur, and
 prevents me from bowing my old head too soon. i shall remain unto the very
 end a trooper; and when my turn comes, i shall fall perfectly straight,
 all in a heap, still alive, after having selected my place beforehand. do
 as i do, monsieur fouquet, you will not find yourself the worse for it; a
 fall happens only once in a lifetime to men like yourself, and the chief
 thing is, to take it gracefully when the chance presents itself. there is
 a latin proverb—the words have escaped me, but i remember the sense
 of it very well, for i have thought over it more than once—which
 says, ‘the end crowns the work!’”
 fouquet rose from his seat, passed his arm round d’artagnan’s neck, and
 clasped him in a close embrace, whilst with the other hand he pressed his
 hand. “an excellent homily,” he said, after a moment’s pause.
 “a soldier’s, monseigneur.”
 “you have a regard for me, in telling me all that.”
 “perhaps.”
 fouquet resumed his pensive attitude once more, and then, a moment after,
 he said: “where can m. d’herblay be? i dare not ask you to send for him.”
 “you would not ask me, because i would not do it, monsieur fouquet. people
 would learn it, and aramis, who is not mixed up with the affair, might
 possibly be compromised and included in your disgrace.”
 “i will wait here till daylight,” said fouquet.
 “yes; that is best.”
 “what shall we do when daylight comes?”
 “i know nothing at all about it, monseigneur.”
 “monsieur d’artagnan, will you do me a favor?”
 “most willingly.”
 “you guard me, i remain; you are acting in the full discharge of your
 duty, i suppose?”
 “certainly.”
 “very good, then; remain as close to me as my shadow if you like; and i
 infinitely prefer such a shadow to any one else.”
 d’artagnan bowed to the compliment.
 “but, forget that you are monsieur d’artagnan, captain of the musketeers;
 forget that i am monsieur fouquet, surintendant of the finances; and let
 us talk about my affairs.”
 “that is rather a delicate subject.”
 “indeed?”
 “yes; but, for your sake, monsieur fouquet, i will do what may almost be
 regarded as an impossibility.”
 “thank you. what did the king say to you?”
 “nothing.”
 “ah! is that the way you talk?”
 “the deuce!”
 “what do you think of my situation?”
 “i do not know.”
 “however, unless you have some ill feeling against me—”
 “your position is a difficult one.”
 “in what respect?”
 “because you are under your own roof.”
 “however difficult it may be, i understand it very well.”
 “do you suppose that, with any one else but yourself, i should have shown
 so much frankness?”
 “what! so much frankness, do you say? you, who refuse to tell me the
 slightest thing?”
 “at all events, then, so much ceremony and consideration.”
 “ah! i have nothing to say in that respect.”
 “one moment, monseigneur: let me tell you how i should have behaved
 towards any one but yourself. it might be that i happened to arrive at
 your door just as your guests or your friends had left you—or, if
 they had not gone yet, i should wait until they were leaving, and should
 then catch them one after the other, like rabbits; i should lock them up
 quietly enough, i should steal softly along the carpet of your corridor,
 and with one hand upon you, before you suspected the slightest thing
 amiss, i should keep you safely until my master’s breakfast in the
 morning. in this way, i should just the same have avoided all publicity,
 all disturbance, all opposition; but there would also have been no warning
 for m. fouquet, no consideration for his feelings, none of those delicate
 concessions which are shown by persons who are essentially courteous in
 their natures, whenever the decisive moment may arrive. are you satisfied
 with the plan?”
 “it makes me shudder.”
 “i thought you would not like it. it would have been very disagreeable to
 have made my appearance to-morrow, without any preparation, and to have
 asked you to deliver up your sword.”
 “oh! monsieur, i should have died of shame and anger.”
 “your gratitude is too eloquently expressed. i have not done enough to
 deserve it, i assure you.”
 “most certainly, monsieur, you will never get me to believe that.”
 “well, then, monseigneur, if you are satisfied with what i have done, and
 have somewhat recovered from the shock which i prepared you for as much as
 i possibly could, let us allow the few hours that remain to pass away
 undisturbed. you are harassed, and should arrange your thoughts; i beg
 you, therefore, go to sleep, or pretend to go to sleep, either on your
 bed, or in your bed; i will sleep in this armchair; and when i fall
 asleep, my rest is so sound that a cannon would not wake me.”
 fouquet smiled. “i expect, however,” continued the musketeer, “the case of
 a door being opened, whether a secret door, or any other; or the case of
 any one going out of, or coming into, the room—for anything like
 that my ear is as quick and sensitive as the ear of a mouse. creaking
 noises make me start. it arises, i suppose, from a natural antipathy to
 anything of the kind. move about as much as you like; walk up and down in
 any part of the room, write, efface, destroy, burn,—nothing like
 that will prevent me from going to sleep or even prevent me from snoring,
 but do not touch either the key or the handle of the door, for i should
 start up in a moment, and that would shake my nerves and make me ill.”
 “monsieur d’artagnan,” said fouquet, “you are certainly the most witty and
 the most courteous man i ever met with; and you will leave me only one
 regret, that of having made your acquaintance so late.”
 d’artagnan drew a deep sigh, which seemed to say, “alas! you have perhaps
 made it too soon.” he then settled himself in his armchair, while fouquet,
 half lying on his bed and leaning on his arm, was meditating on his
 misadventures. in this way, both of them, leaving the candles burning,
 awaited the first dawn of the day; and when fouquet happened to sigh too
 loudly, d’artagnan only snored the louder. not a single visit, not even
 from aramis, disturbed their quietude: not a sound even was heard
 throughout the whole vast palace. outside, however, the guards of honor on
 duty, and the patrol of musketeers, paced up and down; and the sound of
 their feet could be heard on the gravel walks. it seemed to act as an
 additional soporific for the sleepers, while the murmuring of the wind
 through the trees, and the unceasing music of the fountains whose waters
 tumbled in the basin, still went on uninterruptedly, without being
 disturbed at the slight noises and items of little moment that constitute
 the life and death of human nature.
 chapter xx. the morning.
 in vivid contrast to the sad and terrible destiny of the king imprisoned
 in the bastile, and tearing, in sheer despair, the bolts and bars of his
 dungeon, the rhetoric of the chroniclers of old would not fail to present,
 as a complete antithesis, the picture of philippe lying asleep beneath the
 royal canopy. we do not pretend to say that such rhetoric is always bad,
 and always scatters, in places where they have no right to grow, the
 flowers with which it embellishes and enlivens history. but we shall, on
 the present occasion, carefully avoid polishing the antithesis in
 question, but shall proceed to draw another picture as minutely as
 possible, to serve as foil and counterfoil to the one in the preceding
 chapter. the young prince alighted from aramis’s room, in the same way the
 king had descended from the apartment dedicated to morpheus. the dome
 gradually and slowly sank down under aramis’s pressure, and philippe stood
 beside the royal bed, which had ascended again after having deposited its
 prisoner in the secret depths of the subterranean passage. alone, in the
 presence of all the luxury which surrounded him; alone, in the presence of
 his power; alone, with the part he was about to be forced to act, philippe
 for the first time felt his heart, and mind, and soul expand beneath the
 influence of a thousand mutable emotions, which are the vital throbs of a
 king’s heart. he could not help changing color when he looked upon the
 empty bed, still tumbled by his brother’s body. this mute accomplice had
 returned, after having completed the work it had been destined to perform;
 it returned with the traces of the crime; it spoke to the guilty author of
 that crime, with the frank and unreserved language which an accomplice
 never fears to use in the company of his companion in guilt; for it spoke
 the truth. philippe bent over the bed, and perceived a pocket-handkerchief
 lying on it, which was still damp from the cold sweat which had poured
 from louis xiv.‘s face. this sweat-bestained handkerchief terrified
 philippe, as the gore of abel frightened cain.
 “i am face to face with my destiny,” said philippe, his eyes on fire, and
 his face a livid white. “is it likely to be more terrifying than my
 captivity has been sad and gloomy? though i am compelled to follow out, at
 every moment, the sovereign power and authority i have usurped, shall i
 cease to listen to the scruples of my heart? yes! the king has lain on
 this bed; it is indeed his head that has left its impression on this
 pillow; his bitter tears that have stained this handkerchief: and yet, i
 hesitate to throw myself on the bed, or to press in my hand the
 handkerchief which is embroidered with my brother’s arms. away with such
 weakness; let me imitate m. d’herblay, who asserts that a man’s action
 should be always one degree above his thoughts; let me imitate m.
 d’herblay, whose thoughts are of and for himself alone, who regards
 himself as a man of honor, so long as he injures or betrays his enemies
 only. i, i alone, should have occupied this bed, if louis xiv. had not,
 owing to my mother’s criminal abandonment, stood in my way; and this
 handkerchief, embroidered with the arms of france, would in right and
 justice belong to me alone, if, as m. d’herblay observes, i had been left
 my royal cradle. philippe, son of france, take your place on that bed;
 philippe, sole king of france, resume the blazonry that is yours!
 philippe, sole heir presumptive to louis xiii., your father, show yourself
 without pity or mercy for the usurper who, at this moment, has not even to
 suffer the agony of the remorse of all that you have had to submit to.”
 with these words, philippe, notwithstanding an instinctive repugnance of
 feeling, and in spite of the shudder of terror which mastered his will,
 threw himself on the royal bed, and forced his muscles to press the still
 warm place where louis xiv. had lain, while he buried his burning face in
 the handkerchief still moistened by his brother’s tears. with his head
 thrown back and buried in the soft down of his pillow, philippe perceived
 above him the crown of france, suspended, as we have stated, by angels
 with outspread golden wings.
 a man may be ambitious of lying in a lion’s den, but can hardly hope to
 sleep there quietly. philippe listened attentively to every sound; his
 heart panted and throbbed at the very suspicion of approaching terror and
 misfortune; but confident in his own strength, which was confirmed by the
 force of an overpoweringly resolute determination, he waited until some
 decisive circumstance should permit him to judge for himself. he hoped
 that imminent danger might be revealed to him, like those phosphoric
 lights of the tempest which show the sailors the altitude of the waves
 against which they have to struggle. but nothing approached. silence, that
 mortal enemy of restless hearts, and of ambitious minds, shrouded in the
 thickness of its gloom during the remainder of the night the future king
 of france, who lay there sheltered beneath his stolen crown. towards the
 morning a shadow, rather than a body, glided into the royal chamber;
 philippe expected his approach and neither expressed nor exhibited any
 surprise.
 “well, m. d’herblay?”
 “well, sire, all is accomplished.”
 “how?”
 “exactly as we expected.”
 “did he resist?”
 “terribly! tears and entreaties.”
 “and then?”
 “a perfect stupor.”
 “but at last?”
 “oh! at last, a complete victory, and absolute silence.”
 “did the governor of the bastile suspect anything?”
 “nothing.”
 “the resemblance, however—”
 “was the cause of the success.”
 “but the prisoner cannot fail to explain himself. think well of that. i
 have myself been able to do as much as that, on former occasion.”
 “i have already provided for every chance. in a few days, sooner if
 necessary, we will take the captive out of his prison, and will send him
 out of the country, to a place of exile so remote—”
 “people can return from their exile, monsieur d’herblay.”
 “to a place of exile so distant, i was going to say, that human strength
 and the duration of human life would not be enough for his return.”
 once more a cold look of intelligence passed between aramis and the young
 king.
 “and m. du vallon?” asked philippe in order to change the conversation.
 “he will be presented to you to-day, and confidentially will congratulate
 you on the danger which that conspirator has made you run.”
 “what is to be done with him?”
 “with m. du vallon?”
 “yes; confer a dukedom on him, i suppose.”
 “a dukedom,” replied aramis, smiling in a significant manner.
 “why do you laugh, monsieur d’herblay?”
 “i laugh at the extreme caution of your idea.”
 “cautious, why so?”
 “your majesty is doubtless afraid that poor porthos may possible become a
 troublesome witness, and you wish to get rid of him.”
 “what! in making him a duke?”
 “certainly; you would assuredly kill him, for he would die from joy, and
 the secret would die with him.”
 “good heavens!”
 “yes,” said aramis, phlegmatically; “i should lose a very good friend.”
 at this moment, and in the middle of this idle conversation, under the
 light tone of which the two conspirators concealed their joy and pride at
 their mutual success, aramis heard something which made him prick up his
 ears.
 “what is that?” said philippe.
 “the dawn, sire.”
 “well?”
 “well, before you retired to bed last night, you probably decided to do
 something this morning at break of day.”
 “yes, i told my captain of the musketeers,” replied the young man
 hurriedly, “that i should expect him.”
 “if you told him that, he will certainly be here, for he is a most
 punctual man.”
 “i hear a step in the vestibule.”
 “it must be he.”
 “come, let us begin the attack,” said the young king resolutely.
 “be cautious for heaven’s sake. to begin the attack, and with d’artagnan,
 would be madness. d’artagnan knows nothing, he has seen nothing; he is a
 hundred miles from suspecting our mystery in the slightest degree, but if
 he comes into this room the first this morning, he will be sure to detect
 something of what has taken place, and which he would imagine it his
 business to occupy himself about. before we allow d’artagnan to penetrate
 into this room, we must air the room thoroughly, or introduce so many
 people into it, that the keenest scent in the whole kingdom may be
 deceived by the traces of twenty different persons.”
 “but how can i send him away, since i have given him a rendezvous?”
 observed the prince, impatient to measure swords with so redoubtable an
 antagonist.
 “i will take care of that,” replied the bishop, “and in order to begin, i
 am going to strike a blow which will completely stupefy our man.”
 “he, too, is striking a blow, for i hear him at the door,” added the
 prince, hurriedly.
 and, in fact, a knock at the door was heard at that moment. aramis was not
 mistaken; for it was indeed d’artagnan who adopted that mode of announcing
 himself.
 we have seen how he passed the night in philosophizing with m. fouquet,
 but the musketeer was very weary even of feigning to fall asleep, and as
 soon as earliest dawn illumined with its gloomy gleams of light the
 sumptuous cornices of the superintendent’s room, d’artagnan rose from his
 armchair, arranged his sword, brushed his coat and hat with his sleeve,
 like a private soldier getting ready for inspection.
 “are you going out?” said fouquet.
 “yes, monseigneur. and you?”
 “i shall remain.”
 “you pledge your word?”
 “certainly.”
 “very good. besides, my only reason for going out is to try and get that
 reply,—you know what i mean?”
 “that sentence, you mean—”
 “stay, i have something of the old roman in me. this morning, when i got
 up, i remarked that my sword had got caught in one of the aiguillettes,
 and that my shoulder-belt had slipped quite off. that is an infallible
 sign.”
 “of prosperity?”
 “yes, be sure of it; for every time that that confounded belt of mine
 stuck fast to my back, it always signified a punishment from m. de
 treville, or a refusal of money by m. de mazarin. every time my sword hung
 fast to my shoulder-belt, it always predicted some disagreeable commission
 or another for me to execute, and i have had showers of them all my life
 through. every time, too, my sword danced about in its sheath, a duel,
 fortunate in its result, was sure to follow: whenever it dangled about the
 calves of my legs, it signified a slight wound; every time it fell
 completely out of the scabbard, i was booked, and made up my mind that i
 should have to remain on the field of battle, with two or three months
 under surgical bandages into the bargain.”
 “i did not know your sword kept you so well informed,” said fouquet, with
 a faint smile, which showed how he was struggling against his own
 weakness. “is your sword bewitched, or under the influence of some
 imperial charm?”
 “why, you must know that my sword may almost be regarded as part of my own
 body. i have heard that certain men seem to have warnings given them by
 feeling something the matter with their legs, or a throbbing of their
 temples. with me, it is my sword that warns me. well, it told me of
 nothing this morning. but, stay a moment—look here, it has just
 fallen of its own accord into the last hole of the belt. do you know what
 that is a warning of?”
 “no.”
 “well, that tells me of an arrest that will have to be made this very
 day.”
 “well,” said the surintendant, more astonished than annoyed by this
 frankness, “if there is nothing disagreeable predicted to you by your
 sword, i am to conclude that it is not disagreeable for you to arrest me.”
 “you! arrest you!”
 “of course. the warning—”
 “does not concern you, since you have been arrested ever since yesterday.
 it is not you i shall have to arrest, be assured of that. that is the
 reason why i am delighted, and also the reason why i said that my day will
 be a happy one.”
 and with these words, pronounced with the most affectionate graciousness
 of manner, the captain took leave of fouquet in order to wait upon the
 king. he was on the point of leaving the room, when fouquet said to him,
 “one last mark of kindness.”
 “what is it, monseigneur?”
 “m. d’herblay; let me see monsieur d’herblay.”
 “i am going to try and get him to come to you.”
 d’artagnan did not think himself so good a prophet. it was written that
 the day would pass away and realize all the predictions that had been made
 in the morning. he had accordingly knocked, as we have seen, at the king’s
 door. the door opened. the captain thought that it was the king who had
 just opened it himself; and this supposition was not altogether
 inadmissible, considering the state of agitation in which he had left
 louis xiv. the previous evening; but instead of his royal master, whom he
 was on the point of saluting with the greatest respect, he perceived the
 long, calm features of aramis. so extreme was his surprise that he could
 hardly refrain from uttering a loud exclamation. “aramis!” he said.
 “good morning, dear d’artagnan,” replied the prelate, coldly.
 “you here!” stammered out the musketeer.
 “his majesty desires you to report that he is still sleeping, after having
 been greatly fatigued during the whole night.”
 “ah!” said d’artagnan, who could not understand how the bishop of vannes,
 who had been so indifferent a favorite the previous evening, had become in
 half a dozen hours the most magnificent mushroom of fortune that had ever
 sprung up in a sovereign’s bedroom. in fact, to transmit the orders of the
 king even to the mere threshold of that monarch’s room, to serve as an
 intermediary of louis xiv. so as to be able to give a single order in his
 name at a couple paces from him, he must have become more than richelieu
 had ever been to louis xiii. d’artagnan’s expressive eye, half-opened
 lips, his curling mustache, said as much indeed in the plainest language
 to the chief favorite, who remained calm and perfectly unmoved.
 “moreover,” continued the bishop, “you will be good enough, monsieur le
 capitaine des mousquetaires, to allow those only to pass into the king’s
 room this morning who have special permission. his majesty does not wish
 to be disturbed just yet.”
 “but,” objected d’artagnan, almost on the point of refusing to obey this
 order, and particularly of giving unrestrained passage to the suspicions
 which the king’s silence had aroused—“but, monsieur l’eveque, his
 majesty gave me a rendezvous for this morning.”
 “later, later,” said the king’s voice, from the bottom of the alcove; a
 voice which made a cold shudder pass through the musketeer’s veins. he
 bowed, amazed, confused, and stupefied by the smile with which aramis
 seemed to overwhelm him, as soon as these words had been pronounced.
 “and then,” continued the bishop, “as an answer to what you were coming to
 ask the king, my dear d’artagnan, here is an order of his majesty, which
 you will be good enough to attend to forthwith, for it concerns m.
 fouquet.”
 d’artagnan took the order which was held out to him. “to be set at
 liberty!” he murmured. “ah!” and he uttered a second “ah!” still more full
 of intelligence than the former; for this order explained aramis’s
 presence with the king, and that aramis, in order to have obtained
 fouquet’s pardon, must have made considerable progress in the royal favor,
 and that this favor explained, in its tenor, the hardly conceivable
 assurance with which m. d’herblay issued the order in the king’s name. for
 d’artagnan it was quite sufficient to have understood something of the
 matter in hand to order to understand the rest. he bowed and withdrew a
 couple of paces, as though he were about to leave.
 “i am going with you,” said the bishop.
 “where to?”
 “to m. fouquet; i wish to be a witness of his delight.”
 “ah! aramis, how you puzzled me just now!” said d’artagnan again.
 “but you understand now, i suppose?”
 “of course i understand,” he said aloud; but added in a low tone to
 himself, almost hissing the words between his teeth, “no, no, i do not
 understand yet. but it is all the same, for here is the order for it.” and
 then he added, “i will lead the way, monseigneur,” and he conducted aramis
 to fouquet’s apartments.
 chapter xxi. the king’s friend.
 fouquet was waiting with anxiety; he had already sent away many of his
 servants and friends, who, anticipating the usual hour of his ordinary
 receptions, had called at his door to inquire after him. preserving the
 utmost silence respecting the danger which hung suspended by a hair above
 his head, he only asked them, as he did every one, indeed, who came to the
 door, where aramis was. when he saw d’artagnan return, and when he
 perceived the bishop of vannes behind him, he could hardly restrain his
 delight; it was fully equal to his previous uneasiness. the mere sight of
 aramis was a complete compensation to the surintendant for the unhappiness
 he had undergone in his arrest. the prelate was silent and grave;
 d’artagnan completely bewildered by such an accumulation of events.
 “well, captain, so you have brought m. d’herblay to me.”
 “and something better still, monseigneur.”
 “what is that?”
 “liberty.”
 “i am free!”
 “yes; by the king’s order.”
 fouquet resumed his usual serenity, that he might interrogate aramis with
 a look.
 “oh! yes, you can thank m. l’eveque de vannes,” pursued d’artagnan, “for
 it is indeed to him that you owe the change that has taken place in the
 king.”
 “oh!” said fouquet, more humiliated at the service than grateful at its
 success.
 “but you,” continued d’artagnan, addressing aramis—“you, who have
 become m. fouquet’s protector and patron, can you not do something for
 me?”
 “anything in the wide world you like, my friend,” replied the bishop, in
 his calmest tones.
 “one thing only, then, and i shall be perfectly satisfied. how on earth
 did you manage to become the favorite of the king, you who have never
 spoken to him more than twice in your life?”
 “from a friend such as you are,” said aramis, “i cannot conceal anything.”
 “ah! very good, tell me, then.”
 “very well. you think that i have seen the king only twice, whilst the
 fact is i have seen him more than a hundred times; only we have kept it
 very secret, that is all.” and without trying to remove the color which at
 this revelation made d’artagnan’s face flush scarlet, aramis turned
 towards m. fouquet, who was as much surprised as the musketeer.
 “monseigneur,” he resumed, “the king desires me to inform you that he is
 more than ever your friend, and that your beautiful fete, so
 generously offered by you on his behalf, has touched him to the very
 heart.”
 and thereupon he saluted m. fouquet with so much reverence of manner, that
 the latter, incapable of understanding a man whose diplomacy was of so
 prodigious a character, remained incapable of uttering a single syllable,
 and equally incapable of thought or movement. d’artagnan fancied he
 perceived that these two men had something to say to each other, and he
 was about to yield to that feeling of instinctive politeness which in such
 a case hurries a man towards the door, when he feels his presence is an
 inconvenience for others; but his eager curiosity, spurred on by so many
 mysteries, counseled him to remain.
 aramis thereupon turned towards him, and said, in a quiet tone, “you will
 not forget, my friend, the king’s order respecting those whom he intends
 to receive this morning on rising.” these words were clear enough, and the
 musketeer understood them; he therefore bowed to fouquet, and then to
 aramis,—to the latter with a slight admixture of ironical respect,—and
 disappeared.
 no sooner had he left, than fouquet, whose impatience had hardly been able
 to wait for that moment, darted towards the door to close it, and then
 returning to the bishop, he said, “my dear d’herblay, i think it now high
 time you should explain all that has passed, for, in plain and honest
 truth, i do not understand anything.”
 “we will explain all that to you,” said aramis, sitting down, and making
 fouquet sit down also. “where shall i begin?”
 “with this first of all. why does the king set me at liberty?”
 “you ought rather to ask me what his reason was for having you arrested.”
 “since my arrest, i have had time to think over it, and my idea is that it
 arises out of some slight feeling of jealousy. my fete put m.
 colbert out of temper, and m. colbert discovered some cause of complaint
 against me; belle-isle, for instance.”
 “no; there is no question at all just now of belle-isle.”
 “what is it, then?”
 “do you remember those receipts for thirteen millions which m. de mazarin
 contrived to steal from you?”
 “yes, of course!”
 “well, you are pronounced a public robber.”
 “good heavens!”
 “oh! that is not all. do you also remember that letter you wrote to la
 valliere?”
 “alas! yes.”
 “and that proclaims you a traitor and a suborner.”
 “why should he have pardoned me, then?”
 “we have not yet arrived at that part of our argument. i wish you to be
 quite convinced of the fact itself. observe this well: the king knows you
 to be guilty of an appropriation of public funds. oh! of course i
 know that you have done nothing of the kind; but, at all events, the king
 has seen the receipts, and he can do no other than believe you are
 incriminated.”
 “i beg your pardon, i do not see—”
 “you will see presently, though. the king, moreover, having read your
 love-letter to la valliere, and the offers you there made her, cannot
 retain any doubt of your intentions with regard to that young lady; you
 will admit that, i suppose?”
 “certainly. pray conclude.”
 “in the fewest words. the king, we may henceforth assume, is your
 powerful, implacable, and eternal enemy.”
 “agreed. but am i, then, so powerful, that he has not dared to sacrifice
 me, notwithstanding his hatred, with all the means which my weakness, or
 my misfortunes, may have given him as a hold upon me?”
 “it is clear, beyond all doubt,” pursued aramis, coldly, “that the king
 has quarreled with you—irreconcilably.”
 “but, since he has absolved me—”
 “do you believe it likely?” asked the bishop, with a searching look.
 “without believing in his sincerity, i believe it in the accomplished
 fact.”
 aramis slightly shrugged his shoulders.
 “but why, then, should louis xiv. have commissioned you to tell me what
 you have just stated?”
 “the king charged me with no message for you.”
 “with nothing!” said the superintendent, stupefied. “but, that order—”
 “oh! yes. you are quite right. there is an order, certainly;” and
 these words were pronounced by aramis in so strange a tone, that fouquet
 could not resist starting.
 “you are concealing something from me, i see. what is it?”
 aramis softly rubbed his white fingers over his chin, but said nothing.
 “does the king exile me?”
 “do not act as if you were playing at the game children play at when they
 have to try and guess where a thing has been hidden, and are informed, by
 a bell being rung, when they are approaching near to it, or going away
 from it.”
 “speak, then.”
 “guess.”
 “you alarm me.”
 “bah! that is because you have not guessed, then.”
 “what did the king say to you? in the name of our friendship, do not
 deceive me.”
 “the king has not said one word to me.”
 “you are killing me with impatience, d’herblay. am i still
 superintendent?”
 “as long as you like.”
 “but what extraordinary empire have you so suddenly acquired over his
 majesty’s mind?”
 “ah! that’s the point.”
 “he does your bidding?”
 “i believe so.”
 “it is hardly credible.”
 “so any one would say.”
 “d’herblay, by our alliance, by our friendship, by everything you hold
 dearest in the world, speak openly, i implore you. by what means have you
 succeeded in overcoming louis xiv.‘s prejudices, for he did not like you,
 i am certain.”
 “the king will like me now,” said aramis, laying stress upon the
 last word.
 “you have something particular, then, between you?”
 “yes.”
 “a secret, perhaps?”
 “a secret.”
 “a secret of such a nature as to change his majesty’s interests?”
 “you are, indeed, a man of superior intelligence, monseigneur, and have
 made a particularly accurate guess. i have, in fact, discovered a secret,
 of a nature to change the interests of the king of france.”
 “ah!” said fouquet, with the reserve of a man who does not wish to ask any
 more questions.
 “and you shall judge of it yourself,” pursued aramis; “and you shall tell
 me if i am mistaken with regard to the importance of this secret.”
 “i am listening, since you are good enough to unbosom yourself to me; only
 do not forget that i have asked you about nothing which it may be
 indiscreet in you to communicate.”
 aramis seemed, for a moment, as if he were collecting himself.
 “do not speak!” said fouquet: “there is still time enough.”
 “do you remember,” said the bishop, casting down his eyes, “the birth of
 louis xiv.?”
 “as if it were yesterday.”
 “have you ever heard anything particular respecting his birth?”
 “nothing; except that the king was not really the son of louis xiii.”
 “that does not matter to us, or the kingdom either; he is the son of his
 father, says the french law, whose father is recognized by law.”
 “true; but it is a grave matter, when the quality of races is called into
 question.”
 “a merely secondary question, after all. so that, in fact, you have never
 learned or heard anything in particular?”
 “nothing.”
 “that is where my secret begins. the queen, you must know, instead of
 being delivered of a son, was delivered of twins.”
 fouquet looked up suddenly as he replied:
 “and the second is dead?”
 “you will see. these twins seemed likely to be regarded as the pride of
 their mother, and the hope of france; but the weak nature of the king, his
 superstitious feelings, made him apprehend a series of conflicts between
 two children whose rights were equal; so he put out of the way—he
 suppressed—one of the twins.”
 “suppressed, do you say?”
 “have patience. both the children grew up; the one on the throne, whose
 minister you are—the other, who is my friend, in gloom and
 isolation.”
 “good heavens! what are you saying, monsieur d’herblay? and what is this
 poor prince doing?”
 “ask me, rather, what has he done.”
 “yes, yes.”
 “he was brought up in the country, and then thrown into a fortress which
 goes by the name of the bastile.”
 “is it possible?” cried the surintendant, clasping his hands.
 “the one was the most fortunate of men: the other the most unhappy and
 miserable of all living beings.”
 “does his mother not know this?”
 “anne of austria knows it all.”
 “and the king?”
 “knows absolutely nothing.”
 “so much the better,” said fouquet.
 this remark seemed to make a great impression on aramis; he looked at
 fouquet with the most anxious expression of countenance.
 “i beg your pardon; i interrupted you,” said fouquet.
 “i was saying,” resumed aramis, “that this poor prince was the unhappiest
 of human beings, when heaven, whose thoughts are over all his creatures,
 undertook to come to his assistance.”
 “oh! in what way? tell me.”
 “you will see. the reigning king—i say the reigning king—you
 can guess very well why?”
 “no. why?”
 “because both of them, being legitimate princes, ought to have been
 kings. is not that your opinion?”
 “it is, certainly.”
 “unreservedly?”
 “most unreservedly; twins are one person in two bodies.”
 “i am pleased that a legist of your learning and authority should have
 pronounced such an opinion. it is agreed, then, that each of them
 possessed equal rights, is it not?”
 “incontestably! but, gracious heavens, what an extraordinary
 circumstance!”
 “we are not at the end of it yet.—patience.”
 “oh! i shall find ‘patience’ enough.”
 “heaven wished to raise up for that oppressed child an avenger, or a
 supporter, or vindicator, if you prefer it. it happened that the reigning
 king, the usurper—you are quite of my opinion, i believe, that it is
 an act of usurpation quietly to enjoy, and selfishly to assume the right
 over, an inheritance to which a man has only half a right?”
 “yes, usurpation is the word.”
 “in that case, i continue. it was heaven’s will that the usurper should
 possess, in the person of his first minister, a man of great talent, of
 large and generous nature.”
 “well, well,” said fouquet, “i understand you; you have relied upon me to
 repair the wrong which has been done to this unhappy brother of louis xiv.
 you have thought well; i will help you. i thank you, d’herblay, i thank
 you.”
 “oh, no, it is not that at all; you have not allowed me to finish,” said
 aramis, perfectly unmoved.
 “i will not say another word, then.”
 “m. fouquet, i was observing, the minister of the reigning sovereign, was
 suddenly taken into the greatest aversion, and menaced with the ruin of
 his fortune, loss of liberty, loss of life even, by intrigue and personal
 hatred, to which the king gave too readily an attentive ear. but heaven
 permits (still, however, out of consideration for the unhappy prince who
 had been sacrificed) that m. fouquet should in his turn have a devoted
 friend who knew this state secret, and felt that he possessed strength and
 courage enough to divulge this secret, after having had the strength to
 carry it locked up in his own heart for twenty years.
 “go no farther,” said fouquet, full of generous feelings. “i understand
 you, and can guess everything now. you went to see the king when the
 intelligence of my arrest reached you; you implored him, he refused to
 listen to you; then you threatened him with that secret, threatened to
 reveal it, and louis xiv., alarmed at the risk of its betrayal, granted to
 the terror of your indiscretion what he refused to your generous
 intercession. i understand, i understand; you have the king in your power;
 i understand.”
 “you understand nothing—as yet,” replied aramis, “and again
 you interrupt me. then, too, allow me to observe that you pay no attention
 to logical reasoning, and seem to forget what you ought most to remember.”
 “what do you mean?”
 “you know upon what i laid the greatest stress at the beginning of our
 conversation?”
 “yes, his majesty’s hate, invincible hate for me; yes, but what feeling of
 hate could resist the threat of such a revelation?”
 “such a revelation, do you say? that is the very point where your logic
 fails you. what! do you suppose that if i had made such a revelation to
 the king, i should have been alive now?”
 “it is not ten minutes ago that you were with the king.”
 “that may be. he might not have had the time to get me killed outright,
 but he would have had the time to get me gagged and thrown in a dungeon.
 come, come, show a little consistency in your reasoning, mordieu!”
 and by the mere use of this word, which was so thoroughly his old
 musketeer’s expression, forgotten by one who never seemed to forget
 anything, fouquet could not but understand to what a pitch of exaltation
 the calm, impenetrable bishop of vannes had wrought himself. he shuddered.
 “and then,” replied the latter, after having mastered his feelings,
 “should i be the man i really am, should i be the true friend you believe
 me, if i were to expose you, whom the king already hates so bitterly, to a
 feeling more than ever to be dreaded in that young man? to have robbed
 him, is nothing; to have addressed the woman he loves, is not much; but to
 hold in your keeping both his crown and his honor, why, he would pluck out
 your heart with his own hands.”
 “you have not allowed him to penetrate your secret, then?”
 “i would sooner, far sooner, have swallowed at one draught all the poisons
 that mithridates drank in twenty years, in order to try and avoid death,
 than have betrayed my secret to the king.”
 “what have you done, then?”
 “ah! now we are coming to the point, monseigneur. i think i shall not fail
 to excite in you a little interest. you are listening, i hope.”
 “how can you ask me if i am listening? go on.”
 aramis walked softly all round the room, satisfied himself that they were
 alone, and that all was silent, and then returned and placed himself close
 to the armchair in which fouquet was seated, awaiting with the deepest
 anxiety the revelation he had to make.
 “i forgot to tell you,” resumed aramis, addressing himself to fouquet, who
 listened to him with the most absorbed attention—“i forgot to
 mention a most remarkable circumstance respecting these twins, namely,
 that god had formed them so startlingly, so miraculously, like each other,
 that it would be utterly impossible to distinguish the one from the other.
 their own mother would not be able to distinguish them.”
 “is it possible?” exclaimed fouquet.
 “the same noble character in their features, the same carriage, the same
 stature, the same voice.”
 “but their thoughts? degree of intelligence? their knowledge of human
 life?”
 “there is inequality there, i admit, monseigneur. yes; for the prisoner of
 the bastile is, most incontestably, superior in every way to his brother;
 and if, from his prison, this unhappy victim were to pass to the throne,
 france would not, from the earliest period of its history, perhaps, have
 had a master more powerful in genius and nobility of character.”
 fouquet buried his face in his hands, as if he were overwhelmed by the
 weight of this immense secret. aramis approached him.
 “there is a further inequality,” he said, continuing his work of
 temptation, “an inequality which concerns yourself, monseigneur, between
 the twins, both sons of louis xiii., namely, the last comer does not know
 m. colbert.”
 fouquet raised his head immediately—his features were pale and
 distorted. the bolt had hit its mark—not his heart, but his mind and
 comprehension.
 “i understand you,” he said to aramis; “you are proposing a conspiracy to
 me?”
 “something like it.”
 “one of those attempts which, as you said at the beginning of this
 conversation, alters the fate of empires?”
 “and of superintendents, too; yes, monseigneur.”
 “in a word, you propose that i should agree to the substitution of the son
 of louis xiii., who is now a prisoner in the bastile, for the son of louis
 xiii., who is at this moment asleep in the chamber of morpheus?”
 aramis smiled with the sinister expression of the sinister thought which
 was passing through his brain. “exactly,” he said.
 “have you thought,” continued fouquet, becoming animated with that
 strength of talent which in a few seconds originates, and matures the
 conception of a plan, and with that largeness of view which foresees all
 consequences, and embraces every result at a glance—“have you
 thought that we must assemble the nobility, the clergy, and the third
 estate of the realm; that we shall have to depose the reigning sovereign,
 to disturb by so frightful a scandal the tomb of their dead father, to
 sacrifice the life, the honor of a woman, anne of austria, the life and
 peace of mind and heart of another woman, maria theresa; and suppose that
 it were all done, if we were to succeed in doing it—”
 “i do not understand you,” continued aramis, coldly. “there is not a
 single syllable of sense in all you have just said.”
 “what!” said the superintendent, surprised, “a man like you refuse to view
 the practical bearing of the case! do you confine yourself to the childish
 delight of a political illusion, and neglect the chances of its being
 carried into execution; in other words, the reality itself, is it
 possible?”
 “my friend,” said aramis, emphasizing the word with a kind of disdainful
 familiarity, “what does heaven do in order to substitute one king for
 another?”
 “heaven!” exclaimed fouquet—“heaven gives directions to its agent,
 who seizes upon the doomed victim, hurries him away, and seats the
 triumphant rival on the empty throne. but you forget that this agent is
 called death. oh! monsieur d’herblay, in heaven’s name, tell me if you
 have had the idea—”
 “there is no question of that, monseigneur; you are going beyond the
 object in view. who spoke of louis xiv.‘s death? who spoke of adopting the
 example which heaven sets in following out the strict execution of its
 decrees? no, i wish you to understand that heaven effects its purposes
 without confusion or disturbance, without exciting comment or remark,
 without difficulty or exertion; and that men, inspired by heaven, succeed
 like heaven itself, in all their undertakings, in all they attempt, in all
 they do.”
 “what do you mean?”
 “i mean, my friend,” returned aramis, with the same intonation on
 the word friend that he had applied to it the first time—“i mean
 that if there has been any confusion, scandal, and even effort in the
 substitution of the prisoner for the king, i defy you to prove it.”
 “what!” cried fouquet, whiter than the handkerchief with which he wiped
 his temples, “what do you say?”
 “go to the king’s apartment,” continued aramis, tranquilly, “and you who
 know the mystery, i defy even you to perceive that the prisoner of the
 bastile is lying in his brother’s bed.”
 “but the king,” stammered fouquet, seized with horror at the intelligence.
 “what king?” said aramis, in his gentlest tone; “the one who hates you, or
 the one who likes you?”
 “the king—of—yesterday.”
 “the king of yesterday! be quite easy on that score; he has gone to take
 the place in the bastile which his victim occupied for so many years.”
 “great god! and who took him there?”
 “you?”
 “yes, and in the simplest way. i carried him away last night. while he was
 descending into midnight, the other was ascending into day. i do not think
 there has been any disturbance whatever. a flash of lightning without
 thunder awakens nobody.”
 fouquet uttered a thick, smothered cry, as if he had been struck by some
 invisible blow, and clasping his head between his clenched hands, he
 murmured: “you did that?”
 “cleverly enough, too; what do you think of it?”
 “you dethroned the king? imprisoned him, too?”
 “yes, that has been done.”
 “and such an action was committed here, at vaux?”
 “yes, here, at vaux, in the chamber of morpheus. it would almost seem that
 it had been built in anticipation of such an act.”
 “and at what time did it occur?”
 “last night, between twelve and one o’clock.”
 fouquet made a movement as if he were on the point of springing upon
 aramis; he restrained himself. “at vaux; under my roof!” he said, in a
 half-strangled voice.
 “i believe so! for it is still your house, and it is likely to continue
 so, since m. colbert cannot rob you of it now.”
 “it was under my roof, then, monsieur, that you committed this crime?”
 “this crime?” said aramis, stupefied.
 “this abominable crime!” pursued fouquet, becoming more and more excited;
 “this crime more execrable than an assassination! this crime which
 dishonors my name forever, and entails upon me the horror of posterity.”
 “you are not in your senses, monsieur,” replied aramis, in an irresolute
 tone of voice; “you are speaking too loudly; take care!”
 “i will call out so loudly, that the whole world shall hear me.”
 “monsieur fouquet, take care!”
 fouquet turned round towards the prelate, whom he looked at full in the
 face. “you have dishonored me,” he said, “in committing so foul an act of
 treason, so heinous a crime upon my guest, upon one who was peacefully
 reposing beneath my roof. oh! woe, woe is me!”
 “woe to the man, rather, who beneath your roof meditated the ruin of your
 fortune, your life. do you forget that?”
 “he was my guest, my sovereign.”
 aramis rose, his eyes literally bloodshot, his mouth trembling
 convulsively. “have i a man out of his senses to deal with?” he said.
 “you have an honorable man to deal with.”
 “you are mad.”
 “a man who will prevent you consummating your crime.”
 “you are mad, i say.”
 “a man who would sooner, oh! far sooner, die; who would kill you even,
 rather than allow you to complete his dishonor.”
 and fouquet snatched up his sword, which d’artagnan had placed at the head
 of his bed, and clenched it resolutely in his hand. aramis frowned, and
 thrust his hand into his breast as if in search of a weapon. this movement
 did not escape fouquet, who, full of nobleness and pride in his
 magnanimity, threw his sword to a distance from him, and approached aramis
 so close as to touch his shoulder with his disarmed hand. “monsieur,” he
 said, “i would sooner die here on the spot than survive this terrible
 disgrace; and if you have any pity left for me, i entreat you to take my
 life.”
 aramis remained silent and motionless.
 “you do not reply?” said fouquet.
 aramis raised his head gently, and a glimmer of hope might be seen once
 more to animate his eyes. “reflect, monseigneur,” he said, “upon
 everything we have to expect. as the matter now stands, the king is still
 alive, and his imprisonment saves your life.”
 “yes,” replied fouquet, “you may have been acting on my behalf, but i will
 not, do not, accept your services. but, first of all, i do not wish your
 ruin. you will leave this house.”
 aramis stifled the exclamation which almost escaped his broken heart.
 “i am hospitable towards all who are dwellers beneath my roof,” continued
 fouquet, with an air of inexpressible majesty; “you will not be more
 fatally lost than he whose ruin you have consummated.”
 “you will be so,” said aramis, in a hoarse, prophetic voice, “you will be
 so, believe me.”
 “i accept the augury, monsieur d’herblay; but nothing shall prevent me,
 nothing shall stop me. you will leave vaux—you must leave france; i
 give you four hours to place yourself out of the king’s reach.”
 “four hours?” said aramis, scornfully and incredulously.
 “upon the word of fouquet, no one shall follow you before the expiration
 of that time. you will therefore have four hours’ advance of those whom
 the king may wish to dispatch after you.”
 “four hours!” repeated aramis, in a thick, smothered voice.
 “it is more than you will need to get on board a vessel and flee to
 belle-isle, which i give you as a place of refuge.”
 “ah!” murmured aramis.
 “belle-isle is as much mine for you, as vaux is mine for the king. go,
 d’herblay, go! as long as i live, not a hair of your head shall be
 injured.”
 “thank you,” said aramis, with a cold irony of manner.
 “go at once, then, and give me your hand, before we both hasten away; you
 to save your life, i to save my honor.”
 aramis withdrew from his breast the hand he had concealed there; it was
 stained with his blood. he had dug his nails into his flesh, as if in
 punishment for having nursed so many projects, more vain, insensate, and
 fleeting than the life of the man himself. fouquet was horror-stricken,
 and then his heart smote him with pity. he threw open his arms as if to
 embrace him.
 “i had no arms,” murmured aramis, as wild and terrible in his wrath as the
 shade of dido. and then, without touching fouquet’s hand, he turned his
 head aside, and stepped back a pace or two. his last word was an
 imprecation, his last gesture a curse, which his blood-stained hand seemed
 to invoke, as it sprinkled on fouquet’s face a few drops of blood which
 flowed from his breast. and both of them darted out of the room by the
 secret staircase which led down to the inner courtyard. fouquet ordered
 his best horses, while aramis paused at the foot of the staircase which
 led to porthos’s apartment. he reflected profoundly and for some time,
 while fouquet’s carriage left the courtyard at full gallop.
 “shall i go alone?” said aramis to himself, “or warn the prince? oh! fury!
 warn the prince, and then—do what? take him with me? to carry this
 accusing witness about with me everywhere? war, too, would follow—civil
 war, implacable in its nature! and without any resource save myself—it
 is impossible! what could he do without me? oh! without me he will be
 utterly destroyed. yet who knows—let destiny be fulfilled—condemned
 he was, let him remain so then! good or evil spirit—gloomy and
 scornful power, whom men call the genius of humanity, thou art a power
 more restlessly uncertain, more baselessly useless, than wild mountain
 wind! chance, thou term’st thyself, but thou art nothing; thou inflamest
 everything with thy breath, crumblest mountains at thy approach, and
 suddenly art thyself destroyed at the presence of the cross of dead wood
 behind which stand another power invisible like thyself—whom thou
 deniest, perhaps, but whose avenging hand is on thee, and hurls thee in
 the dust dishonored and unnamed! lost!—i am lost! what can be done?
 flee to belle-isle? yes, and leave porthos behind me, to talk and relate
 the whole affair to every one! porthos, too, who will have to suffer for
 what he has done. i will not let poor porthos suffer. he seems like one of
 the members of my own frame; and his grief or misfortune would be mine as
 well. porthos shall leave with me, and shall follow my destiny. it must be
 so.”
 and aramis, apprehensive of meeting any one to whom his hurried movements
 might appear suspicious, ascended the staircase without being perceived.
 porthos, so recently returned from paris, was already in a profound sleep;
 his huge body forgot its fatigue, as his mind forgot its thoughts. aramis
 entered, light as a shadow, and placed his nervous grasp on the giant’s
 shoulder. “come, porthos,” he cried, “come.”
 porthos obeyed, rose from his bed, opened his eyes, even before his
 intelligence seemed to be aroused.
 “we leave immediately,” said aramis.
 “ah!” returned porthos.
 “we shall go mounted, and faster than we have ever gone in our lives.”
 “ah!” repeated porthos.
 “dress yourself, my friend.”
 and he helped the giant to dress himself, and thrust his gold and diamonds
 into his pocket. whilst he was thus engaged, a slight noise attracted his
 attention, and on looking up, he saw d’artagnan watching them through the
 half-opened door. aramis started.
 “what the devil are you doing there in such an agitated manner?” said the
 musketeer.
 “hush!” said porthos.
 “we are going off on a mission of great importance,” added the bishop.
 “you are very fortunate,” said the musketeer.
 “oh, dear me!” said porthos, “i feel so wearied; i would far sooner have
 been fast asleep. but the service of the king....”
 “have you seen m. fouquet?” said aramis to d’artagnan.
 “yes, this very minute, in a carriage.”
 “what did he say to you?”
 “‘adieu;’ nothing more.”
 “was that all?”
 “what else do you think he could say? am i worth anything now, since you
 have got into such high favor?”
 “listen,” said aramis, embracing the musketeer; “your good times are
 returning again. you will have no occasion to be jealous of any one.”
 “ah! bah!”
 “i predict that something will happen to you to-day which will increase
 your importance more than ever.”
 “really?”
 “you know that i know all the news?”
 “oh, yes!”
 “come, porthos, are you ready? let us go.”
 “i am quite ready, aramis.”
 “let us embrace d’artagnan first.”
 “most certainly.”
 “but the horses?”
 “oh! there is no want of them here. will you have mine?”
 “no; porthos has his own stud. so adieu! adieu!”
 the fugitives mounted their horses beneath the very eyes of the captain of
 the musketeers, who held porthos’s stirrup for him, and gazed after them
 until they were out of sight.
 “on any other occasion,” thought the gascon, “i should say that those
 gentlemen were making their escape; but in these days politics seem so
 changed that such an exit is termed going on a mission. i have no
 objection; let me attend to my own affairs, that is more than enough for
 me,”—and he philosophically entered his apartments.
 chapter xxii. showing how the countersign was respected at the bastile.
 fouquet tore along as fast as his horses could drag him. on his way he
 trembled with horror at the idea of what had just been revealed to him.
 “what must have been,” he thought, “the youth of those extraordinary men,
 who, even as age is stealing fast upon them, are still able to conceive
 such gigantic plans, and carry them through without a tremor?”
 at one moment he could not resist the idea that all aramis had just been
 recounting to him was nothing more than a dream, and whether the fable
 itself was not the snare; so that when fouquet arrived at the bastile, he
 might possibly find an order of arrest, which would send him to join the
 dethroned king. strongly impressed with this idea, he gave certain sealed
 orders on his route, while fresh horses were being harnessed to his
 carriage. these orders were addressed to m. d’artagnan and to certain
 others whose fidelity to the king was far above suspicion.
 “in this way,” said fouquet to himself, “prisoner or not, i shall have
 performed the duty that i owe my honor. the orders will not reach them
 until after my return, if i should return free, and consequently they will
 not have been unsealed. i shall take them back again. if i am delayed; it
 will be because some misfortune will have befallen me; and in that case
 assistance will be sent for me as well as for the king.”
 prepared in this manner, the superintendent arrived at the bastile; he had
 traveled at the rate of five leagues and a half the hour. every
 circumstance of delay which aramis had escaped in his visit to the bastile
 befell fouquet. it was useless giving his name, equally useless his being
 recognized; he could not succeed in obtaining an entrance. by dint of
 entreaties, threats, commands, he succeeded in inducing a sentinel to
 speak to one of the subalterns, who went and told the major. as for the
 governor they did not even dare disturb him. fouquet sat in his carriage,
 at the outer gate of the fortress, chafing with rage and impatience,
 awaiting the return of the officers, who at last re-appeared with a
 sufficiently sulky air.
 “well,” said fouquet, impatiently, “what did the major say?”
 “well, monsieur,” replied the soldier, “the major laughed in my face. he
 told me that m. fouquet was at vaux, and that even were he at paris, m.
 fouquet would not get up at so early an hour as the present.”
 “mordieu! you are an absolute set of fools,” cried the minister,
 darting out of the carriage; and before the subaltern had time to shut the
 gate, fouquet sprang through it, and ran forward in spite of the soldier,
 who cried out for assistance. fouquet gained ground, regardless of the
 cries of the man, who, however, having at last come up with fouquet,
 called out to the sentinel of the second gate, “look out, look out,
 sentinel!” the man crossed his pike before the minister; but the latter,
 robust and active, and hurried away, too, by his passion, wrested the pike
 from the soldier and struck him a violent blow on the shoulder with it.
 the subaltern, who approached too closely, received a share of the blows
 as well. both of them uttered loud and furious cries, at the sound of
 which the whole of the first body of the advanced guard poured out of the
 guardhouse. among them there was one, however, who recognized the
 superintendent, and who called, “monseigneur, ah! monseigneur. stop, stop,
 you fellows!” and he effectually checked the soldiers, who were on the
 point of revenging their companions. fouquet desired them to open the
 gate, but they refused to do so without the countersign; he desired them
 to inform the governor of his presence; but the latter had already heard
 the disturbance at the gate. he ran forward, followed by his major, and
 accompanied by a picket of twenty men, persuaded that an attack was being
 made on the bastile. baisemeaux also recognized fouquet immediately, and
 dropped the sword he bravely had been brandishing.
 “ah! monseigneur,” he stammered, “how can i excuse—”
 “monsieur,” said the superintendent, flushed with anger, and heated by his
 exertions, “i congratulate you. your watch and ward are admirably kept.”
 baisemeaux turned pale, thinking that this remark was made ironically, and
 portended a furious burst of anger. but fouquet had recovered his breath,
 and, beckoning the sentinel and the subaltern, who were rubbing their
 shoulders, towards him, he said, “there are twenty pistoles for the
 sentinel, and fifty for the officer. pray receive my compliments,
 gentlemen. i will not fail to speak to his majesty about you. and now, m.
 baisemeaux, a word with you.”
 and he followed the governor to his official residence, accompanied by a
 murmur of general satisfaction. baisemeaux was already trembling with
 shame and uneasiness. aramis’s early visit, from that moment, seemed to
 possess consequences, which a functionary such as he (baisemeaux) was, was
 perfectly justified in apprehending. it was quite another thing, however,
 when fouquet in a sharp tone of voice, and with an imperious look, said,
 “you have seen m. d’herblay this morning?”
 “yes, monseigneur.”
 “and are you not horrified at the crime of which you have made yourself an
 accomplice?”
 “well,” thought baisemeaux, “good so far;” and then he added, aloud, “but
 what crime, monseigneur, do you allude to?”
 “that for which you can be quartered alive, monsieur—do not forget
 that! but this is not a time to show anger. conduct me immediately to the
 prisoner.”
 “to what prisoner?” said baisemeaux, trembling.
 “you pretend to be ignorant? very good—it is the best plan for you,
 perhaps; for if, in fact, you were to admit your participation in such a
 crime, it would be all over with you. i wish, therefore, to seem to
 believe in your assumption of ignorance.”
 “i entreat you, monseigneur—”
 “that will do. lead me to the prisoner.”
 “to marchiali?”
 “who is marchiali?”
 “the prisoner who was brought back this morning by m. d’herblay.”
 “he is called marchiali?” said the superintendent, his conviction somewhat
 shaken by baisemeaux’s cool manner.
 “yes, monseigneur; that is the name under which he was inscribed here.”
 fouquet looked steadily at baisemeaux, as if he would read his very heart;
 and perceived, with that clear-sightedness most men possess who are
 accustomed to the exercise of power, that the man was speaking with
 perfect sincerity. besides, in observing his face for a few moments, he
 could not believe that aramis would have chosen such a confidant.
 “it is the prisoner,” said the superintendent to him, “whom m. d’herblay
 carried away the day before yesterday?”
 “yes, monseigneur.”
 “and whom he brought back this morning?” added fouquet, quickly: for he
 understood immediately the mechanism of aramis’s plan.
 “precisely, monseigneur.”
 “and his name is marchiali, you say?”
 “yes, marchiali. if monseigneur has come here to remove him, so much the
 better, for i was going to write about him.”
 “what has he done, then?”
 “ever since this morning he has annoyed me extremely. he has had such
 terrible fits of passion, as almost to make me believe that he would bring
 the bastile itself down about our ears.”
 “i will soon relieve you of his possession,” said fouquet.
 “ah! so much the better.”
 “conduct me to his prison.”
 “will monseigneur give me the order?”
 “what order?”
 “an order from the king.”
 “wait until i sign you one.”
 “that will not be sufficient, monseigneur. i must have an order from the
 king.”
 fouquet assumed an irritated expression. “as you are so scrupulous,” he
 said, “with regard to allowing prisoners to leave, show me the order by
 which this one was set at liberty.”
 baisemeaux showed him the order to release seldon.
 “very good,” said fouquet; “but seldon is not marchiali.”
 “but marchiali is not at liberty, monseigneur; he is here.”
 “but you said that m. d’herblay carried him away and brought him back
 again.”
 “i did not say so.”
 “so surely did you say it, that i almost seem to hear it now.”
 “it was a slip of my tongue, then, monseigneur.”
 “take care, m. baisemeaux, take care.”
 “i have nothing to fear, monseigneur; i am acting according to the very
 strictest regulation.”
 “do you dare to say so?”
 “i would say so in the presence of one of the apostles. m. d’herblay
 brought me an order to set seldon at liberty. seldon is free.”
 “i tell you that marchiali has left the bastile.”
 “you must prove that, monseigneur.”
 “let me see him.”
 “you, monseigneur, who govern this kingdom, know very well that no one can
 see any of the prisoners without an express order from the king.”
 “m. d’herblay has entered, however.”
 “that remains to be proved, monseigneur.”
 “m. de baisemeaux, once more i warn you to pay particular attention to
 what you are saying.”
 “all the documents are there, monseigneur.”
 “m. d’herblay is overthrown.”
 “overthrown?—m. d’herblay! impossible!”
 “you see that he has undoubtedly influenced you.”
 “no, monseigneur; what does, in fact, influence me, is the king’s service.
 i am doing my duty. give me an order from him, and you shall enter.”
 “stay, m. le gouverneur, i give you my word that if you allow me to see
 the prisoner, i will give you an order from the king at once.”
 “give it to me now, monseigneur.”
 “and that, if you refuse me, i will have you and all your officers
 arrested on the spot.”
 “before you commit such an act of violence, monseigneur, you will
 reflect,” said baisemeaux, who had turned very pale, “that we will only
 obey an order signed by the king; and that it will be just as easy for you
 to obtain one to see marchiali as to obtain one to do me so much injury;
 me, too, who am perfectly innocent.”
 “true. true!” cried fouquet, furiously; “perfectly true. m. de
 baisemeaux,” he added, in a sonorous voice, drawing the unhappy governor
 towards him, “do you know why i am so anxious to speak to the prisoner?”
 “no, monseigneur; and allow me to observe that you are terrifying me out
 of my senses; i am trembling all over—in fact, i feel as though i
 were about to faint.”
 “you will stand a better chance of fainting outright, monsieur baisemeaux,
 when i return here at the head of ten thousand men and thirty pieces of
 cannon.”
 “good heavens, monseigneur, you are losing your senses.”
 “when i have roused the whole population of paris against you and your
 accursed towers, and have battered open the gates of this place, and
 hanged you to the topmost tree of yonder pinnacle!”
 “monseigneur! monseigneur! for pity’s sake!”
 “i give you ten minutes to make up your mind,” added fouquet, in a calm
 voice. “i will sit down here, in this armchair, and wait for you; if, in
 ten minutes’ time, you still persist, i leave this place, and you may
 think me as mad as you like. then—you shall see!”
 baisemeaux stamped his foot on the ground like a man in a state of
 despair, but he did not reply a single syllable; whereupon fouquet seized
 a pen and ink, and wrote:
 “order for m. le prevot des marchands to assemble the municipal guard and
 to march upon the bastile on the king’s immediate service.”
 baisemeaux shrugged his shoulders. fouquet wrote:
 “order for the duc de bouillon and m. le prince de conde to assume the
 command of the swiss guards, of the king’s guards, and to march upon the
 bastile on the king’s immediate service.”
 baisemeaux reflected. fouquet still wrote:
 “order for every soldier, citizen, or gentleman to seize and apprehend,
 wherever he may be found, le chevalier d’herblay, eveque de vannes, and
 his accomplices, who are: first, m. de baisemeaux, governor of the
 bastile, suspected of the crimes of high treason and rebellion—”
 “stop, monseigneur!” cried baisemeaux; “i do not understand a single jot
 of the whole matter; but so many misfortunes, even were it madness itself
 that had set them at their awful work, might happen here in a couple of
 hours, that the king, by whom i must be judged, will see whether i have
 been wrong in withdrawing the countersign before this flood of imminent
 catastrophes. come with me to the keep, monseigneur, you shall see
 marchiali.”
 fouquet darted out of the room, followed by baisemeaux as he wiped the
 perspiration from his face. “what a terrible morning!” he said; “what a
 disgrace for me!”
 “walk faster,” replied fouquet.
 baisemeaux made a sign to the jailer to precede them. he was afraid of his
 companion, which the latter could not fail to perceive.
 “a truce to this child’s play,” he said, roughly. “let the man remain
 here; take the keys yourself, and show me the way. not a single person, do
 you understand, must hear what is going to take place here.”
 “ah!” said baisemeaux, undecided.
 “again!” cried m. fouquet. “ah! say ‘no’ at once, and i will leave the
 bastile and will myself carry my own dispatches.”
 baisemeaux bowed his head, took the keys, and unaccompanied, except by the
 minister, ascended the staircase. the higher they advanced up the spiral
 staircase, the more clearly did certain muffled murmurs become distinct
 appeals and fearful imprecations.
 “what is that?” asked fouquet.
 “that is your marchiali,” said the governor; “this is the way these madmen
 scream.”
 and he accompanied that reply with a glance more pregnant with injurious
 allusion, as far as fouquet was concerned, than politeness. the latter
 trembled; he had just recognized in one cry more terrible than any that
 had preceded it, the king’s voice. he paused on the staircase, snatching
 the bunch of keys from baisemeaux, who thought this new madman was going
 to dash out his brains with one of them. “ah!” he cried, “m. d’herblay did
 not say a word about that.”
 “give me the keys at once!” cried fouquet, tearing them from his hand.
 “which is the key of the door i am to open?”
 “that one.”
 a fearful cry, followed by a violent blow against the door, made the whole
 staircase resound with the echo.
 “leave this place,” said fouquet to baisemeaux, in a threatening tone.
 “i ask nothing better,” murmured the latter, to himself. “there will be a
 couple of madmen face to face, and the one will kill the other, i am
 sure.”
 “go!” repeated fouquet. “if you place your foot on this staircase before i
 call you, remember that you shall take the place of the meanest prisoner
 in the bastile.”
 “this job will kill me, i am sure it will,” muttered baisemeaux, as he
 withdrew with tottering steps.
 the prisoner’s cries became more and more terrible. when fouquet had
 satisfied himself that baisemeaux had reached the bottom of the staircase,
 he inserted the key in the first lock. it was then that he heard the
 hoarse, choking voice of the king, crying out, in a frenzy of rage, “help,
 help! i am the king.” the key of the second door was not the same as the
 first, and fouquet was obliged to look for it on the bunch. the king,
 however, furious and almost mad with rage and passion, shouted at the top
 of his voice, “it was m. fouquet who brought me here. help me against m.
 fouquet! i am the king! help the king against m. fouquet!” these cries
 filled the minister’s heart with terrible emotions. they were followed by
 a shower of blows leveled against the door with a part of the broken chair
 with which the king had armed himself. fouquet at last succeeded in
 finding the key. the king was almost exhausted; he could hardly articulate
 distinctly as he shouted, “death to fouquet! death to the traitor
 fouquet!” the door flew open.
 chapter xxiii. the king’s gratitude.
 the two men were on the point of darting towards each other when they
 suddenly and abruptly stopped, as a mutual recognition took place, and
 each uttered a cry of horror.
 “have you come to assassinate me, monsieur?” said the king, when he
 recognized fouquet.
 “the king in this state!” murmured the minister.
 nothing could be more terrible indeed than the appearance of the young
 prince at the moment fouquet had surprised him; his clothes were in
 tatters; his shirt, open and torn to rags, was stained with sweat and with
 the blood which streamed from his lacerated breast and arms. haggard,
 ghastly pale, his hair in disheveled masses, louis xiv. presented the most
 perfect picture of despair, distress, anger and fear combined that could
 possibly be united in one figure. fouquet was so touched, so affected and
 disturbed by it, that he ran towards him with his arms stretched out and
 his eyes filled with tears. louis held up the massive piece of wood of
 which he had made such a furious use.
 “sire,” said fouquet, in a voice trembling with emotion, “do you not
 recognize the most faithful of your friends?”
 “a friend—you!” repeated louis, gnashing his teeth in a manner which
 betrayed his hate and desire for speedy vengeance.
 “the most respectful of your servants,” added fouquet, throwing himself on
 his knees. the king let the rude weapon fall from his grasp. fouquet
 approached him, kissed his knees, and took him in his arms with
 inconceivable tenderness.
 “my king, my child,” he said, “how you must have suffered!”
 louis, recalled to himself by the change of situation, looked at himself,
 and ashamed of the disordered state of his apparel, ashamed of his
 conduct, and ashamed of the air of pity and protection that was shown
 towards him, drew back. fouquet did not understand this movement; he did
 not perceive that the king’s feeling of pride would never forgive him for
 having been a witness of such an exhibition of weakness.
 “come, sire,” he said, “you are free.”
 “free?” repeated the king. “oh! you set me at liberty, then, after having
 dared to lift up your hand against me.”
 “you do not believe that!” exclaimed fouquet, indignantly; “you cannot
 believe me to be guilty of such an act.”
 and rapidly, warmly even, he related the whole particulars of the
 intrigue, the details of which are already known to the reader. while the
 recital continued, louis suffered the most horrible anguish of mind; and
 when it was finished, the magnitude of the danger he had run struck him
 far more than the importance of the secret relative to his twin brother.
 “monsieur,” he said, suddenly to fouquet, “this double birth is a
 falsehood; it is impossible—you cannot have been the dupe of it.”
 “sire!”
 “it is impossible, i tell you, that the honor, the virtue of my mother can
 be suspected, and my first minister has not yet done justice on the
 criminals!”
 “reflect, sire, before you are hurried away by anger,” replied fouquet.
 “the birth of your brother—”
 “i have only one brother—and that is monsieur. you know it as well
 as myself. there is a plot, i tell you, beginning with the governor of the
 bastile.”
 “be careful, sire, for this man has been deceived as every one else has by
 the prince’s likeness to yourself.”
 “likeness? absurd!”
 “this marchiali must be singularly like your majesty, to be able to
 deceive every one’s eye,” fouquet persisted.
 “ridiculous!”
 “do not say so, sire; those who had prepared everything in order to face
 and deceive your ministers, your mother, your officers of state, the
 members of your family, must be quite confident of the resemblance between
 you.”
 “but where are these persons, then?” murmured the king.
 “at vaux.”
 “at vaux! and you suffer them to remain there!”
 “my most instant duty appeared to me to be your majesty’s release. i have
 accomplished that duty; and now, whatever your majesty may command, shall
 be done. i await your orders.”
 louis reflected for a few moments.
 “muster all the troops in paris,” he said.
 “all the necessary orders are given for that purpose,” replied fouquet.
 “you have given orders!” exclaimed the king.
 “for that purpose, yes, sire; your majesty will be at the head of ten
 thousand men in less than an hour.”
 the only reply the king made was to take hold of fouquet’s hand with such
 an expression of feeling, that it was very easy to perceive how strongly
 he had, until that remark, maintained his suspicions of the minister,
 notwithstanding the latter’s intervention.
 “and with these troops,” he said, “we shall go at once and besiege in your
 house the rebels who by this time will have established and intrenched
 themselves therein.”
 “i should be surprised if that were the case,” replied fouquet.
 “why?”
 “because their chief—the very soul of the enterprise—having
 been unmasked by me, the whole plan seems to me to have miscarried.”
 “you have unmasked this false prince also?”
 “no, i have not seen him.”
 “whom have you seen, then?”
 “the leader of the enterprise, not that unhappy young man; the latter is
 merely an instrument, destined through his whole life to wretchedness, i
 plainly perceive.”
 “most certainly.”
 “it is m. l’abbe d’herblay, eveque de vannes.”
 “your friend?”
 “he was my friend, sire,” replied fouquet, nobly.
 “an unfortunate circumstance for you,” said the king, in a less generous
 tone of voice.
 “such friendships, sire, had nothing dishonorable in them so long as i was
 ignorant of the crime.”
 “you should have foreseen it.”
 “if i am guilty, i place myself in your majesty’s hands.”
 “ah! monsieur fouquet, it was not that i meant,” returned the king, sorry
 to have shown the bitterness of his thought in such a manner. “well! i
 assure you that, notwithstanding the mask with which the villain covered
 his face, i had something like a vague suspicion that he was the very man.
 but with this chief of the enterprise there was a man of prodigious
 strength, the one who menaced me with a force almost herculean; what is
 he?”
 “it must be his friend the baron du vallon, formerly one of the
 musketeers.”
 “the friend of d’artagnan? the friend of the comte de la fere? ah!”
 exclaimed the king, as he paused at the name of the latter, “we must not
 forget the connection that existed between the conspirators and m. de
 bragelonne.”
 “sire, sire, do not go too far. m. de la fere is the most honorable man in
 france. be satisfied with those whom i deliver up to you.”
 “with those whom you deliver up to me, you say? very good, for you will
 deliver up those who are guilty to me.”
 “what does your majesty understand by that?” inquired fouquet.
 “i understand,” replied the king, “that we shall soon arrive at vaux with
 a large body of troops, that we will lay violent hands upon that nest of
 vipers, and that not a soul shall escape.”
 “your majesty will put these men to death!” cried fouquet.
 “to the very meanest of them.”
 “oh! sire.”
 “let us understand one another, monsieur fouquet,” said the king,
 haughtily. “we no longer live in times when assassination was the only and
 the last resource kings held in reservation at extremity. no, heaven be
 praised! i have parliaments who sit and judge in my name, and i have
 scaffolds on which supreme authority is carried out.”
 fouquet turned pale. “i will take the liberty of observing to your
 majesty, that any proceedings instituted respecting these matters would
 bring down the greatest scandal upon the dignity of the throne. the august
 name of anne of austria must never be allowed to pass the lips of the
 people accompanied by a smile.”
 “justice must be done, however, monsieur.”
 “good, sire; but royal blood must not be shed upon a scaffold.”
 “the royal blood! you believe that!” cried the king with fury in his
 voice, stamping his foot on the ground. “this double birth is an
 invention; and in that invention, particularly, do i see m. d’herblay’s
 crime. it is the crime i wish to punish rather than the violence, or the
 insult.”
 “and punish it with death, sire?”
 “with death; yes, monsieur, i have said it.”
 “sire,” said the surintendant, with firmness, as he raised his head
 proudly, “your majesty will take the life, if you please, of your brother
 philippe of france; that concerns you alone, and you will doubtless
 consult the queen-mother upon the subject. whatever she may command will
 be perfectly correct. i do not wish to mix myself up in it, not even for
 the honor of your crown, but i have a favor to ask of you, and i beg to
 submit it to you.”
 “speak,” said the king, in no little degree agitated by his minister’s
 last words. “what do you require?”
 “the pardon of m. d’herblay and of m. du vallon.”
 “my assassins?”
 “two rebels, sire, that is all.”
 “oh! i understand, then, you ask me to forgive your friends.”
 “my friends!” said fouquet, deeply wounded.
 “your friends, certainly; but the safety of the state requires that an
 exemplary punishment should be inflicted on the guilty.”
 “i will not permit myself to remind your majesty that i have just restored
 you to liberty, and have saved your life.”
 “monsieur!”
 “i will not allow myself to remind your majesty that had m. d’herblay
 wished to carry out his character of an assassin, he could very easily
 have assassinated your majesty this morning in the forest of senart, and
 all would have been over.” the king started.
 “a pistol-bullet through the head,” pursued fouquet, “and the disfigured
 features of louis xiv., which no one could have recognized, would be m.
 d’herblay’s complete and entire justification.”
 the king turned pale and giddy at the bare idea of the danger he had
 escaped.
 “if m. d’herblay,” continued fouquet, “had been an assassin, he had no
 occasion to inform me of his plan in order to succeed. freed from the real
 king, it would have been impossible in all futurity to guess the false.
 and if the usurper had been recognized by anne of austria, he would still
 have been—her son. the usurper, as far as monsieur d’herblay’s
 conscience was concerned, was still a king of the blood of louis xiii.
 moreover, the conspirator, in that course, would have had security,
 secrecy, impunity. a pistol-bullet would have procured him all that. for
 the sake of heaven, sire, grant me his forgiveness.”
 the king, instead of being touched by the picture, so faithfully drawn in
 all details, of aramis’s generosity, felt himself most painfully and
 cruelly humiliated. his unconquerable pride revolted at the idea that a
 man had held suspended at the end of his finger the thread of his royal
 life. every word that fell from fouquet’s lips, and which he thought most
 efficacious in procuring his friend’s pardon, seemed to pour another drop
 of poison into the already ulcerated heart of louis xiv. nothing could
 bend or soften him. addressing himself to fouquet, he said, “i really
 don’t know, monsieur, why you should solicit the pardon of these men. what
 good is there in asking that which can be obtained without solicitation?”
 “i do not understand you, sire.”
 “it is not difficult, either. where am i now?”
 “in the bastile, sire.”
 “yes; in a dungeon. i am looked upon as a madman, am i not?”
 “yes, sire.”
 “and no one is known here but marchiali?”
 “certainly.”
 “well; change nothing in the position of affairs. let the poor madman rot
 between the slimy walls of the bastile, and m. d’herblay and m. du vallon
 will stand in no need of my forgiveness. their new king will absolve
 them.”
 “your majesty does me a great injustice, sire; and you are wrong,” replied
 fouquet, dryly; “i am not child enough, nor is m. d’herblay silly enough,
 to have omitted to make all these reflections; and if i had wished to make
 a new king, as you say, i had no occasion to have come here to force open
 the gates and doors of the bastile, to free you from this place. that
 would show a want of even common sense. your majesty’s mind is disturbed
 by anger; otherwise you would be far from offending, groundlessly, the
 very one of your servants who has rendered you the most important service
 of all.”
 louis perceived that he had gone too far; that the gates of the bastile
 were still closed upon him, whilst, by degrees, the floodgates were
 gradually being opened, behind which the generous-hearted fouquet had
 restrained his anger. “i did not say that to humiliate you, heaven knows,
 monsieur,” he replied. “only you are addressing yourself to me in order to
 obtain a pardon, and i answer according to my conscience. and so, judging
 by my conscience, the criminals we speak of are not worthy of
 consideration or forgiveness.”
 fouquet was silent.
 “what i do is as generous,” added the king, “as what you have done, for i
 am in your power. i will even say it is more generous, inasmuch as you
 place before me certain conditions upon which my liberty, my life, may
 depend; and to reject which is to make a sacrifice of both.”
 “i was wrong, certainly,” replied fouquet. “yes,—i had the
 appearance of extorting a favor; i regret it, and entreat your majesty’s
 forgiveness.”
 “and you are forgiven, my dear monsieur fouquet,” said the king, with a
 smile, which restored the serene expression of his features, which so many
 circumstances had altered since the preceding evening.
 “i have my own forgiveness,” replied the minister, with some degree of
 persistence; “but m. d’herblay, and m. du vallon?”
 “they will never obtain theirs, as long as i live,” replied the inflexible
 king. “do me the kindness not to speak of it again.”
 “your majesty shall be obeyed.”
 “and you will bear me no ill-will for it?”
 “oh! no, sire; for i anticipated the event.”
 “you had ‘anticipated’ that i should refuse to forgive those gentlemen?”
 “certainly; and all my measures were taken in consequence.”
 “what do you mean to say?” cried the king, surprised.
 “m. d’herblay came, as may be said, to deliver himself into my hands. m.
 d’herblay left to me the happiness of saving my king and my country. i
 could not condemn m. d’herblay to death; nor could i, on the other hand,
 expose him to your majesty’s justifiable wrath; it would have been just
 the same as if i had killed him myself.”
 “well! and what have you done?”
 “sire, i gave m. d’herblay the best horses in my stables and four hours’
 start over all those your majesty might, probably, dispatch after him.”
 “be it so!” murmured the king. “but still, the world is wide enough and
 large enough for those whom i may send to overtake your horses,
 notwithstanding the ‘four hours’ start’ which you have given to m.
 d’herblay.”
 “in giving him these four hours, sire, i knew i was giving him his life,
 and he will save his life.”
 “in what way?”
 “after having galloped as hard as possible, with the four hours’ start,
 before your musketeers, he will reach my chateau of belle-isle, where i
 have given him a safe asylum.”
 “that may be! but you forget that you have made me a present of
 belle-isle.”
 “but not for you to arrest my friends.”
 “you take it back again, then?”
 “as far as that goes—yes, sire.”
 “my musketeers shall capture it, and the affair will be at an end.”
 “neither your musketeers, nor your whole army could take belle-isle,” said
 fouquet, coldly. “belle-isle is impregnable.”
 the king became perfectly livid; a lightning flash seemed to dart from his
 eyes. fouquet felt that he was lost, but he as not one to shrink when the
 voice of honor spoke loudly within him. he bore the king’s wrathful gaze;
 the latter swallowed his rage, and after a few moments’ silence, said,
 “are we going to return to vaux?”
 “i am at your majesty’s orders,” replied fouquet, with a low bow; “but i
 think that your majesty can hardly dispense with changing your clothes
 previous to appearing before your court.”
 “we shall pass by the louvre,” said the king. “come.” and they left the
 prison, passing before baisemeaux, who looked completely bewildered as he
 saw marchiali once more leave; and, in his helplessness, tore out the
 major portion of his few remaining hairs. it was perfectly true, however,
 that fouquet wrote and gave him an authority for the prisoner’s release,
 and that the king wrote beneath it, “seen and approved, louis”; a piece of
 madness that baisemeaux, incapable of putting two ideas together,
 acknowledged by giving himself a terrible blow on the forehead with his
 own fist.
 chapter xxiv. the false king.
 in the meantime, usurped royalty was playing out its part bravely at vaux.
 philippe gave orders that for his petit lever the grandes
 entrees, already prepared to appear before the king, should be
 introduced. he determined to give this order notwithstanding the absence
 of m. d’herblay, who did not return—our readers know the reason. but
 the prince, not believing that absence could be prolonged, wished, as all
 rash spirits do, to try his valor and his fortune far from all protection
 and instruction. another reason urged him to this—anne of austria
 was about to appear; the guilty mother was about to stand in the presence
 of her sacrificed son. philippe was not willing, if he had a weakness, to
 render the man a witness of it before whom he was bound thenceforth to
 display so much strength. philippe opened his folding doors, and several
 persons entered silently. philippe did not stir whilst his valets de
 chambre dressed him. he had watched, the evening before, all the
 habits of his brother, and played the king in such a manner as to awaken
 no suspicion. he was thus completely dressed in hunting costume when he
 received his visitors. his own memory and the notes of aramis announced
 everybody to him, first of all anne of austria, to whom monsieur gave his
 hand, and then madame with m. de saint-aignan. he smiled at seeing these
 countenances, but trembled on recognizing his mother. that still so noble
 and imposing figure, ravaged by pain, pleaded in his heart the cause of
 the famous queen who had immolated a child to reasons of state. he found
 his mother still handsome. he knew that louis xiv. loved her, and he
 promised himself to love her likewise, and not to prove a scourge to her
 old age. he contemplated his brother with a tenderness easily to be
 understood. the latter had usurped nothing, had cast no shades athwart his
 life. a separate tree, he allowed the stem to rise without heeding its
 elevation or majestic life. philippe promised himself to be a kind brother
 to this prince, who required nothing but gold to minister to his
 pleasures. he bowed with a friendly air to saint-aignan, who was all
 reverences and smiles, and trembling held out his hand to henrietta, his
 sister-in-law, whose beauty struck him; but he saw in the eyes of that
 princess an expression of coldness which would facilitate, as he thought,
 their future relations.
 “how much more easy,” thought he, “it will be to be the brother of that
 woman than her gallant, if she evinces towards me a coldness that my
 brother could not have for her, but which is imposed upon me as a duty.”
 the only visit he dreaded at this moment was that of the queen; his heart—his
 mind—had just been shaken by so violent a trial, that, in spite of
 their firm temperament, they would not, perhaps, support another shock.
 happily the queen did not come. then commenced, on the part of anne of
 austria, a political dissertation upon the welcome m. fouquet had given to
 the house of france. she mixed up hostilities with compliments addressed
 to the king, and questions as to his health, with little maternal
 flatteries and diplomatic artifices.
 “well, my son,” said she, “are you convinced with regard to m. fouquet?”
 “saint-aignan,” said philippe, “have the goodness to go and inquire after
 the queen.”
 at these words, the first philippe had pronounced aloud, the slight
 difference that there was between his voice and that of the king was
 sensible to maternal ears, and anne of austria looked earnestly at her
 son. saint-aignan left the room, and philippe continued:
 “madame, i do not like to hear m. fouquet ill-spoken of, you know i do not—and
 you have even spoken well of him yourself.”
 “that is true; therefore i only question you on the state of your
 sentiments with respect to him.”
 “sire,” said henrietta, “i, on my part, have always liked m. fouquet. he
 is a man of good taste,—a superior man.”
 “a superintendent who is never sordid or niggardly,” added monsieur; “and
 who pays in gold all the orders i have on him.”
 “every one in this thinks too much of himself, and nobody for the state,”
 said the old queen. “m. fouquet, it is a fact, m. fouquet is ruining the
 state.”
 “well, mother!” replied philippe, in rather a lower key, “do you likewise
 constitute yourself the buckler of m. colbert?”
 “how is that?” replied the old queen, rather surprised.
 “why, in truth,” replied philippe, “you speak that just as your old friend
 madame de chevreuse would speak.”
 “why do you mention madame de chevreuse to me?” said she, “and what sort
 of humor are you in to-day towards me?”
 philippe continued: “is not madame de chevreuse always in league against
 somebody? has not madame de chevreuse been to pay you a visit, mother?”
 “monsieur, you speak to me now in such a manner that i can almost fancy i
 am listening to your father.”
 “my father did not like madame de chevreuse, and had good reason for not
 liking her,” said the prince. “for my part, i like her no better than he
 did, and if she thinks proper to come here as she formerly did, to sow
 divisions and hatreds under the pretext of begging money—why—”
 “well! what?” said anne of austria, proudly, herself provoking the storm.
 “well!” replied the young man firmly, “i will drive madame de chevreuse
 out of my kingdom—and with her all who meddle with its secrets and
 mysteries.”
 he had not calculated the effect of this terrible speech, or perhaps he
 wished to judge the effect of it, like those who, suffering from a chronic
 pain, and seeking to break the monotony of that suffering, touch their
 wound to procure a sharper pang. anne of austria was nearly fainting; her
 eyes, open but meaningless, ceased to see for several seconds; she
 stretched out her arms towards her other son, who supported and embraced
 her without fear of irritating the king.
 “sire,” murmured she, “you are treating your mother very cruelly.”
 “in what respect, madame?” replied he. “i am only speaking of madame de
 chevreuse; does my mother prefer madame de chevreuse to the security of
 the state and of my person? well, then, madame, i tell you madame de
 chevreuse has returned to france to borrow money, and that she addressed
 herself to m. fouquet to sell him a certain secret.”
 “a certain secret!” cried anne of austria.
 “concerning pretended robberies that monsieur le surintendant had
 committed, which is false,” added philippe. “m. fouquet rejected her
 offers with indignation, preferring the esteem of the king to complicity
 with such intriguers. then madame de chevreuse sold the secret to m.
 colbert, and as she is insatiable, and was not satisfied with having
 extorted a hundred thousand crowns from a servant of the state, she has
 taken a still bolder flight, in search of surer sources of supply. is that
 true, madame?”
 “you know all, sire,” said the queen, more uneasy than irritated.
 “now,” continued philippe, “i have good reason to dislike this fury, who
 comes to my court to plan the shame of some and the ruin of others. if
 heaven has suffered certain crimes to be committed, and has concealed them
 in the shadow of its clemency, i will not permit madame de chevreuse to
 counteract the just designs of fate.”
 the latter part of this speech had so agitated the queen-mother, that her
 son had pity on her. he took her hand and kissed it tenderly; she did not
 feel that in that kiss, given in spite of repulsion and bitterness of the
 heart, there was a pardon for eight years of suffering. philippe allowed
 the silence of a moment to swallow the emotions that had just developed
 themselves. then, with a cheerful smile:
 “we will not go to-day,” said he, “i have a plan.” and, turning towards
 the door, he hoped to see aramis, whose absence began to alarm him. the
 queen-mother wished to leave the room.
 “remain where you are, mother,” said he, “i wish you to make your peace
 with m. fouquet.”
 “i bear m. fouquet no ill-will; i only dreaded his prodigalities.”
 “we will put that to rights, and will take nothing of the superintendent
 but his good qualities.”
 “what is your majesty looking for?” said henrietta, seeing the king’s eyes
 constantly turned towards the door, and wishing to let fly a little
 poisoned arrow at his heart, supposing he was so anxiously expecting
 either la valliere or a letter from her.
 “my sister,” said the young man, who had divined her thought, thanks to
 that marvelous perspicuity of which fortune was from that time about to
 allow him the exercise, “my sister, i am expecting a most distinguished
 man, a most able counselor, whom i wish to present to you all,
 recommending him to your good graces. ah! come in, then, d’artagnan.”
 “what does your majesty wish?” said d’artagnan, appearing.
 “where is monsieur the bishop of vannes, your friend?”
 “why, sire—”
 “i am waiting for him, and he does not come. let him be sought for.”
 d’artagnan remained for an instant stupefied; but soon, reflecting that
 aramis had left vaux privately on a mission from the king, he concluded
 that the king wished to preserve the secret. “sire,” replied he, “does
 your majesty absolutely require m. d’herblay to be brought to you?”
 “absolutely is not the word,” said philippe; “i do not want him so
 particularly as that; but if he can be found—”
 “i thought so,” said d’artagnan to himself.
 “is this m. d’herblay the bishop of vannes?”
 “yes, madame.”
 “a friend of m. fouquet?”
 “yes, madame; an old musketeer.”
 anne of austria blushed.
 “one of the four braves who formerly performed such prodigies.”
 the old queen repented of having wished to bite; she broke off the
 conversation, in order to preserve the rest of her teeth. “whatever may be
 your choice, sire,” said she, “i have no doubt it will be excellent.”
 all bowed in support of that sentiment.
 “you will find in him,” continued philippe, “the depth and penetration of
 m. de richelieu, without the avarice of m. de mazarin!”
 “a prime minister, sire?” said monsieur, in a fright.
 “i will tell you all about that, brother; but it is strange that m.
 d’herblay is not here!”
 he called out:
 “let m. fouquet be informed that i wish to speak to him—oh! before
 you, before you; do not retire!”
 m. de saint-aignan returned, bringing satisfactory news of the queen, who
 only kept her bed from precaution, and to have strength to carry out the
 king’s wishes. whilst everybody was seeking m. fouquet and aramis, the new
 king quietly continued his experiments, and everybody, family, officers,
 servants, had not the least suspicion of his identity, his air, his voice,
 and manners were so like the king’s. on his side, philippe, applying to
 all countenances the accurate descriptions and key-notes of character
 supplied by his accomplice aramis, conducted himself so as not to give
 birth to a doubt in the minds of those who surrounded him. nothing from
 that time could disturb the usurper. with what strange facility had
 providence just reversed the loftiest fortune of the world to substitute
 the lowliest in its stead! philippe admired the goodness of god with
 regard to himself, and seconded it with all the resources of his admirable
 nature. but he felt, at times, something like a specter gliding between
 him and the rays of his new glory. aramis did not appear. the conversation
 had languished in the royal family; philippe, preoccupied, forgot to
 dismiss his brother and madame henrietta. the latter were astonished, and
 began, by degrees, to lose all patience. anne of austria stooped towards
 her son’s ear and addressed some words to him in spanish. philippe was
 completely ignorant of that language, and grew pale at this unexpected
 obstacle. but, as if the spirit of the imperturbable aramis had covered
 him with his infallibility, instead of appearing disconcerted, philippe
 rose. “well! what?” said anne of austria.
 “what is all that noise?” said philippe, turning round towards the door of
 the second staircase.
 and a voice was heard saying, “this way, this way! a few steps more,
 sire!”
 “the voice of m. fouquet,” said d’artagnan, who was standing close to the
 queen-mother.
 “then m. d’herblay cannot be far off,” added philippe.
 but he then saw what he little thought to have beheld so near to him. all
 eyes were turned towards the door at which m. fouquet was expected to
 enter; but it was not m. fouquet who entered. a terrible cry resounded
 from all corners of the chamber, a painful cry uttered by the king and all
 present. it is given to but few men, even those whose destiny contains the
 strangest elements, and accidents the most wonderful, to contemplate such
 a spectacle similar to that which presented itself in the royal chamber at
 that moment. the half-closed shutters only admitted the entrance of an
 uncertain light passing through thick violet velvet curtains lined with
 silk. in this soft shade, the eyes were by degrees dilated, and every one
 present saw others rather with imagination than with actual sight. there
 could not, however, escape, in these circumstances, one of the surrounding
 details; and the new object which presented itself appeared as luminous as
 though it shone out in full sunlight. so it happened with louis xiv., when
 he showed himself, pale and frowning, in the doorway of the secret stairs.
 the face of fouquet appeared behind him, stamped with sorrow and
 determination. the queen-mother, who perceived louis xiv., and who held
 the hand of philippe, uttered a cry of which we have spoken, as if she
 beheld a phantom. monsieur was bewildered, and kept turning his head in
 astonishment from one to the other. madame made a step forward, thinking
 she was looking at the form of her brother-in-law reflected in a mirror.
 and, in fact, the illusion was possible. the two princes, both pale as
 death—for we renounce the hope of being able to describe the fearful
 state of philippe—trembling, clenching their hands convulsively,
 measured each other with looks, and darted their glances, sharp as
 poniards, at each other. silent, panting, bending forward, they appeared
 as if about to spring upon an enemy. the unheard-of resemblance of
 countenance, gesture, shape, height, even to the resemblance of costume,
 produced by chance—for louis xiv. had been to the louvre and put on
 a violet-colored dress—the perfect analogy of the two princes,
 completed the consternation of anne of austria. and yet she did not at
 once guess the truth. there are misfortunes in life so truly dreadful that
 no one will at first accept them; people rather believe in the
 supernatural and the impossible. louis had not reckoned on these
 obstacles. he expected that he had only to appear to be acknowledged. a
 living sun, he could not endure the suspicion of equality with any one. he
 did not admit that every torch should not become darkness at the instant
 he shone out with his conquering ray. at the aspect of philippe, then, he
 was perhaps more terrified than any one round him, and his silence, his
 immobility were, this time, a concentration and a calm which precede the
 violent explosions of concentrated passion.
 but fouquet! who shall paint his emotion and stupor in presence of this
 living portrait of his master! fouquet thought aramis was right, that this
 newly-arrived was a king as pure in his race as the other, and that, for
 having repudiated all participation in this coup d’etat, so
 skillfully got up by the general of the jesuits, he must be a mad
 enthusiast, unworthy of ever dipping his hands in political grand strategy
 work. and then it was the blood of louis xiii. which fouquet was
 sacrificing to the blood of louis xiii.; it was to a selfish ambition he
 was sacrificing a noble ambition; to the right of keeping he sacrificed
 the right of having. the whole extent of his fault was revealed to him at
 simple sight of the pretender. all that passed in the mind of fouquet was
 lost upon the persons present. he had five minutes to focus meditation on
 this point of conscience; five minutes, that is to say five ages, during
 which the two kings and their family scarcely found energy to breathe
 after so terrible a shock. d’artagnan, leaning against the wall, in front
 of fouquet, with his hand to his brow, asked himself the cause of such a
 wonderful prodigy. he could not have said at once why he doubted, but he
 knew assuredly that he had reason to doubt, and that in this meeting of
 the two louis xiv.s lay all the doubt and difficulty that during late days
 had rendered the conduct of aramis so suspicious to the musketeer. these
 ideas were, however, enveloped in a haze, a veil of mystery. the actors in
 this assembly seemed to swim in the vapors of a confused waking. suddenly
 louis xiv., more impatient and more accustomed to command, ran to one of
 the shutters, which he opened, tearing the curtains in his eagerness. a
 flood of living light entered the chamber, and made philippe draw back to
 the alcove. louis seized upon this movement with eagerness, and addressing
 himself to the queen:
 “my mother,” said he, “do you not acknowledge your son, since every one
 here has forgotten his king!” anne of austria started, and raised her arms
 towards heaven, without being able to articulate a single word.
 “my mother,” said philippe, with a calm voice, “do you not acknowledge
 your son?” and this time, in his turn, louis drew back.
 as to anne of austria, struck suddenly in head and heart with fell
 remorse, she lost her equilibrium. no one aiding her, for all were
 petrified, she sank back in her fauteuil, breathing a weak, trembling
 sigh. louis could not endure the spectacle and the affront. he bounded
 towards d’artagnan, over whose brain a vertigo was stealing and who
 staggered as he caught at the door for support.
 “a moi! mousquetaire!” said he. “look us in the face and say which
 is the paler, he or i!”
 this cry roused d’artagnan, and stirred in his heart the fibers of
 obedience. he shook his head, and, without more hesitation, he walked
 straight up to philippe, on whose shoulder he laid his hand, saying,
 “monsieur, you are my prisoner!”
 philippe did not raise his eyes towards heaven, nor stir from the spot,
 where he seemed nailed to the floor, his eye intently fixed upon the king
 his brother. he reproached him with a sublime silence for all misfortunes
 past, all tortures to come. against this language of the soul the king
 felt he had no power; he cast down his eyes, dragging away precipitately
 his brother and sister, forgetting his mother, sitting motionless within
 three paces of the son whom she left a second time to be condemned to
 death. philippe approached anne of austria, and said to her, in a soft and
 nobly agitated voice:
 “if i were not your son, i should curse you, my mother, for having
 rendered me so unhappy.”
 d’artagnan felt a shudder pass through the marrow of his bones. he bowed
 respectfully to the young prince, and said as he bent, “excuse me,
 monseigneur, i am but a soldier, and my oaths are his who has just left
 the chamber.”
 “thank you, m. d’artagnan.... what has become of m. d’herblay?”
 “m. d’herblay is in safety, monseigneur,” said a voice behind them; “and
 no one, while i live and am free, shall cause a hair to fall from his
 head.”
 “monsieur fouquet!” said the prince, smiling sadly.
 “pardon me, monseigneur,” said fouquet, kneeling, “but he who is just gone
 out from hence was my guest.”
 “here are,” murmured philippe, with a sigh, “brave friends and good
 hearts. they make me regret the world. on, m. d’artagnan, i follow you.”
 at the moment the captain of the musketeers was about to leave the room
 with his prisoner, colbert appeared, and, after remitting an order from
 the king to d’artagnan, retired. d’artagnan read the paper, and then
 crushed it in his hand with rage.
 “what is it?” asked the prince.
 “read, monseigneur,” replied the musketeer.
 philippe read the following words, hastily traced by the hand of the king:
 “m. d’artagnan will conduct the prisoner to the ile sainte-marguerite. he
 will cover his face with an iron vizor, which the prisoner shall never
 raise except at peril of his life.”
 “that is just,” said philippe, with resignation; “i am ready.”
 “aramis was right,” said fouquet, in a low voice, to the musketeer, “this
 one is every whit as much a king as the other.”
 “more so!” replied d’artagnan. “he wanted only you and me.”
 chapter xxv. in which porthos thinks he is pursuing a duchy.
 aramis and porthos, having profited by the time granted them by fouquet,
 did honor to the french cavalry by their speed. porthos did not clearly
 understand on what kind of mission he was forced to display so much
 velocity; but as he saw aramis spurring on furiously, he, porthos, spurred
 on in the same way. they had soon, in this manner, placed twelve leagues
 between them and vaux; they were then obliged to change horses, and
 organize a sort of post arrangement. it was during a relay that porthos
 ventured to interrogate aramis discreetly.
 “hush!” replied the latter, “know only that our fortune depends on our
 speed.”
 as if porthos had still been the musketeer, without a sou or a maille
 of , he pushed forward. that magic word “fortune” always means
 something in the human ear. it means enough for those who have
 nothing; it means too much for those who have enough.
 “i shall be made a duke!” said porthos, aloud. he was speaking to himself.
 “that is possible,” replied aramis, smiling after his own fashion, as
 porthos’s horse passed him. aramis felt, notwithstanding, as though his
 brain were on fire; the activity of the body had not yet succeeded in
 subduing that of the mind. all there is of raging passion, mental
 toothache or mortal threat, raged, gnawed and grumbled in the thoughts of
 the unhappy prelate. his countenance exhibited visible traces of this rude
 combat. free on the highway to abandon himself to every impression of the
 moment, aramis did not fail to swear at every start of his horse, at every
 inequality in the road. pale, at times inundated with boiling sweats, then
 again dry and icy, he flogged his horses till the blood streamed from
 their sides. porthos, whose dominant fault was not sensibility, groaned at
 this. thus traveled they on for eight long hours, and then arrived at
 orleans. it was four o’clock in the afternoon. aramis, on observing this,
 judged that nothing showed pursuit to be a possibility. it would be
 without example that a troop capable of taking him and porthos should be
 furnished with relays sufficient to perform forty leagues in eight hours.
 thus, admitting pursuit, which was not at all manifest, the fugitives were
 five hours in advance of their pursuers.
 aramis thought that there might be no imprudence in taking a little rest,
 but that to continue would make the matter more certain. twenty leagues
 more, performed with the same rapidity, twenty more leagues devoured, and
 no one, not even d’artagnan, could overtake the enemies of the king.
 aramis felt obliged, therefore, to inflict upon porthos the pain of
 mounting on horseback again. they rode on till seven o’clock in the
 evening, and had only one post more between them and blois. but here a
 diabolical accident alarmed aramis greatly. there were no horses at the
 post. the prelate asked himself by what infernal machination his enemies
 had succeeded in depriving him of the means of going further,—he who
 never recognized chance as a deity, who found a cause for every accident,
 preferred believing that the refusal of the postmaster, at such an hour,
 in such a country, was the consequence of an order emanating from above:
 an order given with a view of stopping short the king-maker in the midst
 of his flight. but at the moment he was about to fly into a passion, so as
 to procure either a horse or an explanation, he was struck with the
 recollection that the comte de la fere lived in the neighborhood.
 “i am not traveling,” said he; “i do not want horses for a whole stage.
 find me two horses to go and pay a visit to a nobleman of my acquaintance
 who resides near this place.”
 “what nobleman?” asked the postmaster.
 “m. le comte de la fere.”
 “oh!” replied the postmaster, uncovering with respect, “a very worthy
 nobleman. but, whatever may be my desire to make myself agreeable to him,
 i cannot furnish you with horses, for all mine are engaged by m. le duc de
 beaufort.”
 “indeed!” said aramis, much disappointed.
 “only,” continued the postmaster, “if you will put up with a little
 carriage i have, i will harness an old blind horse who has still his legs
 left, and peradventure will draw you to the house of m. le comte de la
 fere.”
 “it is worth a louis,” said aramis.
 “no, monsieur, such a ride is worth no more than a crown; that is what m.
 grimaud, the comte’s intendant, always pays me when he makes use of that
 carriage; and i should not wish the comte de la fere to have to reproach
 me with having imposed on one of his friends.”
 “as you please,” said aramis, “particularly as regards disobliging the
 comte de la fere; only i think i have a right to give you a louis for your
 idea.”
 “oh! doubtless,” replied the postmaster with delight. and he himself
 harnessed the ancient horse to the creaking carriage. in the meantime
 porthos was curious to behold. he imagined he had discovered a clew to the
 secret, and he felt pleased, because a visit to athos, in the first place,
 promised him much satisfaction, and, in the next, gave him the hope of
 finding at the same time a good bed and good supper. the master, having
 got the carriage ready, ordered one of his men to drive the strangers to
 la fere. porthos took his seat by the side of aramis, whispering in his
 ear, “i understand.”
 “aha!” said aramis, “and what do you understand, my friend?”
 “we are going, on the part of the king, to make some great proposal to
 athos.”
 “pooh!” said aramis.
 “you need tell me nothing about it,” added the worthy porthos, endeavoring
 to reseat himself so as to avoid the jolting, “you need tell me nothing, i
 shall guess.”
 “well! do, my friend; guess away.”
 they arrived at athos’s dwelling about nine o’clock in the evening,
 favored by a splendid moon. this cheerful light rejoiced porthos beyond
 expression; but aramis appeared annoyed by it in an equal degree. he could
 not help showing something of this to porthos, who replied—“ay! ay!
 i guess how it is! the mission is a secret one.”
 these were his last words in the carriage. the driver interrupted him by
 saying, “gentlemen, we have arrived.”
 porthos and his companion alighted before the gate of the little chateau,
 where we are about to meet again our old acquaintances athos and
 bragelonne, the latter of whom had disappeared since the discovery of the
 infidelity of la valliere. if there be one saying truer than another, it
 is this: great griefs contain within themselves the germ of consolation.
 this painful wound, inflicted upon raoul, had drawn him nearer to his
 father again; and god knows how sweet were the consolations which flowed
 from the eloquent mouth and generous heart of athos. the wound was not
 cicatrized, but athos, by dint of conversing with his son and mixing a
 little more of his life with that of the young man, had brought him to
 understand that this pang of a first infidelity is necessary to every
 human existence; and that no one has loved without encountering it. raoul
 listened, again and again, but never understood. nothing replaces in the
 deeply afflicted heart the remembrance and thought of the beloved object.
 raoul then replied to the reasoning of his father:
 “monsieur, all that you tell me is true; i believe that no one has
 suffered in the affections of the heart so much as you have; but you are a
 man too great by reason of intelligence, and too severely tried by adverse
 fortune not to allow for the weakness of the soldier who suffers for the
 first time. i am paying a tribute that will not be paid a second time;
 permit me to plunge myself so deeply in my grief that i may forget myself
 in it, that i may drown even my reason in it.”
 “raoul! raoul!”
 “listen, monsieur. never shall i accustom myself to the idea that louise,
 the chastest and most innocent of women, has been able to so basely
 deceive a man so honest and so true a lover as myself. never can i
 persuade myself that i see that sweet and noble mask change into a
 hypocritical lascivious face. louise lost! louise infamous! ah!
 monseigneur, that idea is much more cruel to me than raoul abandoned—raoul
 unhappy!”
 athos then employed the heroic remedy. he defended louise against raoul,
 and justified her perfidy by her love. “a woman who would have yielded to
 a king because he is a king,” said he, “would deserve to be styled
 infamous; but louise loves louis. young, both, they have forgotten, he his
 rank, she her vows. love absolves everything, raoul. the two young people
 love each other with sincerity.”
 and when he had dealt this severe poniard-thrust, athos, with a sigh, saw
 raoul bound away beneath the rankling wound, and fly to the thickest
 recesses of the wood, or the solitude of his chamber, whence, an hour
 after, he would return, pale, trembling, but subdued. then, coming up to
 athos with a smile, he would kiss his hand, like the dog who, having been
 beaten, caresses a respected master, to redeem his fault. raoul redeemed
 nothing but his weakness, and only confessed his grief. thus passed away
 the days that followed that scene in which athos had so violently shaken
 the indomitable pride of the king. never, when conversing with his son,
 did he make any allusion to that scene; never did he give him the details
 of that vigorous lecture, which might, perhaps, have consoled the young
 man, by showing him his rival humbled. athos did not wish that the
 offended lover should forget the respect due to his king. and when
 bragelonne, ardent, angry, and melancholy, spoke with contempt of royal
 words, of the equivocal faith which certain madmen draw from promises that
 emanate from thrones, when, passing over two centuries, with that rapidity
 of a bird that traverses a narrow strait to go from one continent to the
 other, raoul ventured to predict the time in which kings would be esteemed
 as less than other men, athos said to him, in his serene, persuasive
 voice, “you are right, raoul; all that you say will happen; kings will
 lose their privileges, as stars which have survived their aeons lose their
 splendor. but when that moment comes, raoul, we shall be dead. and
 remember well what i say to you. in this world, all, men, women, and
 kings, must live for the present. we can only live for the future for
 god.”
 this was the manner in which athos and raoul were, as usual, conversing,
 and walking backwards and forwards in the long alley of limes in the park,
 when the bell which served to announce to the comte either the hour of
 dinner or the arrival of a visitor, was rung; and, without attaching any
 importance to it, he turned towards the house with his son; and at the end
 of the alley they found themselves in the presence of aramis and porthos.
 chapter xxvi. the last adieux.
 raoul uttered a cry, and affectionately embraced porthos. aramis and athos
 embraced like old men; and this embrace itself being a question for
 aramis, he immediately said, “my friend, we have not long to remain with
 you.”
 “ah!” said the comte.
 “only time to tell you of my good fortune,” interrupted porthos.
 “ah!” said raoul.
 athos looked silently at aramis, whose somber air had already appeared to
 him very little in harmony with the good news porthos hinted.
 “what is the good fortune that has happened to you? let us hear it,” said
 raoul, with a smile.
 “the king has made me a duke,” said the worthy porthos, with an air of
 mystery, in the ear of the young man, “a duke by brevet.”
 but the asides of porthos were always loud enough to be heard by
 everybody. his murmurs were in the diapason of ordinary roaring. athos
 heard him, and uttered an exclamation which made aramis start. the latter
 took athos by the arm, and, after having asked porthos’s permission to say
 a word to his friend in private, “my dear athos,” he began, “you see me
 overwhelmed with grief and trouble.”
 “with grief and trouble, my dear friend?” cried the comte; “oh, what?”
 “in two words. i have conspired against the king; that conspiracy has
 failed, and, at this moment, i am doubtless pursued.”
 “you are pursued!—a conspiracy! eh! my friend, what do you tell me?”
 “the saddest truth. i am entirely ruined.”
 “well, but porthos—this title of duke—what does all that
 mean?”
 “that is the subject of my severest pain; that is the deepest of my
 wounds. i have, believing in infallible success, drawn porthos into my
 conspiracy. he threw himself into it, as you know he would do, with all
 his strength, without knowing what he was about; and now he is as much
 compromised as myself—as completely ruined as i am.”
 “good god!” and athos turned towards porthos, who was smiling
 complacently.
 “i must make you acquainted with the whole. listen to me,” continued
 aramis; and he related the history as we know it. athos, during the
 recital, several times felt the sweat break from his forehead. “it was a
 great idea,” said he, “but a great error.”
 “for which i am punished, athos.”
 “therefore, i will not tell you my entire thought.”
 “tell it, nevertheless.”
 “it is a crime.”
 “a capital crime; i know it is. lese majeste.”
 “porthos! poor porthos!”
 “what would you advise me to do? success, as i have told you, was
 certain.”
 “m. fouquet is an honest man.”
 “and i a fool for having so ill-judged him,” said aramis. “oh, the wisdom
 of man! oh, millstone that grinds the world! and which is one day stopped
 by a grain of sand which has fallen, no one knows how, between its
 wheels.”
 “say by a diamond, aramis. but the thing is done. how do you think of
 acting?”
 “i am taking away porthos. the king will never believe that that worthy
 man has acted innocently. he never can believe that porthos has thought he
 was serving the king, whilst acting as he has done. his head would pay my
 fault. it shall not, must not, be so.”
 “you are taking him away, whither?”
 “to belle-isle, at first. that is an impregnable place of refuge. then, i
 have the sea, and a vessel to pass over into england, where i have many
 relations.”
 “you? in england?”
 “yes, or else in spain, where i have still more.”
 “but, our excellent porthos! you ruin him, for the king will confiscate
 all his property.”
 “all is provided for. i know how, when once in spain, to reconcile myself
 with louis xiv., and restore porthos to favor.”
 “you have credit, seemingly, aramis!” said athos, with a discreet air.
 “much; and at the service of my friends.”
 these words were accompanied by a warm pressure of the hand.
 “thank you,” replied the comte.
 “and while we are on this head,” said aramis, “you also are a malcontent;
 you also, raoul, have griefs to lay to the king. follow our example; pass
 over into belle-isle. then we shall see, i guarantee upon my honor, that
 in a month there will be war between france and spain on the subject of
 this son of louis xiii., who is an infante likewise, and whom france
 detains inhumanly. now, as louis xiv. would have no inclination for a war
 on that subject, i will answer for an arrangement, the result of which
 must bring greatness to porthos and to me, and a duchy in france to you,
 who are already a grandee of spain. will you join us?”
 “no; for my part i prefer having something to reproach the king with; it
 is a pride natural to my race to pretend to a superiority over royal
 races. doing what you propose, i should become the obliged of the king; i
 should certainly be the gainer on that ground, but i should be a loser in
 my conscience.—no, thank you!”
 “then give me two things, athos,—your absolution.”
 “oh! i give it you if you really wished to avenge the weak and oppressed
 against the oppressor.”
 “that is sufficient for me,” said aramis, with a blush which was lost in
 the obscurity of the night. “and now, give me your two best horses to gain
 the second post, as i have been refused any under the pretext of the duc
 de beaufort being traveling in this country.”
 “you shall have the two best horses, aramis; and again i recommend poor
 porthos strongly to your care.”
 “oh! i have no fear on that score. one word more: do you think i am
 maneuvering for him as i ought?”
 “the evil being committed, yes; for the king would not pardon him, and you
 have, whatever may be said, always a supporter in m. fouquet, who will not
 abandon you, he being himself compromised, notwithstanding his heroic
 action.”
 “you are right. and that is why, instead of gaining the sea at once, which
 would proclaim my fear and guilt, that is why i remain upon french ground.
 but belle-isle will be for me whatever ground i wish it to be, english,
 spanish, or roman; all will depend, with me, on the standard i shall think
 proper to unfurl.”
 “how so?”
 “it was i who fortified belle-isle; and, so long as i defend it, nobody
 can take belle-isle from me. and then, as you have said just now, m.
 fouquet is there. belle-isle will not be attacked without the signature of
 m. fouquet.”
 “that is true. nevertheless, be prudent. the king is both cunning and
 strong.” aramis smiled.
 “i again recommend porthos to you,” repeated the count, with a sort of
 cold persistence.
 “whatever becomes of me, count,” replied aramis, in the same tone, “our
 brother porthos will fare as i do—or better.”
 athos bowed whilst pressing the hand of aramis, and turned to embrace
 porthos with emotion.
 “i was born lucky, was i not?” murmured the latter, transported with
 happiness, as he folded his cloak round him.
 “come, my dear friend,” said aramis.
 raoul had gone out to give orders for the saddling of the horses. the
 group was already divided. athos saw his two friends on the point of
 departure, and something like a mist passed before his eyes and weighed
 upon his heart.
 “it is strange,” thought he, “whence comes the inclination i feel to
 embrace porthos once more?” at that moment porthos turned round, and he
 came towards his old friend with open arms. this last endearment was
 tender as in youth, as in times when hearts were warm—life happy.
 and then porthos mounted his horse. aramis came back once more to throw
 his arms round the neck of athos. the latter watched them along the
 high-road, elongated by the shade, in their white cloaks. like phantoms
 they seemed to enlarge on their departure from the earth, and it was not
 in the mist, but in the declivity of the ground that they disappeared. at
 the end of the perspective, both seemed to have given a spring with their
 feet, which made them vanish as if evaporated into cloud-land.
 then athos, with a very heavy heart, returned towards the house, saying to
 bragelonne, “raoul, i don’t know what it is that has just told me that i
 have seen those two for the last time.”
 “it does not astonish me, monsieur, that you should have such a thought,”
 replied the young man, “for i have at this moment the same, and think also
 that i shall never see messieurs du vallon and d’herblay again.”
 “oh! you,” replied the count, “you speak like a man rendered sad by a
 different cause; you see everything in black; you are young, and if you
 chance never to see those old friends again, it will because they no
 longer exist in the world in which you have yet many years to pass. but i—”
 raoul shook his head sadly, and leaned upon the shoulder of the count,
 without either of them finding another word in their hearts, which were
 ready to overflow.
 all at once a noise of horses and voices, from the extremity of the road
 to blois, attracted their attention that way. flambeaux-bearers shook
 their torches merrily among the trees of their route, and turned round,
 from time to time, to avoid distancing the horsemen who followed them.
 these flames, this noise, this dust of a dozen richly caparisoned horses,
 formed a strange contrast in the middle of the night with the melancholy
 and almost funereal disappearance of the two shadows of aramis and
 porthos. athos went towards the house; but he had hardly reached the
 parterre, when the entrance gate appeared in a blaze; all the flambeaux
 stopped and appeared to enflame the road. a cry was heard of “m. le duc de
 beaufort”—and athos sprang towards the door of his house. but the
 duke had already alighted from his horse, and was looking around him.
 “i am here, monseigneur,” said athos.
 “ah! good evening, dear count,” said the prince, with that frank
 cordiality which won him so many hearts. “is it too late for a friend?”
 “ah! my dear prince, come in!” said the count.
 and, m. de beaufort leaning on the arm of athos, they entered the house,
 followed by raoul, who walked respectfully and modestly among the officers
 of the prince, with several of whom he was acquainted.
 chapter xxvii. monsieur de beaufort.
 the prince turned round at the moment when raoul, in order to leave him
 alone with athos, was shutting the door, and preparing to go with the
 other officers into an adjoining apartment.
 “is that the young man i have heard m. le prince speak so highly of?”
 asked m. de beaufort.
 “it is, monseigneur.”
 “he is quite the soldier; let him stay, count, we cannot spare him.”
 “remain, raoul, since monseigneur permits it,” said athos.
 “ma foi! he is tall and handsome!” continued the duke. “will you
 give him to me, monseigneur, if i ask him of you?”
 “how am i to understand you, monseigneur?” said athos.
 “why, i call upon you to bid you farewell.”
 “farewell!”
 “yes, in good truth. have you no idea of what i am about to become?”
 “why, i suppose, what you have always been, monseigneur,—a valiant
 prince, and an excellent gentleman.”
 “i am going to become an african prince,—a bedouin gentleman. the
 king is sending me to make conquests among the arabs.”
 “what is this you tell me, monseigneur?”
 “strange, is it not? i, the parisian par essence, i who have
 reigned in the faubourgs, and have been called king of the halles,—i
 am going to pass from the place maubert to the minarets of gigelli; from a
 frondeur i am becoming an adventurer!”
 “oh, monseigneur, if you did not yourself tell me that—”
 “it would not be credible, would it? believe me, nevertheless, and we have
 but to bid each other farewell. this is what comes of getting into favor
 again.”
 “into favor?”
 “yes. you smile. ah, my dear count, do you know why i have accepted this
 enterprise, can you guess?”
 “because your highness loves glory above—everything.”
 “oh! no; there is no glory in firing muskets at savages. i see no glory in
 that, for my part, and it is more probable that i shall there meet with
 something else. but i have wished, and still wish earnestly, my dear
 count, that my life should have that last facet, after all the
 whimsical exhibitions i have seen myself make during fifty years. for, in
 short, you must admit that it is sufficiently strange to be born the
 grandson of a king, to have made war against kings, to have been reckoned
 among the powers of the age, to have maintained my rank, to feel henry iv.
 within me, to be great admiral of france—and then to go and get
 killed at gigelli, among all those turks, saracens, and moors.”
 “monseigneur, you harp with strange persistence on that theme,” said
 athos, in an agitated voice. “how can you suppose that so brilliant a
 destiny will be extinguished in that remote and miserable scene?”
 “and can you believe, upright and simple as you are, that if i go into
 africa for this ridiculous motive, i will not endeavor to come out of it
 without ridicule? shall i not give the world cause to speak of me? and to
 be spoken of, nowadays, when there are monsieur le prince, m. de turenne,
 and many others, my contemporaries, i, admiral of france, grandson of
 henry iv., king of paris, have i anything left but to get myself killed?
 cordieu! i will be talked of, i tell you; i shall be killed whether
 or not; if not there, somewhere else.”
 “why, monseigneur, this is mere exaggeration; and hitherto you have shown
 nothing exaggerated save in bravery.”
 “peste! my dear friend, there is bravery in facing scurvy,
 dysentery, locusts, poisoned arrows, as my ancestor st. louis did. do you
 know those fellows still use poisoned arrows? and then, you know me of
 old, i fancy, and you know that when i once make up my mind to a thing, i
 perform it in grim earnest.”
 “yes, you made up your mind to escape from vincennes.”
 “ay, but you aided me in that, my master; and, a propos, i turn
 this way and that, without seeing my old friend, m. vaugrimaud. how is
 he?”
 “m. vaugrimaud is still your highness’s most respectful servant,” said
 athos, smiling.
 “i have a hundred pistoles here for him, which i bring as a legacy. my
 will is made, count.”
 “ah! monseigneur! monseigneur!”
 “and you may understand that if grimaud’s name were to appear in my will—”
 the duke began to laugh; then addressing raoul, who, from the commencement
 of this conversation, had sunk into a profound reverie, “young man,” said
 he, “i know there is to be found here a certain de vouvray wine, and i
 believe—” raoul left the room precipitately to order the wine. in
 the meantime m. de beaufort took the hand of athos.
 “what do you mean to do with him?” asked he.
 “nothing at present, monseigneur.”
 “ah! yes, i know; since the passion of the king for la valliere.”
 “yes, monseigneur.”
 “that is all true, then, is it? i think i know her, that little la
 valliere. she is not particularly handsome, if i remember right?”
 “no, monseigneur,” said athos.
 “do you know whom she reminds me of?”
 “does she remind your highness of any one?”
 “she reminds me of a very agreeable girl, whose mother lived in the
 halles.”
 “ah! ah!” said athos, smiling.
 “oh! the good old times,” added m. de beaufort. “yes, la valliere reminds
 me of that girl.”
 “who had a son, had she not?” 
 “i believe she had,” replied the duke, with careless naivete and a
 complaisant forgetfulness, of which no words could translate the tone and
 the vocal expression. “now, here is poor raoul, who is your son, i
 believe.”
 “yes, he is my son, monseigneur.”
 “and the poor lad has been cut out by the king, and he frets.”
 “still better, monseigneur, he abstains.”
 “you are going to let the boy rust in idleness; it is a mistake. come,
 give him to me.”
 “my wish is to keep him at home, monseigneur. i have no longer anything in
 the world but him, and as long as he likes to remain—”
 “well, well,” replied the duke. “i could, nevertheless, have soon put
 matters to rights again. i assure you, i think he has in him the stuff of
 which marechals of france are made; i have seen more than one produced
 from less likely rough material.”
 “that is very possible, monseigneur; but it is the king who makes
 marechals of france, and raoul will never accept anything of the king.”
 raoul interrupted this conversation by his return. he preceded grimaud,
 whose still steady hands carried the plateau with one glass and a bottle
 of the duke’s favorite wine. on seeing his old protege, the duke
 uttered an exclamation of pleasure.
 “grimaud! good evening, grimaud!” said he; “how goes it?”
 the servant bowed profoundly, as much gratified as his noble interlocutor.
 “two old friends!” said the duke, shaking honest grimaud’s shoulder after
 a vigorous fashion; which was followed by another still more profound and
 delighted bow from grimaud.
 “but what is this, count, only one glass?”
 “i should not think of drinking with your highness, unless your highness
 permitted me,” replied athos, with noble humility.
 “cordieu! you were right to bring only one glass, we will both
 drink out of it, like two brothers in arms. begin, count.”
 “do me the honor,” said athos, gently putting back the glass.
 “you are a charming friend,” replied the duc de beaufort, who drank, and
 passed the goblet to his companion. “but that is not all,” continued he,
 “i am still thirsty, and i wish to do honor to this handsome young man who
 stands here. i carry good luck with me, vicomte,” said he to raoul; “wish
 for something while drinking out of my glass, and may the black plague
 grab me if what you wish does not come to pass!” he held the goblet to
 raoul, who hastily moistened his lips, and replied with the same
 promptitude:
 “i have wished for something, monseigneur.” his eyes sparkled with a
 gloomy fire, and the blood mounted to his cheeks; he terrified athos, if
 only with his smile.
 “and what have you wished for?” replied the duke, sinking back into his
 fauteuil, whilst with one hand he returned the bottle to grimaud, and with
 the other gave him a purse.
 “will you promise me, monseigneur, to grant me what i wish for?”
 “pardieu! that is agreed upon.”
 “i wished, monsieur le duc, to go with you to gigelli.”
 athos became pale, and was unable to conceal his agitation. the duke
 looked at his friend, as if desirous to assist him to parry this
 unexpected blow.
 “that is difficult, my dear vicomte, very difficult,” added he, in a lower
 tone of voice.
 “pardon me, monseigneur, i have been indiscreet,” replied raoul, in a firm
 voice; “but as you yourself invited me to wish—”
 “to wish to leave me?” said athos.
 “oh! monsieur—can you imagine—”
 “well, mordieu!” cried the duke, “the young vicomte is right! what
 can he do here? he will go moldy with grief.”
 raoul blushed, and the excitable prince continued: “war is a distraction:
 we gain everything by it; we can only lose one thing by it—life—then
 so much the worse!”
 “that is to say, memory,” said raoul, eagerly; “and that is to say, so
 much the better!”
 he repented of having spoken so warmly when he saw athos rise and open the
 window; which was, doubtless, to conceal his emotion. raoul sprang towards
 the comte, but the latter had already overcome his emotion, and turned to
 the lights with a serene and impassible countenance. “well, come,” said
 the duke, “let us see! shall he go, or shall he not? if he goes, comte, he
 shall be my aide-de-camp, my son.”
 “monseigneur!” cried raoul, bending his knee.
 “monseigneur!” cried athos, taking the hand of the duke; “raoul shall do
 just as he likes.”
 “oh! no, monsieur, just as you like,” interrupted the young man.
 “par la corbleu!” said the prince in his turn, “it is neither the
 comte nor the vicomte that shall have his way, it is i. i will take him
 away. the marine offers a superb fortune, my friend.”
 raoul smiled again so sadly, that this time athos felt his heart
 penetrated by it, and replied to him by a severe look. raoul comprehended
 it all; he recovered his calmness, and was so guarded, that not another
 word escaped him. the duke at length rose, on observing the advanced hour,
 and said, with animation, “i am in great haste, but if i am told i have
 lost time in talking with a friend, i will reply i have gained—on
 the balance—a most excellent recruit.”
 “pardon me, monsieur le duc,” interrupted raoul, “do not tell the king so,
 for it is not the king i wish to serve.”
 “eh! my friend, whom, then, will you serve? the times are past when you
 might have said, ‘i belong to m. de beaufort.’ no, nowadays, we all belong
 to the king, great or small. therefore, if you serve on board my vessels,
 there can be nothing equivocal about it, my dear vicomte; it will be the
 king you will serve.”
 athos waited with a kind of impatient joy for the reply about to be made
 to this embarrassing question by raoul, the intractable enemy of the king,
 his rival. the father hoped that the obstacle would overcome the desire.
 he was thankful to m. de beaufort, whose lightness or generous reflection
 had thrown an impediment in the way of the departure of a son, now his
 only joy. but raoul, still firm and tranquil, replied: “monsieur le duc,
 the objection you make i have already considered in my mind. i will serve
 on board your vessels, because you do me the honor to take me with you;
 but i shall there serve a more powerful master than the king: i shall
 serve god!”
 “god! how so?” said the duke and athos together.
 “my intention is to make profession, and become a knight of malta,” added
 bragelonne, letting fall, one by one, words more icy than the drops which
 fall from the bare trees after the tempests of winter. 
 under this blow athos staggered and the prince himself was moved. grimaud
 uttered a heavy groan, and let fall the bottle, which was broken without
 anybody paying attention. m. de beaufort looked the young man in the face,
 and read plainly, though his eyes were cast down, the fire of resolution
 before which everything must give way. as to athos, he was too well
 acquainted with that tender, but inflexible soul; he could not hope to
 make it deviate from the fatal road it had just chosen. he could only
 press the hand the duke held out to him. “comte, i shall set off in two
 days for toulon,” said m. de beaufort. “will you meet me at paris, in
 order that i may know your determination?”
 “i will have the honor of thanking you there, mon prince, for all
 your kindness,” replied the comte.
 “and be sure to bring the vicomte with you, whether he follows me or does
 not follow me,” added the duke; “he has my word, and i only ask yours.”
 having thrown a little balm upon the wound of the paternal heart, he
 pulled the ear of grimaud, whose eyes sparkled more than usual, and
 regained his escort in the parterre. the horses, rested and refreshed, set
 off with spirit through the lovely night, and soon placed a considerable
 distance between their master and the chateau.
 athos and bragelonne were again face to face. eleven o’clock was striking.
 the father and son preserved a profound silence towards each other, where
 an intelligent observer would have expected cries and tears. but these two
 men were of such a nature that all emotion following their final
 resolutions plunged itself so deep into their hearts that it was lost
 forever. they passed, then, silently and almost breathlessly, the hour
 that preceded midnight. the clock, by striking, alone pointed out to them
 how many minutes had lasted the painful journey made by their souls in the
 immensity of their remembrances of the past and fear of the future. athos
 rose first, saying, “it is late, then.... till to-morrow.”
 raoul rose, and in his turn embraced his father. the latter held him
 clasped to his breast, and said, in a tremulous voice, “in two days, you
 will have left me, my son—left me forever, raoul!”
 “monsieur,” replied the young man, “i had formed a determination, that of
 piercing my heart with my sword; but you would have thought that cowardly.
 i have renounced that determination, and therefore we must part.”
 “you leave me desolate by going, raoul.”
 “listen to me again, monsieur, i implore you. if i do not go, i shall die
 here of grief and love. i know how long a time i have to live thus. send
 me away quickly, monsieur, or you will see me basely die before your eyes—in
 your house—this is stronger than my will—stronger than my
 strength—you may plainly see that within one month i have lived
 thirty years, and that i approach the end of my life.”
 “then,” said athos, coldly, “you go with the intention of getting killed
 in africa? oh, tell me! do not lie!”
 raoul grew deadly pale, and remained silent for two seconds, which were to
 his father two hours of agony. then, all at once: “monsieur,” said he, “i
 have promised to devote myself to god. in exchange for the sacrifice i
 make of my youth and liberty, i will only ask of him one thing, and that
 is, to preserve me for you, because you are the only tie which attaches me
 to this world. god alone can give me the strength not to forget that i owe
 you everything, and that nothing ought to stand in my esteem before you.”
 athos embraced his son tenderly, and said:
 “you have just replied to me on the word of honor of an honest man; in two
 days we shall be with m. de beaufort at paris, and you will then do what
 will be proper for you to do. you are free, raoul; adieu.”
 and he slowly gained his bedroom. raoul went down into the garden, and
 passed the night in the alley of limes.
 chapter xxviii. preparations for departure.
 athos lost no more time in combating this immutable resolution. he gave
 all his attention to preparing, during the two days the duke had granted
 him, the proper appointments for raoul. this labor chiefly concerned
 grimaud, who immediately applied himself to it with the good-will and
 intelligence we know he possessed. athos gave this worthy servant orders
 to take the route to paris when the equipments should be ready; and, not
 to expose himself to the danger of keeping the duke waiting, or delaying
 raoul, so that the duke should perceive his absence, he himself, the day
 after the visit of m. de beaufort, set off for paris with his son.
 for the poor young man it was an emotion easily to be understood, thus to
 return to paris amongst all the people who had known and loved him. every
 face recalled a pang to him who had suffered so much; to him who had loved
 so much, some circumstance of his unhappy love. raoul, on approaching
 paris, felt as if he were dying. once in paris, he really existed no
 longer. when he reached guiche’s residence, he was informed that guiche
 was with monsieur. raoul took the road to the luxembourg, and when
 arrived, without suspecting that he was going to the place where la
 valliere had lived, he heard so much music and respired so many perfumes,
 he heard so much joyous laughter, and saw so many dancing shadows, that if
 it had not been for a charitable woman, who perceived him so dejected and
 pale beneath a doorway, he would have remained there a few minutes, and
 then would have gone away, never to return. but, as we have said, in the
 first ante-chamber he had stopped, solely for the sake of not mixing
 himself with all those happy beings he felt were moving around him in the
 adjacent salons. and as one of monsieur’s servants, recognizing him, had
 asked him if he wished to see monsieur or madame, raoul had scarcely
 answered him, but had sunk down upon a bench near the velvet doorway,
 looking at a clock, which had stopped for nearly an hour. the servant had
 passed on, and another, better acquainted with him, had come up, and
 interrogated raoul whether he should inform m. de guiche of his being
 there. this name did not even arouse the recollections of raoul. the
 persistent servant went on to relate that de guiche had just invented a
 new game of lottery, and was teaching it to the ladies. raoul, opening his
 large eyes, like the absent man in theophrastus, made no answer, but his
 sadness increased two shades. with his head hanging down, his limbs
 relaxed, his mouth half open for the escape of his sighs, raoul remained,
 thus forgotten, in the ante-chamber, when all at once a lady’s robe
 passed, rubbing against the doors of a side salon, which opened on the
 gallery. a lady, young, pretty, and gay, scolding an officer of the
 household, entered by that way, and expressed herself with much vivacity.
 the officer replied in calm but firm sentences; it was rather a little
 love pet than a quarrel of courtiers, and was terminated by a kiss on the
 fingers of the lady. suddenly, on perceiving raoul, the lady became
 silent, and pushing away the officer:
 “make your escape, malicorne,” said she; “i did not think there was any
 one here. i shall curse you, if they have either heard or seen us!”
 malicorne hastened away. the young lady advanced behind raoul, and
 stretching her joyous face over him as he lay:
 “monsieur is a gallant man,” said she, “and no doubt—”
 she here interrupted herself by uttering a cry. “raoul!” said she,
 blushing.
 “mademoiselle de montalais!” said raoul, paler than death.
 he rose unsteadily, and tried to make his way across the slippery mosaic
 of the floor; but she had comprehended that savage and cruel grief; she
 felt that in the flight of raoul there was an accusation of herself. a
 woman, ever vigilant, she did not think she ought to let the opportunity
 slip of making good her justification; but raoul, though stopped by her in
 the middle of the gallery, did not seem disposed to surrender without a
 combat. he took it up in a tone so cold and embarrassed, that if they had
 been thus surprised, the whole court would have no doubt about the
 proceedings of mademoiselle de montalais.
 “ah! monsieur,” said she with disdain, “what you are doing is very
 unworthy of a gentleman. my heart inclines me to speak to you; you
 compromise me by a reception almost uncivil; you are wrong, monsieur; and
 you confound your friends with enemies. farewell!”
 raoul had sworn never to speak of louise, never even to look at those who
 might have seen louise; he was going into another world, that he might
 never meet with anything louise had seen, or even touched. but after the
 first shock of his pride, after having had a glimpse of montalais, the
 companion of louise—montalais, who reminded him of the turret of
 blois and the joys of youth—all his reason faded away.
 “pardon me, mademoiselle; it enters not, it cannot enter into my thoughts
 to be uncivil.”
 “do you wish to speak to me?” said she, with the smile of former days.
 “well! come somewhere else; for we may be surprised.”
 “oh!” said he.
 she looked at the clock, doubtingly, then, having reflected:
 “in my apartment,” said she, “we shall have an hour to ourselves.” and
 taking her course, lighter than a fairy, she ran up to her chamber,
 followed by raoul. shutting the door, and placing in the hands of her cameriste
 the mantle she had held upon her arm:
 “you were seeking m. de guiche, were you not?” said she to raoul.
 “yes, mademoiselle.”
 “i will go and ask him to come up here, presently, after i have spoken to
 you.”
 “do so, mademoiselle.”
 “are you angry with me?”
 raoul looked at her for a moment, then, casting down his eyes, “yes,” said
 he.
 “you think i was concerned in the plot which brought about the rupture, do
 you not?”
 “rupture!” said he, with bitterness. “oh! mademoiselle, there can be no
 rupture where there has been no love.”
 “you are in error,” replied montalais; “louise did love you.”
 raoul started.
 “not with love, i know; but she liked you, and you ought to have married
 her before you set out for london.”
 raoul broke into a sinister laugh, which made montalais shudder.
 “you tell me that very much at your ease, mademoiselle. do people marry
 whom they like? you forget that the king then kept for himself as his
 mistress her of whom we are speaking.”
 “listen,” said the young woman, pressing the hands of raoul in her own,
 “you were wrong in every way; a man of your age ought never to leave a
 woman of hers alone.”
 “there is no longer any faith in the world, then,” said raoul.
 “no, vicomte,” said montalais, quietly. “nevertheless, let me tell you
 that, if, instead of loving louise coldly and philosophically, you had
 endeavored to awaken her to love—”
 “enough, i pray you, mademoiselle,” said raoul. “i feel as though you are
 all, of both sexes, of a different age from me. you can laugh, and you can
 banter agreeably. i, mademoiselle, i loved mademoiselle de—” raoul
 could not pronounce her name,—“i loved her well! i put my faith in
 her—now i am quits by loving her no longer.”
 “oh, vicomte!” said montalais, pointing to his reflection in a
 looking-glass.
 “i know what you mean, mademoiselle; i am much altered, am i not? well! do
 you know why? because my face is the mirror of my heart, the outer surface
 changed to match the mind within.”
 “you are consoled, then?” said montalais, sharply.
 “no, i shall never be consoled.”
 “i don’t understand you, m. de bragelonne.”
 “i care but little for that. i do not quite understand myself.”
 “you have not even tried to speak to louise?”
 “who! i?” exclaimed the young man, with eyes flashing fire; “i!—why
 do you not advise me to marry her? perhaps the king would consent now.”
 and he rose from his chair full of anger.
 “i see,” said montalais, “that you are not cured, and that louise has one
 enemy the more.”
 “one enemy the more!”
 “yes; favorites are but little beloved at the court of france.”
 “oh! while she has her lover to protect her, is not that enough? she has
 chosen him of such a quality that her enemies cannot prevail against her.”
 but, stopping all at once, “and then she has you for a friend,
 mademoiselle,” added he, with a shade of irony which did not glide off the
 cuirass.
 “who! i?—oh, no! i am no longer one of those whom mademoiselle de la
 valliere condescends to look upon; but—”
 this but, so big with menace and with storm; this but, which
 made the heart of raoul beat, such griefs did it presage for her whom
 lately he loved so dearly; this terrible but, so significant in a
 woman like montalais, was interrupted by a moderately loud noise heard by
 the speakers proceeding from the alcove behind the wainscoting. montalais
 turned to listen, and raoul was already rising, when a lady entered the
 room quietly by the secret door, which she closed after her.
 “madame!” exclaimed raoul, on recognizing the sister-in-law of the king.
 “stupid wretch!” murmured montalais, throwing herself, but too late,
 before the princess, “i have been mistaken in an hour!” she had, however,
 time to warn the princess, who was walking towards raoul.
 “m. de bragelonne, madame,” and at these words the princess drew back,
 uttering a cry in her turn.
 “your royal highness,” said montalais, with volubility, “is kind enough to
 think of this lottery, and—”
 the princess began to lose countenance. raoul hastened his departure,
 without divining all, but he felt that he was in the way. madame was
 preparing a word of transition to recover herself, when a closet opened in
 front of the alcove, and m. de guiche issued, all radiant, also from that
 closet. the palest of the four, we must admit, was still raoul. the
 princess, however, was near fainting, and was obliged to lean upon the
 foot of the bed for support. no one ventured to support her. this scene
 occupied several minutes of terrible suspense. but raoul broke it. he went
 up to the count, whose inexpressible emotion made his knees tremble, and
 taking his hand, “dear count,” said he, “tell madame i am too unhappy not
 to merit pardon; tell her also that i have loved in the course of my life,
 and that the horror of the treachery that has been practiced on me renders
 me inexorable towards all other treachery that may be committed around me.
 this is why, mademoiselle,” said he, smiling to montalais, “i never would
 divulge the secret of the visits of my friend to your apartment. obtain
 from madame—from madame, who is so clement and so generous,—obtain
 her pardon for you whom she has just surprised also. you are both free,
 love each other, be happy!”
 the princess felt for a moment a despair that cannot be described; it was
 repugnant to her, notwithstanding the exquisite delicacy which raoul had
 exhibited, to feel herself at the mercy of one who had discovered such an
 indiscretion. it was equally repugnant to her to accept the evasion
 offered by this delicate deception. agitated, nervous, she struggled
 against the double stings of these two troubles. raoul comprehended her
 position, and came once more to her aid. bending his knee before her:
 “madame!” said he, in a low voice, “in two days i shall be far from paris;
 in a fortnight i shall be far from france, where i shall never be seen
 again.”
 “are you going away, then?” said she, with great delight.
 “with m. de beaufort.”
 “into africa!” cried de guiche, in his turn. “you, raoul—oh! my
 friend—into africa, where everybody dies!”
 and forgetting everything, forgetting that that forgetfulness itself
 compromised the princess more eloquently than his presence, “ingrate!”
 said he, “and you have not even consulted me!” and he embraced him; during
 which time montalais had led away madame, and disappeared herself.
 raoul passed his hand over his brow, and said, with a smile, “i have been
 dreaming!” then warmly to guiche, who by degrees absorbed him, “my
 friend,” said he, “i conceal nothing from you, who are the elected of my
 heart. i am going to seek death in yonder country; your secret will not
 remain in my breast more than a year.”
 “oh, raoul! a man!”
 “do you know what is my thought, count? this is it—i shall live more
 vividly, being buried beneath the earth, than i have lived for this month
 past. we are christians, my friend, and if such sufferings were to
 continue, i would not be answerable for the safety of my soul.”
 de guiche was anxious to raise objections.
 “not one word more on my account,” said raoul; “but advice to you, dear
 friend; what i am going to say to you is of much greater importance.”
 “what is that?”
 “without doubt you risk much more than i do, because you love.”
 “oh!”
 “it is a joy so sweet to me to be able to speak to you thus! well, then,
 de guiche, beware of montalais.”
 “what! of that kind friend?”
 “she was the friend of—her you know of. she ruined her by pride.”
 “you are mistaken.”
 “and now, when she has ruined her, she would ravish from her the only
 thing that renders that woman excusable in my eyes.”
 “what is that?”
 “her love.”
 “what do you mean by that?”
 “i mean that there is a plot formed against her who is the mistress of the
 king—a plot formed in the very house of madame.”
 “can you think so?”
 “i am certain of it.”
 “by montalais?”
 “take her as the least dangerous of the enemies i dread for—the
 other!”
 “explain yourself clearly, my friend; and if i can understand you—”
 “in two words. madame has been long jealous of the king.”
 “i know she has—”
 “oh! fear nothing—you are beloved—you are beloved, count; do
 you feel the value of these three words? they signify that you can raise
 your head, that you can sleep tranquilly, that you can thank god every
 minute of you life. you are beloved; that signifies that you may hear
 everything, even the counsel of a friend who wishes to preserve your
 happiness. you are beloved, de guiche, you are beloved! you do not endure
 those atrocious nights, those nights without end, which, with arid eye and
 fainting heart, others pass through who are destined to die. you will live
 long, if you act like the miser who, bit by bit, crumb by crumb, collects
 and heaps up diamonds and gold. you are beloved!—allow me to tell
 you what you must do that you may be beloved forever.”
 de guiche contemplated for some time this unfortunate young man, half mad
 with despair, till there passed through his heart something like remorse
 at his own happiness. raoul suppressed his feverish excitement, to assume
 the voice and countenance of an impassible man.
 “they will make her, whose name i should wish still to be able to
 pronounce—they will make her suffer. swear to me that you will not
 second them in anything—but that you will defend her when possible,
 as i would have done myself.”
 “i swear i will,” replied de guiche.
 “and,” continued raoul, “some day, when you shall have rendered her a
 great service—some day when she shall thank you, promise me to say
 these words to her—‘i have done you this kindness, madame, at the
 warm request of m. de bragelonne, whom you so deeply injured.’”
 “i swear i will,” murmured de guiche.
 “that is all. adieu! i set out to-morrow, or the day after, for
toulon. if you have a few hours to spare, give them to me.”
 “all! all!” cried the young man.
 “thank you!”
 “and what are you going to do now?”
 “i am going to meet m. le comte at planchet’s residence, where we hope to
 find m. d’artagnan.”
 “m. d’artagnan?”
 “yes, i wish to embrace him before my departure. he is a brave man, who
 loves me dearly. farewell, my friend; you are expected, no doubt; you will
 find me, when you wish, at the lodgings of the comte. farewell!”
 the two young men embraced. those who chanced to see them both thus, would
 not have hesitated to say, pointing to raoul, “that is the happy man!”
 chapter xxix. planchet’s inventory.
 athos, during the visit made to the luxembourg by raoul, had gone to
 planchet’s residence to inquire after d’artagnan. the comte, on arriving
 at the rue des lombards, found the shop of the grocer in great confusion;
 but it was not the encumberment of a lucky sale, or that of an arrival of
 goods. planchet was not enthroned, as usual, on sacks and barrels. no. a
 young man with a pen behind his ear, and another with an account-book in
 his hand, were setting down a number of figures, whilst a third counted
 and weighed. an inventory was being taken. athos, who had no knowledge of
 commercial matters, felt himself a little embarrassed by material
 obstacles and the majesty of those who were thus employed. he saw several
 customers sent away, and asked himself whether he, who came to buy
 nothing, would not be more properly deemed importunate. he therefore asked
 very politely if he could see m. planchet. the reply, quite carelessly
 given, was that m. planchet was packing his trunks. these words surprised
 athos. “what! his trunks?” said he; “is m. planchet going away?”
 “yes, monsieur, directly.”
 “then, if you please, inform him that m. le comte de la fere desires to
 speak to him for a moment.”
 at the mention of the comte’s name, one of the young men, no doubt
 accustomed to hear it pronounced with respect, immediately went to inform
 planchet. it was at this moment that raoul, after his painful scene with
 montalais and de guiche, arrived at the grocer’s house. planchet left his
 job directly he received the comte’s message.
 “ah! monsieur le comte!” exclaimed he, “how glad i am to see you! what
 good star brings you here?”
 “my dear planchet,” said athos, pressing the hand of his son, whose sad
 look he silently observed,—“we are come to learn of you—but in
 what confusion do i find you! you are as white as a miller; where have you
 been rummaging?”
 “ah, diable! take care, monsieur; don’t come near me till i have
 well shaken myself.”
 “what for? flour or dust only whiten.”
 “no, no; what you see on my arms is arsenic.”
 “arsenic?”
 “yes; i am taking my precautions against rats.”
 “ay, i suppose in an establishment like this, rats play a conspicuous
 part.”
 “it is not with this establishment i concern myself, monsieur le comte.
 the rats have robbed me of more here than they will ever rob me of again.”
 “what do you mean?”
 “why, you may have observed, monsieur, my inventory is being taken.”
 “are you leaving trade, then?”
 “eh! mon dieu! yes. i have disposed of my business to one of my
 young men.”
 “bah! you are rich, then, i suppose?”
 “monsieur, i have taken a dislike to the city; i don’t know whether it is
 because i am growing old, and as m. d’artagnan one day said, when we grow
 old we more often think of the adventures of our youth; but for some time
 past i have felt myself attracted towards the country and gardening. i was
 a countryman formerly.” and planchet marked this confession with a rather
 pretentious laugh for a man making profession of humility.
 athos made a gesture of approval, and then added: “you are going to buy an
 estate, then?”
 “i have bought one, monsieur.”
 “ah! that is still better.”
 “a little house at fontainebleau, with something like twenty acres of land
 round it.”
 “very well, planchet! accept my compliments on your acquisition.”
 “but, monsieur, we are not comfortable here; the cursed dust makes you
 cough. corbleu! i do not wish to poison the most worthy gentleman
 in the kingdom.”
 athos did not smile at this little pleasantry which planchet had aimed at
 him, in order to try his strength in mundane facetiousness.
 “yes,” said athos, “let us have a little talk by ourselves—in your
 own room, for example. you have a room, have you not?”
 “certainly, monsieur le comte.”
 “upstairs, perhaps?” and athos, seeing planchet a little embarrassed,
 wished to relieve him by going first.
 “it is—but—” said planchet, hesitating.
 athos was mistaken in the cause of this hesitation, and, attributing it to
 a fear the grocer might have of offering humble hospitality, “never mind,
 never mind,” said he, still going up, “the dwelling of a tradesman in this
 quarter is not expected to be a palace. come on.”
 raoul nimbly preceded him, and entered first. two cries were heard
 simultaneously—we may say three. one of these cries dominated the
 others; it emanated from a woman. another proceeded from the mouth of
 raoul; it was an exclamation of surprise. he had no sooner uttered it than
 he shut the door sharply. the third was from fright; it came from
 planchet.
 “i ask your pardon!” added he; “madame is dressing.”
 raoul had, no doubt, seen that what planchet said was true, for he turned
 round to go downstairs again.
 “madame—” said athos. “oh! pardon me, planchet, i did not know that
 you had upstairs—”
 “it is truchen,” added planchet, blushing a little.
 “it is whoever you please, my good planchet; but pardon my rudeness.”
 “no, no; go up now, gentlemen.”
 “we will do no such thing,” said athos.
 “oh! madame, having notice, has had time—”
 “no, planchet; farewell!”
 “eh, gentlemen! you would not disoblige me by thus standing on the
 staircase, or by going away without having sat down.”
 “if we had known you had a lady upstairs,” replied athos, with his
 customary coolness, “we would have asked permission to pay our respects to
 her.”
 planchet was so disconcerted by this little extravagance, that he forced
 the passage, and himself opened the door to admit the comte and his son.
 truchen was quite dressed: in the costume of the shopkeeper’s wife, rich
 yet coquettish; german eyes attacking french eyes. she left the apartment
 after two courtesies, and went down into the shop—but not without
 having listened at the door, to know what planchet’s gentlemen visitors
 would say of her. athos suspected that, and therefore turned the
 conversation accordingly. planchet, on his part, was burning to give
 explanations, which athos avoided. but, as certain tenacities are stronger
 than others, athos was forced to hear planchet recite his idyls of
 felicity, translated into a language more chaste than that of longus. so
 planchet related how truchen had charmed the years of his advancing age,
 and brought good luck to his business, as ruth did to boaz.
 “you want nothing now, then, but heirs to your property.”
 “if i had one he would have three hundred thousand livres,” said planchet.
 “humph! you must have one, then,” said athos, phlegmatically, “if only to
 prevent your little fortune being lost.”
 this word little fortune placed planchet in his rank, like the
 voice of the sergeant when planchet was but a piqueur in the
 regiment of piedmont, in which rochefort had placed him. athos perceived
 that the grocer would marry truchen, and, in spite of fate, establish a
 family. this appeared the more evident to him when he learned that the
 young man to whom planchet was selling the business was her cousin. having
 heard all that was necessary of the happy prospects of the retiring
 grocer, “what is m. d’artagnan about?” said he; “he is not at the louvre.”
 “ah! monsieur le comte, monsieur d’artagnan has disappeared.”
 “disappeared!” said athos, in surprise.
 “oh! monsieur, we know what that means.”
 “but i do not know.”
 “whenever m. d’artagnan disappears it is always for some mission or some
 great affair.”
 “has he said anything to you about it?”
 “never.”
 “you were acquainted with his departure for england formerly, were you
 not?”
 “on account of the speculation.” said planchet, heedlessly.
 “the speculation!”
 “i mean—” interrupted planchet, quite confused.
 “well, well; neither your affairs nor those of your master are in
 question; the interest we take in him alone has induced me to apply to
 you. since the captain of the musketeers is not here, and as we cannot
 learn from you where we are likely to find m. d’artagnan, we will take our
 leave of you. au revoir, planchet, au revoir. let us be
 gone, raoul.”
 “monsieur le comte, i wish i were able to tell you—”
 “oh, not at all; i am not the man to reproach a servant with discretion.”
 this word “servant” struck rudely on the ears of the demi-millionnaire
 planchet, but natural respect and bonhomie prevailed over pride.
 “there is nothing indiscreet in telling you, monsieur le comte, m.
 d’artagnan came here the other day—”
 “aha?”
 “and remained several hours consulting a geographical chart.”
 “you are right, then, my friend; say no more about it.”
 “and the chart is there as a proof,” added planchet, who went to fetch
 from the neighboring wall, where it was suspended by a twist, forming a
 triangle with the bar of the window to which it was fastened, the plan
 consulted by the captain on his last visit to planchet. this plan, which
 he brought to the comte, was a map of france, upon which the practiced eye
 of that gentleman discovered an itinerary, marked out with small pins;
 wherever a pin was missing, a hole denoted its having been there. athos,
 by following with his eye the pins and holes, saw that d’artagnan had
 taken the direction of the south, and gone as far as the mediterranean,
 towards toulon. it was near cannes that the marks and the punctured places
 ceased. the comte de la fere puzzled his brains for some time, to divine
 what the musketeer could be going to do at cannes, and what motive could
 have led him to examine the banks of the var. the reflections of athos
 suggested nothing. his accustomed perspicacity was at fault. raoul’s
 researches were not more successful than his father’s.
 “never mind,” said the young man to the comte, who silently, and with his
 finger, had made him understand the route of d’artagnan; “we must confess
 that there is a providence always occupied in connecting our destiny with
 that of m. d’artagnan. there he is on the coast of cannes, and you,
 monsieur, will, at least, conduct me as far as toulon. be assured that we
 shall meet with him more easily upon our route than on this map.”
 then, taking leave of planchet, who was scolding his shopmen, even the
 cousin of truchen, his successor, the gentlemen set out to pay a visit to
 m. de beaufort. on leaving the grocer’s shop, they saw a coach, the future
 depository of the charms of mademoiselle truchen and planchet’s bags of
 crowns.
 “every one journeys towards happiness by the route he chooses,” said
 raoul, in a melancholy tone.
 “road to fontainebleau!” cried planchet to his coachman.
 chapter xxx. the inventory of m. de beaufort.
 to have talked of d’artagnan with planchet, to have seen planchet quit
 paris to bury himself in his country retreat, had been for athos and his
 son like a last farewell to the noise of the capital—to their life
 of former days. what, in fact, did these men leave behind them—one
 of whom had exhausted the past age in glory, and the other, the present
 age in misfortune? evidently neither of them had anything to ask of his
 contemporaries. they had only to pay a visit to m. de beaufort, and
 arrange with him the particulars of departure. the duke was lodged
 magnificently in paris. he had one of those superb establishments
 pertaining to great fortunes, the like of which certain old men remembered
 to have seen in all their glory in the times of wasteful liberality of
 henry iii.‘s reign. then, really, several great nobles were richer than
 the king. they knew it, used it, and never deprived themselves of the
 pleasure of humiliating his royal majesty when they had an opportunity. it
 was this egotistical aristocracy richelieu had constrained to contribute,
 with its blood, its purse, and its duties, to what was from his time
 styled the king’s service. from louis xi.—that terrible mower-down
 of the great—to richelieu, how many families had raised their heads!
 how many, from richelieu to louis xiv., had bowed their heads, never to
 raise them again! but m. de beaufort was born a prince, and of a blood
 which is not shed upon scaffolds, unless by the decree of peoples,—a
 prince who had kept up a grand style of living. how did he maintain his
 horses, his people, and his table? nobody knew; himself less than others.
 only there were then privileges for the sons of kings, to whom nobody
 refused to become a creditor, whether from respect or the persuasion that
 they would some day be paid.
 athos and raoul found the mansion of the duke in as much confusion as that
 of planchet. the duke, likewise, was making his inventory; that is to say,
 he was distributing to his friends everything of value he had in his
 house. owing nearly two millions—an enormous amount in those days—m.
 de beaufort had calculated that he could not set out for africa without a
 good round sum, and, in order to find that sum, he was distributing to his
 old creditors plate, arms, jewels, and furniture, which was more
 magnificent in selling it, and brought him back double. in fact, how could
 a man to whom ten thousand livres were owing, refuse to carry away a
 present worth six thousand, enhanced in estimation from having belonged to
 a descendant of henry iv.? and how, after having carried away that
 present, could he refuse ten thousand livres more to this generous noble?
 this, then, was what had happened. the duke had no longer a dwelling-house—that
 had become useless to an admiral whose place of residence is his ship; he
 had no longer need of superfluous arms, when he was placed amidst his
 cannons; no more jewels, which the sea might rob him of; but he had three
 or four hundred thousand crowns fresh in his coffers. and throughout the
 house there was a joyous movement of people who believed they were
 plundering monseigneur. the prince had, in a supreme degree, the art of
 making happy the creditors most to be pitied. every distressed man, every
 empty purse, found in him patience and sympathy for his position. to some
 he said, “i wish i had what you have; i would give it you.” and to
 others, “i have but this silver ewer; it is worth at least five hundred
 livres,—take it.” the effect of which was—so truly is courtesy
 a current payment—that the prince constantly found means to renew
 his creditors. this time he used no ceremony; it might be called a general
 pillage. he gave up everything. the oriental fable of the poor arab who
 carried away from the pillage of palace a kettle at the bottom of which
 was concealed a bag of gold, and whom everybody allowed to pass without
 jealousy,—this fable had become a truth in the prince’s mansion.
 many contractors paid themselves upon the offices of the duke. thus, the
 provision department, who plundered the clothes-presses and the
 harness-rooms, attached very little value to things which tailors and
 saddlers set great store by. anxious to carry home to their wives presents
 given them by monseigneur, many were seen bounding joyously along, under
 the weight of earthen jars and bottles, gloriously stamped with the arms
 of the prince. m. de beaufort finished by giving away his horses and the
 hay from his lofts. he made more than thirty happy with kitchen utensils;
 and thirty more with the contents of his cellar. still further; all these
 people went away with the conviction that m. de beaufort only acted in
 this manner to prepare for a new fortune concealed beneath the arabs’
 tents. they repeated to each other, while pillaging his hotel, that he was
 sent to gigelli by the king to reconstruct his lost fortunes; that the
 treasures of africa would be equally divided between the admiral and the
 king of france; that these treasures consisted in mines of diamonds, or
 other fabulous stones; the gold and silver mines of mount atlas did not
 even obtain the honor of being named. in addition to the mines to be
 worked—which could not be begun till after the campaign—there
 would be the booty made by the army. m. de beaufort would lay his hands on
 all the riches pirates had robbed christendom of since the battle of
 lepanto. the number of millions from these sources defied calculation.
 why, then, should he, who was going in quest of such treasure, set any
 store by the poor utensils of his past life? and reciprocally, why should
 they spare the property of him who spared it so little himself?
 such was the position of affairs. athos, with his piercing practiced
 glance, saw what was going on at once. he found the admiral of france a
 little exalted, for he was rising from a table of fifty covers, at which
 the guests had drunk long and deeply to the prosperity of the expedition;
 at the conclusion of which repast, the remains, with the dessert, had been
 given to the servants, and the empty dishes and plates to the curious. the
 prince was intoxicated with his ruin and his popularity at one and the
 same time. he had drunk his old wine to the health of his wine of the
 future. when he saw athos and raoul:
 “there is my aide-de-camp being brought to me!” he cried. “come hither,
 comte; come hither, vicomte.”
 athos tried to find a passage through the heaps of linen and plate.
 “ah! step over, step over!” said the duke, offering a full glass to athos.
 the latter drank it; raoul scarcely moistened his lips.
 “here is your commission,” said the prince to raoul. “i had prepared it,
 reckoning upon you. you will go before me as far as antibes.”
 “yes, monseigneur.”
 “here is the order.” and de beaufort gave raoul the order. “do you know
 anything of the sea?”
 “yes, monseigneur; i have traveled with m. le prince.”
 “that is well. all these barges and lighters must be in attendance to form
 an escort and carry my provisions. the army must be prepared to embark in
 a fortnight at the very latest.”
 “that shall be done, monseigneur.”
 “the present order gives you the right to visit and search all the isles
 along the coast; you will there make the enrolments and levies you may
 want for me.”
 “yes, monsieur le duc.”
 “and you are an active man, and will work freely, you will spend much
 money.”
 “i hope not, monseigneur.”
 “but i am sure you will. my intendant has prepared the orders of a
 thousand livres, drawn upon the cities of the south; he will give you a
 hundred of them. now, dear vicomte, be gone.”
 athos interrupted the prince. “keep your money, monseigneur; war is to be
 waged among the arabs with gold as well as lead.”
 “i wish to try the contrary,” replied the duke; “and then you are
 acquainted with my ideas upon the expedition—plenty of noise, plenty
 of fire, and, if so it must be, i shall disappear in the smoke.” having
 spoken thus, m. de beaufort began to laugh; but his mirth was not
 reciprocated by athos and raoul. he perceived this at once. “ah,” said he,
 with the courteous egotism of his rank and age, “you are such people as a
 man should not see after dinner; you are cold, stiff, and dry when i am
 all fire, suppleness, and wine. no, devil take me! i should always see you
 fasting, vicomte, and you, comte, if you wear such a face as that, you
 shall see me no more.”
 he said this, pressing the hand of athos, who replied with a smile,
 “monseigneur, do not talk so grandly because you happen to have plenty of
 money. i predict that within a month you will be dry, stiff, and cold, in
 presence of your strong-box, and that then, having raoul at your elbow,
 fasting, you will be surprised to see him gay, animated, and generous,
 because he will have some new crowns to offer you.”
 “god grant it may be so!” cried the delighted duke. “comte, stay with me!”
 “no, i shall go with raoul; the mission with which you charge him is a
 troublesome and difficult one. alone it would be too much for him to
 execute. you do not observe, monseigneur, you have given him command of
 the first order.”
 “bah!”
 “and in your naval arrangements, too.”
 “that may be true. but one finds that such fine young fellows as your son
 generally do all that is required of them.”
 “monseigneur, i believe you will find nowhere so much zeal and
 intelligence, so much real bravery, as in raoul; but if he failed to
 arrange your embarkation, you would only meet the fate that you deserve.”
 “humph! you are scolding me, then.”
 “monseigneur, to provision a fleet, to assemble a flotilla, to enroll your
 maritime force, would take an admiral a year. raoul is a cavalry officer,
 and you allow him a fortnight!”
 “i tell you he will do it.”
 “he may; but i will go and help him.”
 “to be sure you will; i reckoned upon you, and still further believe that
 when we are once at toulon you will not let him depart alone.”
 “oh!” said athos, shaking his head.
 “patience! patience!”
 “monseigneur, permit us to take our leave.”
 “begone, then, and may my good luck attend you.”
 “adieu! monseigneur; and may your own good luck attend you likewise.”
 “here is an expedition admirably commenced!” said athos to his son. “no
 provisions—no store flotilla! what can be done, thus?”
 “humph!” murmured raoul; “if all are going to do as i am, provisions will
 not be wanted.”
 “monsieur,” replied athos, sternly, “do not be unjust and senseless in
 your egotism, or your grief, whichever you please to call it. if you set
 out for this war solely with the intention of getting killed therein, you
 stand in need of nobody, and it was scarcely worth while to recommend you
 to m. de beaufort. but when you have been introduced to the prime
 commandant—when you have accepted the responsibility of a post in
 his army, the question is no longer about you, but about all those
 poor soldiers, who, as well as you, have hearts and bodies, who will weep
 for their country and endure all the necessities of their condition.
 remember, raoul, that officers are ministers as useful to the world as
 priests, and that they ought to have more charity.”
 “monsieur, i know it and have practiced it; i would have continued to do
 so still, but—”
 “you forget also that you are of a country that is proud of its military
 glory; go and die if you like, but do not die without honor and without
 advantage to france. cheer up, raoul! do not let my words grieve you; i
 love you, and wish to see you perfect.”
 “i love your reproaches, monsieur,” said the young man, mildly; “they
 alone may cure me, because they prove to me that some one loves me still.”
 “and now, raoul, let us be off; the weather is so fine, the heavens so
 clear, those heavens which we always find above our heads, which you will
 see more clear still at gigelli, and which will speak to you of me there,
 as they speak to me here of god.”
 the two gentlemen, after having agreed on this point, talked over the wild
 freaks of the duke, convinced that france would be served in a very
 incomplete manner, as regarded both spirit and practice, in the ensuing
 expedition; and having summed up the ducal policy under the one word
 vanity, they set forward, in obedience rather to their will than destiny.
 the sacrifice was half accomplished.
 chapter xxxi. the silver dish.
 the journey passed off pretty well. athos and his son traversed france at
 the rate of fifteen leagues per day; sometimes more, sometimes less,
 according to the intensity of raoul’s grief. it took them a fortnight to
 reach toulon, and they lost all traces of d’artagnan at antibes. they were
 forced to believe that the captain of the musketeers was desirous of
 preserving an incognito on his route, for athos derived from his inquiries
 an assurance that such a cavalier as he described had exchanged his horse
 for a well-closed carriage on quitting avignon. raoul was much affected at
 not meeting with d’artagnan. his affectionate heart longed to take a
 farewell and received consolation from that heart of steel. athos knew
 from experience that d’artagnan became impenetrable when engaged in any
 serious affair, whether on his own account or on the service of the king.
 he even feared to offend his friend, or thwart him by too pressing
 inquiries. and yet when raoul commenced his labor of classing the
 flotilla, and got together the chalands and lighters to send them
 to toulon, one of the fishermen told the comte that his boat had been laid
 up to refit since a trip he had made on account of a gentleman who was in
 great haste to embark. athos, believing that this man was telling a
 falsehood in order to be left at liberty to fish, and so gain more money
 when all his companions were gone, insisted upon having the details. the
 fisherman informed him that six days previously, a man had come in the
 night to hire his boat, for the purpose of visiting the island of st.
 honnorat. the price was agreed upon, but the gentleman had arrived with an
 immense carriage case, which he insisted upon embarking, in spite of the
 many difficulties that opposed the operation. the fisherman wished to
 retract. he had even threatened, but his threats had procured him nothing
 but a shower of blows from the gentleman’s cane, which fell upon his
 shoulders sharp and long. swearing and grumbling, he had recourse to the
 syndic of his brotherhood at antibes, who administer justice among
 themselves and protect each other; but the gentleman had exhibited a
 certain paper, at sight of which the syndic, bowing to the very ground,
 enjoined obedience from the fisherman, and abused him for having been
 refractory. they then departed with the freight.
 “but all this does not tell us,” said athos, “how you injured your boat.”
 “this is the way. i was steering towards st. honnorat as the gentleman
 desired me; but he changed his mind, and pretended that i could not pass
 to the south of the abbey.”
 “and why not?”
 “because, monsieur, there is in front of the square tower of the
 benedictines, towards the southern point, the bank of the moines.”
 “a rock?” asked athos.
 “level with the water, but below water; a dangerous passage, yet one i
 have cleared a thousand times; the gentleman required me to land him at
 sainte-marguerite’s.”
 “well?”
 “well, monsieur!” cried the fisherman, with his provencal accent,
 “a man is a sailor, or he is not; he knows his course, or he is nothing
 but a fresh-water lubber. i was obstinate, and wished to try the channel.
 the gentleman took me by the collar, and told me quietly he would strangle
 me. my mate armed himself with a hatchet, and so did i. we had the affront
 of the night before to pay him out for. but the gentleman drew his sword,
 and used it in such an astonishingly rapid manner, that we neither of us
 could get near him. i was about to hurl my hatchet at his head, and i had
 a right to do so, hadn’t i, monsieur? for a sailor aboard is master, as a
 citizen is in his chamber; i was going, then, in self-defense, to cut the
 gentleman in two, when, all at once—believe me or not, monsieur—the
 great carriage case opened of itself, i don’t know how, and there came out
 of it a sort of a phantom, his head covered with a black helmet and a
 black mask, something terrible to look upon, which came towards me
 threatening with its fist.”
 “and that was—” said athos.
 “that was the devil, monsieur; for the gentleman, with great glee, cried
 out, on seeing him: ‘ah! thank you, monseigneur!’”
 “a most strange story!” murmured the comte, looking at raoul.
 “and what did you do?” asked the latter of the fisherman.
 “you must know, monsieur, that two poor men, such as we are, could be no
 match for two gentlemen; but when one of them turned out to be the devil,
 we had no earthly chance! my companion and i did not stop to consult one
 another; we made but one jump into the sea, for we were within seven or
 eight hundred feet of the shore.”
 “well, and then?”
 “why, and then, monseigneur, as there was a little wind from the
 southwest, the boat drifted into the sands of sainte-marguerite’s.”
 “oh!—but the travelers?”
 “bah! you need not be uneasy about them! it was pretty plain that one was
 the devil, and protected the other; for when we recovered the boat, after
 she got afloat again, instead of finding these two creatures injured by
 the shock, we found nothing, not even the carriage or the case.”
 “very strange! very strange!” repeated the comte. “but after that, what
 did you do, my friend?”
 “i made my complaint to the governor of sainte-marguerite’s, who brought
 my finger under my nose by telling me if i plagued him with such silly
 stories he would have me flogged.”
 “what! did the governor himself say so?”
 “yes, monsieur; and yet my boat was injured, seriously injured, for the
 prow is left upon the point of sainte-marguerite’s, and the carpenter asks
 a hundred and twenty livres to repair it.”
 “very well,” replied raoul; “you will be exempted from the service. go.”
 “we will go to sainte-marguerite’s, shall we?” said the comte to
 bragelonne, as the man walked away.
 “yes, monsieur, for there is something to be cleared up; that man does not
 seem to me to have told the truth.”
 “nor to me either, raoul. the story of the masked man and the carriage
 having disappeared, may be told to conceal some violence these fellows
 have committed upon their passengers in the open sea, to punish him for
 his persistence in embarking.”
 “i formed the same suspicion; the carriage was more likely to contain
 property than a man.”
 “we shall see to that, raoul. the gentleman very much resembles
 d’artagnan; i recognize his methods of proceeding. alas! we are no longer
 the young invincibles of former days. who knows whether the hatchet or the
 iron bar of this miserable coaster has not succeeded in doing that which
 the best blades of europe, balls, and bullets have not been able to do in
 forty years?”
 that same day they set out for sainte-marguerite’s, on board a chasse-maree
 come from toulon under orders. the impression they experienced on landing
 was a singularly pleasing one. the island seemed loaded with flowers and
 fruits. in its cultivated part it served as a garden for the governor.
 orange, pomegranate, and fig trees bent beneath the weight of their golden
 or purple fruits. all round this garden, in the uncultivated parts, red
 partridges ran about in conveys among the brambles and tufts of junipers,
 and at every step of the comte and raoul a terrified rabbit quitted his
 thyme and heath to scuttle away to the burrow. in fact, this fortunate
 isle was uninhabited. flat, offering nothing but a tiny bay for the
 convenience of embarkation, and under the protection of the governor, who
 went shares with them, smugglers made use of it as a provisional entrepot,
 at the expense of not killing the game or devastating the garden. with
 this compromise, the governor was in a situation to be satisfied with a
 garrison of eight men to guard his fortress, in which twelve cannons
 accumulated coats of moldy green. the governor was a sort of happy farmer,
 harvesting wines, figs, oil, and oranges, preserving his citrons and cedrates
 in the sun of his casemates. the fortress, encircled by a deep ditch, its
 only guardian, arose like three heads upon turrets connected with each
 other by terraces covered with moss.
 athos and raoul wandered for some time round the fences of the garden
 without finding any one to introduce them to the governor. they ended by
 making their own way into the garden. it was at the hottest time of the
 day. each living thing sought its shelter under grass or stone. the
 heavens spread their fiery veils as if to stifle all noises, to envelop
 all existences; the rabbit under the broom, the fly under the leaf, slept
 as the wave did beneath the heavens. athos saw nothing living but a
 soldier, upon the terrace beneath the second and third court, who was
 carrying a basket of provisions on his head. this man returned almost
 immediately without his basket, and disappeared in the shade of his
 sentry-box. athos supposed he must have been carrying dinner to some one,
 and, after having done so, returned to dine himself. all at once they
 heard some one call out, and raising their heads, perceived in the frame
 of the bars of the window something of a white color, like a hand that was
 waved backwards and forwards—something shining, like a polished
 weapon struck by the rays of the sun. and before they were able to
 ascertain what it was, a luminous train, accompanied by a hissing sound in
 the air, called their attention from the donjon to the ground. a second
 dull noise was heard from the ditch, and raoul ran to pick up a silver
 plate which was rolling along the dry sand. the hand that had thrown this
 plate made a sign to the two gentlemen, and then disappeared. athos and
 raoul, approaching each other, commenced an attentive examination of the
 dusty plate, and they discovered, in characters traced upon the bottom of
 it with the point of a knife, this inscription:
 “i am the brother of the king of france—a prisoner to-day—a
 madman to-morrow. french gentlemen and christians, pray to god for the
 soul and the reason of the son of your old rulers.”
 the plate fell from the hands of athos whilst raoul was endeavoring to
 make out the meaning of these dismal words. at the same moment they heard
 a cry from the top of the donjon. quick as lightning raoul bent down his
 head, and forced down that of his father likewise. a musket-barrel
 glittered from the crest of the wall. a white smoke floated like a plume
 from the mouth of the musket, and a ball was flattened against a stone
 within six inches of the two gentlemen.
 “cordieu!” cried athos. “what, are people assassinated here? come
 down, cowards as you are!”
 “yes, come down!” cried raoul, furiously shaking his fist at the castle.
 one of the assailants—he who was about to fire—replied to
 these cries by an exclamation of surprise; and, as his companion, who
 wished to continue the attack, had re-seized his loaded musket, he who had
 cried out threw up the weapon, and the ball flew into the air. athos and
 raoul, seeing them disappear from the platform, expected they would come
 down to them, and waited with a firm demeanor. five minutes had not
 elapsed, when a stroke upon a drum called the eight soldiers of the
 garrison to arms, and they showed themselves on the other side of the
 ditch with their muskets in hand. at the head of these men was an officer,
 whom athos and raoul recognized as the one who had fired the first musket.
 the man ordered the soldiers to “make ready.”
 “we are going to be shot!” cried raoul; “but, sword in hand, at least, let
 us leap the ditch! we shall kill at least two of these scoundrels, when
 their muskets are empty.” and, suiting the action to the word, raoul was
 springing forward, followed by athos, when a well-known voice resounded
 behind them, “athos! raoul!”
 “d’artagnan!” replied the two gentlemen.
 “recover arms! mordioux!” cried the captain to the soldiers. “i was
 sure i could not be mistaken!”
 “what is the meaning of this?” asked athos. “what! were we to be shot
 without warning?”
 “it was i who was going to shoot you, and if the governor missed you, i
 should not have missed you, my dear friends. how fortunate it is that i am
 accustomed to take a long aim, instead of firing at the instant i raise my
 weapon! i thought i recognized you. ah! my dear friends, how fortunate!”
 and d’artagnan wiped his brow, for he had run fast, and emotion with him
 was not feigned.
 “how!” said athos. “and is the gentleman who fired at us the governor of
 the fortress?”
 “in person.”
 “and why did he fire at us? what have we done to him?”
 “pardieu! you received what the prisoner threw to you?”
 “that is true.”
 “that plate—the prisoner has written something on it, has he not?”
 “yes.”
 “good heavens! i was afraid he had.”
 and d’artagnan, with all the marks of mortal disquietude, seized the
 plate, to read the inscription. when he had read it, a fearful pallor
 spread across his countenance. “oh! good heavens!” repeated he. “silence!—here
 is the governor.”
 “and what will he do to us? is it our fault?”
 “it is true, then?” said athos, in a subdued voice. “it is true?”
 “silence! i tell you—silence! if he only believes you can read; if
 he only suspects you have understood; i love you, my dear friends, i would
 willingly be killed for you, but—”
 “but—” said athos and raoul.
 “but i could not save you from perpetual imprisonment if i saved you from
 death. silence, then! silence again!”
 the governor came up, having crossed the ditch upon a plank bridge.
 “well!” said he to d’artagnan, “what stops us?”
 “you are spaniards—you do not understand a word of french,” said the
 captain, eagerly, to his friends in a low voice.
 “well!” replied he, addressing the governor, “i was right; these gentlemen
 are two spanish captains with whom i was acquainted at ypres, last year;
 they don’t know a word of french.”
 “ah!” said the governor, sharply. “and yet they were trying to read the
 inscription on the plate.”
 d’artagnan took it out of his hands, effacing the characters with the
 point of his sword.
 “how!” cried the governor, “what are you doing? i cannot read them now!”
 “it is a state secret,” replied d’artagnan, bluntly; “and as you know
 that, according to the king’s orders, it is under the penalty of death any
 one should penetrate it, i will, if you like, allow you to read it, and
 have you shot immediately afterwards.”
 during this apostrophe—half serious, half ironical—athos and
 raoul preserved the coolest, most unconcerned silence.
 “but, is it possible,” said the governor, “that these gentlemen do not
 comprehend at least some words?”
 “suppose they do! if they do understand a few spoken words, it does not
 follow that they should understand what is written. they cannot even read
 spanish. a noble spaniard, remember, ought never to know how to read.”
 the governor was obliged to be satisfied with these explanations, but he
 was still tenacious. “invite these gentlemen to come to the fortress,”
 said he.
 “that i will willingly do. i was about to propose it to you.” the fact is,
 the captain had quite another idea, and would have wished his friends a
 hundred leagues off. but he was obliged to make the best of it. he
 addressed the two gentlemen in spanish, giving them a polite invitation,
 which they accepted. they all turned towards the entrance of the fort,
 and, the incident being at an end, the eight soldiers returned to their
 delightful leisure, for a moment disturbed by this unexpected adventure.
 chapter xxxii. captive and jailers.
 when they had entered the fort, and whilst the governor was making some
 preparations for the reception of his guests, “come,” said athos, “let us
 have a word of explanation whilst we are alone.”
 “it is simply this,” replied the musketeer. “i have conducted hither a
 prisoner, who the king commands shall not be seen. you came here, he has
 thrown something to you through the lattice of his window; i was at dinner
 with the governor, i saw the object thrown, and i saw raoul pick it up. it
 does not take long to understand this. i understood it, and i thought you
 in intelligence with my prisoner. and then—”
 “and then—you commanded us to be shot.”
 “ma foi! i admit it; but, if i was the first to seize a musket,
 fortunately, i was the last to take aim at you.”
 “if you had killed me, d’artagnan, i should have had the good fortune to
 die for the royal house of france, and it would be an honor to die by your
 hand—you, its noblest and most loyal defender.”
 “what the devil, athos, do you mean by the royal house?” stammered
 d’artagnan. “you don’t mean that you, a well-informed and sensible man,
 can place any faith in the nonsense written by an idiot?”
 “i do believe in it.”
 “with so much the more reason, my dear chevalier, from your having orders
 to kill all those who do believe in it,” said raoul.
 “that is because,” replied the captain of the musketeers—“because
 every calumny, however absurd it may be, has the almost certain chance of
 becoming popular.”
 “no, d’artagnan,” replied athos, promptly; “but because the king is not
 willing that the secret of his family should transpire among the people,
 and cover with shame the executioners of the son of louis xiii.”
 “do not talk in such a childish manner, athos, or i shall begin to think
 you have lost your senses. besides, explain to me how it is possible louis
 xiii. should have a son in the isle of sainte-marguerite.”
 “a son whom you have brought hither masked, in a fishing-boat,” said
 athos. “why not?”
 d’artagnan was brought to a pause.
 “oh!” said he; “whence do you know that a fishing-boat—?”
 “brought you to sainte-marguerite’s with the carriage containing the
 prisoner—with a prisoner whom you styled monseigneur. oh! i am
 acquainted with all that,” resumed the comte. d’artagnan bit his mustache.
 “if it were true,” said he, “that i had brought hither in a boat and with
 a carriage a masked prisoner, nothing proves that this prisoner must be a
 prince—a prince of the house of france.”
 “ask aramis such riddles,” replied athos, coolly.
 “aramis,” cried the musketeer, quite at a stand. “have you seen aramis?”
 “after his discomfiture at vaux, yes; i have seen aramis, a fugitive,
 pursued, bewildered, ruined; and aramis has told me enough to make me
 believe in the complaints this unfortunate young prince cut upon the
 bottom of the plate.”
 d’artagnan’s head sunk on his breast in some confusion. “this is the way,”
 said he, “in which god turns to nothing that which men call wisdom! a fine
 secret must that be of which twelve or fifteen persons hold the tattered
 fragments! athos, cursed be the chance which has brought you face to face
 with me in this affair! for now—”
 “well,” said athos, with his customary mild severity, “is your secret lost
 because i know it? consult your memory, my friend. have i not borne
 secrets heavier than this?”
 “you have never borne one so dangerous,” replied d’artagnan, in a tone of
 sadness. “i have something like a sinister idea that all who are concerned
 with this secret will die, and die unhappily.”
 “the will of god be done!” said athos, “but here is your governor.”
 d’artagnan and his friends immediately resumed their parts. the governor,
 suspicious and hard, behaved towards d’artagnan with a politeness almost
 amounting to obsequiousness. with respect to the travelers, he contented
 himself with offering good cheer, and never taking his eye from them.
 athos and raoul observed that he often tried to embarrass them by sudden
 attacks, or to catch them off their guard; but neither the one nor the
 other gave him the least advantage. what d’artagnan had said was probable,
 if the governor did not believe it to be quite true. they rose from the
 table to repose awhile.
 “what is this man’s name? i don’t like the looks of him,” said athos to
 d’artagnan in spanish.
 “de saint-mars,” replied the captain.
 “he is, then, i suppose, the prince’s jailer?”
 “eh! how can i tell? i may be kept at sainte-marguerite forever.”
 “oh! no, not you!”
 “my friend, i am in the situation of a man who finds a treasure in the
 midst of a desert. he would like to carry it away, but he cannot; he would
 like to leave it, but he dares not. the king will not dare to recall me,
 for no one else would serve him as faithfully as i do; he regrets not
 having me near him, from being aware that no one would be of so much
 service near his person as myself. but it will happen as it may please
 god.”
 “but,” observed raoul, “your not being certain proves that your situation
 here is provisional, and you will return to paris?”
 “ask these gentlemen,” interrupted the governor, “what was their purpose
 in coming to saint-marguerite?”
 “they came from learning there was a convent of benedictines at
 sainte-honnorat which is considered curious; and from being told there was
 excellent shooting in the island.”
 “that is quite at their service, as well as yours,” replied saint-mars.
 d’artagnan politely thanked him.
 “when will they depart?” added the governor.
 “to-morrow,” replied d’artagnan.
 m. de saint-mars went to make his rounds, and left d’artagnan alone with
 the pretended spaniards.
 “oh!” exclaimed the musketeer, “here is a life and a society that suits me
 very little. i command this man, and he bores me, mordioux! come,
 let us have a shot or two at the rabbits; the walk will be beautiful, and
 not fatiguing. the whole island is but a league and a half in length, with
 the breadth of a league; a real park. let us try to amuse ourselves.”
 “as you please, d’artagnan; not for the sake of amusing ourselves, but to
 gain an opportunity for talking freely.”
 d’artagnan made a sign to a soldier, who brought the gentlemen some guns,
 and then returned to the fort.
 “and now,” said the musketeer, “answer me the question put to you by that
 black-looking saint-mars: what did you come to do at the lerin isles?”
 “to bid you farewell.”
 “bid me farewell! what do you mean by that? is raoul going anywhere?”
 “yes.”
 “then i will lay a wager it is with m. de beaufort.”
 “with m. de beaufort it is, my dear friend. you always guess correctly.”
 “from habit.”
 whilst the two friends were commencing their conversation, raoul, with his
 head hanging down and his heart oppressed, seated himself on a mossy rock,
 his gun across his knees, looking at the sea—looking at the heavens,
 and listening to the voice of his soul; he allowed the sportsmen to attain
 a considerable distance from him. d’artagnan remarked his absence.
 “he has not recovered the blow?” said he to athos.
 “he is struck to death.”
 “oh! your fears exaggerate, i hope. raoul is of a tempered nature. around
 all hearts as noble as his, there is a second envelope that forms a
 cuirass. the first bleeds, the second resists.”
 “no,” replied athos, “raoul will die of it.”
 “mordioux!” said d’artagnan, in a melancholy tone. and he did not
 add a word to this exclamation. then, a minute after, “why do you let him
 go?”
 “because he insists on going.”
 “and why do you not go with him?”
 “because i could not bear to see him die.”
 d’artagnan looked his friend earnestly in the face. “you know one thing,”
 continued the comte, leaning upon the arm of the captain; “you know that
 in the course of my life i have been afraid of but few things. well! i
 have an incessant gnawing, insurmountable fear that an hour will come in
 which i shall hold the dead body of that boy in my arms.”
 “oh!” murmured d’artagnan; “oh!”
 “he will die, i know, i have a perfect conviction of that; but i would not
 see him die.”
 “how is this, athos? you come and place yourself in the presence of the
 bravest man, you say you have ever seen, of your own d’artagnan, of that
 man without an equal, as you formerly called him, and you come and tell
 him, with your arms folded, that you are afraid of witnessing the death of
 your son, you who have seen all that can be seen in this world! why have
 you this fear, athos? man upon this earth must expect everything, and
 ought to face everything.”
 “listen to me, my friend. after having worn myself out upon this earth of
 which you speak, i have preserved but two religions: that of life,
 friendship, my duty as a father—that of eternity, love, and respect
 for god. now, i have within me the revelation that if god should decree
 that my friend or my son should render up his last sigh in my presence—oh!
 no, i cannot even tell you, d’artagnan!”
 “speak, speak, tell me!”
 “i am strong against everything, except against the death of those i love.
 for that only there is no remedy. he who dies, gains; he who sees others
 die, loses. no, this is it—to know that i should no more meet on
 earth him whom i now behold with joy; to know that there would nowhere be
 a d’artagnan any more, nowhere again be a raoul, oh! i am old, look you, i
 have no longer courage; i pray god to spare me in my weakness; but if he
 struck me so plainly and in that fashion, i should curse him. a christian
 gentleman ought not to curse his god, d’artagnan; it is enough to once
 have cursed a king!”
 “humph!” sighed d’artagnan, a little confused by this violent tempest of
 grief.
 “let me speak to him, athos. who knows?”
 “try, if you please, but i am convinced you will not succeed.”
 “i will not attempt to console him. i will serve him.”
 “you will?”
 “doubtless, i will. do you think this would be the first time a woman had
 repented of an infidelity? i will go to him, i tell you.”
 athos shook his head, and continued his walk alone, d’artagnan, cutting
 across the brambles, rejoined raoul and held out his hand to him. “well,
 raoul! you have something to say to me?”
 “i have a kindness to ask of you,” replied bragelonne.
 “ask it, then.”
 “you will some day return to france?”
 “i hope so.”
 “ought i to write to mademoiselle de la valliere?”
 “no, you must not.”
 “but i have many things to say to her.”
 “go and say them to her, then.”
 “never!”
 “pray, what virtue do you attribute to a letter, which your speech might
 not possess?”
 “perhaps you are right.”
 “she loves the king,” said d’artagnan, bluntly; “and she is an honest
 girl.” raoul started. “and you, you whom she abandons, she, perhaps, loves
 better than she does the king, but after another fashion.”
 “d’artagnan, do you believe she loves the king?”
 “to idolatry. her heart is inaccessible to any other feeling. you might
 continue to live near her, and would be her best friend.”
 “ah!” exclaimed raoul, with a passionate burst of repugnance at such a
 hideous hope.
 “will you do so?”
 “it would be base.”
 “that is a very absurd word, which would lead me to think slightly of your
 understanding. please to understand, raoul, that it is never base to do
 that which is imposed upon us by a superior force. if your heart says to
 you, ‘go there, or die,’ why go, raoul. was she base or brave, she whom
 you loved, in preferring the king to you, the king whom her heart
 commanded her imperiously to prefer to you? no, she was the bravest of
 women. do, then, as she has done. oblige yourself. do you know one thing
 of which i am sure, raoul?”
 “what is that?”
 “why, that by seeing her closely with the eyes of a jealous man—”
 “well?”
 “well! you would cease to love her.”
 “then i am decided, my dear d’artagnan.”
 “to set off to see her again?”
 “no; to set off that i may never see her again. i wish to love her
 forever.”
 “ha! i must confess,” replied the musketeer, “that is a conclusion which i
 was far from expecting.”
 “this is what i wish, my friend. you will see her again, and you will give
 her a letter which, if you think proper, will explain to her, as to
 yourself, what is passing in my heart. read it; i drew it up last night.
 something told me i should see you to-day.” he held the letter out, and
 d’artagnan read:
 “mademoiselle,—you are not wrong in my eyes in not loving me. you
 have only been guilty of one fault towards me, that of having left me to
 believe you loved me. this error will cost me my life. i pardon you, but i
 cannot pardon myself. it is said that happy lovers are deaf to the sorrows
 of rejected lovers. it will not be so with you, who did not love me, save
 with anxiety. i am sure that if i had persisted in endeavoring to change
 that friendship into love, you would have yielded out of a fear of
 bringing about my death, or lessening the esteem i had for you. it is much
 more delightful to me to die, knowing that you are free and
 satisfied. how much, then, will you love me, when you will no longer fear
 either my presence or reproaches? you will love me, because, however
 charming a new love may appear to you, god has not made me in anything
 inferior to him you have chosen, and because my devotedness, my sacrifice,
 and my painful end will assure me, in your eyes, a certain superiority
 over him. i have allowed to escape, in the candid credulity of my heart,
 the treasure i possessed. many people tell me that you loved me enough to
 lead me to hope you would have loved me much. that idea takes from my mind
 all bitterness, and leads me only to blame myself. you will accept this
 last farewell, and you will bless me for having taken refuge in the
 inviolable asylum where hatred is extinguished, and where all love endures
 forever. adieu, mademoiselle. if your happiness could be purchased by the
 last drop of my blood, i would shed that drop. i willingly make the
 sacrifice of it to my misery!
 “the letter reads very well,” said the captain. “i have only one fault to
 find with it.”
 “tell me what that is!” said raoul.
 “why, it is that it tells everything, except the thing which exhales, like
 a mortal poison from your eyes and from your heart; except the senseless
 love which still consumes you.” raoul grew paler, but remained silent.
 “why did you not write simply these words:
 “‘mademoiselle,—instead of cursing you, i love you and i die.’”
 “that is true,” exclaimed raoul, with a sinister kind of joy.
 and tearing the letter he had just taken back, he wrote the following
 words upon a leaf of his tablets:
 “to procure the happiness of once more telling you i love you, i commit
 the baseness of writing to you; and to punish myself for that baseness, i
 die.” and he signed it.
 “you will give her these tablets, captain, will you not?”
 “when?” asked the latter.
 “on the day,” said bragelonne, pointing to the last sentence, “on the day
 when you can place a date under these words.” and he sprang away quickly
 to join athos, who was returning with slow steps.
 as they re-entered the fort, the sea rose with that rapid, gusty vehemence
 which characterizes the mediterranean; the ill-humor of the element became
 a tempest. something shapeless, and tossed about violently by the waves,
 appeared just off the coast.
 “what is that?” said athos,—“a wrecked boat?”
 “no, it is not a boat,” said d’artagnan.
 “pardon me,” said raoul, “there is a bark gaining the port rapidly.”
 “yes, there is a bark in the creek, which is prudently seeking shelter
 here; but that which athos points to in the sand is not a boat at all—it
 has run aground.”
 “yes, yes, i see it.”
 “it is the carriage, which i threw into the sea after landing the
 prisoner.”
 “well!” said athos, “if you take my advice, d’artagnan, you will burn that
 carriage, in order that no vestige of it may remain, without which the
 fishermen of antibes, who have believed they had to do with the devil,
 will endeavor to prove that your prisoner was but a man.”
 “your advice is good, athos, and i will this night have it carried out, or
 rather, i will carry it out myself; but let us go in, for the rain falls
 heavily, and the lightning is terrific.”
 as they were passing over the ramparts to a gallery of which d’artagnan
 had the key, they saw m. de saint-mars directing his steps towards the
 chamber inhabited by the prisoner. upon a sign from d’artagnan, they
 concealed themselves in an angle of the staircase.
 “what is it?” said athos.
 “you will see. look. the prisoner is returning from chapel.”
 and they saw, by the red flashes of lightning against the violet fog which
 the wind stamped upon the bank-ward sky, they saw pass gravely, at six
 paces behind the governor, a man clothed in black and masked by a vizor of
 polished steel, soldered to a helmet of the same nature, which altogether
 enveloped the whole of his head. the fire of the heavens cast red
 reflections on the polished surface, and these reflections, flying off
 capriciously, seemed to be angry looks launched by the unfortunate,
 instead of imprecations. in the middle of the gallery, the prisoner
 stopped for a moment, to contemplate the infinite horizon, to respire the
 sulphurous perfumes of the tempest, to drink in thirstily the hot rain,
 and to breathe a sigh resembling a smothered groan.
 “come on, monsieur,” said saint-mars, sharply, to the prisoner, for he
 already became uneasy at seeing him look so long beyond the walls.
 “monsieur, come on!”
 “say monseigneur!” cried athos, from his corner, with a voice so solemn
 and terrible, that the governor trembled from head to foot. athos insisted
 upon respect being paid to fallen majesty. the prisoner turned round.
 “who spoke?” asked saint-mars.
 “it was i,” replied d’artagnan, showing himself promptly. “you know that
 is the order.”
 “call me neither monsieur nor monseigneur,” said the prisoner in his turn,
 in a voice that penetrated to the very soul of raoul; “call me accursed!”
 he passed on, and the iron door croaked after him.
 “there goes a truly unfortunate man!” murmured the musketeer in a hollow
 whisper, pointing out to raoul the chamber inhabited by the prince.
 chapter xxxiii. promises.
 scarcely had d’artagnan re-entered his apartment with his two friends,
 when one of the soldiers of the fort came to inform him that the governor
 was seeking him. the bark which raoul had perceived at sea, and which
 appeared so eager to gain the port, came to sainte-marguerite with an
 important dispatch for the captain of the musketeers. on opening it,
 d’artagnan recognized the writing of the king: “i should think,” said
 louis xiv., “you will have completed the execution of my orders, monsieur
 d’artagnan; return, then, immediately to paris, and join me at the
 louvre.”
 “there is the end of my exile!” cried the musketeer with joy; “god be
 praised, i am no longer a jailer!” and he showed the letter to athos.
 “so, then, you must leave us?” replied the latter, in a melancholy tone.
 “yes, but to meet again, dear friend, seeing that raoul is old enough now
 to go alone with m. de beaufort, and will prefer his father going back in
 company with m. d’artagnan, to forcing him to travel two hundred leagues
 solitarily to reach home at la fere; will you not, raoul?”
 “certainly,” stammered the latter, with an expression of tender regret.
 “no, no, my friend,” interrupted athos, “i will never quit raoul till the
 day his vessel disappears on the horizon. as long as he remains in france
 he shall not be separated from me.”
 “as you please, dear friend; but we will, at least, leave
 sainte-marguerite together; take advantage of the bark that will convey me
 back to antibes.”
 “with all my heart; we cannot too soon be at a distance from this fort,
 and from the spectacle that shocked us so just now.”
 the three friends quitted the little isle, after paying their respects to
 the governor, and by the last flashes of the departing tempest they took
 their farewell of the white walls of the fort. d’artagnan parted from his
 friend that same night, after having seen fire set to the carriage upon
 the shore by the orders of saint-mars, according to the advice the captain
 had given him. before getting on horseback, and after leaving the arms of
 athos: “my friends,” said he, “you bear too much resemblance to two
 soldiers who are abandoning their post. something warns me that raoul will
 require being supported by you in his rank. will you allow me to ask
 permission to go over into africa with a hundred good muskets? the king
 will not refuse me, and i will take you with me.”
 “monsieur d’artagnan,” replied raoul, pressing his hand with emotion,
 “thanks for that offer, which would give us more than we wish, either
 monsieur le comte or i. i, who am young, stand in need of labor of mind
 and fatigue of body; monsieur le comte wants the profoundest repose. you
 are his best friend. i recommend him to your care. in watching over him,
 you are holding both our souls in your hands.”
 “i must go; my horse is all in a fret,” said d’artagnan, with whom the
 most manifest sign of a lively emotion was the change of ideas in
 conversation. “come, comte, how many days longer has raoul to stay here?”
 “three days at most.”
 “and how long will it take you to reach home?”
 “oh! a considerable time,” replied athos. “i shall not like the idea of
 being separated too quickly from raoul. time will travel too fast of
 itself to require me to aid it by distance. i shall only make
 half-stages.”
 “and why so, my friend? nothing is more dull than traveling slowly; and
 hostelry life does not become a man like you.”
 “my friend, i came hither on post-horses; but i wish to purchase two
 animals of a superior kind. now, to take them home fresh, it would not be
 prudent to make them travel more than seven or eight leagues a day.”
 “where is grimaud?”
 “he arrived yesterday morning with raoul’s appointments; and i have left
 him to sleep.”
 “that is, never to come back again,” d’artagnan suffered to escape him.
 “till we meet again, then, dear athos—and if you are diligent, i
 shall embrace you the sooner.” so saying, he put his foot in the stirrup,
 which raoul held.
 “farewell!” said the young man, embracing him.
 “farewell!” said d’artagnan, as he got into his saddle.
 his horse made a movement which divided the cavalier from his friends.
 this scene had taken place in front of the house chosen by athos, near the
 gates of antibes, whither d’artagnan, after his supper, had ordered his
 horses to be brought. the road began to branch off there, white and
 undulating in the vapors of the night. the horse eagerly respired the
 salt, sharp perfume of the marshes. d’artagnan put him to a trot; and
 athos and raoul sadly turned towards the house. all at once they heard the
 rapid approach of a horse’s steps, and first believed it to be one of
 those singular repercussions which deceive the ear at every turn in a
 road. but it was really the return of the horseman. they uttered a cry of
 joyous surprise; and the captain, springing to the ground like a young
 man, seized within his arms the two beloved heads of athos and raoul. he
 held them long embraced thus, without speaking a word, or suffering the
 sigh which was bursting his breast to escape him. then, as rapidly as he
 had come back, he set off again, with a sharp application of his spurs to
 the sides of his fiery horse.
 “alas!” said the comte, in a low voice, “alas! alas!”
 “an evil omen!” on his side, said d’artagnan to himself, making up for
 lost time. “i could not smile upon them. an evil omen!”
 the next day grimaud was on foot again. the service commanded by m. de
 beaufort was happily accomplished. the flotilla, sent to toulon by the
 exertions of raoul, had set out, dragging after it in little nutshells,
 almost invisible, the wives and friends of the fishermen and smugglers put
 in requisition for the service of the fleet. the time, so short, which
 remained for father and son to live together, appeared to go by with
 double rapidity, like some swift stream that flows towards eternity. athos
 and raoul returned to toulon, which began to be filled with the noise of
 carriages, with the noise of arms, the noise of neighing horses. the
 trumpeters sounded their spirited marches; the drummers signalized their
 strength; the streets were overflowing with soldiers, servants, and
 tradespeople. the duc de beaufort was everywhere, superintending the
 embarkation with the zeal and interest of a good captain. he encouraged
 the humblest of his companions; he scolded his lieutenants, even those of
 the highest rank. artillery, provisions, baggage, he insisted upon seeing
 all himself. he examined the equipment of every soldier; assured himself
 of the health and soundness of every horse. it was plain that, light,
 boastful, egotistical, in his hotel, the gentleman became the soldier
 again—the high noble, a captain—in face of the responsibility
 he had accepted. and yet, it must be admitted that, whatever was the care
 with which he presided over the preparations for departure, it was easy to
 perceive careless precipitation, and the absence of all the precaution
 that make the french soldier the first soldier in the world, because, in
 that world, he is the one most abandoned to his own physical and moral
 resources. all things having satisfied, or appearing to have satisfied,
 the admiral, he paid his compliments to raoul, and gave the last orders
 for sailing, which was ordered the next morning at daybreak. he invited
 the comte had his son to dine with him; but they, under a pretext of
 service, kept themselves apart. gaining their hostelry, situated under the
 trees of the great place, they took their repast in haste, and athos led
 raoul to the rocks which dominate the city, vast gray mountains, whence
 the view is infinite and embraces a liquid horizon which appears, so
 remote is it, on a level with the rocks themselves. the night was fine, as
 it always is in these happy climes. the moon, rising behind the rocks,
 unrolled a silver sheet on the cerulean carpet of the sea. in the
 roadsteads maneuvered silently the vessels which had just taken their rank
 to facilitate the embarkation. the sea, loaded with phosphoric light,
 opened beneath the hulls of the barks that transported the baggage and
 munitions; every dip of the prow plowed up this gulf of white flames; from
 every oar dropped liquid diamonds. the sailors, rejoicing in the largesses
 of the admiral, were heard murmuring their slow and artless songs.
 sometimes the grinding of the chains was mixed with the dull noise of shot
 falling into the holds. such harmonies, such a spectacle, oppress the
 heart like fear, and dilate it like hope. all this life speaks of death.
 athos had seated himself with his son, upon the moss, among the brambles
 of the promontory. around their heads passed and repassed large bats,
 carried along by the fearful whirl of their blind chase. the feet of raoul
 were over the edge of the cliff, bathed in that void which is peopled by
 vertigo, and provokes to self-annihilation. when the moon had risen to its
 fullest height, caressing with light the neighboring peaks, when the
 watery mirror was illumined in its full extent, and the little red fires
 had made their openings in the black masses of every ship, athos,
 collecting all his ideas and all his courage, said:
 “god has made all these things that we see, raoul; he has made us also,—poor
 atoms mixed up with this monstrous universe. we shine like those fires and
 those stars; we sigh like those waves; we suffer like those great ships,
 which are worn out in plowing the waves, in obeying the wind that urges
 them towards an end, as the breath of god blows us towards a port.
 everything likes to live, raoul; and everything seems beautiful to living
 things.”
 “monsieur,” said raoul, “we have before us a beautiful spectacle!”
 “how good d’artagnan is!” interrupted athos, suddenly, “and what a rare
 good fortune it is to be supported during a whole life by such a friend as
 he is! that is what you have missed, raoul.”
 “a friend!” cried raoul, “i have wanted a friend!”
 “m. de guiche is an agreeable companion,” resumed the comte, coldly, “but
 i believe, in the times in which you live, men are more engaged in their
 own interests and their own pleasures than they were in ours. you have
 sought a secluded life; that is a great happiness, but you have lost your
 strength thereby. we four, more weaned from those delicate abstractions
 that constitute your joy, furnished much more resistance when misfortune
 presented itself.”
 “i have not interrupted you, monsieur, to tell you that i had a friend,
 and that that friend is m. de guiche. certes, he is good and
 generous, and moreover he loves me. but i have lived under the
 guardianship of another friendship, monsieur, as precious and as strong as
 that of which you speak, since it is yours.”
 “i have not been a friend for you, raoul,” said athos.
 “eh! monsieur, and in what respect not?”
 “because i have given you reason to think that life has but one face,
 because, sad and severe, alas! i have always cut off for you, without, god
 knows, wishing to do so, the joyous buds that spring incessantly from the
 fair tree of youth; so that at this moment i repent of not having made of
 you a more expansive, dissipated, animated man.”
 “i know why you say that, monsieur. no, it is not you who have made me
 what i am; it was love, which took me at the time when children only have
 inclinations; it is the constancy natural to my character, which with
 other creatures is but habit. i believed that i should always be as i was;
 i thought god had cast me in a path quite clear, quite straight, bordered
 with fruits and flowers. i had ever watching over me your vigilance and
 strength. i believed myself to be vigilant and strong. nothing prepared
 me; i fell once, and that once deprived me of courage for the whole of my
 life. it is quite true that i wrecked myself. oh, no, monsieur! you are
 nothing in my past but happiness—in my future but hope! no, i have
 no reproach to make against life such as you made it for me; i bless you,
 and i love you ardently.”
 “my dear raoul, your words do me good. they prove to me that you will act
 a little for me in the time to come.”
 “i shall only act for you, monsieur.”
 “raoul, what i have never hitherto done with respect to you, i will
 henceforward do. i will be your friend, not your father. we will live in
 expanding ourselves, instead of living and holding ourselves prisoners,
 when you come back. and that will be soon, will it not?”
 “certainly, monsieur, for such an expedition cannot last long.”
 “soon, then, raoul, soon, instead of living moderately on my income, i
 will give you the capital of my estates. it will suffice for launching you
 into the world till my death; and you will give me, i hope, before that
 time, the consolation of not seeing my race extinct.”
 “i will do all you may command,” said raoul, much agitated.
 “it is not necessary, raoul, that your duty as aide-de-camp should lead
 you into too hazardous enterprises. you have gone through your ordeal; you
 are known to be a true man under fire. remember that war with arabs is a
 war of snares, ambuscades, and assassinations.”
 “so it is said, monsieur.”
 “there is never much glory in falling in an ambuscade. it is a death which
 always implies a little rashness or want of foresight. often, indeed, he
 who falls in one meets with but little pity. those who are not pitied,
 raoul, have died to little purpose. still further, the conqueror laughs,
 and we frenchmen ought not to allow stupid infidels to triumph over our
 faults. do you clearly understand what i am saying to you, raoul? god
 forbid i should encourage you to avoid encounters.”
 “i am naturally prudent, monsieur, and i have very good fortune,” said
 raoul, with a smile which chilled the heart of his poor father; “for,” the
 young man hastened to add, “in twenty combats through which i have been, i
 have only received one scratch.”
 “there is in addition,” said athos, “the climate to be dreaded: that is an
 ugly end, to die of fever! king saint-louis prayed god to send him an
 arrow or the plague, rather than the fever.”
 “oh, monsieur! with sobriety, with reasonable exercise—”
 “i have already obtained from m. de beaufort a promise that his dispatches
 shall be sent off every fortnight to france. you, as his aide-de-camp,
 will be charged with expediting them, and will be sure not to forget me.”
 “no, monsieur,” said raoul, almost choked with emotion.
 “besides, raoul, as you are a good christian, and i am one also, we ought
 to reckon upon a more special protection of god and his guardian angels.
 promise me that if anything evil should happen to you, on any occasion,
 you will think of me at once.”
 “first and at once! oh! yes, monsieur.”
 “and will call upon me?”
 “instantly.”
 “you dream of me sometimes, do you not, raoul?”
 “every night, monsieur. during my early youth i saw you in my dreams, calm
 and mild, with one hand stretched out over my head, and that it was which
 made me sleep so soundly—formerly.”
 “we love each other too dearly,” said the comte, “that from this moment,
 in which we separate, a portion of both our souls should not travel with
 one and the other of us, and should not dwell wherever we may dwell.
 whenever you may be sad, raoul, i feel that my heart will be dissolved in
 sadness; and when you smile on thinking of me, be assured you will send
 me, from however remote a distance, a vital scintillation of your joy.”
 “i will not promise you to be joyous,” replied the young man; “but you may
 be certain that i will never pass an hour without thinking of you, not one
 hour, i swear, unless i shall be dead.”
 athos could contain himself no longer; he threw his arm round the neck of
 his son, and held him embraced with all the power of his heart. the moon
 began to be now eclipsed by twilight; a golden band surrounded the
 horizon, announcing the approach of the day. athos threw his cloak over
 the shoulders of raoul, and led him back to the city, where burdens and
 porters were already in motion, like a vast ant-hill. at the extremity of
 the plateau which athos and bragelonne were quitting, they saw a dark
 shadow moving uneasily backwards and forwards, as if in indecision or
 ashamed to be seen. it was grimaud, who in his anxiety had tracked his
 master, and was there awaiting him.
 “oh! my good grimaud,” cried raoul, “what do you want? you are come to
 tell us it is time to be gone, have you not?”
 “alone?” said grimaud, addressing athos and pointing to raoul in a tone of
 reproach, which showed to what an extent the old man was troubled.
 “oh! you are right!” cried the comte. “no, raoul shall not go alone; no,
 he shall not be left alone in a strange land without some friendly hand to
 support him, some friendly heart to recall to him all he loved!”
 “i?” said grimaud.
 “you, yes, you!” cried raoul, touched to the inmost heart.
 “alas!” said athos, “you are very old, my good grimaud.”
 “so much the better,” replied the latter, with an inexpressible depth of
 feeling and intelligence.
 “but the embarkation is begun,” said raoul, “and you are not prepared.”
 “yes,” said grimaud, showing the keys of his trunks, mixed with those of
 his young master.
 “but,” again objected raoul, “you cannot leave monsieur le comte thus
 alone; monsieur le comte, whom you have never quitted?”
 grimaud turned his diamond eyes upon athos and raoul, as if to measure the
 strength of both. the comte uttered not a word.
 “monsieur le comte prefers my going,” said grimaud.
 “i do,” said athos, by an inclination of the head.
 at that moment the drums suddenly rolled, and the clarions filled the air
 with their inspiring notes. the regiments destined for the expedition
 began to debouch from the city. they advanced to the number of five, each
 composed of forty companies. royals marched first, distinguished by their
 white uniform, faced with blue. the ordonnance colors, quartered
 cross-wise, violet and dead leaf, with a sprinkling of golden fleurs-de-lis,
 left the white-colored flag, with its fleur-de-lised cross, to
 dominate the whole. musketeers at the wings, with their forked sticks and
 their muskets on their shoulders; pikemen in the center, with their
 lances, fourteen feet in length, marched gayly towards the transports,
 which carried them in detail to the ships. the regiments of picardy,
 navarre, normandy, and royal vaisseau, followed after. m. de beaufort had
 known well how to select his troops. he himself was seen closing the march
 with his staff—it would take a full hour before he could reach the
 sea. raoul with athos turned his steps slowly towards the beach, in order
 to take his place when the prince embarked. grimaud, boiling with the
 ardor of a young man, superintended the embarkation of raoul’s baggage in
 the admiral’s vessel. athos, with his arm passed through that of the son
 he was about to lose, absorbed in melancholy meditation, was deaf to every
 noise around him. an officer came quickly towards them to inform raoul
 that m. de beaufort was anxious to have him by his side.
 “have the kindness to tell the prince,” said raoul, “that i request he
 will allow me this hour to enjoy the company of my father.”
 “no, no,” said athos, “an aide-de-camp ought not thus to quit his general.
 please to tell the prince, monsieur, that the vicomte will join him
 immediately.” the officer set off at a gallop.
 “whether we part here or part there,” added the comte, “it is no less a
 separation.” he carefully brushed the dust from his son’s coat, and passed
 his hand over his hair as they walked along. “but, raoul,” said he, “you
 want money. m. de beaufort’s train will be splendid, and i am certain it
 will be agreeable to you to purchase horses and arms, which are very dear
 things in africa. now, as you are not actually in the service of the king
 or m. de beaufort, and are simply a volunteer, you must not reckon upon
 either pay or largesse. but i should not like you to want for anything at
 gigelli. here are two hundred pistoles; if you would please me, raoul,
 spend them.”
 raoul pressed the hand of his father, and, at the turning of a street,
 they saw m. de beaufort, mounted on a magnificent white genet,
 which responded by graceful curvets to the applause of the women of the
 city. the duke called raoul, and held out his hand to the comte. he spoke
 to him for some time, with such a kindly expression that the heart of the
 poor father even felt a little comforted. it was, however, evident to both
 father and son that their walk amounted to nothing less than a punishment.
 there was a terrible moment—that at which, on quitting the sands of
 the shore, the soldiers and sailors exchanged the last kisses with their
 families and friends; a supreme moment, in which, notwithstanding the
 clearness of the heavens, the warmth of the sun, of the perfumes of the
 air, and the rich life that was circulating in their veins, everything
 appeared black, everything bitter, everything created doubts of
 providence, nay, at the most, of god. it was customary for the admiral and
 his suite to embark last; the cannon waited to announce, with its
 formidable voice, that the leader had placed his foot on board his vessel.
 athos, forgetful of both the admiral and the fleet, and of his own dignity
 as a strong man, opened his arms to his son, and pressed him convulsively
 to his heart.
 “accompany us on board,” said the duke, very much affected; “you will gain
 a good half-hour.”
 “no,” said athos, “my farewell has been spoken, i do not wish to voice a
 second.”
 “then, vicomte, embark—embark quickly!” added the prince, wishing to
 spare the tears of these two men, whose hearts were bursting. and
 paternally, tenderly, very much as porthos might have done, he took raoul
 in his arms and placed him in the boat, the oars of which, at a signal,
 immediately were dipped in the waves. he himself, forgetful of ceremony,
 jumped into his boat, and pushed it off with a vigorous foot. “adieu!”
 cried raoul.
 athos replied only by a sign, but he felt something burning on his hand:
 it was the respectful kiss of grimaud—the last farewell of the
 faithful dog. this kiss given, grimaud jumped from the step of the mole
 upon the stem of a two-oared yawl, which had just been taken in tow by a
 chaland served by twelve galley-oars. athos seated himself on the
 mole, stunned, deaf, abandoned. every instant took from him one of the
 features, one of the shades of the pale face of his son. with his arms
 hanging down, his eyes fixed, his mouth open, he remained confounded with
 raoul—in one same look, in one same thought, in one same stupor. the
 sea, by degrees, carried away boats and faces to that distance at which
 men become nothing but points,—loves, nothing but remembrances.
 athos saw his son ascend the ladder of the admiral’s ship, he saw him lean
 upon the rail of the deck, and place himself in such a manner as to be
 always an object in the eye of his father. in vain the cannon thundered,
 in vain from the ship sounded the long and lordly tumult, responded to by
 immense acclamations from the shore; in vain did the noise deafen the ear
 of the father, the smoke obscured the cherished object of his aspirations.
 raoul appeared to him to the last moment; and the imperceptible atom,
 passing from black to pale, from pale to white, from white to nothing,
 disappeared for athos—disappeared very long after, to all the eyes
 of the spectators, had disappeared both gallant ships and swelling sails.
 towards midday, when the sun devoured space, and scarcely the tops of the
 masts dominated the incandescent limit of the sea, athos perceived a soft
 aerial shadow rise, and vanish as soon as seen. this was the smoke of a
 cannon, which m. de beaufort ordered to be fired as a last salute to the
 coast of france. the point was buried in its turn beneath the sky, and
 athos returned with slow and painful step to his deserted hostelry.
 chapter xxxiv. among women.
 d’artagnan had not been able to hide his feelings from his friends so much
 as he would have wished. the stoical soldier, the impassive man-at-arms,
 overcome by fear and sad presentiments, had yielded, for a few moments, to
 human weakness. when, therefore, he had silenced his heart and calmed the
 agitation of his nerves, turning towards his lackey, a silent servant,
 always listening, in order to obey the more promptly:
 “rabaud,” said he, “mind, we must travel thirty leagues a day.”
 “at your pleasure, captain,” replied rabaud.
 and from that moment, d’artagnan, accommodating his action to the pace of
 the horse, like a true centaur, gave up his thoughts to nothing—that
 is to say, to everything. he asked himself why the king had sent for him
 back; why the iron mask had thrown the silver plate at the feet of raoul.
 as to the first subject, the reply was negative; he knew right well that
 the king’s calling him was from necessity. he still further knew that
 louis xiv. must experience an imperious desire for a private conversation
 with one whom the possession of such a secret placed on a level with the
 highest powers of the kingdom. but as to saying exactly what the king’s
 wish was, d’artagnan found himself completely at a loss. the musketeer had
 no doubts, either, upon the reason which had urged the unfortunate
 philippe to reveal his character and birth. philippe, buried forever
 beneath a mask of steel, exiled to a country where the men seemed little
 more than slaves of the elements; philippe, deprived even of the society
 of d’artagnan, who had loaded him with honors and delicate attentions, had
 nothing more to see than odious specters in this world, and, despair
 beginning to devour him, he poured himself forth in complaints, in the
 belief that his revelations would raise up some avenger for him. the
 manner in which the musketeer had been near killing his two best friends,
 the destiny which had so strangely brought athos to participate in the
 great state secret, the farewell of raoul, the obscurity of the future
 which threatened to end in a melancholy death; all this threw d’artagnan
 incessantly back on lamentable predictions and forebodings, which the
 rapidity of his pace did not dissipate, as it used formerly to do.
 d’artagnan passed from these considerations to the remembrance of the
 proscribed porthos and aramis. he saw them both, fugitives, tracked,
 ruined—laborious architects of fortunes they had lost; and as the
 king called for his man of execution in hours of vengeance and malice,
 d’artagnan trembled at the very idea of receiving some commission that
 would make his very soul bleed. sometimes, ascending hills, when the
 winded horse breathed hard from his red nostrils, and heaved his flanks,
 the captain, left to more freedom of thought, reflected on the prodigious
 genius of aramis, a genius of acumen and intrigue, a match to which the
 fronde and the civil war had produced but twice. soldier, priest,
 diplomatist; gallant, avaricious, cunning; aramis had never taken the good
 things of this life except as stepping-stones to rise to giddier ends.
 generous in spirit, if not lofty in heart, he never did ill but for the
 sake of shining even yet more brilliantly. towards the end of his career,
 at the moment of reaching the goal, like the patrician fuscus, he had made
 a false step upon a plank, and had fallen into the sea. but porthos, good,
 harmless porthos! to see porthos hungry, to see mousqueton without gold
 lace, imprisoned, perhaps; to see pierrefonds, bracieux, razed to the very
 stones, dishonored even to the timber,—these were so many poignant
 griefs for d’artagnan, and every time that one of these griefs struck him,
 he bounded like a horse at the sting of a gadfly beneath the vaults of
 foliage where he has sought shady shelter from the burning sun. never was
 the man of spirit subjected to ennui, if his body was exposed to
 fatigue; never did the man of healthy body fail to find life light, if he
 had something to engage his mind. d’artagnan, riding fast, thinking as
 constantly, alighted from his horse in pairs, fresh and tender in his
 muscles as the athlete preparing for the gymnasium. the king did not
 expect him so soon, and had just departed for the chase towards meudon.
 d’artagnan, instead of riding after the king, as he would formerly have
 done, took off his boots, had a bath, and waited till his majesty should
 return dusty and tired. he occupied the interval of five hours in taking,
 as people say, the air of the house, and in arming himself against all ill
 chances. he learned that the king, during the last fortnight, had been
 gloomy; that the queen-mother was ill and much depressed; that monsieur,
 the king’s brother, was exhibiting a devotional turn; that madame had the
 vapors; and that m. de guiche was gone to one of his estates. he learned
 that m. colbert was radiant; that m. fouquet consulted a fresh physician
 every day, who still did not cure him, and that his principal complaint
 was one which physicians do not usually cure, unless they are political
 physicians. the king, d’artagnan was told, behaved in the kindest manner
 to m. fouquet, and did not allow him to be ever out of his sight; but the
 surintendant, touched to the heart, like one of those fine trees a worm
 has punctured, was declining daily, in spite of the royal smile, that sun
 of court trees. d’artagnan learned that mademoiselle de la valliere had
 become indispensable to the king; that the king, during his sporting
 excursions, if he did not take her with him, wrote to her frequently, no
 longer verses, but, which was much worse, prose, and that whole pages at a
 time. thus, as the political pleiad of the day said, the first king in
 the world was seen descending from his horse with an ardor beyond
 compare, and on the crown of his hat scrawling bombastic phrases,
 which m. de saint-aignan, aide-de-camp in perpetuity, carried to la
 valliere at the risk of foundering his horses. during this time, deer and
 pheasants were left to the free enjoyment of their nature, hunted so
 lazily that, it was said, the art of venery ran great risk of degenerating
 at the court of france. d’artagnan then thought of the wishes of poor
 raoul, of that desponding letter destined for a woman who passed her life
 in hoping, and as d’artagnan loved to philosophize a little occasionally,
 he resolved to profit by the absence of the king to have a minute’s talk
 with mademoiselle de la valliere. this was a very easy affair; while the
 king was hunting, louise was walking with some other ladies in one of the
 galleries of the palais royal, exactly where the captain of the musketeers
 had some guards to inspect. d’artagnan did not doubt that, if he could but
 open the conversation on raoul, louise might give him grounds for writing
 a consolatory letter to the poor exile; and hope, or at least consolation
 for raoul, in the state of heart in which he had left him, was the sun,
 was life to two men, who were very dear to our captain. he directed his
 course, therefore, to the spot where he knew he should find mademoiselle
 de la valliere. d’artagnan found la valliere the center of the circle. in
 her apparent solitude, the king’s favorite received, like a queen, more,
 perhaps, than the queen, a homage of which madame had been so proud, when
 all the king’s looks were directed to her and commanded the looks of the
 courtiers. d’artagnan, although no squire of dames, received,
 nevertheless, civilities and attentions from the ladies; he was polite, as
 a brave man always is, and his terrible reputation had conciliated as much
 friendship among the men as admiration among the women. on seeing him
 enter, therefore, they immediately accosted him; and, as is not
 unfrequently the case with fair ladies, opened the attack by questions.
 “where had he been? what had become of him so long? why had
 they not seen him as usual make his fine horse curvet in such beautiful
 style, to the delight and astonishment of the curious from the king’s
 balcony?”
 he replied that he had just come from the land of oranges. this set all
 the ladies laughing. those were times in which everybody traveled, but in
 which, notwithstanding, a journey of a hundred leagues was a problem often
 solved by death.
 “from the land of oranges?” cried mademoiselle de tonnay-charente. “from
 spain?”
 “eh! eh!” said the musketeer.
 “from malta?” echoed montalais.
 “ma foi! you are coming very near, ladies.”
 “is it an island?” asked la valliere.
 “mademoiselle,” said d’artagnan; “i will not give you the trouble of
 seeking any further; i come from the country where m. de beaufort is, at
 this moment, embarking for algiers.”
 “have you seen the army?” asked several warlike fair ones.
 “as plainly as i see you,” replied d’artagnan.
 “and the fleet?”
 “yes, i saw everything.”
 “have we any of us any friends there?” said mademoiselle de
 tonnay-charente, coldly, but in a manner to attract attention to a
 question that was not without its calculated aim.
 “why,” replied d’artagnan, “yes; there were m. de la guillotiere, m. de
 manchy, m. de bragelonne—”
 la valliere became pale. “m. de bragelonne!” cried the perfidious
 athenais. “eh, what!—is he gone to the wars?—he!”
 montalais trod on her toe, but all in vain.
 “do you know what my opinion is?” continued she, addressing d’artagnan.
 “no, mademoiselle; but i should like very much to know it.”
 “my opinion is, then, that all the men who go to this war are desperate,
 desponding men, whom love has treated ill; and who go to try if they
 cannot find jet-complexioned women more kind than fair ones have been.”
 some of the ladies laughed; la valliere was evidently confused; montalais
 coughed loud enough to waken the dead.
 “mademoiselle,” interrupted d’artagnan, “you are in error when you speak
 of black women at gigelli; the women there have not jet faces; it is true
 they are not white—they are yellow.”
 “yellow!” exclaimed the bevy of fair beauties.
 “eh! do not disparage it. i have never seen a finer color to match with
 black eyes and a coral mouth.”
 “so much the better for m. de bragelonne,” said mademoiselle de
 tonnay-charente, with persistent malice. “he will make amends for his
 loss. poor fellow!”
 a profound silence followed these words; and d’artagnan had time to
 observe and reflect that women—mild doves—treat each other
 more cruelly than tigers. but making la valliere pale did not satisfy
 athenais; she determined to make her blush likewise. resuming the
 conversation without pause, “do you know, louise,” said she, “that there
 is a great sin on your conscience?”
 “what sin, mademoiselle?” stammered the unfortunate girl, looking round
 her for support, without finding it.
 “eh!—why,” continued athenais, “the poor young man was affianced to
 you; he loved you; you cast him off.”
 “well, that is a right which every honest woman has,” said montalais, in
 an affected tone. “when we know we cannot constitute the happiness of a
 man, it is much better to cast him off.”
 “cast him off! or refuse him!—that’s all very well,” said athenais,
 “but that is not the sin mademoiselle de la valliere has to reproach
 herself with. the actual sin is sending poor bragelonne to the wars; and
 to wars in which death is so very likely to be met with.” louise pressed
 her hand over her icy brow. “and if he dies,” continued her pitiless
 tormentor, “you will have killed him. that is the sin.”
 louise, half-dead, caught at the arm of the captain of the musketeers,
 whose face betrayed unusual emotion. “you wished to speak with me,
 monsieur d’artagnan,” said she, in a voice broken by anger and pain. “what
 had you to say to me?”
 d’artagnan made several steps along the gallery, holding louise on his
 arm; then, when they were far enough removed from the others—“what i
 had to say to you, mademoiselle,” replied he, “mademoiselle de
 tonnay-charente has just expressed; roughly and unkindly, it is true but
 still in its entirety.”
 she uttered a faint cry; pierced to the heart by this new wound, she went
 her way, like one of those poor birds which, struck unto death, seek the
 shade of the thicket in which to die. she disappeared at one door, at the
 moment the king was entering by another. the first glance of the king was
 directed towards the empty seat of his mistress. not perceiving la
 valliere, a frown came over his brow; but as soon as he saw d’artagnan,
 who bowed to him—“ah! monsieur!” cried he, “you have been
 diligent! i am much pleased with you.” this was the superlative expression
 of royal satisfaction. many men would have been ready to lay down their
 lives for such a speech from the king. the maids of honor and the
 courtiers, who had formed a respectful circle round the king on his
 entrance, drew back, on observing he wished to speak privately with his
 captain of the musketeers. the king led the way out of the gallery, after
 having again, with his eyes, sought everywhere for la valliere, whose
 absence he could not account for. the moment they were out of the reach of
 curious ears, “well! monsieur d’artagnan,” said he, “the prisoner?”
 “is in his prison, sire.”
 “what did he say on the road?”
 “nothing, sire.”
 “what did he do?”
 “there was a moment at which the fisherman—who took me in his boat
 to sainte-marguerite—revolted, and did his best to kill me. the—the
 prisoner defended me instead of attempting to fly.”
 the king became pale. “enough!” said he; and d’artagnan bowed. louis
 walked about his cabinet with hasty steps. “were you at antibes,” said he,
 “when monsieur de beaufort came there?”
 “no, sire; i was setting off when monsieur le duc arrived.”
 “ah!” which was followed by a fresh silence. “whom did you see there?”
 “a great many persons,” said d’artagnan, coolly.
 the king perceived he was unwilling to speak. “i have sent for you,
 monsieur le capitaine, to desire you to go and prepare my lodgings at
 nantes.”
 “at nantes!” cried d’artagnan.
 “in bretagne.”
 “yes, sire, it is in bretagne. will you majesty make so long a journey as
 to nantes?”
 “the states are assembled there,” replied the king. “i have two demands to
 make of them: i wish to be there.”
 “when shall i set out?” said the captain.
 “this evening—to-morrow—to-morrow evening; for you must stand
 in need of rest.”
 “i have rested, sire.”
 “that is well. then between this and to-morrow evening, when you please.”
 d’artagnan bowed as if to take his leave; but, perceiving the king very
 much embarrassed, “will you majesty,” said he, stepping two paces forward,
 “take the court with you?”
 “certainly i shall.”
 “then you majesty will, doubtless, want the musketeers?” and the eye of
 the king sank beneath the penetrating glance of the captain.
 “take a brigade of them,” replied louis.
 “is that all? has your majesty no other orders to give me?”
 “no—ah—yes.”
 “i am all attention, sire.”
 “at the castle of nantes, which i hear is very ill arranged, you will
 adopt the practice of placing musketeers at the door of each of the
 principal dignitaries i shall take with me.”
 “of the principal?”
 “yes.”
 “for instance, at the door of m. de lyonne?”
 “yes.”
 “and that of m. letellier?”
 “yes.”
 “of m. de brienne?”
 “yes.”
 “and of monsieur le surintendant?”
 “without doubt.”
 “very well, sire. by to-morrow i shall have set out.”
 “oh, yes; but one more word, monsieur d’artagnan. at nantes you will meet
 with m. le duc de gesvres, captain of the guards. be sure that your
 musketeers are placed before his guards arrive. precedence always belongs
 to the first comer.”
 “yes, sire.”
 “and if m. de gesvres should question you?”
 “question me, sire! is it likely that m. de gesvres should question me?”
 and the musketeer, turning cavalierly on his heel, disappeared. “to
 nantes!” said he to himself, as he descended from the stairs. “why did he
 not dare to say, from thence to belle-isle?”
 as he reached the great gates, one of m. brienne’s clerks came running
 after him, exclaiming, “monsieur d’artagnan! i beg your pardon—”
 “what is the matter, monsieur ariste?”
 “the king has desired me to give you this order.”
 “upon your cash-box?” asked the musketeer.
 “no, monsieur; on that of m. fouquet.”
 d’artagnan was surprised, but he took the order, which was in the king’s
 own writing, and was for two hundred pistoles. “what!” thought he, after
 having politely thanked m. brienne’s clerk, “m. fouquet is to pay for the
 journey, then! mordioux! that is a bit of pure louis xi. why was
 not this order on the chest of m. colbert? he would have paid it with such
 joy.” and d’artagnan, faithful to his principle of never letting an order
 at sight get cold, went straight to the house of m. fouquet, to receive
 his two hundred pistoles.
 chapter xxxv. the last supper.
 the superintendent had no doubt received advice of the approaching
 departure, for he was giving a farewell dinner to his friends. from the
 bottom to the top of the house, the hurry of the servants bearing dishes,
 and the diligence of the registres, denoted an approaching change
 in offices and kitchen. d’artagnan, with his order in his hand, presented
 himself at the offices, when he was told it was too late to pay cash, the
 chest was closed. he only replied: “on the king’s service.”
 the clerk, a little put out by the serious air of the captain, replied,
 that “that was a very respectable reason, but that the customs of the
 house were respectable likewise; and that, in consequence, he begged the
 bearer to call again next day.” d’artagnan asked if he could not see m.
 fouquet. the clerk replied that m. le surintendant did not interfere with
 such details, and rudely closed the outer door in the captain’s face. but
 the latter had foreseen this stroke, and placed his boot between the door
 and the door-case, so that the lock did not catch, and the clerk was still
 nose to nose with his interlocutor. this made him change his tone, and
 say, with terrified politeness, “if monsieur wishes to speak to m. le
 surintendant, he must go to the ante-chambers; these are the offices,
 where monseigneur never comes.”
 “oh! very well! where are they?” replied d’artagnan.
 “on the other side of the court,” said the clerk, delighted to be free.
 d’artagnan crossed the court, and fell in with a crowd of servants.
 “monseigneur sees nobody at this hour,” he was answered by a fellow
 carrying a vermeil dish, in which were three pheasants and twelve quails.
 “tell him,” said the captain, laying hold of the servant by the end of his
 dish, “that i am m. d’artagnan, captain of his majesty’s musketeers.”
 the fellow uttered a cry of surprise, and disappeared; d’artagnan
 following him slowly. he arrived just in time to meet m. pelisson in the
 ante-chamber: the latter, a little pale, came hastily out of the
 dining-room to learn what was the matter. d’artagnan smiled.
 “there is nothing unpleasant, monsieur pelisson; only a little order to
 receive the money for.”
 “ah!” said fouquet’s friend, breathing more freely; and he took the
 captain by the hand, and, dragging him behind him, led him into the
 dining-room, where a number of friends surrounded the surintendant, placed
 in the center, and buried in the cushions of a fauteuil. there were
 assembled all the epicureans who so lately at vaux had done the honors of
 the mansion of wit and money in aid of m. fouquet. joyous friends, for the
 most part faithful, they had not fled their protector at the approach of
 the storm, and, in spite of the threatening heavens, in spite of the
 trembling earth, they remained there, smiling, cheerful, as devoted in
 misfortune as they had been in prosperity. on the left of the surintendant
 sat madame de belliere; on his right was madame fouquet; as if braving the
 laws of the world, and putting all vulgar reasons of propriety to silence,
 the two protecting angels of this man united to offer, at the moment of
 the crisis, the support of their twined arms. madame de belliere was pale,
 trembling, and full of respectful attentions for madame la surintendante,
 who, with one hand on her husband’s, was looking anxiously towards the
 door by which pelisson had gone out to bring d’artagnan. the captain
 entered at first full of courtesy, and afterwards of admiration, when,
 with his infallible glance, he had divined as well as taken in the
 expression of every face. fouquet raised himself up in his chair.
 “pardon me, monsieur d’artagnan,” said he, “if i did not myself receive
 you when coming in the king’s name.” and he pronounced the last words with
 a sort of melancholy firmness, which filled the hearts of all his friends
 with terror.
 “monseigneur,” replied d’artagnan, “i only come to you in the king’s name
 to demand payment of an order for two hundred pistoles.”
 the clouds passed from every brow but that of fouquet, which still
 remained overcast.
 “ah! then,” said he, “perhaps you also are setting out for nantes?”
 “i do not know whither i am setting out, monseigneur.”
 “but,” said madame fouquet, recovered from her fright, “you are not going
 so soon, monsieur le capitaine, as not to do us the honor to take a seat
 with us?”
 “madame, i should esteem that a great honor done me, but i am so pressed
 for time, that, you see, i have been obliged to permit myself to interrupt
 your repast to procure payment of my note.”
 “the reply to which shall be gold,” said fouquet, making a sign to his
 intendant, who went out with the order d’artagnan handed him.
 “oh!” said the latter, “i was not uneasy about the payment; the house is
 good.”
 a painful smile passed over the pale features of fouquet.
 “are you in pain?” asked madame de belliere.
 “do you feel your attack coming on?” asked madame fouquet.
 “neither, thank you both,” said fouquet.
 “your attack?” said d’artagnan, in his turn; “are you unwell,
 monseigneur?”
 “i have a tertian fever, which seized me after the fete at vaux.”
 “caught cold in the grottos, at night, perhaps?”
 “no, no; nothing but agitation, that was all.”
 “the too much heart you displayed in your reception of the king,” said la
 fontaine, quietly, without suspicion that he was uttering a sacrilege.
 “we cannot devote too much heart to the reception of our king,” said
 fouquet, mildly, to his poet.
 “monsieur meant to say the too great ardor,” interrupted d’artagnan, with
 perfect frankness and much amenity. “the fact is, monseigneur, that
 hospitality was never practiced as at vaux.”
 madame fouquet permitted her countenance to show clearly that if fouquet
 had conducted himself well towards the king, the king had hardly done the
 like to the minister. but d’artagnan knew the terrible secret. he alone
 with fouquet knew it; those two men had not, the one the courage to
 complain, the other the right to accuse. the captain, to whom the two
 hundred pistoles were brought, was about to take his leave, when fouquet,
 rising, took a glass of wine, and ordered one to be given to d’artagnan.
 “monsieur,” said he, “to the health of the king, whatever may happen.”
 “and to your health, monseigneur, whatever may happen,” said
 d’artagnan.
 he bowed, with these words of evil omen, to all the company, who rose as
 soon as they heard the sound of his spurs and boots at the bottom of the
 stairs.
 “i, for a moment, thought it was i and not my money he wanted,” said
 fouquet, endeavoring to laugh.
 “you!” cried his friends; “and what for, in the name of heaven!”
 “oh! do not deceive yourselves, my dear brothers in epicurus,” said the
 superintendent; “i do not wish to make a comparison between the most
 humble sinner on the earth, and the god we adore, but remember, he gave
 one day to his friends a repast which is called the last supper, and which
 was nothing but a farewell dinner, like that which we are making at this
 moment.”
 a painful cry of denial arose from all parts of the table. “shut the
 doors,” said fouquet, and the servants disappeared. “my friends,”
 continued fouquet, lowering his voice, “what was i formerly? what am i
 now? consult among yourselves and reply. a man like me sinks when he does
 not continue to rise. what shall we say, then, when he really sinks? i
 have no more money, no more credit; i have no longer anything but powerful
 enemies, and powerless friends.”
 “quick!” cried pelisson. “since you explain yourself with such frankness,
 it is our duty to be frank, likewise. yes, you are ruined—yes, you
 are hastening to your ruin—stop. and, in the first place, what money
 have we left?”
 “seven hundred thousand livres,” said the intendant.
 “bread,” murmured madame fouquet.
 “relays,” said pelisson, “relays, and fly!”
 “whither?”
 “to switzerland—to savoy—but fly!”
 “if monseigneur flies,” said madame belliere, “it will be said that he was
 guilty—was afraid.”
 “more than that, it will be said that i have carried away twenty millions
 with me.”
 “we will draw up memoirs to justify you,” said la fontaine. “fly!”
 “i will remain,” said fouquet. “and, besides, does not everything serve
 me?”
 “you have belle-isle,” cried the abbe fouquet.
 “and i am naturally going there, when going to nantes,” replied the
 superintendent. “patience, then, patience!”
 “before arriving at nantes, what a distance!” said madame fouquet.
 “yes, i know that well,” replied fouquet. “but what is to be done there?
 the king summons me to the states. i know well it is for the purpose of
 ruining me; but to refuse to go would be to evince uneasiness.”
 “well, i have discovered the means of reconciling everything,” cried
 pelisson. “you are going to set out for nantes.”
 fouquet looked at him with an air of surprise.
 “but with friends; but in your own carriage as far as orleans; in your own
 barge as far as nantes; always ready to defend yourself, if you are
 attacked; to escape, if you are threatened. in fact, you will carry your
 money against all chances; and, whilst flying, you will only have obeyed
 the king; then, reaching the sea, when you like, you will embark for
 belle-isle, and from belle-isle you will shoot out wherever it may please
 you, like the eagle that leaps into space when it has been driven from its
 eyrie.”
 a general assent followed pelisson’s words. “yes, do so,” said madame
 fouquet to her husband.
 “do so,” said madame de belliere.
 “do it! do it!” cried all his friends.
 “i will do so,” replied fouquet.
 “this very evening?”
 “in an hour?”
 “instantly.”
 “with seven hundred thousand livres you can lay the foundation of another
 fortune,” said the abbe fouquet.
 “what is there to prevent our arming corsairs at belle-isle?”
 “and, if necessary, we will go and discover a new world,” added la
 fontaine, intoxicated with fresh projects and enthusiasm.
 a knock at the door interrupted this concert of joy and hope. “a courier
 from the king,” said the master of the ceremonies.
 a profound silence immediately ensued, as if the message brought by this
 courier was nothing but a reply to all the projects given birth to a
 moment before. every one waited to see what the master would do. his brow
 was streaming with perspiration, and he was really suffering from his
 fever at that instant. he passed into his cabinet, to receive the king’s
 message. there prevailed, as we have said, such a silence in the chambers,
 and throughout the attendance, that from the dining-room could be heard
 the voice of fouquet, saying, “that is well, monsieur.” this voice was,
 however, broken by fatigue, and trembled with emotion. an instant after,
 fouquet called gourville, who crossed the gallery amidst the universal
 expectation. at length, he himself re-appeared among his guests; but it
 was no longer the same pale, spiritless countenance they had beheld when
 he left them; from pale he had become livid; and from spiritless,
 annihilated. a breathing, living specter, he advanced with his arms
 stretched out, his mouth parched, like a shade that comes to salute the
 friends of former days. on seeing him thus, every one cried out, and every
 one rushed towards fouquet. the latter, looking at pelisson, leaned upon
 his wife, and pressed the icy hand of the marquise de belliere.
 “well,” said he, in a voice which had nothing human in it.
 “what has happened, my god!” said some one to him.
 fouquet opened his right hand, which was clenched, but glistening with
 perspiration, and displayed a paper, upon which pelisson cast a terrified
 glance. he read the following lines, written by the king’s hand:
 “‘dear and well-beloved monsieur fouquet,—give us, upon that which
 you have left of ours, the sum of seven hundred thousand livres, of which
 we stand in need to prepare for our departure.
 “‘and, as we know your health is not good, we pray god to restore you, and
 to have you in his holy keeping. “‘louis.
 “‘the present letter is to serve as a receipt.’”
 a murmur of terror circulated through the apartment.
 “well,” cried pelisson, in his turn, “you have received that letter?”
 “received it, yes!”
 “what will you do, then?”
 “nothing, since i have received it.”
 “but—”
 “if i have received it, pelisson, i have paid it,” said the surintendant,
 with a simplicity that went to the heart of all present.
 “you have paid it!” cried madame fouquet. “then we are ruined!”
 “come, no useless words,” interrupted pelisson. “next to money, life.
 monseigneur, to horse! to horse!”
 “what, leave us!” at once cried both the women, wild with grief.
 “eh! monseigneur, in saving yourself, you save us all. to horse!”
 “but he cannot hold himself on. look at him.”
 “oh! if he takes time to reflect—” said the intrepid pelisson.
 “he is right,” murmured fouquet.
 “monseigneur! monseigneur!” cried gourville, rushing up the stairs, four
 steps at once. “monseigneur!”
 “well! what?”
 “i escorted, as you desired, the king’s courier with the money.”
 “yes.”
 “well! when i arrived at the palais royal, i saw—”
 “take breath, my poor friend, take breath; you are suffocating.”
 “what did you see?” cried the impatient friends.
 “i saw the musketeers mounting on horseback,” said gourville.
 “there, then!” cried every voice at once; “there, then! is there an
 instant to be lost?”
 madame fouquet rushed downstairs, calling for her horses; madame de
 belliere flew after her, catching her in her arms, and saying: “madame, in
 the name of his safety, do not betray anything, do not manifest alarm.”
 pelisson ran to have the horses put to the carriages. and, in the
 meantime, gourville gathered in his hat all that the weeping friends were
 able to throw into it of gold and silver—the last offering, the
 pious alms made to misery by poverty. the surintendant, dragged along by
 some, carried by others, was shut up in his carriage. gourville took the
 reins, and mounted the box. pelisson supported madame fouquet, who had
 fainted. madame de belliere had more strength, and was well paid for it;
 she received fouquet’s last kiss. pelisson easily explained this
 precipitate departure by saying that an order from the king had summoned
 the minister to nantes.
 chapter xxxvi. in m. colbert’s carriage.
 as gourville had seen, the king’s musketeers were mounting and following
 their captain. the latter, who did not like to be confined in his
 proceedings, left his brigade under the orders of a lieutenant, and set
 off on post horses, recommending his men to use all diligence. however
 rapidly they might travel, they could not arrive before him. he had time,
 in passing along the rue des petits-champs, to see something which
 afforded him plenty of food for thought and conjecture. he saw m. colbert
 coming out from his house to get into his carriage, which was stationed
 before the door. in this carriage d’artagnan perceived the hoods of two
 women, and being rather curious, he wished to know the names of the ladies
 hid beneath these hoods. to get a glimpse at them, for they kept
 themselves closely covered up, he urged his horse so near the carriage,
 that he drove him against the step with such force as to shake everything
 containing and contained. the terrified women uttered, the one a faint
 cry, by which d’artagnan recognized a young woman, the other an
 imprecation, in which he recognized the vigor and aplomb that half
 a century bestows. the hoods were thrown back: one of the women was madame
 vanel, the other the duchesse de chevreuse. d’artagnan’s eyes were quicker
 than those of the ladies; he had seen and known them, whilst they did not
 recognize him; and as they laughed at their fright, pressing each other’s
 hands,—
 “humph!” said d’artagnan, “the old duchesse is no more inaccessible to
 friendship than formerly. she paying her court to the mistress of
 m. colbert! poor m. fouquet! that presages you nothing good!”
 he rode on. m. colbert got into his carriage and the distinguished trio
 commenced a sufficiently slow pilgrimage toward the wood of vincennes.
 madame de chevreuse set down madame vanel at her husband’s house, and,
 left alone with m. colbert, chatted upon affairs whilst continuing her
 ride. she had an inexhaustible fund of conversation, that dear duchesse,
 and as she always talked for the ill of others, though ever with a view to
 her own good, her conversation amused her interlocutor, and did not fail
 to leave a favorable impression.
 she taught colbert, who, poor man! was ignorant of the fact, how great a
 minister he was, and how fouquet would soon become a cipher. she promised
 to rally around him, when he should become surintendant, all the old
 nobility of the kingdom, and questioned him as to the preponderance it
 would be proper to allow la valliere. she praised him, she blamed him, she
 bewildered him. she showed him the secret of so many secrets that, for a
 moment, colbert thought he was doing business with the devil. she proved
 to him that she held in her hand the colbert of to-day, as she had held
 the fouquet of yesterday; and as he asked her very simply the reason of
 her hatred for the surintendant: “why do you yourself hate him?” said she.
 “madame, in politics,” replied he, “the differences of system oft bring
 about dissentions between men. m. fouquet always appeared to me to
 practice a system opposed to the true interests of the king.”
 she interrupted him.—“i will say no more to you about m. fouquet.
 the journey the king is about to take to nantes will give a good account
 of him. m. fouquet, for me, is a man gone by—and for you also.”
 colbert made no reply. “on his return from nantes,” continued the
 duchesse, “the king, who is only anxious for a pretext, will find that the
 states have not behaved well—that they have made too few sacrifices.
 the states will say that the imposts are too heavy, and that the
 surintendant has ruined them. the king will lay all the blame on m.
 fouquet, and then—”
 “and then?” said colbert.
 “oh! he will be disgraced. is not that your opinion?”
 colbert darted a glance at the duchesse, which plainly said: “if m.
 fouquet be only disgraced, you will not be the cause of it.”
 “your place, m. colbert,” the duchesse hastened to say, “must be a high
 place. do you perceive any one between the king and yourself, after the
 fall of m. fouquet?”
 “i do not understand,” said he.
 “you will understand. to what does your ambition aspire?”
 “i have none.”
 “it was useless, then, to overthrow the superintendent, monsieur colbert.
 it was idle.”
 “i had the honor to tell you, madame—”
 “oh! yes, i know, all about the interest of the king—but, if you
 please, we will speak of your own.”
 “mine! that is to say, the affairs of his majesty.”
 “in short, are you, or are you not endeavoring to ruin m. fouquet? answer
 without evasion.”
 “madame, i ruin nobody.”
 “i am endeavoring to comprehend, then, why you purchased from me the
 letters of m. mazarin concerning m. fouquet. neither can i conceive why
 you have laid those letters before the king.”
 colbert, half stupefied, looked at the duchesse with an air of constraint.
 “madame,” said he, “i can less easily conceive how you, who received the
 money, can reproach me on that head—”
 “that is,” said the old duchesse, “because we must will that which we wish
 for, unless we are not able to obtain what we wish.”
 “will!” said colbert, quite confounded by such coarse logic.
 “you are not able, hein! speak.”
 “i am not able, i allow, to destroy certain influences near the king.”
 “that fight in favor of m. fouquet? what are they? stop, let me help you.”
 “do, madame.”
 “la valliere?”
 “oh! very little influence; no knowledge of business, and small means. m.
 fouquet has paid his court to her.”
 “to defend him would be to accuse herself, would it not?”
 “i think it would.”
 “there is still another influence, what do you say to that?”
 “is it considerable?”
 “the queen-mother, perhaps?”
 “her majesty, the queen-mother, has a weakness for m. fouquet very
 prejudicial to her son.”
 “never believe that,” said the old duchesse, smiling.
 “oh!” said colbert, with incredulity, “i have often experienced it.”
 “formerly?”
 “very recently, madame, at vaux. it was she who prevented the king from
 having m. fouquet arrested.”
 “people do not forever entertain the same opinions, my dear monsieur. that
 which the queen may have wished recently, she would not wish, perhaps,
 to-day.”
 “and why not?” said colbert, astonished.
 “oh! the reason is of very little consequence.”
 “on the contrary, i think it is of great consequence; for, if i were
 certain of not displeasing her majesty, the queen-mother, my scruples
 would be all removed.”
 “well! have you never heard talk of a certain secret?”
 “a secret?”
 “call it what you like. in short, the queen-mother has conceived a bitter
 hatred for all those who have participated, in one fashion or another, in
 the discovery of this secret, and m. fouquet i believe is one of these.”
 “then,” said colbert, “we may be sure of the assent of the queen-mother?”
 “i have just left her majesty, and she assures me so.”
 “so be it, then, madame.”
 “but there is something further; do you happen to know a man who was the
 intimate friend of m. fouquet, m. d’herblay, a bishop, i believe?”
 “bishop of vannes.”
 “well! this m. d’herblay, who also knew the secret, the queen-mother is
 pursuing with the utmost rancor.”
 “indeed!”
 “so hotly pursued, that if he were dead, she would not be satisfied with
 anything less than his head, to satisfy her he would never speak again.”
 “and is that the desire of the queen-mother?”
 “an order is given for it.”
 “this monsieur d’herblay shall be sought for, madame.”
 “oh! it is well known where he is.”
 colbert looked at the duchesse.
 “say where, madame.”
 “he is at belle-ile-en-mer.”
 “at the residence of m. fouquet?”
 “at the residence of m. fouquet.”
 “he shall be taken.”
 it was now the duchesse’s turn to smile. “do not fancy the capture so
 easy,” said she; “do not promise it so lightly.”
 “why not, madame?”
 “because m. d’herblay is not one of those people who can be taken when and
 where you please.”
 “he is a rebel, then?”
 “oh! monsieur colbert, we have passed all our lives in making rebels, and
 yet you see plainly, that so far from being taken, we take others.”
 colbert fixed upon the old duchesse one of those fierce looks of which no
 words can convey the expression, accompanied by a firmness not altogether
 wanting in grandeur. “the times are gone,” said he, “in which subjects
 gained duchies by making war against the king of france. if m. d’herblay
 conspires, he will perish on the scaffold. that will give, or will not
 give, pleasure to his enemies,—a matter, by the way, of little
 importance to us.”
 and this us, a strange word in the mouth of colbert, made the
 duchesse thoughtful for a moment. she caught herself reckoning inwardly
 with this man—colbert had regained his superiority in the
 conversation, and he meant to keep it.
 “you ask me, madame,” he said, “to have this m. d’herblay arrested?”
 “i?—i ask you nothing of the kind!”
 “i thought you did, madame. but as i have been mistaken, we will leave him
 alone; the king has said nothing about him.”
 the duchesse bit her nails.
 “besides,” continued colbert, “what a poor capture would this bishop be! a
 bishop game for a king! oh! no, no; i will not even take the slightest
 notice of him.”
 the hatred of the duchesse now discovered itself.
 “game for a woman!” said she. “is not the queen a woman? if she wishes m.
 d’herblay arrested, she has her reasons. besides, is not m. d’herblay the
 friend of him who is doomed to fall?”
 “oh! never mind that,” said colbert. “this man shall be spared, if he is
 not the enemy of the king. is that displeasing to you?”
 “i say nothing.”
 “yes—you wish to see him in prison, in the bastile, for instance.”
 “i believe a secret better concealed behind the walls of the bastile than
 behind those of belle-isle.”
 “i will speak to the king about it; he will clear up the point.”
 “and whilst waiting for that enlightenment, monsieur l’eveque de vannes
 will have escaped. i would do so.”
 “escaped! he! and whither should he escape? europe is ours, in will, if
 not in fact.”
 “he will always find an asylum, monsieur. it is evident you know nothing
 of the man you have to do with. you do not know d’herblay; you do not know
 aramis. he was one of those four musketeers who, under the late king, made
 cardinal de richelieu tremble, and who, during the regency, gave so much
 trouble to monseigneur mazarin.”
 “but, madame, what can he do, unless he has a kingdom to back him?”
 “he has one, monsieur.”
 “a kingdom, he! what, monsieur d’herblay?”
 “i repeat to you, monsieur, that if he wants a kingdom, he either has it
 or will have it.”
 “well, as you are so earnest that this rebel should not escape, madame, i
 promise you he shall not escape.”
 “belle-isle is fortified, m. colbert, and fortified by him.”
 “if belle-isle were also defended by him, belle-isle is not impregnable;
 and if monsieur l’eveque de vannes is shut up in belle-isle, well, madame,
 the place shall be besieged, and he will be taken.”
 “you may be very certain, monsieur, that the zeal you display in the
 interest of the queen-mother will please her majesty mightily, and you
 will be magnificently rewarded; but what shall i tell her of your projects
 respecting this man?”
 “that when once taken, he shall be shut up in a fortress from which her
 secret shall never escape.”
 “very well, monsieur colbert, and we may say, that, dating from this
 instant, we have formed a solid alliance, that is, you and i, and that i
 am absolutely at your service.”
 “it is i, madame, who place myself at yours. this chevalier d’herblay is a
 kind of spanish spy, is he not?”
 “much more.”
 “a secret ambassador?”
 “higher still.”
 “stop—king phillip iii. of spain is a bigot. he is, perhaps, the
 confessor of phillip iii.”
 “you must go higher even than that.”
 “mordieu!” cried colbert, who forgot himself so far as to swear in
 the presence of this great lady, of this old friend of the queen-mother.
 “he must then be the general of the jesuits.”
 “i believe you have guessed it at last,” replied the duchesse.
 “ah! then, madame, this man will ruin us all if we do not ruin him; and we
 must make haste, too.”
 “such was my opinion, monsieur, but i did not dare to give it you.”
 “and it was lucky for us he has attacked the throne, and not us.”
 “but, mark this well, m. colbert. m. d’herblay is never discouraged; if he
 has missed one blow, he will be sure to make another; he will begin again.
 if he has allowed an opportunity to escape of making a king for himself,
 sooner or later, he will make another, of whom, to a certainty, you will
 not be prime minister.”
 colbert knitted his brow with a menacing expression. “i feel assured that
 a prison will settle this affair for us, madame, in a manner satisfactory
 for both.”
 the duchesse smiled again.
 “oh! if you knew,” said she, “how many times aramis has got out of
 prison!”
 “oh!” replied colbert, “we will take care that he shall not get out this
 time.”
 “but you were not attending to what i said to you just now. do you
 remember that aramis was one of the four invincibles whom richelieu so
 dreaded? and at that period the four musketeers were not in possession of
 that which they have now—money and experience.”
 colbert bit his lips.
 “we will renounce the idea of the prison,” said he, in a lower tone: “we
 will find a little retreat from which the invincible cannot possibly
 escape.”
 “that was well spoken, our ally!” replied the duchesse. “but it is getting
 late; had we not better return?”
 “the more willingly, madame, from my having my preparations to make for
 setting out with the king.”
 “to paris!” cried the duchesse to the coachman.
 and the carriage returned towards the faubourg saint antoine, after the
 conclusion of the treaty that gave to death the last friend of fouquet,
 the last defender of belle-isle, the former friend of marie michon, the
 new foe of the old duchesse.
 chapter xxxvii. the two lighters.
 d’artagnan had set off; fouquet likewise was gone, and with a rapidity
 which doubled the tender interest of his friends. the first moments of
 this journey, or better say, this flight, were troubled by a ceaseless
 dread of every horse and carriage to be seen behind the fugitive. it was
 not natural, in fact, if louis xiv. was determined to seize this prey,
 that he should allow it to escape; the young lion was already accustomed
 to the chase, and he had bloodhounds sufficiently clever to be trusted.
 but insensibly all fears were dispersed; the surintendant, by hard
 traveling, placed such a distance between himself and his persecutors,
 that no one of them could reasonably be expected to overtake him. as to
 his position, his friends had made it excellent for him. was he not
 traveling to join the king at nantes, and what did the rapidity prove but
 his zeal to obey? he arrived, fatigued, but reassured, at orleans, where
 he found, thanks to the care of a courier who had preceded him, a handsome
 lighter of eight oars. these lighters, in the shape of gondolas, somewhat
 wide and heavy, containing a small chamber, covered by the deck, and a
 chamber in the poop, formed by a tent, then acted as passage-boats from
 orleans to nantes, by the loire, and this passage, a long one in our days,
 appeared then more easy and convenient than the high-road, with its
 post-hacks and its ill-hung carriages. fouquet went on board this lighter,
 which set out immediately. the rowers, knowing they had the honor of
 conveying the surintendant of the finances, pulled with all their
 strength, and that magic word, the finances, promised them a
 liberal gratification, of which they wished to prove themselves worthy.
 the lighter seemed to leap the mimic waves of the loire. magnificent
 weather, a sunrise that empurpled all the landscape, displayed the river
 in all its limpid serenity. the current and the rowers carried fouquet
 along as wings carry a bird, and he arrived before beaugency without the
 slightest accident having signalized the voyage. fouquet hoped to be the
 first to arrive at nantes; there he would see the notables and gain
 support among the principal members of the states; he would make himself a
 necessity, a thing very easy for a man of his merit, and would delay the
 catastrophe, if he did not succeed in avoiding it entirely. “besides,”
 said gourville to him, “at nantes, you will make out, or we will make out,
 the intentions of your enemies; we will have horses always ready to convey
 you to poitou, a bark in which to gain the sea, and when once upon the
 open sea, belle-isle is your inviolable port. you see, besides, that no
 one is watching you, no one is following.” he had scarcely finished when
 they discovered at a distance, behind an elbow formed by the river, the
 masts of a huge lighter coming down. the rowers of fouquet’s boat uttered
 a cry of surprise on seeing this galley.
 “what is the matter?” asked fouquet.
 “the matter is, monseigneur,” replied the patron of the bark, “that it is
 a truly remarkable thing—that lighter comes along like a hurricane.”
 gourville started, and mounted to the deck, in order to obtain a better
 view.
 fouquet did not go up with him, but said to gourville, with restrained
 mistrust: “see what it is, dear friend.”
 the lighter had just passed the elbow. it came on so fast, that behind it
 might be plainly seen the white wake illumined with the fires of the day.
 “how they go,” repeated the skipper, “how they go! they must be well paid!
 i did not think,” he added, “that oars of wood could behave better than
 ours, but yonder oarsmen prove the contrary.”
 “well they may,” said one of the rowers, “they are twelve, and we but
 eight.”
 “twelve rowers!” replied gourville, “twelve! impossible.”
 the number of eight rowers for a lighter had never been exceeded, even for
 the king. this honor had been paid to monsieur le surintendant, more for
 the sake of haste than of respect.
 “what does it mean?” said gourville, endeavoring to distinguish beneath
 the tent, which was already apparent, travelers which the most piercing
 eye could not yet have succeeded in discovering.
 “they must be in a hurry, for it is not the king,” said the patron.
 fouquet shuddered.
 “by what sign do you know that it is not the king?” said gourville.
 “in the first place, because there is no white flag with fleurs-de-lis,
 which the royal lighter always carries.”
 “and then,” said fouquet, “because it is impossible it should be the king,
 gourville, as the king was still in paris yesterday.”
 gourville replied to the surintendant by a look which said: “you were
 there yourself yesterday.”
 “and by what sign do you make out they are in such haste?” added he, for
 the sake of gaining time.
 “by this, monsieur,” said the patron; “these people must have set out a
 long while after us, and they have already nearly overtaken us.”
 “bah!” said gourville, “who told you that they do not come from beaugency
 or from moit even?”
 “we have seen no lighter of that shape, except at orleans. it comes from
 orleans, monsieur, and makes great haste.”
 fouquet and gourville exchanged a glance. the captain remarked their
 uneasiness, and, to mislead him, gourville immediately said:
 “some friend, who has laid a wager he would catch us; let us win the
 wager, and not allow him to come up with us.”
 the patron opened his mouth to say that it was quite impossible, but
 fouquet said with much hauteur,—“if it is any one who wishes
 to overtake us, let him come.”
 “we can try, monseigneur,” said the man, timidly. “come, you fellows, put
 out your strength; row, row!”
 “no,” said fouquet, “on the contrary; stop short.”
 “monseigneur! what folly!” interrupted gourville, stooping towards his
 ear.
 “pull up!” repeated fouquet. the eight oars stopped, and resisting the
 water, created a retrograde motion. it stopped. the twelve rowers in the
 other did not, at first, perceive this maneuver, for they continued to
 urge on their boat so vigorously that it arrived quickly within
 musket-shot. fouquet was short-sighted, gourville was annoyed by the sun,
 now full in his eyes; the skipper alone, with that habit and clearness
 which are acquired by a constant struggle with the elements, perceived
 distinctly the travelers in the neighboring lighter.
 “i can see them!” cried he; “there are two.”
 “i can see nothing,” said gourville.
 “you will not be long before you distinguish them; in twenty strokes of
 their oars they will be within ten paces of us.”
 but what the patron announced was not realized; the lighter imitated the
 movement commanded by fouquet, and instead of coming to join its pretended
 friends, it stopped short in the middle of the river.
 “i cannot comprehend this,” said the captain.
 “nor i,” cried gourville.
 “you who can see so plainly the people in that lighter,” resumed fouquet,
 “try to describe them to us, before we are too far off.”
 “i thought i saw two,” replied the boatman. “i can only see one now, under
 the tent.”
 “what sort of man is he?”
 “he is a dark man, broad-shouldered, bull-necked.”
 a little cloud at that moment passed across the azure, darkening the sun.
 gourville, who was still looking, with one hand over his eyes, became able
 to see what he sought, and all at once, jumping from the deck into the
 chamber where fouquet awaited him: “colbert!” said he, in a voice broken
 by emotion.
 “colbert!” repeated fouquet. “too strange! but no, it is impossible!”
 “i tell you i recognized him, and he, at the same time, so plainly
 recognized me, that he is just gone into the chamber on the poop. perhaps
 the king has sent him on our track.”
 “in that case he would join us, instead of lying by. what is he doing
 there?”
 “he is watching us, without a doubt.”
 “i do not like uncertainty,” said fouquet; “let us go straight up to him.”
 “oh! monseigneur, do not do that, the lighter is full of armed men.”
 “he wishes to arrest me, then, gourville? why does he not come on?”
 “monseigneur, it is not consistent with your dignity to go to meet even
 your ruin.”
 “but to allow them to watch me like a malefactor!”
 “nothing yet proves that they are watching you, monseigneur; be patient!”
 “what is to be done, then?”
 “do not stop; you were only going so fast to appear to obey the king’s
 order with zeal. redouble the speed. he who lives will see!”
 “that is better. come!” cried fouquet; “since they remain stock-still
 yonder, let us go on.”
 the captain gave the signal, and fouquet’s rowers resumed their task with
 all the success that could be looked for from men who had rested. scarcely
 had the lighter made a hundred fathoms, than the other, that with the
 twelve rowers, resumed its rapid course. this position lasted all day,
 without any increase or diminution of distance between the two vessels.
 towards evening fouquet wished to try the intentions of his persecutor. he
 ordered his rowers to pull towards the shore, as if to effect a landing.
 colbert’s lighter imitated this maneuver, and steered towards the shore in
 a slanting direction. by the merest chance, at the spot where fouquet
 pretended to wish to land, a stableman, from the chateau of langeais, was
 following the flowery banks leading three horses in halters. without doubt
 the people of the twelve-oared lighter fancied that fouquet was directing
 his course to these horses ready for flight, for four or five men, armed
 with muskets, jumped from the lighter on to the shore, and marched along
 the banks, as if to gain ground on the horseman. fouquet, satisfied of
 having forced the enemy to a demonstration, considered his intention
 evident, and put his boat in motion again. colbert’s people returned
 likewise to theirs, and the course of the two vessels was resumed with
 fresh perseverance. upon seeing this, fouquet felt himself threatened
 closely, and in a prophetic voice—“well, gourville,” said he,
 whisperingly, “what did i say at our last repast, at my house? am i going,
 or not, to my ruin?”
 “oh! monseigneur!”
 “these two boats, which follow each other with so much emulation, as if we
 were disputing, m. colbert and i, a prize for swiftness on the loire, do
 they not aptly represent our fortunes; and do you not believe, gourville,
 that one of the two will be wrecked at nantes?”
 “at least,” objected gourville, “there is still uncertainty; you are about
 to appear at the states; you are about to show what sort of man you are;
 your eloquence and genius for business are the buckler and sword that will
 serve to defend you, if not to conquer with. the bretons do not know you;
 and when they become acquainted with you your cause is won! oh! let m.
 colbert look to it well, for his lighter is as much exposed as yours to
 being upset. both go quickly, his faster than yours, it is true; we shall
 see which will be wrecked first.”
 fouquet, taking gourville’s hand—“my friend,” said he, “everything
 considered, remember the proverb, ‘first come, first served!’ well! m.
 colbert takes care not to pass me. he is a prudent man is m. colbert.”
 he was right; the two lighters held their course as far as nantes,
 watching each other. when the surintendant landed, gourville hoped he
 should be able to seek refuge at once, and have the relays prepared. but,
 at the landing, the second lighter joined the first, and colbert,
 approaching fouquet, saluted him on the quay with marks of the profoundest
 respect—marks so significant, so public, that their result was the
 bringing of the whole population upon la fosse. fouquet was completely
 self-possessed; he felt that in his last moments of greatness he had
 obligations towards himself. he wished to fall from such a height that his
 fall should crush some of his enemies. colbert was there—so much the
 worse for colbert. the surintendant, therefore, coming up to him, replied,
 with that arrogant semi-closure of the eyes peculiar to him—“what!
 is that you, m. colbert?”
 “to offer you my respects, monseigneur,” said the latter.
 “were you in that lighter?”—pointing to the one with twelve rowers.
 “yes, monseigneur.”
 “of twelve rowers?” said fouquet; “what luxury, m. colbert. for a moment i
 thought it was the queen-mother.”
 “monseigneur!”—and colbert blushed.
 “this is a voyage that will cost those who have to pay for it dear,
 monsieur l’intendant!” said fouquet. “but you have, happily, arrived!—you
 see, however,” added he, a moment after, “that i, who had but eight
 rowers, arrived before you.” and he turned his back towards him, leaving
 him uncertain whether the maneuvers of the second lighter had escaped the
 notice of the first. at least he did not give him the satisfaction of
 showing that he had been frightened. colbert, so annoyingly attacked, did
 not give way.
 “i have not been quick, monseigneur,” he replied, “because i followed your
 example whenever you stopped.”
 “and why did you do that, monsieur colbert?” cried fouquet, irritated by
 the base audacity; “as you had a superior crew to mine, why did you not
 either join me or pass me?”
 “out of respect,” said the intendant, bowing to the ground.
 fouquet got into a carriage which the city had sent to him, we know not
 why or how, and he repaired to la maison de nantes, escorted by a
 vast crowd of people, who for several days had been agog with expectation
 of a convocation of the states. scarcely was he installed when gourville
 went out to order horses on the route to poitiers and vannes, and a boat
 at paimboef. he performed these various operations with so much mystery,
 activity, and generosity, that never was fouquet, then laboring under an
 attack of fever, more nearly saved, except for the counteraction of that
 immense disturber of human projects,—chance. a report was spread
 during the night, that the king was coming in great haste on post horses,
 and would arrive in ten or twelve hours at the latest. the people, while
 waiting for the king, were greatly rejoiced to see the musketeers, newly
 arrived, with monsieur d’artagnan, their captain, and quartered in the
 castle, of which they occupied all the posts, in quality of guard of
 honor. m. d’artagnan, who was very polite, presented himself, about ten
 o’clock, at the lodgings of the surintendant to pay his respectful
 compliments; and although the minister suffered from fever, although he
 was in such pain as to be bathed in sweat, he would receive m. d’artagnan,
 who was delighted with that honor, as will be seen by the conversation
 they had together.
 chapter xxxviii. friendly advice.
 fouquet had gone to bed, like a man who clings to life, and wishes to
 economize, as much as possible, that slender tissue of existence, of which
 the shocks and frictions of this world so quickly wear out the tenuity.
 d’artagnan appeared at the door of this chamber, and was saluted by the
 superintendent with a very affable “good day.”
 “bon jour! monseigneur,” replied the musketeer; “how did you get
 through the journey?”
 “tolerably well, thank you.”
 “and the fever?”
 “but poorly. i drink, as you perceive. i am scarcely arrived, and i have
 already levied a contribution of tisane upon nantes.”
 “you should sleep first, monseigneur.”
 “eh! corbleu! my dear monsieur d’artagnan, i should be very glad to
 sleep.”
 “who hinders you?”
 “why, you in the first place.”
 “i? oh, monseigneur!”
 “no doubt you do. is it at nantes as at paris? do you not come in the
 king’s name?”
 “for heaven’s sake, monseigneur,” replied the captain, “leave the king
 alone! the day on which i shall come on the part of the king, for the
 purpose you mean, take my word for it, i will not leave you long in doubt.
 you will see me place my hand on my sword, according to the ordonnance,
 and you will hear my say at once, in ceremonial voice, ‘monseigneur, in
 the name of the king, i arrest you!’”
 “you promise me that frankness?” said the superintendent.
 “upon my honor! but we have not come to that, believe me.”
 “what makes you think that, m. d’artagnan? for my part, i think quite the
 contrary.”
 “i have heard speak of nothing of the kind,” replied d’artagnan.
 “eh! eh!” said fouquet.
 “indeed, no. you are an agreeable man, in spite of your fever. the king
 should not, cannot help loving you, at the bottom of his heart.”
 fouquet’s expression implied doubt. “but m. colbert?” said he; “does m.
 colbert love me as much as you say?”
 “i am not speaking of m. colbert,” replied d’artagnan. “he is an
 exceptional man. he does not love you; so much is very possible; but, mordioux!
 the squirrel can guard himself against the adder with very little
 trouble.”
 “do you know that you are speaking to me quite as a friend?” replied
 fouquet; “and that, upon my life! i have never met with a man of your
 intelligence, and heart?”
 “you are pleased to say so,” replied d’artagnan. “why did you wait till
 to-day to pay me such a compliment?”
 “blind that we are!” murmured fouquet.
 “your voice is getting hoarse,” said d’artagnan; “drink, monseigneur,
 drink!” and he offered him a cup of tisane, with the most friendly
 cordiality; fouquet took it, and thanked him by a gentle smile. “such
 things only happen to me,” said the musketeer. “i have passed ten years
 under your very beard, while you were rolling about tons of gold. you were
 clearing an annual pension of four millions; you never observed me; and
 you find out there is such a person in the world, just at the moment you—”
 “just at the moment i am about to fall,” interrupted fouquet. “that is
 true, my dear monsieur d’artagnan.”
 “i did not say so.”
 “but you thought so; and that is the same thing. well! if i fall, take my
 word as truth, i shall not pass a single day without saying to myself, as
 i strike my brow, ‘fool! fool!—stupid mortal! you had a monsieur
 d’artagnan under your eye and hand, and you did not employ him, you did
 not enrich him!’”
 “you overwhelm me,” said the captain. “i esteem you greatly.”
 “there exists another man, then, who does not think as m. colbert thinks,”
 said the surintendant.
 “how this m. colbert looms up in your imagination! he is worse than
 fever!”
 “oh! i have good cause,” said fouquet. “judge for yourself.” and he
 related the details of the course of the lighters, and the hypocritical
 persecution of colbert. “is not this a clear sign of my ruin?”
 d’artagnan became very serious. “that is true,” he said. “yes; it has an
 unsavory odor, as m. de treville used to say.” and he fixed on m. fouquet
 his intelligent and significant look.
 “am i not clearly designated in that, captain? is not the king bringing me
 to nantes to get me away from paris, where i have so many creatures, and
 to possess himself of belle-isle?”
 “where m. d’herblay is,” added d’artagnan. fouquet raised his head. “as
 for me, monseigneur,” continued d’artagnan, “i can assure you the king has
 said nothing to me against you.”
 “indeed!”
 “the king commanded me to set out for nantes, it is true; and to say
 nothing about it to m. de gesvres.”
 “my friend.”
 “to m. de gesvres, yes, monseigneur,” continued the musketeer, whose eye s
 did not cease to speak a language different from the language of his lips.
 “the king, moreover, commanded me to take a brigade of musketeers, which
 is apparently superfluous, as the country is quite quiet.”
 “a brigade!” said fouquet, raising himself upon his elbow.
 “ninety-six horsemen, yes, monseigneur. the same number as were employed
 in arresting mm. de chalais, de cinq-mars, and montmorency.”
 fouquet pricked up his ears at these words, pronounced without apparent
 value. “and what else?” said he.
 “oh! nothing but insignificant orders; such as guarding the castle,
 guarding every lodging, allowing none of m. de gesvres’s guards to occupy
 a single post.”
 “and as to myself,” cried fouquet, “what orders had you?”
 “as to you, monseigneur?—not the smallest word.”
 “monsieur d’artagnan, my safety, my honor, perhaps my life are at stake.
 you would not deceive me?”
 “i?—to what end? are you threatened? only there really is an order
 with respect to carriages and boats—”
 “an order?”
 “yes; but it cannot concern you—a simple measure of police.”
 “what is it, captain?—what is it?”
 “to forbid all horses or boats to leave nantes, without a pass, signed by
 the king.”
 “great god! but—”
 d’artagnan began to laugh. “all that is not to be put into execution
 before the arrival of the king at nantes. so that you see plainly,
 monseigneur, the order in nowise concerns you.”
 fouquet became thoughtful, and d’artagnan feigned not to observe his
 preoccupation. “it is evident, by my thus confiding to you the orders
 which have been given to me, that i am friendly towards you, and that i am
 trying to prove to you that none of them are directed against you.”
 “without doubt!—without doubt!” said fouquet, still absent.
 “let us recapitulate,” said the captain, his glance beaming with
 earnestness. “a special guard about the castle, in which your lodging is
 to be, is it not?”
 “do you know the castle?”
 “ah! monseigneur, a regular prison! the absence of m. de gesvres, who has
 the honor of being one of your friends. the closing of the gates of the
 city, and of the river without a pass; but, only when the king shall have
 arrived. please to observe, monsieur fouquet, that if, instead of speaking
 to man like you, who are one of the first in the kingdom, i were speaking
 to a troubled, uneasy conscience—i should compromise myself forever.
 what a fine opportunity for any one who wished to be free! no police, no
 guards, no orders; the water free, the roads free, monsieur d’artagnan
 obliged to lend his horses, if required. all this ought to reassure you,
 monsieur fouquet, for the king would not have left me thus independent, if
 he had any sinister designs. in truth, monsieur fouquet, ask me whatever
 you like, i am at your service; and, in return, if you will consent to do
 it, do me a service, that of giving my compliments to aramis and porthos,
 in case you embark for belle-isle, as you have a right to do without
 changing your dress, immediately, in your robe de chambre—just
 as you are.” saying these words, and with a profound bow, the musketeer,
 whose looks had lost none of their intelligent kindness, left the
 apartment. he had not reached the steps of the vestibule, when fouquet,
 quite beside himself, hung to the bell-rope, and shouted, “my horses!—my
 lighter!” but nobody answered. the surintendant dressed himself with
 everything that came to hand.
 “gourville!—gourville!” cried he, while slipping his watch into his
 pocket. and the bell sounded again, whilst fouquet repeated, “gourville!—gourville!”
 gourville at length appeared, breathless and pale.
 “let us be gone! let us be gone!” cried fouquet, as soon as he saw him.
 “it is too late!” said the surintendant’s poor friend.
 “too late!—why?”
 “listen!” and they heard the sounds of trumpets and drums in front of the
 castle.
 “what does that mean, gourville?”
 “it means the king is come, monseigneur.”
 “the king!”
 “the king, who has ridden double stages, who has killed horses, and who is
 eight hours in advance of all our calculations.”
 “we are lost!” murmured fouquet. “brave d’artagnan, all is over, thou has
 spoken to me too late!”
 the king, in fact, was entering the city, which soon resounded with the
 cannon from the ramparts, and from a vessel which replied from the lower
 parts of the river. fouquet’s brow darkened; he called his valets de
 chambre and dressed in ceremonial costume. from his window, behind the
 curtains, he could see the eagerness of the people, and the movement of a
 large troop, which had followed the prince. the king was conducted to the
 castle with great pomp, and fouquet saw him dismount under the portcullis,
 and say something in the ear of d’artagnan, who held his stirrup.
 d’artagnan, when the king had passed under the arch, directed his steps
 towards the house fouquet was in; but so slowly, and stopping so
 frequently to speak to his musketeers, drawn up like a hedge, that it
 might be said he was counting the seconds, or the steps, before
 accomplishing his object. fouquet opened the window to speak to him in the
 court.
 “ah!” cried d’artagnan, on perceiving him, “are you still there,
 monseigneur?”
 and that word still completed the proof to fouquet of how much
 information and how many useful counsels were contained in the first visit
 the musketeer had paid him. the surintendant sighed deeply. “good heavens!
 yes, monsieur,” replied he. “the arrival of the king has interrupted me in
 the projects i had formed.”
 “oh, then you know that the king has arrived?”
 “yes, monsieur, i have seen him; and this time you come from him—”
 “to inquire after you, monseigneur; and, if your health is not too bad, to
 beg you to have the kindness to repair to the castle.”
 “directly, monsieur d’artagnan, directly!”
 “ah, mordioux!” said the captain, “now the king is come, there is
 no more walking for anybody—no more free will; the password governs
 all now, you as much as me, me as much as you.”
 fouquet heaved a last sigh, climbed with difficulty into his carriage, so
 great was his weakness, and went to the castle, escorted by d’artagnan,
 whose politeness was not less terrifying this time than it had just before
 been consoling and cheerful.
 chapter xxxix. how the king, louis xiv., played his little part.
 as fouquet was alighting from his carriage, to enter the castle of nantes,
 a man of mean appearance went up to him with marks of the greatest
 respect, and gave him a letter. d’artagnan endeavored to prevent this man
 from speaking to fouquet, and pushed him away, but the message had been
 given to the surintendant. fouquet opened the letter and read it, and
 instantly a vague terror, which d’artagnan did not fail to penetrate, was
 painted on the countenance of the first minister. fouquet put the paper
 into the portfolio which he had under his arm, and passed on towards the
 king’s apartments. d’artagnan, through the small windows made at every
 landing of the donjon stairs, saw, as he went up behind fouquet, the man
 who had delivered the note, looking round him on the place and making
 signs to several persons, who disappeared in the adjacent streets, after
 having themselves repeated the signals. fouquet was made to wait for a
 moment on the terrace of which we have spoken,—a terrace which
 abutted on the little corridor, at the end of which the cabinet of the
 king was located. here d’artagnan passed on before the surintendant, whom,
 till that time, he had respectfully accompanied, and entered the royal
 cabinet.
 “well?” asked louis xiv., who, on perceiving him, threw on to the table
 covered with papers a large green cloth.
 “the order is executed, sire.”
 “and fouquet?”
 “monsieur le surintendant follows me,” said d’artagnan.
 “in ten minutes let him be introduced,” said the king, dismissing
 d’artagnan again with a gesture. the latter retired; but had scarcely
 reached the corridor at the extremity of which fouquet was waiting for
 him, when he was recalled by the king’s bell.
 “did he not appear astonished?” asked the king.
 “who, sire?”
 “fouquet,” replied the king, without saying monsieur, a peculiarity
 which confirmed the captain of the musketeers in his suspicions.
 “no, sire,” replied he.
 “that’s well!” and a second time louis dismissed d’artagnan.
 fouquet had not quitted the terrace where he had been left by his guide.
 he reperused his note, conceived thus:
 “something is being contrived against you. perhaps they will not dare to
 carry it out at the castle; it will be on your return home. the house is
 already surrounded by musketeers. do not enter. a white horse is in
 waiting for you behind the esplanade!”
 fouquet recognized the writing and zeal of gourville. not being willing
 that, if any evil happened to himself, this paper should compromise a
 faithful friend, the surintendant was busy tearing it into a thousand
 morsels, spread about by the wind from the balustrade of the terrace.
 d’artagnan found him watching the snowflake fluttering of the last scraps
 in space.
 “monsieur,” said he, “the king awaits you.”
 fouquet walked with a deliberate step along the little corridor, where mm.
 de brienne and rose were at work, whilst the duc de saint-aignan, seated
 on a chair, likewise in the corridor, appeared to be waiting for orders,
 with feverish impatience, his sword between his legs. it appeared strange
 to fouquet that mm. brienne, rose, and de saint-aignan, in general so
 attentive and obsequious, should scarcely take the least notice, as he,
 the surintendant, passed. but how could he expect to find it otherwise
 among courtiers, he whom the king no longer called anything but fouquet?
 he raised his head, determined to look every one and everything bravely in
 the face, and entered the king’s apartment, where a little bell, which we
 already know, had already announced him to his majesty.
 the king, without rising, nodded to him, and with interest: “well! how are
 you, monsieur fouquet?” said he.
 “i am in a high fever,” replied the surintendant; “but i am at the king’s
 service.”
 “that is well; the states assemble to-morrow; have you a speech ready?”
 fouquet looked at the king with astonishment. “i have not, sire,” replied
 he; “but i will improvise one. i am too well acquainted with affairs to
 feel any embarrassment. i have only one question to ask; will your majesty
 permit me?”
 “certainly. ask it.”
 “why did not your majesty do his first minister the honor of giving him
 notice of this in paris?”
 “you were ill; i was not willing to fatigue you.”
 “never did a labor—never did an explanation fatigue me, sire; and
 since the moment is come for me to demand an explanation of my king—”
 “oh, monsieur fouquet! an explanation? an explanation, pray, of what?”
 “of your majesty’s intentions with respect to myself.”
 the king blushed. “i have been calumniated,” continued fouquet, warmly,
 “and i feel called upon to adjure the justice of the king to make
 inquiries.”
 “you say all this to me very uselessly, monsieur fouquet; i know what i
 know.”
 “your majesty can only know the things that have been told to you; and i,
 on my part, have said nothing to you, whilst others have spoken many, many
 times—”
 “what do you wish to say?” said the king, impatient to put an end to this
 embarrassing conversation.
 “i will go straight to the facts, sire; and i accuse a certain man of
 having injured me in your majesty’s opinion.”
 “nobody has injured you, monsieur fouquet.”
 “that reply proves to me, sire, that i am right.”
 “monsieur fouquet, i do not like people to be accused.”
 “not when one is accused?”
 “we have already spoken too much about this affair.”
 “your majesty will not allow me to justify myself?”
 “i repeat that i do not accuse you.”
 fouquet, with a half-bow, made a step backward. “it is certain,” thought
 he, “that he has made up his mind. he alone who cannot go back can show
 such obstinacy. not to see the danger now would be to be blind indeed; not
 to shun it would be stupid.” he resumed aloud, “did your majesty send for
 me on business?”
 “no, monsieur fouquet, but for some advice i wish to give you.”
 “i respectfully await it, sire.”
 “rest yourself, monsieur fouquet, do not throw away your strength; the
 session of the states will be short, and when my secretaries shall have
 closed it, i do not wish business to be talked of in france for a
 fortnight.”
 “has the king nothing to say to me on the subject of this assembly of the
 states?”
 “no, monsieur fouquet.”
 “not to me, the surintendant of the finances?”
 “rest yourself, i beg you; that is all i have to say to you.”
 fouquet bit his lips and hung his head. he was evidently busy with some
 uneasy thought. this uneasiness struck the king. “are you angry at having
 to rest yourself, m. fouquet?” said he.
 “yes, sire, i am not accustomed to take rest.”
 “but you are ill; you must take care of yourself.”
 “your majesty spoke just now of a speech to be pronounced to-morrow.”
 his majesty made no reply; this unexpected stroke embarrassed him. fouquet
 felt the weight of this hesitation. he thought he could read danger in the
 eyes of the young prince, which fear would but precipitate. “if i appear
 frightened, i am lost,” thought he.
 the king, on his part, was only uneasy at the alarm of fouquet. “has he a
 suspicion of anything?” murmured he.
 “if his first word is severe,” again thought fouquet; “if he becomes
 angry, or feigns to be angry for the sake of a pretext, how shall i
 extricate myself? let us smooth the declivity a little. gourville was
 right.”
 “sire,” said he, suddenly, “since the goodness of the king watches over my
 health to the point of dispensing with my labor, may i not be allowed to
 be absent from the council of to-morrow? i could pass the day in bed, and
 will entreat the king to grant me his physician, that we may endeavor to
 find a remedy against this fearful fever.”
 “so be it, monsieur fouquet, it shall be as you desire; you shall have a
 holiday to-morrow, you shall have the physician, and shall be restored to
 health.”
 “thanks!” said fouquet, bowing. then, opening his game: “shall i not have
 the happiness of conducting your majesty to my residence of belle-isle?”
 and he looked louis full in the face, to judge of the effect of such a
 proposal. the king blushed again.
 “do you know,” replied he, endeavoring to smile, “that you have just said,
 ‘my residence of belle-isle’?”
 “yes, sire.”
 “well! do you not remember,” continued the king in the same cheerful tone,
 “that you gave me belle-isle?”
 “that is true again, sire. only, as you have not taken it, you will
 doubtless come with me and take possession of it.”
 “i mean to do so.”
 “that was, besides, your majesty’s intention as well as mine; and i cannot
 express to your majesty how happy and proud i have been to see all the
 king’s regiments from paris to help take possession.”
 the king stammered out that he did not bring the musketeers for that
 alone.
 “oh, i am convinced of that,” said fouquet, warmly; “your majesty knows
 very well that you have nothing to do but to come alone with a cane in
 your hand, to bring to the ground all the fortifications of belle-isle.”
 “peste!” cried the king; “i do not wish those fine fortifications,
 which cost so much to build, to fall at all. no, let them stand against
 the dutch and english. you would not guess what i want to see at
 belle-isle, monsieur fouquet; it is the pretty peasants and women of the
 lands on the sea-shore, who dance so well, and are so seducing with their
 scarlet petticoats! i have heard great boast of your pretty tenants,
 monsieur le surintendant; well, let me have a sight of them.”
 “whenever your majesty pleases.”
 “have you any means of transport? it shall be to-morrow, if you like.”
 the surintendant felt this stroke, which was not adroit, and replied, “no,
 sire; i was ignorant of your majesty’s wish; above all, i was ignorant of
 your haste to see belle-isle, and i am prepared with nothing.”
 “you have a boat of your own, nevertheless?”
 “i have five; but they are all in port, or at paimboeuf; and to join them,
 or bring them hither, would require at least twenty-four hours. have i any
 occasion to send a courier? must i do so?”
 “wait a little, put an end to the fever,—wait till to-morrow.”
 “that is true. who knows but that by to-morrow we may not have a hundred
 other ideas?” replied fouquet, now perfectly convinced and very pale.
 the king started, and stretched his hand out towards his little bell, but
 fouquet prevented his ringing.
 “sire,” said he, “i have an ague—i am trembling with cold. if i
 remain a moment longer, i shall most likely faint. i request your
 majesty’s permission to go and fling myself beneath the bedclothes.”
 “indeed, you are in a shiver; it is painful to behold! come, monsieur
 fouquet, begone! i will send to inquire after you.”
 “your majesty overwhelms me with kindness. in an hour i shall be better.”
 “i will call some one to reconduct you,” said the king.
 “as you please, sire; i would gladly take the arm of any one.”
 “monsieur d’artagnan!” cried the king, ringing his little bell.
 “oh, sire,” interrupted fouquet, laughing in such a manner as made the
 prince feel cold, “would you give me the captain of your musketeers to
 take me to my lodgings? an equivocal honor that, sire! a simple footman, i
 beg.”
 “and why, m. fouquet? m. d’artagnan conducts me often, and extremely
 well!”
 “yes, but when he conducts you, sire, it is to obey you; whilst me—”
 “go on!”
 “if i am obliged to return home supported by the leader of the musketeers,
 it would be everywhere said you had had me arrested.”
 “arrested!” replied the king, who became paler than fouquet himself,—“arrested!
 oh!”
 “and why should they not say so?” continued fouquet, still laughing; “and
 i would lay a wager there would be people found wicked enough to laugh at
 it.” this sally disconcerted the monarch. fouquet was skillful enough, or
 fortunate enough, to make louis xiv. recoil before the appearance of the
 deed he meditated. m. d’artagnan, when he appeared, received an order to
 desire a musketeer to accompany the surintendant.
 “quite unnecessary,” said the latter; “sword for sword; i prefer
 gourville, who is waiting for me below. but that will not prevent me
 enjoying the society of m. d’artagnan. i am glad he will see belle-isle,
 he is so good a judge of fortifications.”
 d’artagnan bowed, without at all comprehending what was going on. fouquet
 bowed again and left the apartment, affecting all the slowness of a man
 who walks with difficulty. when once out of the castle, “i am saved!” said
 he. “oh! yes, disloyal king, you shall see belle-isle, but it shall be
 when i am no longer there.”
 he disappeared, leaving d’artagnan with the king.
 “captain,” said the king, “you will follow m. fouquet at the distance of a
 hundred paces.”
 “yes, sire.”
 “he is going to his lodgings again. you will go with him.”
 “yes, sire.”
 “you will arrest him in my name, and will shut him up in a carriage.”
 “in a carriage. well, sire?”
 “in such a fashion that he may not, on the road, either converse with any
 one or throw notes to people he may meet.”
 “that will be rather difficult, sire.”
 “not at all.”
 “pardon me, sire, i cannot stifle m. fouquet, and if he asks for liberty
 to breathe, i cannot prevent him by closing both the windows and the
 blinds. he will throw out at the doors all the cries and notes possible.”
 “the case is provided for, monsieur d’artagnan; a carriage with a trellis
 will obviate both the difficulties you point out.”
 “a carriage with an iron trellis!” cried d’artagnan; “but a carriage with
 an iron trellis is not made in half an hour, and your majesty commands me
 to go immediately to m. fouquet’s lodgings.”
 “the carriage in question is already made.”
 “ah! that is quite a different thing,” said the captain; “if the carriage
 is ready made, very well, then, we have only to set it in motion.”
 “it is ready—and the horses harnessed.”
 “ah!”
 “and the coachman, with the outriders, is waiting in the lower court of
 the castle.”
 d’artagnan bowed. “there only remains for me to ask your majesty whither i
 shall conduct m. fouquet.”
 “to the castle of angers, at first.”
 “very well, sire.”
 “afterwards we will see.”
 “yes, sire.”
 “monsieur d’artagnan, one last word: you have remarked that, for making
 this capture of m. fouquet, i have not employed my guards, on which
 account m. de gesvres will be furious.”
 “your majesty does not employ your guards,” said the captain, a little
 humiliated, “because you mistrust m. de gesvres, that is all.”
 “that is to say, monsieur, that i have more confidence in you.”
 “i know that very well, sire! and it is of no use to make so much of it.”
 “it is only for the sake of arriving at this, monsieur, that if, from this
 moment, it should happen that by any chance whatever m. fouquet should
 escape—such chances have been, monsieur—”
 “oh! very often, sire; but for others, not for me.”
 “and why not with you?”
 “because i, sire, have, for an instant, wished to save m. fouquet.”
 the king started. “because,” continued the captain, “i had then a right to
 do so, having guessed your majesty’s plan, without you having spoken to me
 of it, and that i took an interest in m. fouquet. now, was i not at
 liberty to show my interest in this man?”
 “in truth, monsieur, you do not reassure me with regard to your services.”
 “if i had saved him then, i should have been perfectly innocent; i will
 say more, i should have done well, for m. fouquet is not a bad man. but he
 was not willing; his destiny prevailed; he let the hour of liberty slip
 by. so much the worse! now i have orders, i will obey those orders, and m.
 fouquet you may consider as a man arrested. he is at the castle of angers,
 this very m. fouquet.”
 “oh! you have not got him yet, captain.”
 “that concerns me; every one to his trade, sire; only, once more, reflect!
 do you seriously give me orders to arrest m. fouquet, sire?”
 “yes, a thousand times, yes!”
 “in writing, sire, then.”
 “here is the order.”
 d’artagnan read it, bowed to the king, and left the room. from the height
 of the terrace he perceived gourville, who went by with a joyous air
 towards the lodgings of m. fouquet.
 chapter xl: the white horse and the black.
 “that is rather surprising,” said d’artagnan; “gourville running about the
 streets so gayly, when he is almost certain that m. fouquet is in danger;
 when it is almost equally certain that it was gourville who warned m.
 fouquet just now by the note which was torn into a thousand pieces upon
 the terrace, and given to the winds by monsieur le surintendant. gourville
 is rubbing his hands; that is because he has done something clever. whence
 comes m. gourville? gourville is coming from the rue aux herbes. whither
 does the rue aux herbes lead?” and d’artagnan followed, along the tops of
 the houses of nantes, dominated by the castle, the line traced by the
 streets, as he would have done upon a topographical plan; only, instead of
 the dead, flat paper, the living chart rose in relief with the cries, the
 movements, and the shadows of men and things. beyond the inclosure of the
 city, the great verdant plains stretched out, bordering the loire, and
 appeared to run towards the pink horizon, which was cut by the azure of
 the waters and the dark green of the marshes. immediately outside the
 gates of nantes two white roads were seen diverging like separate fingers
 of a gigantic hand. d’artagnan, who had taken in all the panorama at a
 glance by crossing the terrace, was led by the line of the rue aux herbes
 to the mouth of one of those roads which took its rise under the gates of
 nantes. one step more, and he was about to descend the stairs, take his
 trellised carriage, and go towards the lodgings of m. fouquet. but chance
 decreed, at the moment of plunging into the staircase, that he was
 attracted by a moving point then gaining ground upon that road.
 “what is that?” said the musketeer to himself; “a horse galloping,—a
 runaway horse, no doubt. what a rate he is going at!” the moving point
 became detached from the road, and entered into the fields. “a white
 horse,” continued the captain, who had just observed the color thrown
 luminously against the dark ground, “and he is mounted; it must be some
 boy whose horse is thirsty and has run away with him.”
 these reflections, rapid as lightning, simultaneous with visual
 perception, d’artagnan had already forgotten when he descended the first
 steps of the staircase. some morsels of paper were spread over the stairs,
 and shone out white against the dirty stones. “eh! eh!” said the captain
 to himself, “here are some of the fragments of the note torn by m.
 fouquet. poor man! he has given his secret to the wind; the wind will have
 no more to do with it, and brings it back to the king. decidedly, fouquet,
 you play with misfortune! the game is not a fair one,—fortune is
 against you. the star of louis xiv. obscures yours; the adder is stronger
 and more cunning than the squirrel.” d’artagnan picked up one of these
 morsels of paper as he descended. “gourville’s pretty little hand!” cried
 he, whilst examining one of the fragments of the note; “i was not
 mistaken.” and he read the word “horse.” “stop!” said he; and he examined
 another, upon which there was not a letter traced. upon a third he read
 the word “white;” “white horse,” repeated he, like a child that is
 spelling. “ah, mordioux!” cried the suspicious spirit, “a white
 horse!” and, like that grain of powder which, burning, dilates into ten
 thousand times its volume, d’artagnan, enlightened by ideas and
 suspicions, rapidly reascended the stairs towards the terrace. the white
 horse was still galloping in the direction of the loire, at the extremity
 of which, melting into the vapors of the water, a little sail appeared,
 wave-balanced like a water-butterfly. “oh!” cried the musketeer, “only a
 man who wants to fly would go at that pace across plowed lands; there is
 but one fouquet, a financier, to ride thus in open day upon a white horse;
 there is no one but the lord of belle-isle who would make his escape
 towards the sea, while there are such thick forests on land, and there is
 but one d’artagnan in the world to catch m. fouquet, who has half an
 hour’s start, and who will have gained his boat within an hour.” this
 being said, the musketeer gave orders that the carriage with the iron
 trellis should be taken immediately to a thicket situated just outside the
 city. he selected his best horse, jumped upon his back, galloped along the
 rue aux herbes, taking, not the road fouquet had taken, but the bank
 itself of the loire, certain that he should gain ten minutes upon the
 total distance, and, at the intersection of the two lines, come up with
 the fugitive, who could have no suspicion of being pursued in that
 direction. in the rapidity of the pursuit, and with the impatience of the
 avenger, animating himself as in war, d’artagnan, so mild, so kind towards
 fouquet, was surprised to find himself become ferocious—almost
 sanguinary. for a long time he galloped without catching sight of the
 white horse. his rage assumed fury, he doubted himself,—he suspected
 that fouquet had buried himself in some subterranean road, or that he had
 changed the white horse for one of those famous black ones, as swift as
 the wind, which d’artagnan, at saint-mande, had so frequently admired and
 envied for their vigor and their fleetness.
 at such moments, when the wind cut his eyes so as to make the tears spring
 from them, when the saddle had become burning hot, when the galled and
 spurred horse reared with pain, and threw behind him a shower of dust and
 stones, d’artagnan, raising himself in his stirrups, and seeing nothing on
 the waters, nothing beneath the trees, looked up into the air like a
 madman. he was losing his senses. in the paroxysms of eagerness he dreamt
 of aerial ways,—the discovery of following century; he called to his
 mind daedalus and the vast wings that had saved him from the prisons of
 crete. a hoarse sigh broke from his lips, as he repeated, devoured by the
 fear of ridicule, “i! i! duped by a gourville! i! they will say that i am
 growing old,—they will say i have received a million to allow
 fouquet to escape!” and he again dug his spurs into the sides of his
 horse: he had ridden astonishingly fast. suddenly, at the extremity of
 some open pasture-ground, behind the hedges, he saw a white form which
 showed itself, disappeared, and at last remained distinctly visible
 against the rising ground. d’artagnan’s heart leaped with joy. he wiped
 the streaming sweat from his brow, relaxed the tension of his knees,—by
 which the horse breathed more freely,—and, gathering up his reins,
 moderated the speed of the vigorous animal, his active accomplice on this
 man-hunt. he had then time to study the direction of the road, and his
 position with regard to fouquet. the superintendent had completely winded
 his horse by crossing the soft ground. he felt the necessity of gaining a
 firmer footing, and turned towards the road by the shortest secant line.
 d’artagnan, on his part, had nothing to do but to ride straight on,
 concealed by the sloping shore; so that he would cut his quarry off the
 road when he came up with him. then the real race would begin,—then
 the struggle would be in earnest.
 d’artagnan gave his horse good breathing-time. he observed that the
 superintendent had relaxed into a trot, which was to say, he, too, was
 favoring his horse. but both of them were too much pressed for time to
 allow them to continue long at that pace. the white horse sprang off like
 an arrow the moment his feet touched firm ground. d’artagnan dropped his
 head, and his black horse broke into a gallop. both followed the same
 route; the quadruple echoes of this new race-course were confounded.
 fouquet had not yet perceived d’artagnan. but on issuing from the slope, a
 single echo struck the air; it was that of the steps of d’artagnan’s
 horse, which rolled along like thunder. fouquet turned round, and saw
 behind him, within a hundred paces, his enemy bent over the neck of his
 horse. there could be no doubt—the shining baldrick, the red cassock—it
 was a musketeer. fouquet slackened his hand likewise, and the white horse
 placed twenty feet more between his adversary and himself.
 “oh, but,” thought d’artagnan, becoming very anxious, “that is not a
 common horse m. fouquet is upon—let us see!” and he attentively
 examined with his infallible eye the shape and capabilities of the
 courser. round full quarters—a thin long tail—large hocks—thin
 legs, as dry as bars of steel—hoofs hard as marble. he spurred his
 own, but the distance between the two remained the same. d’artagnan
 listened attentively; not a breath of the horse reached him, and yet he
 seemed to cut the air. the black horse, on the contrary, began to puff
 like any blacksmith’s bellows.
 “i must overtake him, if i kill my horse,” thought the musketeer; and he
 began to saw the mouth of the poor animal, whilst he buried the rowels of
 his merciless spurs into his sides. the maddened horse gained twenty
 toises, and came up within pistol-shot of fouquet.
 “courage!” said the musketeer to himself, “courage! the white horse will
 perhaps grow weaker, and if the horse does not fall, the master must pull
 up at last.” but horse and rider remained upright together, gaining ground
 by difficult degrees. d’artagnan uttered a wild cry, which made fouquet
 turn round, and added speed to the white horse.
 “a famous horse! a mad rider!” growled the captain. “hola! mordioux!
 monsieur fouquet! stop! in the king’s name!” fouquet made no reply.
 “do you hear me?” shouted d’artagnan, whose horse had just stumbled.
 “pardieu!” replied fouquet, laconically; and rode on faster.
 d’artagnan was nearly mad; the blood rushed boiling to his temples and his
 eyes. “in the king’s name!” cried he again, “stop, or i will bring you
 down with a pistol-shot!”
 “do!” replied fouquet, without relaxing his speed.
 d’artagnan seized a pistol and cocked it, hoping that the double click of
 the spring would stop his enemy. “you have pistols likewise,” said he,
 “turn and defend yourself.”
 fouquet did turn round at the noise, and looking d’artagnan full in the
 face, opened, with his right hand, the part of his dress which concealed
 his body, but he did not even touch his holsters. there were not more than
 twenty paces between the two.
 “mordioux!” said d’artagnan, “i will not assassinate you; if you
 will not fire upon me, surrender! what is a prison?”
 “i would rather die!” replied fouquet; “i shall suffer less.”
 d’artagnan, drunk with despair, hurled his pistol to the ground. “i will
 take you alive!” said he; and by a prodigy of skill which this
 incomparable horseman alone was capable, he threw his horse forward to
 within ten paces of the white horse; already his hand was stretched out to
 seize his prey.
 “kill me! kill me!” cried fouquet, “‘twould be more humane!”
 “no! alive—alive!” murmured the captain.
 at this moment his horse made a false step for the second time, and
 fouquet’s again took the lead. it was an unheard-of spectacle, this race
 between two horses which now only kept alive by the will of their riders.
 it might be said that d’artagnan rode, carrying his horse along between
 his knees. to the furious gallop had succeeded the fast trot, and that had
 sunk to what might be scarcely called a trot at all. but the chase
 appeared equally warm in the two fatigued athletoe. d’artagnan,
 quite in despair, seized his second pistol, and cocked it.
 “at your horse! not at you!” cried he to fouquet. and he fired. the animal
 was hit in the quarters—he made a furious bound, and plunged
 forward. at that moment d’artagnan’s horse fell dead.
 “i am dishonored!” thought the musketeer; “i am a miserable wretch! for
 pity’s sake, m. fouquet, throw me one of your pistols, that i may blow out
 my brains!” but fouquet rode away.
 “for mercy’s sake! for mercy’s sake!” cried d’artagnan; “that which you
 will not do at this moment, i myself will do within an hour, but here,
 upon this road, i should die bravely; i should die esteemed; do me that
 service, m. fouquet!”
 m. fouquet made no reply, but continued to trot on. d’artagnan began to
 run after his enemy. successively he threw away his hat, his coat, which
 embarrassed him, and then the sheath of his sword, which got between his
 legs as he was running. the sword in his hand itself became too heavy, and
 he threw it after the sheath. the white horse began to rattle in its
 throat; d’artagnan gained upon him. from a trot the exhausted animal sunk
 to a staggering walk—the foam from his mouth was mixed with blood.
 d’artagnan made a desperate effort, sprang towards fouquet, and seized him
 by the leg, saying in a broken, breathless voice, “i arrest you in the
 king’s name! blow my brains out, if you like; we have both done our duty.”
 fouquet hurled far from him, into the river, the two pistols d’artagnan
 might have seized, and dismounting from his horse—“i am your
 prisoner, monsieur,” said he; “will you take my arm, for i see you are
 ready to faint?”
 “thanks!” murmured d’artagnan, who, in fact, felt the earth sliding from
 under his feet, and the light of day turning to blackness around him; then
 he rolled upon the sand, without breath or strength. fouquet hastened to
 the brink of the river, dipped some water in his hat, with which he bathed
 the temples of the musketeer, and introduced a few drop between his lips.
 d’artagnan raised himself with difficulty, and looked about him with a
 wandering eye. he beheld fouquet on his knees, with his wet hat in his
 hand, smiling upon him with ineffable sweetness. “you are not off, then?”
 cried he. “oh, monsieur! the true king of royalty, in heart, in soul, is
 not louis of the louvre, or philippe of sainte-marguerite; it is you,
 proscribed, condemned!”
 “i, who this day am ruined by a single error, m. d’artagnan.”
 “what, in the name of heaven, is that?”
 “i should have had you for a friend! but how shall we return to nantes? we
 are a great way from it.”
 “that is true,” said d’artagnan, gloomily.
 “the white horse will recover, perhaps; he is a good horse! mount,
 monsieur d’artagnan; i will walk till you have rested a little.”
 “poor beast! and wounded, too?” said the musketeer.
 “he will go, i tell you; i know him; but we can do better still, let us
 both get up, and ride slowly.”
 “we can try,” said the captain. but they had scarcely charged the animal
 with this double load, when he began to stagger, and then with a great
 effort walked a few minutes, then staggered again, and sank down dead by
 the side of the black horse, which he had just managed to come up to.
 “we will go on foot—destiny wills it so—the walk will be
 pleasant,” said fouquet, passing his arm through that of d’artagnan.
 “mordioux!” cried the latter, with a fixed eye, a contracted brow,
 and a swelling heart—“what a disgraceful day!”
 they walked slowly the four leagues which separated them from the little
 wood behind which the carriage and escort were in waiting. when fouquet
 perceived that sinister machine, he said to d’artagnan, who cast down his
 eyes, ashamed of louis xiv., “there is an idea that did not emanate from a
 brave man, captain d’artagnan; it is not yours. what are these gratings
 for?” said he.
 “to prevent your throwing letters out.”
 “ingenious!”
 “but you can speak, if you cannot write,” said d’artagnan.
 “can i speak to you?”
 “why, certainly, if you wish to do so.”
 fouquet reflected for a moment, then looking the captain full in the face,
 “one single word,” said he; “will you remember it?”
 “i will not forget it.”
 “will you speak it to whom i wish?”
 “i will.”
 “saint-mande,” articulated fouquet, in a low voice.
 “well! and for whom?”
 “for madame de belliere or pelisson.”
 “it shall be done.”
 the carriage rolled through nantes, and took the route to angers.
 chapter xli. in which the squirrel falls,—the adder flies.
 it was two o’clock in the afternoon. the king, full of impatience, went to
 his cabinet on the terrace, and kept opening the door of the corridor, to
 see what his secretaries were doing. m. colbert, seated in the same place
 m. de saint-aignan had so long occupied in the morning, was chatting in a
 low voice with m. de brienne. the king opened the door suddenly, and
 addressed them. “what is it you are saying?”
 “we were speaking of the first sitting of the states,” said m. de brienne,
 rising.
 “very well,” replied the king, and returned to his room.
 five minutes after, the summons of the bell recalled rose, whose hour it
 was.
 “have you finished your copies?” asked the king.
 “not yet, sire.”
 “see if m. d’artagnan has returned.”
 “not yet, sire.”
 “it is very strange,” murmured the king. “call m. colbert.”
 colbert entered; he had been expecting this all the morning.
 “monsieur colbert,” said the king, very sharply; “you must ascertain what
 has become of m. d’artagnan.”
 colbert in his calm voice replied, “where does your majesty desire him to
 be sought for?”
 “eh! monsieur! do you not know on what i have sent him?” replied louis,
 acrimoniously.
 “your majesty did not inform me.”
 “monsieur, there are things that must be guessed; and you, above all, are
 apt to guess them.”
 “i might have been able to imagine, sire; but i do not presume to be
 positive.”
 colbert had not finished these words when a rougher voice than that of the
 king interrupted the interesting conversation thus begun between the
 monarch and his clerk.
 “d’artagnan!” cried the king, with evident joy.
 d’artagnan, pale and in evidently bad humor, cried to the king, as he
 entered, “sire, is it your majesty who has given orders to my musketeers?”
 “what orders?” said the king.
 “about m. fouquet’s house?”
 “none!” replied louis.
 “ha!” said d’artagnan, biting his mustache; “i was not mistaken, then; it
 was monsieur here;” and he pointed to colbert.
 “what orders? let me know,” said the king.
 “orders to turn the house topsy-turvy, to beat m. fouquet’s servants, to
 force the drawers, to give over a peaceful house to pillage! mordioux!
 these are savage orders!”
 “monsieur!” said colbert, turning pale.
 “monsieur,” interrupted d’artagnan, “the king alone, understand,—the
 king alone has a right to command my musketeers; but, as to you, i forbid
 you to do it, and i tell you so before his majesty; gentlemen who carry
 swords do not sling pens behind their ears.”
 “d’artagnan! d’artagnan!” murmured the king.
 “it is humiliating,” continued the musketeer; “my soldiers are disgraced.
 i do not command reitres, thank you, nor clerks of the intendant,
 mordioux!”
 “well! but what is all this about?” said the king with authority.
 “about this, sire; monsieur—monsieur, who could not guess your
 majesty’s orders, and consequently could not know i was gone to arrest m.
 fouquet; monsieur, who has caused the iron cage to be constructed for his
 patron of yesterday—has sent m. de roncherolles to the lodgings of
 m. fouquet, and, under the pretense of securing the surintendant’s papers,
 they have taken away the furniture. my musketeers have been posted round
 the house all the morning; such were my orders. why did any one presume to
 order them to enter? why, by forcing them to assist in this pillage, have
 they been made accomplices in it? mordioux! we serve the king, we
 do; but we do not serve m. colbert!” 
 “monsieur d’artagnan,” said the king, sternly, “take care; it is not in my
 presence that such explanations, and made in such a tone, should take
 place.”
 “i have acted for the good of the king,” said colbert, in a faltering
 voice. “it is hard to be so treated by one of your majesty’s officers, and
 that without redress, on account of the respect i owe the king.”
 “the respect you owe the king,” cried d’artagnan, his eyes flashing fire,
 “consists, in the first place, in making his authority respected, and his
 person beloved. every agent of a power without control represents that
 power, and when people curse the hand which strikes them, it is the royal
 hand that god reproaches, do you hear? must a soldier, hardened by forty
 years of wounds and blood, give you this lesson, monsieur? must mercy be
 on my side, and ferocity on yours? you have caused the innocent to be
 arrested, bound, and imprisoned!”
 “accomplices, perhaps, of m. fouquet,” said colbert.
 “who told you m. fouquet had accomplices, or even that he was guilty? the
 king alone knows that; his justice is not blind! when he says, ‘arrest and
 imprison’ such and such a man, he is obeyed. do not talk to me, then, any
 more of the respect you owe the king, and be careful of your words, that
 they may not chance to convey the slightest menace; for the king will not
 allow those to be threatened who do him service by others who do him
 disservice; and if in case i should have, which god forbid! a master so
 ungrateful, i would make myself respected.”
 thus saying, d’artagnan took his station haughtily in the king’s cabinet,
 his eyes flashing, his hand on his sword, his lips trembling, affecting
 much more anger than he really felt. colbert, humiliated and devoured with
 rage, bowed to the king as if to ask his permission to leave the room. the
 king, thwarted alike in pride and in curiosity, knew not which part to
 take. d’artagnan saw him hesitate. to remain longer would have been a
 mistake: it was necessary to score a triumph over colbert, and the only
 method was to touch the king so near the quick, that his majesty would
 have no other means of extrication but choosing between the two
 antagonists. d’artagnan bowed as colbert had done; but the king, who, in
 preference to everything else, was anxious to have all the exact details
 of the arrest of the surintendant of the finances from him who had made
 him tremble for a moment,—the king, perceiving that the ill-humor of
 d’artagnan would put off for half an hour at least the details he was
 burning to be acquainted with,—louis, we say, forgot colbert, who
 had nothing new to tell him, and recalled his captain of the musketeers.
 “in the first place,” said he, “let me see the result of your commission,
 monsieur; you may rest yourself hereafter.”
 d’artagnan, who was just passing through the doorway, stopped at the voice
 of the king, retraced his steps, and colbert was forced to leave the
 closet. his countenance assumed almost a purple hue, his black and
 threatening eyes shone with a dark fire beneath their thick brows; he
 stepped out, bowed before the king, half drew himself up in passing
 d’artagnan, and went away with death in his heart. d’artagnan, on being
 left alone with the king, softened immediately, and composing his
 countenance: “sire,” said he, “you are a young king. it is by the dawn
 that people judge whether the day will be fine or dull. how, sire, will
 the people, whom the hand of god has placed under your law, argue of your
 reign, if between them and you, you allow angry and violent ministers to
 interpose their mischief? but let us speak of myself, sire, let us leave a
 discussion that may appear idle, and perhaps inconvenient to you. let us
 speak of myself. i have arrested m. fouquet.”
 “you took plenty of time about it,” said the king, sharply.
 d’artagnan looked at the king. “i perceive that i have expressed myself
 badly. i announced to your majesty that i had arrested monsieur fouquet.”
 “you did; and what then?”
 “well! i ought to have told your majesty that m. fouquet had arrested me;
 that would have been more just. i re-establish the truth, then; i have
 been arrested by m. fouquet.”
 it was now the turn of louis xiv. to be surprised. his majesty was
 astonished in his turn.
 d’artagnan, with his quick glance, appreciated what was passing in the
 heart of his master. he did not allow him time to put any questions. he
 related, with that poetry, that picturesqueness, which perhaps he alone
 possessed at that period, the escape of fouquet, the pursuit, the furious
 race, and, lastly, the inimitable generosity of the surintendant, who
 might have fled ten times over, who might have killed the adversary in the
 pursuit, but who had preferred imprisonment, perhaps worse, to the
 humiliation of one who wished to rob him of his liberty. in proportion as
 the tale advanced, the king became agitated, devouring the narrator’s
 words, and drumming with his finger-nails upon the table.
 “it results from all this, sire, in my eyes, at least, that the man who
 conducts himself thus is a gallant man, and cannot be an enemy to the
 king. that is my opinion, and i repeat it to your majesty. i know what the
 king will say to me, and i bow to it,—reasons of state. so be it! to
 my ears that sounds highly respectable. but i am a soldier, and i have
 received my orders, my orders are executed—very unwillingly on my
 part, it is true, but they are executed. i say no more.”
 “where is m. fouquet at this moment?” asked louis, after a short silence.
 “m. fouquet, sire,” replied d’artagnan, “is in the iron cage that m.
 colbert had prepared for him, and is galloping as fast as four strong
 horses can drag him, towards angers.”
 “why did you leave him on the road?”
 “because your majesty did not tell me to go to angers. the proof, the best
 proof of what i advance, is that the king desired me to be sought for but
 this minute. and then i had another reason.”
 “what is that?”
 “whilst i was with him, poor m. fouquet would never attempt to escape.”
 “well!” cried the king, astonished.
 “your majesty ought to understand, and does understand, certainly, that my
 warmest wish is to know that m. fouquet is at liberty. i have given him
 one of my brigadiers, the most stupid i could find among my musketeers, in
 order that the prisoner might have a chance of escaping.”
 “are you mad, monsieur d’artagnan?” cried the king, crossing his arms on
 his breast. “do people utter such enormities, even when they have the
 misfortune to think them?”
 “ah! sire, you cannot expect that i should be an enemy to m. fouquet,
 after what he has just done for you and me. no, no; if you desire that he
 should remain under your lock and bolt, never give him in charge to me;
 however closely wired might be the cage, the bird would, in the end, take
 wing.”
 “i am surprised,” said the king, in his sternest tone, “you did not follow
 the fortunes of the man m. fouquet wished to place upon my throne. you had
 in him all you want—affection, gratitude. in my service, monsieur,
 you will only find a master.”
 “if m. fouquet had not gone to seek you in the bastile, sire,” replied
 d’artagnan, with a deeply impressive manner, “one single man would have
 gone there, and i should have been that man—you know that right
 well, sire.”
 the king was brought to a pause. before that speech of his captain of the
 musketeers, so frankly spoken and so true, the king had nothing to offer.
 on hearing d’artagnan, louis remembered the d’artagnan of former times;
 him who, at the palais royal, held himself concealed behind the curtains
 of his bed, when the people of paris, led by cardinal de retz, came to
 assure themselves of the presence of the king; the d’artagnan whom he
 saluted with his hand at the door of his carriage, when repairing to notre
 dame on his return to paris; the soldier who had quitted his service at
 blois; the lieutenant he had recalled to be beside his person when the
 death of mazarin restored his power; the man he had always found loyal,
 courageous, devoted. louis advanced towards the door and called colbert.
 colbert had not left the corridor where the secretaries were at work. he
 reappeared.
 “colbert, did you make a perquisition on the house of m. fouquet?”
 “yes, sire.”
 “what has it produced?”
 “m. de roncherolles, who was sent with your majesty’s musketeers, has
 remitted me some papers,” replied colbert.
 “i will look at them. give me your hand.”
 “my hand, sire!”
 “yes, that i may place it in that of m. d’artagnan. in fact, m.
 d’artagnan,” added he, with a smile, turning towards the soldier, who, at
 sight of the clerk, had resumed his haughty attitude, “you do not know
 this man; make his acquaintance.” and he pointed to colbert. “he has been
 made but a moderately valuable servant in subaltern positions, but he will
 be a great man if i raise him to the foremost rank.”
 “sire!” stammered colbert, confused with pleasure and fear.
 “i always understood why,” murmured d’artagnan in the king’s ear; “he was
 jealous.”
 “precisely, and his jealousy confined his wings.”
 “he will henceforward be a winged-serpent,” grumbled the musketeer, with a
 remnant of hatred against his recent adversary.
 but colbert, approaching him, offered to his eyes a physiognomy so
 different from that which he had been accustomed to see him wear; he
 appeared so good, so mild, so easy; his eyes took the expression of an
 intelligence so noble, that d’artagnan, a connoisseur in physiognomies,
 was moved, and almost changed in his convictions. colbert pressed his
 hand.
 “that which the king has just told you, monsieur, proves how well his
 majesty is acquainted with men. the inveterate opposition i have
 displayed, up to this day, against abuses and not against men, proves that
 i had it in view to prepare for my king a glorious reign, for my country a
 great blessing. i have many ideas, m. d’artagnan. you will see them expand
 in the sun of public peace; and if i have not the good fortune to conquer
 the friendship of honest men, i am at least certain, monsieur, that i
 shall obtain their esteem. for their admiration, monsieur, i would give my
 life.”
 this change, this sudden elevation, this mute approbation of the king,
 gave the musketeer matter for profound reflection. he bowed civilly to
 colbert, who did not take his eyes off him. the king, when he saw they
 were reconciled, dismissed them. they left the room together. as soon as
 they were out of the cabinet, the new minister, stopping the captain,
 said:
 “is it possible, m. d’artagnan, that with such an eye as yours, you did
 not, at the first glance, at the first impression, discover what sort of
 man i am?”
 “monsieur colbert,” replied the musketeer, “a ray of the sun in our eyes
 prevents us from seeing the most vivid flame. the man in power radiates,
 you know; and since you are there, why should you continue to persecute
 him who had just fallen into disgrace, and fallen from such a height?”
 “i, monsieur!” said colbert; “oh, monsieur! i would never persecute him. i
 wished to administer the finances and to administer them alone, because i
 am ambitious, and, above all, because i have the most entire confidence in
 my own merit; because i know that all the gold of this country will ebb
 and flow beneath my eyes, and i love to look at the king’s gold; because,
 if i live thirty years, in thirty years not a denir of it will
 remain in my hands; because, with that gold, i will build granaries,
 castles, cities, and harbors; because i will create a marine, i will equip
 navies that shall waft the name of france to the most distant people;
 because i will create libraries and academies; because i will make france
 the first country in the world, and the wealthiest. these are the motives
 for my animosity against m. fouquet, who prevented my acting. and then,
 when i shall be great and strong, when france is great and strong, in my
 turn, then, will i cry, ‘mercy’!”
 “mercy, did you say? then ask his liberty of the king. the king is only
 crushing him on your account.”
 colbert again raised his head. “monsieur,” said he, “you know that is not
 so, and that the king has his own personal animosity against m. fouquet;
 it is not for me to teach you that.”
 “but the king will grow tired; he will forget.”
 “the king never forgets, m. d’artagnan. hark! the king calls. he is going
 to issue an order. i have not influenced him, have i? listen.”
 the king, in fact, was calling his secretaries. “monsieur d’artagnan,”
 said he.
 “i am here, sire.”
 “give twenty of your musketeers to m. de saint-aignan, to form a guard for
 m. fouquet.”
 d’artagnan and colbert exchanged looks. “and from angers,” continued the
 king, “they will conduct the prisoner to the bastile, in paris.”
 “you were right,” said the captain to the minister.
 “saint-aignan,” continued the king, “you will have any one shot who shall
 attempt to speak privately with m. fouquet, during the journey.”
 “but myself, sire,” said the duke.
 “you, monsieur, you will only speak to him in the presence of the
 musketeers.” the duke bowed and departed to execute his commission.
 d’artagnan was about to retire likewise; but the king stopped him.
 “monsieur,” said he, “you will go immediately, and take possession of the
 isle and fief of belle-ile-en-mer.”
 “yes, sire. alone?”
 “you will take a sufficient number of troops to prevent delay, in case the
 place should be contumacious.”
 a murmur of courtly incredulity rose from the group of courtiers. “that
 shall be done,” said d’artagnan.
 “i saw the place in my infancy,” resumed the king, “and i do not wish to
 see it again. you have heard me? go, monsieur, and do not return without
 the keys.”
 colbert went up to d’artagnan. “a commission which, if you carry it out
 well,” said he, “will be worth a marechal’s baton to you.”
 “why do you employ the words, ‘if you carry it out well’?”
 “because it is difficult.”
 “ah! in what respect?”
 “you have friends in belle-isle, monsieur d’artagnan; and it is not an
 easy thing for men like you to march over the bodies of their friends to
 obtain success.”
 d’artagnan hung his head in deepest thought, whilst colbert returned to
 the king. a quarter of an hour after, the captain received the written
 order from the king, to blow up the fortress of belle-isle, in case of
 resistance, with power of life and death over all the inhabitants or
 refugees, and an injunction not to allow one to escape.
 “colbert was right,” thought d’artagnan; “for me the baton of a marechal
 of france will cost the lives of my two friends. only they seem to forget
 that my friends are not more stupid than the birds, and that they will not
 wait for the hand of the fowler to extend over their wings. i will show
 them that hand so plainly, that they will have quite time enough to see
 it. poor porthos! poor aramis! no; my fortune should shall not cost your
 wings a feather.”
 having thus determined, d’artagnan assembled the royal army, embarked it
 at paimboeuf, and set sail, without the loss of an unnecessary minute.
 chapter xlii. belle-ile-en-mer.
 at the extremity of the mole, against which the furious sea beats at the
 evening tide, two men, holding each other by the arm, were conversing in
 an animated and expansive tone, without the possibility of any other human
 being hearing their words, borne away, as they were, one by one, by the
 gusts of wind, with the white foam swept from the crests of the waves. the
 sun had just gone down in the vast sheet of the crimsoned ocean, like a
 gigantic crucible. from time to time, one of these men, turning towards
 the east, cast an anxious, inquiring look over the sea. the other,
 interrogating the features of his companion, seemed to seek for
 information in his looks. then, both silent, busied with dismal thoughts,
 they resumed their walk. every one has already perceived that these two
 men were our proscribed heroes, porthos and aramis, who had taken refuge
 in belle-isle, since the ruin of their hopes, since the discomfiture of
 the colossal schemes of m. d’herblay.
 “if is of no use your saying anything to the contrary, my dear aramis,”
 repeated porthos, inhaling vigorously the salt breeze with which he
 charged his massive chest, “it is of no use, aramis. the disappearance of
 all the fishing-boats that went out two days ago is not an ordinary
 circumstance. there has been no storm at sea; the weather has been
 constantly calm, not even the lightest gale; and even if we had had a
 tempest, all our boats would not have foundered. i repeat, it is strange.
 this complete disappearance astonishes me, i tell you.”
 “true,” murmured aramis. “you are right, friend porthos; it is true, there
 is something strange in it.”
 “and further,” added porthos, whose ideas the assent of the bishop of
 vannes seemed to enlarge; “and, further, do you not observe that if the
 boats have perished, not a single plank has washed ashore?”
 “i have remarked it as well as yourself.”
 “and do you not think it strange that the two only boats we had left in
 the whole island, and which i sent in search of the others—”
 aramis here interrupted his companion by a cry, and by so sudden a
 movement, that porthos stopped as if he were stupefied. “what do you say,
 porthos? what!—you have sent the two boats—”
 “in search of the others! yes, to be sure i have,” replied porthos,
 calmly.
 “unhappy man! what have you done? then we are indeed lost,” cried the
 bishop.
 “lost!—what did you say?” exclaimed the terrified porthos. “how
 lost, aramis? how are we lost?”
 aramis bit his lips. “nothing! nothing! your pardon, i meant to say—”
 “what?”
 “that if we were inclined—if we took a fancy to make an excursion by
 sea, we could not.”
 “very good! and why should that vex you? a precious pleasure, ma foi!
 for my part, i don’t regret it at all. what i regret is certainly not the
 more or less amusement we can find at belle-isle: what i regret, aramis,
 is pierrefonds; bracieux; le vallon; beautiful france! here, we are not in
 france, my dear friend; we are—i know not where. oh! i tell you, in
 full sincerity of soul, and your affection will excuse my frankness, but i
 declare to you i am not happy at belle-isle. no; in good truth, i am not
 happy!”
 aramis breathed a long, but stifled sigh. “dear friend,” replied he: “that
 is why it is so sad a thing you have sent the two boats we had left in
 search of the boats which disappeared two days ago. if you had not sent
 them away, we would have departed.”
 “‘departed!’ and the orders, aramis?”
 “what orders?”
 “parbleu! why, the orders you have been constantly, in and out of
 season, repeating to me—that we were to hold belle-isle against the
 usurper. you know very well!”
 “that is true!” murmured aramis again.
 “you see, then, plainly, my friend, that we could not depart; and that the
 sending away of the boats in search of the others cannot prove prejudicial
 to us in the very least.”
 aramis was silent; and his vague glances, luminous as that of an
 albatross, hovered for a long time over the sea, interrogating space,
 seeking to pierce the very horizon.
 “with all that, aramis,” continued porthos, who adhered to his idea, and
 that the more closely from the bishop having apparently endorsed it,—“with
 all that, you give me no explanation about what can have happened to these
 unfortunate boats. i am assailed by cries and complaints whichever way i
 go. the children cry to see the desolation of the women, as if i could
 restore the absent husbands and fathers. what do you suppose, my friend,
 and how ought i to answer them?”
 “think all you like, my good porthos, and say nothing.”
 this reply did not satisfy porthos at all. he turned away grumbling
 something in ill-humor. aramis stopped the valiant musketeer. “do you
 remember,” said he, in a melancholy tone, kneading the two hands of the
 giant between his own with affectionate cordiality, “do you remember, my
 friend, that in the glorious days of youth—do you remember, porthos,
 when we were all strong and valiant—we, and the other two—if
 we had then had an inclination to return to france, do you think this
 sheet of salt water would have stopped us?”
 “oh!” said porthos; “but six leagues.”
 “if you had seen me get astride of a plank, would you have remained on
 land, porthos?”
 “no, pardieu! no, aramis. but, nowadays, what sort of a plank
 should we want, my friend! i, in particular.” and the seigneur de bracieux
 cast a profound glance over his colossal rotundity with a loud laugh. “and
 do you mean seriously to say you are not tired of belle-isle a little, and
 that you would not prefer the comforts of your dwelling—of your
 episcopal palace, at vannes? come, confess.”
 “no,” replied aramis, without daring to look at porthos.
 “let us stay where we are, then,” said his friend, with a sigh, which, in
 spite of the efforts he made to restrain it, escaped his echoing breast.
 “let us remain!—let us remain! and yet,” added he, “and yet, if we
 seriously wished, but that decidedly—if we had a fixed idea, one
 firmly taken, to return to france, and there were not boats—”
 “have you remarked another thing, my friend—that is, since the
 disappearance of our barks, during the last two days’ absence of
 fishermen, not a single small boat has landed on the shores of the isle?”
 “yes, certainly! you are right. i, too, have remarked it, and the
 observation was the more naturally made, for, before the last two fatal
 days, barks and shallops were as plentiful as shrimps.”
 “i must inquire,” said aramis, suddenly, and with great agitation. “and
 then, if we had a raft constructed—”
 “but there are some canoes, my friend; shall i board one?”
 “a canoe!—a canoe! can you think of such a thing, porthos? a canoe
 to be upset in. no, no,” said the bishop of vannes; “it is not our trade
 to ride upon the waves. we will wait, we will wait.”
 and aramis continued walking about with increased agitation. porthos, who
 grew tired of following all the feverish movements of his friend—porthos,
 who in his faith and calmness understood nothing of the sort of
 exasperation which was betrayed by his companion’s continual convulsive
 starts—porthos stopped him. “let us sit down upon this rock,” said
 he. “place yourself there, close to me, aramis, and i conjure you, for the
 last time, to explain to me in a manner i can comprehend—explain to
 me what we are doing here.”
 “porthos,” said aramis, much embarrassed.
 “i know that the false king wished to dethrone the true king. that is a
 fact, that i understand. well—”
 “yes?” said aramis.
 “i know that the false king formed the project of selling belle-isle to
 the english. i understand that, too.”
 “yes?”
 “i know that we engineers and captains came and threw ourselves into
 belle-isle to take direction of the works, and the command of ten
 companies levied and paid by m. fouquet, or rather the ten companies of
 his son-in-law. all that is plain.”
 aramis rose in a state of great impatience. he might be said to be a lion
 importuned by a gnat. porthos held him by the arm. “but what i cannot
 understand, what, in spite of all the efforts of my mind, and all my
 reflections, i cannot comprehend, and never shall comprehend, is, that
 instead of sending us troops, instead of sending us reinforcements of men,
 munitions, provisions, they leave us without boats, they leave belle-isle
 without arrivals, without help; it is that instead of establishing with us
 a correspondence, whether by signals, or written or verbal communications,
 all relations with the shore are intercepted. tell me, aramis, answer me,
 or rather, before answering me, will you allow me to tell you what i have
 thought? will you hear what my idea is, the plan i have conceived?”
 the bishop raised his head. “well! aramis,” continued porthos, “i have
 dreamed, i have imagined that an event has taken place in france. i dreamt
 of m. fouquet all the night, of lifeless fish, of broken eggs, of chambers
 badly furnished, meanly kept. villainous dreams, my dear d’herblay; very
 unlucky, such dreams!”
 “porthos, what is that yonder?” interrupted aramis, rising suddenly, and
 pointing out to his friend a black spot upon the empurpled line of the
 water.
 “a bark!” said porthos; “yes, it is a bark! ah! we shall have some news at
 last.”
 “there are two!” cried the bishop, on discovering another mast; “two!
 three! four!”
 “five!” said porthos, in his turn. “six! seven! ah! mon dieu! mon dieu!
 it is a fleet!”
 “our boats returning, probably,” said aramis, very uneasily, in spite of
 the assurance he affected.
 “they are very large for fishing-boats,” observed porthos, “and do you not
 remark, my friend, that they come from the loire?”
 “they come from the loire—yes—”
 “and look! everybody here sees them as well as ourselves; look, women and
 children are beginning to crowd the jetty.”
 an old fisherman passed. “are those our barks, yonder?” asked aramis.
 the old man looked steadily into the eye of the horizon.
 “no, monseigneur,” replied he, “they are lighter boars, boats in the
 king’s service.”
 “boats in the royal service?” replied aramis, starting. “how do you know
 that?” said he.
 “by the flag.”
 “but,” said porthos, “the boat is scarcely visible; how the devil, my
 friend, can you distinguish the flag?”
 “i see there is one,” replied the old man; “our boats, trade lighters, do
 not carry any. that sort of craft is generally used for transport of
 troops.”
 “ah!” groaned aramis.
 “vivat!” cried porthos, “they are sending us reinforcements, don’t
 you think they are, aramis?”
 “probably.”
 “unless it is the english coming.”
 “by the loire? that would have an evil look, porthos; for they must have
 come through paris!”
 “you are right; they are reinforcements, decidedly, or provisions.”
 aramis leaned his head upon his hands, and made no reply. then, all at
 once,—“porthos,” said he, “have the alarm sounded.”
 “the alarm! do you imagine such a thing?”
 “yes, and let the cannoniers mount their batteries, the artillerymen be at
 their pieces, and be particularly watchful of the coast batteries.”
 porthos opened his eyes to their widest extent. he looked attentively at
 his friend, to convince himself he was in his proper senses.
 “i will do it, my dear porthos,” continued aramis, in his blandest
 tone; “i will go and have these orders executed myself, if you do not go,
 my friend.”
 “well! i will—instantly!” said porthos, who went to execute the
 orders, casting all the while looks behind him, to see if the bishop of
 vannes were not deceived; and if, on recovering more rational ideas, he
 would not recall him. the alarm was sounded, trumpets brayed, drums
 rolled; the great bronze bell swung in horror from its lofty belfry. the
 dikes and moles were quickly filled with the curious and soldiers; matches
 sparkled in the hands of the artillerymen, placed behind the large cannon
 bedded in their stone carriages. when every man was at his post, when all
 the preparations for defense were made: “permit me, aramis, to try to
 comprehend,” whispered porthos, timidly, in aramis’s ear.
 “my dear friend, you will comprehend but too soon,” murmured m. d’herblay,
 in reply to this question of his lieutenant.
 “the fleet which is coming yonder, with sails unfurled, straight towards
 the port of belle-isle, is a royal fleet, is it not?”
 “but as there are two kings in france, porthos, to which of these two
 kings does this fleet belong?”
 “oh! you open my eyes,” replied the giant, stunned by the insinuation.
 and porthos, whose eyes this reply of his friend’s had at last opened, or
 rather thickened the bandage which covered his sight, went with his best
 speed to the batteries to overlook his people, and exhort every one to do
 his duty. in the meantime, aramis, with his eye fixed on the horizon, saw
 the ships continually drawing nearer. the people and the soldiers, perched
 on the summits of the rocks, could distinguish the masts, then the lower
 sails, and at last the hulls of the lighters, bearing at the masthead the
 royal flag of france. it was night when one of these vessels, which had
 created such a sensation among the inhabitants of belle-isle, dropped
 anchor within cannon shot of the place. it was soon seen, notwithstanding
 the darkness, that some sort of agitation reigned on board the vessel,
 from the side of which a skiff was lowered, of which the three rowers,
 bending to their oars, took the direction of the port, and in a few
 instants struck land at the foot of the fort. the commander jumped ashore.
 he had a letter in his hand, which he waved in the air, and seemed to wish
 to communicate with somebody. this man was soon recognized by several
 soldiers as one of the pilots of the island. he was the captain of one of
 the two barks retained by aramis, but which porthos, in his anxiety with
 regard to the fate of the fishermen who had disappeared, had sent in
 search of the missing boats. he asked to be conducted to m. d’herblay. two
 soldiers, at a signal from a sergeant, marched him between them, and
 escorted him. aramis was upon the quay. the envoy presented himself before
 the bishop of vannes. the darkness was almost absolute, notwithstanding
 the flambeaux borne at a small distance by the soldiers who were following
 aramis in his rounds.
 “well, jonathan, from whom do you come?”
 “monseigneur, from those who captured me.”
 “who captured you?”
 “you know, monseigneur, we set out in search of our comrades?”
 “yes; and afterwards?”
 “well! monseigneur, within a short league we were captured by a chasse
 maree belonging to the king.”
 “ah!” said aramis.
 “of which king?” cried porthos.
 jonathan started.
 “speak!” continued the bishop.
 “we were captured, monseigneur, and joined to those who had been taken
 yesterday morning.”
 “what was the cause of the mania for capturing you all?” said porthos.
 “monsieur, to prevent us from telling you,” replied jonathan.
 porthos was again at a loss to comprehend. “and they have released you
 to-day?” asked he.
 “that i might tell you they have captured us, monsieur.”
 “trouble upon trouble,” thought honest porthos.
 during this time aramis was reflecting.
 “humph!” said he, “then i suppose it is a royal fleet blockading the
 coasts?”
 “yes, monseigneur.”
 “who commands it?”
 “the captain of the king’s musketeers.”
 “d’artagnan?”
 “d’artagnan!” exclaimed porthos.
 “i believe that is the name.”
 “and did he give you this letter?”
 “yes, monseigneur.”
 “bring the torches nearer.”
 “it is his writing,” said porthos.
 aramis eagerly read the following lines:
 “order of the king to take belle-isle; or to put the garrison to the
 sword, if they resist; order to make prisoners of all the men of the
 garrison; signed, d’artagnan, who, the day before yesterday, arrested m.
 fouquet, for the purpose of his being sent to the bastile.”
 aramis turned pale, and crushed the paper in his hands.
 “what is it?” asked porthos.
 “nothing, my friend, nothing.”
 “tell me, jonathan?”
 “monseigneur?”
 “did you speak to m. d’artagnan?”
 “yes, monseigneur.”
 “what did he say to you?”
 “that for ampler information, he would speak with monseigneur.”
 “where?”
 “on board his own vessel.”
 “on board his vessel!” and porthos repeated, “on board his vessel!”
 “m. le mousquetaire,” continued jonathan, “told me to take you both on
 board my canoe, and bring you to him.”
 “let us go at once,” exclaimed porthos. “dear d’artagnan!”
 but aramis stopped him. “are you mad?” cried he. “who knows that it is not
 a snare?”
 “of the other king’s?” said porthos, mysteriously.
 “a snare, in fact! that’s what it is, my friend.”
 “very possibly; what is to be done, then? if d’artagnan sends for us—”
 “who assures you that d’artagnan sends for us?”
 “well, but—but his writing—”
 “writing is easily counterfeited. this looks counterfeited—unsteady—”
 “you are always right; but, in the meantime, we know nothing.”
 aramis was silent.
 “it is true,” said the good porthos, “we do not want to know anything.”
 “what shall i do?” asked jonathan.
 “you will return on board this captain’s vessel.”
 “yes, monseigneur.”
 “and will tell him that we beg he will himself come into the island.”
 “ah! i comprehend!” said porthos.
 “yes, monseigneur,” replied jonathan; “but if the captain should refuse to
 come to belle-isle?”
 “if he refuses, as we have cannon, we will make use of them.”
 “what! against d’artagnan?”
 “if it is d’artagnan, porthos, he will come. go, jonathan, go!”
 “ma foi! i no longer comprehend anything,” murmured porthos.
 “i will make you comprehend it all, my dear friend; the time for it has
 come; sit down upon this gun-carriage, open your ears, and listen well to
 me.”
 “oh! pardieu! i will listen, no fear of that.”
 “may i depart, monseigneur?” cried jonathan.
 “yes, begone, and bring back an answer. allow the canoe to pass, you men
 there!” and the canoe pushed off to regain the fleet.
 aramis took porthos by the hand, and commenced his explanations.
 chapter xliii. explanations by aramis.
 “what i have to say to you, friend porthos, will probably surprise you,
 but it may prove instructive.”
 “i like to be surprised,” said porthos, in a kindly tone; “do not spare
 me, therefore, i beg. i am hardened against emotions; don’t fear, speak
 out.”
 “it is difficult, porthos—difficult; for, in truth, i warn you a
 second time, i have very strange things, very extraordinary things, to
 tell you.”
 “oh! you speak so well, my friend, that i could listen to you for days
 together. speak, then, i beg—and—stop, i have an idea: i will,
 to make your task more easy, i will, to assist you in telling me such
 things, question you.”
 “i shall be pleased at your doing so.”
 “what are we going to fight for, aramis?”
 “if you ask me many such questions as that—if you would render my
 task the easier by interrupting my revelations thus, porthos, you will not
 help me at all. so far, on the contrary, that is the very gordian knot.
 but, my friend, with a man like you, good, generous, and devoted, the
 confession must be bravely made. i have deceived you, my worthy friend.”
 “you have deceived me!”
 “good heavens! yes.”
 “was it for my good, aramis?”
 “i thought so, porthos; i thought so sincerely, my friend.”
 “then,” said the honest seigneur of bracieux, “you have rendered me a
 service, and i thank you for it; for if you had not deceived me, i might
 have deceived myself. in what, then, have you deceived me, tell me?”
 “in that i was serving the usurper against whom louis xiv., at this
 moment, is directing his efforts.”
 “the usurper!” said porthos, scratching his head. “that is—well, i
 do not quite clearly comprehend!”
 “he is one of the two kings who are contending for the crown of france.”
 “very well! then you were serving him who is not louis xiv.?”
 “you have hit the matter in one word.”
 “it follows that—”
 “it follows that we are rebels, my poor friend.”
 “the devil! the devil!” cried porthos, much disappointed.
 “oh! but, dear porthos, be calm, we shall still find means of getting out
 of the affair, trust me.”
 “it is not that which makes me uneasy,” replied porthos; “that which alone
 touches me is that ugly word rebels.”
 “ah! but—”
 “and so, according to this, the duchy that was promised me—”
 “it was the usurper that was to give it to you.”
 “and that is not the same thing, aramis,” said porthos, majestically.
 “my friend, if it had only depended upon me, you should have become a
 prince.”
 porthos began to bite his nails in a melancholy way.
 “that is where you have been wrong,” continued he, “in deceiving me; for
 that promised duchy i reckoned upon. oh! i reckoned upon it seriously,
 knowing you to be a man of your word, aramis.”
 “poor porthos! pardon me, i implore you!”
 “so, then,” continued porthos, without replying to the bishop’s prayer,
 “so then, it seems, i have quite fallen out with louis xiv.?”
 “oh! i will settle all that, my good friend, i will settle all that. i
 will take it on myself alone!”
 “aramis!”
 “no, no, porthos, i conjure you, let me act. no false generosity! no
 inopportune devotedness! you knew nothing of my projects. you have done
 nothing of yourself. with me it is different. i alone am the author of
 this plot. i stood in need of my inseparable companion; i called upon you,
 and you came to me in remembrance of our ancient device, ‘all for one, one
 for all.’ my crime is that i was an egotist.”
 “now, that is a word i like,” said porthos; “and seeing that you have
 acted entirely for yourself, it is impossible for me to blame you. it is
 natural.”
 and upon this sublime reflection, porthos pressed his friend’s hand
 cordially.
 in presence of this ingenuous greatness of soul, aramis felt his own
 littleness. it was the second time he had been compelled to bend before
 real superiority of heart, which is more imposing than brilliancy of mind.
 he replied by a mute and energetic pressure to the endearment of his
 friend.
 “now,” said porthos, “that we have come to an explanation, now that i am
 perfectly aware of our situation with respect to louis xiv., i think, my
 friend, it is time to make me comprehend the political intrigue of which
 we are the victims—for i plainly see there is a political intrigue
 at the bottom of all this.”
 “d’artagnan, my good porthos, d’artagnan is coming, and will detail it to
 you in all its circumstances; but, excuse me, i am deeply grieved, i am
 bowed down with mental anguish, and i have need of all my presence of
 mind, all my powers of reflection, to extricate you from the false
 position in which i have so imprudently involved you; but nothing can be
 more clear, nothing more plain, than your position, henceforth. the king
 louis xiv. has no longer now but one enemy: that enemy is myself, myself
 alone. i have made you a prisoner, you have followed me, to-day i liberate
 you, you fly back to your prince. you can perceive, porthos, there is not
 one difficulty in all this.”
 “do you think so?” said porthos.
 “i am quite sure of it.”
 “then why,” said the admirable good sense of porthos, “then why, if we are
 in such an easy position, why, my friend, do we prepare cannon, muskets,
 and engines of all sorts? it seems to me it would be much more simple to
 say to captain d’artagnan: ‘my dear friend, we have been mistaken; that
 error is to be repaired; open the door to us, let us pass through, and we
 will say good-bye.’”
 “ah! that!” said aramis, shaking his head.
 “why do you say ‘that’? do you not approve of my plan, my friend?”
 “i see a difficulty in it.”
 “what is it?”
 “the hypothesis that d’artagnan may come with orders which will oblige us
 to defend ourselves.”
 “what! defend ourselves against d’artagnan? folly! against the good
 d’artagnan!”
 aramis once more replied by shaking his head.
 “porthos,” at length said he, “if i have had the matches lighted and the
 guns pointed, if i have had the signal of alarm sounded, if i have called
 every man to his post upon the ramparts, those good ramparts of belle-isle
 which you have so well fortified, it was not for nothing. wait to judge;
 or rather, no, do not wait—”
 “what can i do?”
 “if i knew, my friend, i would have told you.”
 “but there is one thing much more simple than defending ourselves:—a
 boat, and away for france—where—”
 “my dear friend,” said aramis, smiling with a strong shade of sadness, “do
 not let us reason like children; let us be men in council and in
 execution.—but, hark! i hear a hail for landing at the port.
 attention, porthos, serious attention!”
 “it is d’artagnan, no doubt,” said porthos, in a voice of thunder,
 approaching the parapet.
 “yes, it is i,” replied the captain of the musketeers, running lightly up
 the steps of the mole, and gaining rapidly the little esplanade on which
 his two friends waited for him. as soon as he came towards them, porthos
 and aramis observed an officer who followed d’artagnan, treading
 apparently in his very steps. the captain stopped upon the stairs of the
 mole, when half-way up. his companions imitated him.
 “make your men draw back,” cried d’artagnan to porthos and aramis; “let
 them retire out of hearing.” this order, given by porthos, was executed
 immediately. then d’artagnan, turning towards him who followed him:
 “monsieur,” said he, “we are no longer on board the king’s fleet, where,
 in virtue of your order, you spoke so arrogantly to me, just now.”
 “monsieur,” replied the officer, “i did not speak arrogantly to you; i
 simply, but rigorously, obeyed instructions. i was commanded to follow
 you. i follow you. i am directed not to allow you to communicate with any
 one without taking cognizance of what you do; i am in duty bound,
 accordingly, to overhear your conversations.”
 d’artagnan trembled with rage, and porthos and aramis, who heard this
 dialogue, trembled likewise, but with uneasiness and fear. d’artagnan,
 biting his mustache with that vivacity which denoted in him exasperation,
 closely to be followed by an explosion, approached the officer.
 “monsieur,” said he, in a low voice, so much the more impressive, that,
 affecting calm, it threatened tempest—“monsieur, when i sent a canoe
 hither, you wished to know what i wrote to the defenders of belle-isle.
 you produced an order to that effect; and, in my turn, i instantly showed
 you the note i had written. when the skipper of the boat sent by me
 returned, when i received the reply of these two gentlemen” (and he
 pointed to aramis and porthos), “you heard every word of what the
 messenger said. all that was plainly in your orders, all that was well
 executed, very punctually, was it not?”
 “yes, monsieur,” stammered the officer; “yes, without doubt, but—”
 “monsieur,” continued d’artagnan, growing warm—“monsieur, when i
 manifested the intention of quitting my vessel to cross to belle-isle, you
 demanded to accompany me; i did not hesitate; i brought you with me. you
 are now at belle-isle, are you not?”
 “yes, monsieur; but—”
 “but—the question no longer is of m. colbert, who has given you that
 order, or of whomsoever in the world you are following the instructions;
 the question now is of a man who is a clog upon m. d’artagnan, and who is
 alone with m. d’artagnan upon steps whose feet are bathed by thirty feet
 of salt water; a bad position for that man, a bad position, monsieur! i
 warn you.”
 “but, monsieur, if i am a restraint upon you,” said the officer, timidly,
 and almost faintly, “it is my duty which—”
 “monsieur, you have had the misfortune, either you or those that sent you,
 to insult me. it is done. i cannot seek redress from those who employ you,—they
 are unknown to me, or are at too great a distance. but you are under my
 hand, and i swear that if you make one step behind me when i raise my feet
 to go up to those gentlemen, i swear to you by my name, i will cleave your
 head in two with my sword, and pitch you into the water. oh! it will
 happen! it will happen! i have only been six times angry in my life,
 monsieur, and all five preceding times i killed my man.”
 the officer did not stir; he became pale under this terrible threat, but
 replied with simplicity, “monsieur, you are wrong in acting against my
 orders.”
 porthos and aramis, mute and trembling at the top of the parapet, cried to
 the musketeer, “good d’artagnan, take care!”
 d’artagnan made them a sign to keep silence, raised his foot with ominous
 calmness to mount the stair, and turned round, sword in hand, to see if
 the officer followed him. the officer made a sign of the cross and stepped
 up. porthos and aramis, who knew their d’artagnan, uttered a cry, and
 rushed down to prevent the blow they thought they already heard. but
 d’artagnan passed his sword into his left hand,—
 “monsieur,” said he to the officer, in an agitated voice, “you are a brave
 man. you will all the better comprehend what i am going to say to you
 now.”
 “speak, monsieur d’artagnan, speak,” replied the officer.
 “these gentlemen we have just seen, and against whom you have orders, are
 my friends.”
 “i know they are, monsieur.”
 “you can understand whether or not i ought to act towards them as your
 instructions prescribe.”
 “i understand your reserve.”
 “very well; permit me, then, to converse with them without a witness.”
 “monsieur d’artagnan, if i yield to your request, if i do that which you
 beg me, i break my word; but if i do not do it, i disoblige you. i prefer
 the one dilemma to the other. converse with your friends, and do not
 despise me, monsieur, for doing this for your sake, whom i esteem
 and honor; do not despise me for committing for you, and you alone, an
 unworthy act.” d’artagnan, much agitated, threw his arm round the neck of
 the young man, and then went up to his friends. the officer, enveloped in
 his cloak, sat down on the damp, weed-covered steps.
 “well!” said d’artagnan to his friends, “such is my position, judge for
 yourselves.” all three embraced as in the glorious days of their youth.
 “what is the meaning of all these preparations?” said porthos.
 “you ought to have a suspicion of what they signify,” said d’artagnan.
 “not any, i assure you, my dear captain; for, in fact, i have done
 nothing, no more has aramis,” the worthy baron hastened to say.
 d’artagnan darted a reproachful look at the prelate, which penetrated that
 hardened heart.
 “dear porthos!” cried the bishop of vannes.
 “you see what is being done against you,” said d’artagnan; “interception
 of all boats coming to or going from belle-isle. your means of transport
 seized. if you had endeavored to fly, you would have fallen into the hands
 of the cruisers that plow the sea in all directions, on the watch for you.
 the king wants you to be taken, and he will take you.” d’artagnan tore at
 his gray mustache. aramis grew somber, porthos angry.
 “my idea was this,” continued d’artagnan: “to make you both come on board,
 to keep you near me, and restore you your liberty. but now, who can say,
 when i return to my ship, i may not find a superior; that i may not find
 secret orders which will take from me my command, and give it to another,
 who will dispose of me and you without hope of help?”
 “we must remain at belle-isle,” said aramis, resolutely; “and i assure
 you, for my part, i will not surrender easily.” porthos said nothing.
 d’artagnan remarked the silence of his friend.
 “i have another trial to make of this officer, of this brave fellow who
 accompanies me, and whose courageous resistance makes me very happy; for
 it denotes an honest man, who, though an enemy, is a thousand times better
 than a complaisant coward. let us try to learn from him what his
 instructions are, and what his orders permit or forbid.”
 “let us try,” said aramis.
 d’artagnan went to the parapet, leaned over towards the steps of the mole,
 and called the officer, who immediately came up. “monsieur,” said
 d’artagnan, after having exchanged the cordial courtesies natural between
 gentlemen who know and appreciate each other, “monsieur, if i wished to
 take away these gentlemen from here, what would you do?”
 “i should not oppose it, monsieur; but having direct explicit orders to
 put them under guard, i should detain them.”
 “ah!” said d’artagnan.
 “that’s all over,” said aramis, gloomily. porthos did not stir.
 “but still take porthos,” said the bishop of vannes. “he can prove to the
 king, and i will help him do so, and you too, monsieur d’artagnan, that he
 had nothing to do with this affair.”
 “hum!” said d’artagnan. “will you come? will you follow me, porthos? the
 king is merciful.”
 “i want time for reflection,” said porthos.
 “you will remain here, then?”
 “until fresh orders,” said aramis, with vivacity.
 “until we have an idea,” resumed d’artagnan; “and i now believe that will
 not be long, for i have one already.”
 “let us say adieu, then,” said aramis; “but in truth, my good porthos, you
 ought to go.”
 “no,” said the latter, laconically.
 “as you please,” replied aramis, a little wounded in his susceptibilities
 at the morose tone of his companion. “only i am reassured by the promise
 of an idea from d’artagnan, an idea i fancy i have divined.”
 “let us see,” said the musketeer, placing his ear near aramis’s mouth. the
 latter spoke several words rapidly, to which d’artagnan replied, “that is
 it, precisely.”
 “infallible!” cried aramis.
 “during the first emotion this resolution will cause, take care of
 yourself, aramis.”
 “oh! don’t be afraid.”
 “now, monsieur,” said d’artagnan to the officer, “thanks, a thousand
 thanks! you have made yourself three friends for life.”
 “yes,” added aramis. porthos alone said nothing, but merely bowed.
 d’artagnan, having tenderly embraced his two old friends, left belle-isle
 with the inseparable companion with whom m. colbert had saddled him. thus,
 with the exception of the explanation with which the worthy porthos had
 been willing to be satisfied, nothing had changed in appearance in the
 fate of one or the other, “only,” said aramis, “there is d’artagnan’s
 idea.”
 d’artagnan did not return on board without profoundly analyzing the idea
 he had discovered. now, we know that whatever d’artagnan did examine,
 according to custom, daylight was certain to illuminate. as to the
 officer, now grown mute again, he had full time for meditation. therefore,
 on putting his foot on board his vessel, moored within cannon-shot of the
 island, the captain of the musketeers had already got together all his
 means, offensive and defensive.
 he immediately assembled his council, which consisted of the officers
 serving under his orders. these were eight in number; a chief of the
 maritime forces; a major directing the artillery; an engineer, the officer
 we are acquainted with, and four lieutenants. having assembled them,
 d’artagnan arose, took of his hat, and addressed them thus:
 “gentlemen, i have been to reconnoiter belle-ile-en-mer, and i have found
 in it a good and solid garrison; moreover, preparations are made for a
 defense that may prove troublesome. i therefore intend to send for two of
 the principal officers of the place, that we may converse with them.
 having separated them from their troops and cannon, we shall be better
 able to deal with them; particularly by reasoning with them. is not this
 your opinion, gentlemen?”
 the major of artillery rose.
 “monsieur,” said he, with respect, but firmness, “i have heard you say
 that the place is preparing to make a troublesome defense. the place is
 then, as you know, determined on rebellion?”
 d’artagnan was visibly put out by this reply; but he was not the man to
 allow himself to be subdued by a trifle, and resumed:
 “monsieur,” said he, “your reply is just. but you are ignorant that
 belle-isle is a fief of m. fouquet’s, and that former monarchs gave the
 right to the seigneurs of belle-isle to arm their people.” the major made
 a movement. “oh! do not interrupt me,” continued d’artagnan. “you are
 going to tell me that that right to arm themselves against the english was
 not a right to arm themselves against their king. but it is not m.
 fouquet, i suppose, who holds belle-isle at this moment, since i arrested
 m. fouquet the day before yesterday. now the inhabitants and defenders of
 belle-isle know nothing of this arrest. you would announce it to them in
 vain. it is a thing so unheard-of and extraordinary, so unexpected, that
 they would not believe you. a breton serves his master, and not his
 masters; he serves his master till he has seen him dead. now the bretons,
 as far as i know, have not seen the body of m. fouquet. it is not, then,
 surprising they hold out against that which is neither m. fouquet nor his
 signature.”
 the major bowed in token of assent.
 “that is why,” continued d’artagnan, “i propose to cause two of the
 principal officers of the garrison to come on board my vessel. they will
 see you, gentlemen; they will see the forces we have at our disposal; they
 will consequently know to what they have to trust, and the fate that
 attends them, in case of rebellion. we will affirm to them, upon our
 honor, that m. fouquet is a prisoner, and that all resistance can only be
 prejudicial to them. we will tell them that at the first cannon fired,
 there will be no further hope of mercy from the king. then, or so at least
 i trust, they will resist no longer. they will yield up without fighting,
 and we shall have a place given up to us in a friendly way which it might
 cost prodigious efforts to subdue.”
 the officer who had followed d’artagnan to belle-isle was preparing to
 speak, but d’artagnan interrupted him.
 “yes, i know what you are going to tell me, monsieur; i know that there is
 an order of the king’s to prevent all secret communications with the
 defenders of belle-isle, and that is exactly why i do not offer to
 communicate except in presence of my staff.”
 and d’artagnan made an inclination of the head to his officers, who knew
 him well enough to attach a certain value to the condescension.
 the officers looked at each other as if to read each other’s opinions in
 their eyes, with the intention of evidently acting, should they agree,
 according to the desire of d’artagnan. and already the latter saw with joy
 that the result of their consent would be sending a bark to porthos and
 aramis, when the king’s officer drew from a pocket a folded paper, which
 he placed in the hands of d’artagnan.
 this paper bore upon its superscription the number .
 “what, more!” murmured the surprised captain.
 “read, monsieur,” said the officer, with a courtesy that was not free from
 sadness.
 d’artagnan, full of mistrust, unfolded the paper, and read these words:
 “prohibition to m. d’artagnan to assemble any council whatever, or to
 deliberate in any way before belle-isle be surrendered and the prisoners
 shot. signed—louis.”
 d’artagnan repressed the quiver of impatience that ran through his whole
 body, and with a gracious smile:
 “that is well, monsieur,” said he; “the king’s orders shall be complied
 with.”
 chapter xliv. result of the ideas of the king, and the ideas of
 d’artagnan.
 the blow was direct. it was severe, mortal. d’artagnan, furious at having
 been anticipated by an idea of the king’s, did not despair, however, even
 yet; and reflecting upon the idea he had brought back from belle-isle, he
 elicited therefrom novel means of safety for his friends.
 “gentlemen,” said he, suddenly, “since the king has charged some other
 than myself with his secret orders, it must be because i no longer possess
 his confidence, and i should really be unworthy of it if i had the courage
 to hold a command subject to so many injurious suspicions. therefore i
 will go immediately and carry my resignation to the king. i tender it
 before you all, enjoining you all to fall back with me upon the coast of
 france, in such a way as not to compromise the safety of the forces his
 majesty has confided to me. for this purpose, return all to your posts;
 within an hour, we shall have the ebb of the tide. to your posts,
 gentlemen! i suppose,” added he, on seeing that all prepared to obey him,
 except the surveillant officer, “you have no orders to object, this time?”
 and d’artagnan almost triumphed while speaking these words. this plan
 would prove the safety of his friends. the blockade once raised, they
 might embark immediately, and set sail for england or spain, without fear
 of being molested. whilst they were making their escape, d’artagnan would
 return to the king; would justify his return by the indignation which the
 mistrust of colbert had raised in him; he would be sent back with full
 powers, and he would take belle-isle; that is to say, the cage, after the
 birds had flown. but to this plan the officer opposed a further order of
 the king’s. it was thus conceived:
 “from the moment m. d’artagnan shall have manifested the desire of giving
 in his resignation, he shall no longer be reckoned leader of the
 expedition, and every officer placed under his orders shall be held to no
 longer obey him. moreover, the said monsieur d’artagnan, having lost that
 quality of leader of the army sent against belle-isle, shall set out
 immediately for france, accompanied by the officer who will have remitted
 the message to him, and who will consider him a prisoner for whom he is
 answerable.”
 brave and careless as he was, d’artagnan turned pale. everything had been
 calculated with a depth of precognition which, for the first time in
 thirty years, recalled to him the solid foresight and inflexible logic of
 the great cardinal. he leaned his head on his hand, thoughtful, scarcely
 breathing. “if i were to put this order in my pocket,” thought he, “who
 would know it, what would prevent my doing it? before the king had had
 time to be informed, i should have saved those poor fellows yonder. let us
 exercise some small audacity! my head is not one of those the executioner
 strikes off for disobedience. we will disobey!” but at the moment he was
 about to adopt this plan, he saw the officers around him reading similar
 orders, which the passive agent of the thoughts of that infernal colbert
 had distributed to them. this contingency of his disobedience had been
 foreseen—as all the rest had been.
 “monsieur,” said the officer, coming up to him, “i await your good
 pleasure to depart.”
 “i am ready, monsieur,” replied d’artagnan, grinding his teeth.
 the officer immediately ordered a canoe to receive m. d’artagnan and
 himself. at sight of this he became almost distraught with rage.
 “how,” stammered he, “will you carry on the directions of the different
 corps?”
 “when you are gone, monsieur,” replied the commander of the fleet, “it is
 to me the command of the whole is committed.”
 “then, monsieur,” rejoined colbert’s man, addressing the new leader, “it
 is for you that this last order remitted to me is intended. let us see
 your powers.”
 “here they are,” said the officer, exhibiting the royal signature.
 “here are your instructions,” replied the officer, placing the folded
 paper in his hands; and turning round towards d’artagnan, “come,
 monsieur,” said he, in an agitated voice (such despair did he behold in
 that man of iron), “do me the favor to depart at once.”
 “immediately!” articulated d’artagnan, feebly, subdued, crushed by
 implacable impossibility.
 and he painfully subsided into the little boat, which started, favored by
 wind and tide, for the coast of france. the king’s guards embarked with
 him. the musketeer still preserved the hope of reaching nantes quickly,
 and of pleading the cause of his friends eloquently enough to incline the
 king to mercy. the bark flew like a swallow. d’artagnan distinctly saw the
 land of france profiled in black against the white clouds of night.
 “ah! monsieur,” said he, in a low voice, to the officer to whom, for an
 hour, he had ceased speaking, “what would i give to know the instructions
 for the new commander! they are all pacific, are they not? and—”
 he did not finish; the thunder of a distant cannon rolled athwart the
 waves, another, and two or three still louder. d’artagnan shuddered.
 “they have commenced the siege of belle-isle,” replied the officer. the
 canoe had just touched the soil of france.
 chapter xlv. the ancestors of porthos.
 when d’artagnan left aramis and porthos, the latter returned to the
 principal fort, in order to converse with greater liberty. porthos, still
 thoughtful, was a restraint on aramis, whose mind had never felt itself
 more free.
 “dear porthos,” said he, suddenly, “i will explain d’artagnan’s idea to
 you.”
 “what idea, aramis?”
 “an idea to which we shall owe our liberty within twelve hours.”
 “ah! indeed!” said porthos, much astonished. “let us hear it.”
 “did you remark, in the scene our friend had with the officer, that
 certain orders constrained him with regard to us?”
 “yes, i did notice that.”
 “well! d’artagnan is going to give in his resignation to the king, and
 during the confusion that will result from his absence, we will get away,
 or rather you will get away, porthos, if there is possibility of flight
 for only one.”
 here porthos shook his head and replied: “we will escape together, aramis,
 or we will stay together.”
 “thine is a right, a generous heart,” said aramis, “only your melancholy
 uneasiness affects me.”
 “i am not uneasy,” said porthos.
 “then you are angry with me.”
 “i am not angry with you.”
 “then why, my friend, do you put on such a dismal countenance?”
 “i will tell you; i am making my will.” and while saying these words, the
 good porthos looked sadly in the face of aramis.
 “your will!” cried the bishop. “what, then! do you think yourself lost?”
 “i feel fatigued. it is the first time, and there is a custom in our
 family.”
 “what is it, my friend?”
 “my grandfather was a man twice as strong as i am.”
 “indeed!” said aramis; “then your grandfather must have been samson
 himself.”
 “no; his name was antoine. well! he was about my age, when, setting out
 one day for the chase, he felt his legs weak, the man who had never known
 what weakness was before.”
 “what was the meaning of that fatigue, my friend?”
 “nothing good, as you will see; for having set out, complaining still of
 weakness of the legs, he met a wild boar, which made head against him; he
 missed him with his arquebuse, and was ripped up by the beast and died
 immediately.”
 “there is no reason in that why you should alarm yourself, dear porthos.”
 “oh! you will see. my father was as strong again as i am. he was a rough
 soldier, under henry iii. and henry iv.; his name was not antoine, but
 gaspard, the same as m. de coligny. always on horseback, he had never
 known what lassitude was. one evening, as he rose from table, his legs
 failed him.”
 “he had supped heartily, perhaps,” said aramis, “and that was why he
 staggered.”
 “bah! a friend of m. de bassompierre, nonsense! no, no, he was astonished
 at this lassitude, and said to my mother, who laughed at him, ‘would not
 one believe i was going to meet with a wild boar, as the late m. du
 vallon, my father did?’”
 “well?” said aramis.
 “well, having this weakness, my father insisted upon going down into the
 garden, instead of going to bed; his foot slipped on the first stair, the
 staircase was steep; my father fell against a stone in which an iron hinge
 was fixed. the hinge gashed his temple; and he was stretched out dead upon
 the spot.”
 aramis raised his eyes to his friend: “these are two extraordinary
 circumstances,” said he; “let us not infer that there may succeed a third.
 it is not becoming in a man of your strength to be superstitious, my brave
 porthos. besides, when were your legs known to fail? never have you stood
 so firm, so haughtily; why, you could carry a house on your shoulders.”
 “at this moment,” said porthos, “i feel myself pretty active; but at times
 i vacillate; i sink; and lately this phenomenon, as you say, has occurred
 four times. i will not say this frightens me, but it annoys me. life is an
 agreeable thing. i have money; i have fine estates; i have horses that i
 love; i have also friends that i love: d’artagnan, athos, raoul, and you.”
 the admirable porthos did not even take the trouble to dissimulate in the
 very presence of aramis the rank he gave him in his friendship. aramis
 pressed his hand: “we will still live many years,” said he, “to preserve
 to the world such specimens of its rarest men. trust yourself to me, my
 friend; we have no reply from d’artagnan, that is a good sign. he must
 have given orders to get the vessels together and clear the seas. on my
 part i have just issued directions that a bark should be rolled on rollers
 to the mouth of the great cavern of locmaria, which you know, where we
 have so often lain in wait for the foxes.”
 “yes, and which terminates at the little creek by a trench where we
 discovered the day that splendid fox escaped that way.”
 “precisely. in case of misfortunes, a bark is to be concealed for us in
 that cavern; indeed, it must be there by this time. we will wait for a
 favorable moment, and during the night we will go to sea!”
 “that is a grand idea. what shall we gain by it?”
 “we shall gain this—nobody knows that grotto, or rather its issue,
 except ourselves and two or three hunters of the island; we shall gain
 this—that if the island is occupied, the scouts, seeing no bark upon
 the shore, will never imagine we can escape, and will cease to watch.”
 “i understand.”
 “well! that weakness in the legs?”
 “oh! better, much, just now.”
 “you see, then, plainly, that everything conspires to give us quietude and
 hope. d’artagnan will sweep the sea and leave us free. no royal fleet or
 descent to be dreaded. vive dieu! porthos, we have still half a
 century of magnificent adventure before us, and if i once touch spanish
 ground, i swear to you,” added the bishop with terrible energy, “that your
 brevet of duke is not such a chance as it is said to be.”
 “we live by hope,” said porthos, enlivened by the warmth of his companion.
 all at once a cry resounded in their ears: “to arms! to arms!”
 this cry, repeated by a hundred throats, piercing the chamber where the
 two friends were conversing, carried surprise to one, and uneasiness to
 the other. aramis opened the window; he saw a crowd of people running with
 flambeaux. women were seeking places of safety, the armed population were
 hastening to their posts.
 “the fleet! the fleet!” cried a soldier, who recognized aramis.
 “the fleet?” repeated the latter.
 “within half cannon-shot,” continued the soldier.
 “to arms!” cried aramis.
 “to arms!” repeated porthos, formidably. and both rushed forth towards the
 mole to place themselves within the shelter of the batteries. boats, laden
 with soldiers, were seen approaching; and in three directions, for the
 purpose of landing at three points at once.
 “what must be done?” said an officer of the guard.
 “stop them; and if they persist, fire!” said aramis.
 five minutes later, the cannonade commenced. these were the shots that
 d’artagnan had heard as he landed in france. but the boats were too near
 the mole to allow the cannon to aim correctly. they landed, and the combat
 commenced hand to hand.
 “what’s the matter, porthos?” said aramis to his friend.
 “nothing! nothing!—only my legs; it is really incomprehensible!—they
 will be better when we charge.” in fact, porthos and aramis did charge
 with such vigor, and so thoroughly animated their men, that the royalists
 re-embarked precipitately, without gaining anything but the wounds they
 carried away.
 “eh! but porthos,” cried aramis, “we must have a prisoner, quick! quick!”
 porthos bent over the stair of the mole, and seized by the nape of the
 neck one of the officers of the royal army who was waiting to embark till
 all his people should be in the boat. the arm of the giant lifted up his
 prey, which served him as a buckler, and he recovered himself without a
 shot being fired at him.
 “here is a prisoner for you,” said porthos coolly to aramis.
 “well!” cried the latter, laughing, “did you not calumniate your legs?”
 “it was not with my legs i captured him,” said porthos, “it was with my
 arms!”
 chapter xlvi. the son of biscarrat.
 the bretons of the isle were very proud of this victory; aramis did not
 encourage them in the feeling.
 “what will happen,” said he to porthos, when everybody was gone home,
 “will be that the anger of the king will be roused by the account of the
 resistance; and that these brave people will be decimated or shot when
 they are taken, which cannot fail to take place.”
 “from which it results, then,” said porthos, “that what we have done is of
 not the slightest use.”
 “for the moment it may be,” replied the bishop, “for we have a prisoner
 from whom we shall learn what our enemies are preparing to do.”
 “yes, let us interrogate the prisoner,” said porthos, “and the means of
 making him speak are very simple. we are going to supper; we will invite
 him to join us; as he drinks he will talk.”
 this was done. the officer was at first rather uneasy, but became
 reassured on seeing what sort of men he had to deal with. he gave, without
 having any fear of compromising himself, all the details imaginable of the
 resignation and departure of d’artagnan. he explained how, after that
 departure, the new leader of the expedition had ordered a surprise upon
 belle-isle. there his explanations stopped. aramis and porthos exchanged a
 glance that evinced their despair. no more dependence to be placed now on
 d’artagnan’s fertile imagination—no further resource in the event of
 defeat. aramis, continuing his interrogations, asked the prisoner what the
 leaders of the expedition contemplated doing with the leaders of
 belle-isle.
 “the orders are,” replied he, “to kill during combat, or hang afterwards.”
 porthos and aramis looked at each other again, and the color mounted to
 their faces.
 “i am too light for the gallows,” replied aramis; “people like me are not
 hung.”
 “and i am too heavy,” said porthos; “people like me break the cord.”
 “i am sure,” said the prisoner, gallantly, “that we could have guaranteed
 you the exact kind of death you preferred.”
 “a thousand thanks!” said aramis, seriously. porthos bowed.
 “one more cup of wine to your health,” said he, drinking himself. from one
 subject to another the chat with the officer was prolonged. he was an
 intelligent gentleman, and suffered himself to be led on by the charm of
 aramis’s wit and porthos’s cordial bonhomie.
 “pardon me,” said he, “if i address a question to you; but men who are in
 their sixth bottle have a clear right to forget themselves a little.”
 “address it!” cried porthos; “address it!”
 “speak,” said aramis.
 “were you not, gentlemen, both in the musketeers of the late king?”
 “yes, monsieur, and amongst the best of them, if you please,” said
 porthos.
 “that is true; i should say even the best of all soldiers, messieurs, if i
 did not fear to offend the memory of my father.”
 “of your father?” cried aramis.
 “do you know what my name is?”
 “ma foi! no, monsieur; but you can tell us, and—”
 “i am called georges de biscarrat.”
 “oh!” cried porthos, in his turn. “biscarrat! do you remember that name,
 aramis?”
 “biscarrat!” reflected the bishop. “it seems to me—”
 “try to recollect, monsieur,” said the officer.
 “pardieu! that won’t take me long,” said porthos. “biscarrat—called
 cardinal—one of the four who interrupted us on the day on which we
 formed our friendship with d’artagnan, sword in hand.”
 “precisely, gentlemen.”
 “the only one,” cried aramis, eagerly, “we could not scratch.”
 “consequently, a capital blade?” said the prisoner.
 “that’s true! most true!” exclaimed both friends together. “ma foi!
 monsieur biscarrat, we are delighted to make the acquaintance of such a
 brave man’s son.”
 biscarrat pressed the hands held out by the two musketeers. aramis looked
 at porthos as much as to say, “here is a man who will help us,” and
 without delay,—“confess, monsieur,” said he, “that it is good to
 have once been a good man.”
 “my father always said so, monsieur.”
 “confess, likewise, that it is a sad circumstance in which you find
 yourself, of falling in with men destined to be shot or hung, and to learn
 that these men are old acquaintances, in fact, hereditary friends.”
 “oh! you are not reserved for such a frightful fate as that, messieurs and
 friends!” said the young man, warmly.
 “bah! you said so yourself.”
 “i said so just now, when i did not know you; but now that i know you, i
 say—you will evade this dismal fate, if you wish!”
 “how—if we wish?” echoed aramis, whose eyes beamed with intelligence
 as he looked alternately at the prisoner and porthos.
 “provided,” continued porthos, looking, in his turn, with noble
 intrepidity, at m. biscarrat and the bishop—“provided nothing
 disgraceful be required of us.”
 “nothing at all will be required of you, gentlemen,” replied the officer—“what
 should they ask of you? if they find you they will kill you, that is a
 predetermined thing; try, then, gentlemen, to prevent their finding you.”
 “i don’t think i am mistaken,” said porthos, with dignity; “but it appears
 evident to me that if they want to find us, they must come and seek us
 here.”
 “in that you are perfectly right, my worthy friend,” replied aramis,
 constantly consulting with his looks the countenance of biscarrat, who had
 grown silent and constrained. “you wish, monsieur de biscarrat, to say
 something to us, to make us some overture, and you dare not—is that
 true?”
 “ah! gentlemen and friends! it is because by speaking i betray the
 watchword. but, hark! i hear a voice that frees mine by dominating it.”
 “cannon!” said porthos.
 “cannon and musketry, too!” cried the bishop.
 on hearing at a distance, among the rocks, these sinister reports of a
 combat which they thought had ceased:
 “what can that be?” asked porthos.
 “eh! pardieu!” cried aramis; “that is just what i expected.”
 “what is that?”
 “that the attack made by you was nothing but a feint; is not that true,
 monsieur? and whilst your companions allowed themselves to be repulsed,
 you were certain of effecting a landing on the other side of the island.”
 “oh! several, monsieur.”
 “we are lost, then,” said the bishop of vannes, quietly.
 “lost! that is possible,” replied the seigneur de pierrefonds, “but we are
 not taken or hung.” and so saying, he rose from the table, went to the
 wall, and coolly took down his sword and pistols, which he examined with
 the care of an old soldier who is preparing for battle, and who feels that
 life, in a great measure, depends upon the excellence and right conditions
 of his arms.
 at the report of the cannon, at the news of the surprise which might
 deliver up the island to the royal troops, the terrified crowd rushed
 precipitately to the fort to demand assistance and advice from their
 leaders. aramis, pale and downcast, between two flambeaux, showed himself
 at the window which looked into the principal court, full of soldiers
 waiting for orders and bewildered inhabitants imploring succor.
 “my friends,” said d’herblay, in a grave and sonorous voice, “m. fouquet,
 your protector, your friend, you father, has been arrested by an order of
 the king, and thrown into the bastile.” a sustained yell of vengeful fury
 came floating up to the window at which the bishop stood, and enveloped
 him in a magnetic field.
 “avenge monsieur fouquet!” cried the most excited of his hearers, “death
 to the royalists!”
 “no, my friends,” replied aramis, solemnly; “no, my friends; no
 resistance. the king is master in his kingdom. the king is the mandatory
 of god. the king and god have struck m. fouquet. humble yourselves before
 the hand of god. love god and the king, who have struck m. fouquet. but do
 not avenge your seigneur, do not think of avenging him. you would
 sacrifice yourselves in vain—you, your wives and children, your
 property, your liberty. lay down your arms, my friends—lay down your
 arms! since the king commands you so to do—and retire peaceably to
 your dwellings. it is i who ask you to do so; it is i who beg you to do
 so; it is i who now, in the hour of need, command you to do so, in the
 name of m. fouquet.”
 the crowd collected under the window uttered a prolonged roar of anger and
 terror. “the soldiers of louis xiv. have reached the island,” continued
 aramis. “from this time it would no longer be a fight betwixt them and you—it
 would be a massacre. begone, then, begone, and forget; this time i command
 you, in the name of the lord of hosts!”
 the mutineers retired slowly, submissive, silent.
 “ah! what have you just been saying, my friend?” said porthos.
 “monsieur,” said biscarrat to the bishop, “you may save all these
 inhabitants, but thus you will neither save yourself nor your friend.”
 “monsieur de biscarrat,” said the bishop of vannes, with a singular accent
 of nobility and courtesy, “monsieur de biscarrat, be kind enough to resume
 your liberty.”
 “i am very willing to do so, monsieur; but—”
 “that would render us a service, for when announcing to the king’s
 lieutenant the submission of the islanders, you will perhaps obtain some
 grace for us on informing him of the manner in which that submission has
 been effected.”
 “grace!” replied porthos with flashing eyes, “what is the meaning of that
 word?”
 aramis touched the elbow of his friend roughly, as he had been accustomed
 to do in the days of their youth, when he wanted to warn porthos that he
 had committed, or was about to commit, a blunder. porthos understood him,
 and was silent immediately.
 “i will go, messieurs,” replied biscarrat, a little surprised likewise at
 the word “grace” pronounced by the haughty musketeer, of and to whom, but
 a few minutes before, he had related with so much enthusiasm the heroic
 exploits with which his father had delighted him.
 “go, then, monsieur biscarrat,” said aramis, bowing to him, “and at
 parting receive the expression of our entire gratitude.”
 “but you, messieurs, you whom i think it an honor to call my friends,
 since you have been willing to accept that title, what will become of you
 in the meantime?” replied the officer, very much agitated at taking leave
 of the two ancient adversaries of his father.
 “we will wait here.”
 “but, mon dieu!—the order is precise and formal.”
 “i am bishop of vannes, monsieur de biscarrat; and they no more shoot a
 bishop than they hang a gentleman.”
 “ah! yes, monsieur—yes, monseigneur,” replied biscarrat; “it is
 true, you are right, there is still that chance for you. then, i will
 depart, i will repair to the commander of the expedition, the king’s
 lieutenant. adieu! then, messieurs, or rather, to meet again, i hope.”
 the worthy officer, jumping upon a horse given him by aramis, departed in
 the direction of the sound of cannon, which, by surging the crowd into the
 fort, had interrupted the conversation of the two friends with their
 prisoner. aramis watched the departure, and when left alone with porthos:
 “well, do you comprehend?” said he.
 “ma foi! no.”
 “did not biscarrat inconvenience you here?”
 “no; he is a brave fellow.”
 “yes; but the grotto of locmaria—is it necessary all the world
 should know it?”
 “ah! that is true, that is true; i comprehend. we are going to escape by
 the cavern.”
 “if you please,” cried aramis, gayly. “forward, friend porthos; our boat
 awaits us. king louis has not caught us—yet.”
 chapter xlvii. the grotto of locmaria.
 the cavern of locmaria was sufficiently distant from the mole to render it
 necessary for our friends to husband their strength in order to reach it.
 besides, night was advancing; midnight had struck at the fort. porthos and
 aramis were loaded with money and arms. they walked, then, across the
 heath, which stretched between the mole and the cavern, listening to every
 noise, in order better to avoid an ambush. from time to time, on the road
 which they had carefully left on their left, passed fugitives coming from
 the interior, at the news of the landing of the royal troops. aramis and
 porthos, concealed behind some projecting mass of rock, collected the
 words that escaped from the poor people, who fled, trembling, carrying
 with them their most valuable effects, and tried, whilst listening to
 their complaints, to gather something from them for their own interest. at
 length, after a rapid race, frequently interrupted by prudent stoppages,
 they reached the deep grottoes, in which the prophetic bishop of vannes
 had taken care to have secreted a bark capable of keeping the sea at this
 fine season.
 “my good friend,” said porthos, panting vigorously, “we have arrived, it
 seems. but i thought you spoke of three men, three servants, who were to
 accompany us. i don’t see them—where are they?”
 “why should you see them, porthos?” replied aramis. “they are certainly
 waiting for us in the cavern, and, no doubt, are resting, having
 accomplished their rough and difficult task.”
 aramis stopped porthos, who was preparing to enter the cavern. “will you
 allow me, my friend,” said he to the giant, “to pass in first? i know the
 signal i have given to these men; who, not hearing it, would be very
 likely to fire upon you or slash away with their knives in the dark.”
 “go on, then, aramis; go on—go first; you impersonate wisdom and
 foresight; go. ah! there is that fatigue again, of which i spoke to you.
 it has just seized me afresh.”
 aramis left porthos sitting at the entrance of the grotto, and bowing his
 head, he penetrated into the interior of the cavern, imitating the cry of
 the owl. a little plaintive cooing, a scarcely distinct echo, replied from
 the depths of the cave. aramis pursued his way cautiously, and soon was
 stopped by the same kind of cry as he had first uttered, within ten paces
 of him.
 “are you there, yves?” said the bishop.
 “yes, monseigneur; goenne is here likewise. his son accompanies us.”
 “that is well. are all things ready?”
 “yes, monseigneur.”
 “go to the entrance of the grottoes, my good yves, and you will there find
 the seigneur de pierrefonds, who is resting after the fatigue of our
 journey. and if he should happen not to be able to walk, lift him up, and
 bring him hither to me.”
 the three men obeyed. but the recommendation given to his servants was
 superfluous. porthos, refreshed, had already commenced the descent, and
 his heavy step resounded amongst the cavities, formed and supported by
 columns of porphyry and granite. as soon as the seigneur de bracieux had
 rejoined the bishop, the bretons lighted a lantern with which they were
 furnished, and porthos assured his friend that he felt as strong again as
 ever.
 “let us inspect the boat,” said aramis, “and satisfy ourselves at once
 what it will hold.”
 “do not go too near with the light,” said the patron yves; “for as you
 desired me, monseigneur, i have placed under the bench of the poop, in the
 coffer you know of, the barrel of powder, and the musket-charges that you
 sent me from the fort.”
 “very well,” said aramis; and, taking the lantern himself, he examined
 minutely all parts of the canoe, with the precautions of a man who is
 neither timid nor ignorant in the face of danger. the canoe was long,
 light, drawing little water, thin of keel; in short, one of those that
 have always been so aptly built at belle-isle; a little high in its sides,
 solid upon the water, very manageable, furnished with planks which, in
 uncertain weather, formed a sort of deck over which the waves might glide,
 so as to protect the rowers. in two well-closed coffers, placed beneath
 the benches of the prow and the poop, aramis found bread, biscuit, dried
 fruits, a quarter of bacon, a good provision of water in leathern bottles;
 the whole forming rations sufficient for people who did not mean to quit
 the coast, and would be able to revictual, if necessity commanded. the
 arms, eight muskets, and as many horse-pistols, were in good condition,
 and all loaded. there were additional oars, in case of accident, and that
 little sail called trinquet, which assists the speed of the canoe
 at the same time the boatmen row, and is so useful when the breeze is
 slack. when aramis had seen to all these things, and appeared satisfied
 with the result of his inspection, “let us consult porthos,” said he, “to
 know if we must endeavor to get the boat out by the unknown extremity of
 the grotto, following the descent and the shade of the cavern, or whether
 it be better, in the open air, to make it slide upon its rollers through
 the bushes, leveling the road of the little beach, which is but twenty
 feet high, and gives, at high tide, three or four fathoms of good water
 upon a sound bottom.”
 “it must be as you please, monseigneur,” replied the skipper yves,
 respectfully; “but i don’t believe that by the slope of the cavern, and in
 the dark in which we shall be obliged to maneuver our boat, the road will
 be so convenient as the open air. i know the beach well, and can certify
 that it is as smooth as a grass-plot in a garden; the interior of the
 grotto, on the contrary, is rough; without reckoning, monseigneur, that at
 its extremity we shall come to the trench which leads into the sea, and
 perhaps the canoe will not pass down it.”
 “i have made my calculation,” said the bishop, “and i am certain it will
 pass.”
 “so be it; i wish it may, monseigneur,” continued yves; “but your highness
 knows very well that to make it reach the extremity of the trench, there
 is an enormous stone to be lifted—that under which the fox always
 passes, and which closes the trench like a door.”
 “it can be raised,” said porthos; “that is nothing.”
 “oh! i know that monseigneur has the strength of ten men,” replied yves;
 “but that is giving him a great deal of trouble.”
 “i think the skipper may be right,” said aramis; “let us try the open-air
 passage.”
 “the more so, monseigneur,” continued the fisherman, “that we should not
 be able to embark before day, it will require so much labor, and that as
 soon as daylight appears, a good vedette placed outside the grotto
 would be necessary, indispensable even, to watch the maneuvers of the
 lighters or cruisers that are on the look-out for us.”
 “yes, yes, yves, your reasons are good; we will go by the beach.”
 and the three robust bretons went to the boat, and were beginning to place
 their rollers underneath it to put it in motion, when the distant barking
 of dogs was heard, proceeding from the interior of the island.
 aramis darted out of the grotto, followed by porthos. dawn just tinted
 with purple and white the waves and plain; through the dim light,
 melancholy fir-trees waved their tender branches over the pebbles, and
 long flights of crows were skimming with their black wings the shimmering
 fields of buckwheat. in a quarter of an hour it would be clear daylight;
 the wakened birds announced it to all nature. the barkings which had been
 heard, which had stopped the three fishermen engaged in moving the boat,
 and had brought aramis and porthos out of the cavern, now seemed to come
 from a deep gorge within about a league of the grotto.
 “it is a pack of hounds,” said porthos; “the dogs are on a scent.”
 “who can be hunting at such a moment as this?” said aramis.
 “and this way, particularly,” continued porthos, “where they might expect
 the army of the royalists.”
 “the noise comes nearer. yes, you are right, porthos, the dogs are on a
 scent. but, yves!” cried aramis, “come here! come here!”
 yves ran towards him, letting fall the cylinder which he was about to
 place under the boat when the bishop’s call interrupted him.
 “what is the meaning of this hunt, skipper?” said porthos.
 “eh! monseigneur, i cannot understand it,” replied the breton. “it is not
 at such a moment that the seigneur de locmaria would hunt. no, and yet the
 dogs—”
 “unless they have escaped from the kennel.”
 “no,” said goenne, “they are not the seigneur de locmaria’s hounds.”
 “in common prudence,” said aramis, “let us go back into the grotto; the
 voices evidently draw nearer, we shall soon know what we have to trust
 to.”
 they re-entered, but had scarcely proceeded a hundred steps in the
 darkness, when a noise like the hoarse sigh of a creature in distress
 resounded through the cavern, and breathless, rapid, terrified, a fox
 passed like a flash of lightning before the fugitives, leaped over the
 boat and disappeared, leaving behind its sour scent, which was perceptible
 for several seconds under the low vaults of the cave.
 “the fox!” cried the bretons, with the glad surprise of born hunters.
 “accursed mischance!” cried the bishop, “our retreat is discovered.”
 “how so?” said porthos; “are you afraid of a fox?”
 “eh! my friend, what do you mean by that? why do you specify the fox? it
 is not the fox alone. pardieu! but don’t you know, porthos, that
 after the foxes come hounds, and after hounds men?”
 porthos hung his head. as though to confirm the words of aramis, they
 heard the yelping pack approach with frightful swiftness upon the trail.
 six foxhounds burst at once upon the little heath, with mingling yelps of
 triumph.
 “there are the dogs, plain enough!” said aramis, posted on the look-out
 behind a chink in the rocks; “now, who are the huntsmen?”
 “if it is the seigneur de locmaria’s,” replied the sailor, “he will leave
 the dogs to hunt the grotto, for he knows them, and will not enter in
 himself, being quite sure that the fox will come out the other side; it is
 there he will wait for him.”
 “it is not the seigneur de locmaria who is hunting,” replied aramis,
 turning pale in spite of his efforts to maintain a placid countenance.
 “who is it, then?” said porthos.
 “look!”
 porthos applied his eye to the slit, and saw at the summit of a hillock a
 dozen horsemen urging on their horses in the track of the dogs, shouting,
 “taiaut! taiaut!”
 “the guards!” said he.
 “yes, my friend, the king’s guards.”
 “the king’s guards! do you say, monseigneur?” cried the bretons, growing
 pale in turn.
 “with biscarrat at their head, mounted upon my gray horse,” continued
 aramis.
 the hounds at the same moment rushed into the grotto like an avalanche,
 and the depths of the cavern were filled with their deafening cries.
 “ah! the devil!” said aramis, resuming all his coolness at the sight of
 this certain, inevitable danger. “i am perfectly satisfied we are lost,
 but we have, at least, one chance left. if the guards who follow their
 hounds happen to discover there is an issue to the grotto, there is no
 help for us, for on entering they must see both ourselves and our boat.
 the dogs must not go out of the cavern. their masters must not enter.”
 “that is clear,” said porthos.
 “you understand,” added aramis, with the rapid precision of command;
 “there are six dogs that will be forced to stop at the great stone under
 which the fox has glided—but at the too narrow opening of which they
 must be themselves stopped and killed.”
 the bretons sprang forward, knife in hand. in a few minutes there was a
 lamentable concert of angry barks and mortal howls—and then,
 silence.
 “that’s well!” said aramis, coolly, “now for the masters!”
 “what is to be done with them?” said porthos.
 “wait their arrival, conceal ourselves, and kill them.”
 “kill them!” replied porthos.
 “there are sixteen,” said aramis, “at least, at present.”
 “and well armed,” added porthos, with a smile of consolation.
 “it will last about ten minutes,” said aramis. “to work!”
 and with a resolute air he took up a musket, and placed a hunting-knife
 between his teeth.
 “yves, goenne, and his son,” continued aramis, “will pass the muskets to
 us. you, porthos, will fire when they are close. we shall have brought
 down, at the lowest computation, eight, before the others are aware of
 anything—that is certain; then all, there are five of us, will
 dispatch the other eight, knife in hand.”
 “and poor biscarrat?” said porthos.
 aramis reflected a moment—“biscarrat first,” replied he, coolly. “he
 knows us.”
 chapter xlviii. the grotto.
 in spite of the sort of divination which was the remarkable side of the
 character of aramis, the event, subject to the risks of things over which
 uncertainty presides, did not fall out exactly as the bishop of vannes had
 foreseen. biscarrat, better mounted than his companions, arrived first at
 the opening of the grotto, and comprehended that fox and hounds were one
 and all engulfed in it. only, struck by that superstitious terror which
 every dark and subterraneous way naturally impresses upon the mind of man,
 he stopped at the outside of the grotto, and waited till his companions
 should have assembled round him.
 “well!” asked the young men, coming up, out of breath, and unable to
 understand the meaning of this inaction.
 “well! i cannot hear the dogs; they and the fox must all be lost in this
 infernal cavern.”
 “they were too close up,” said one of the guards, “to have lost scent all
 at once. besides, we should hear them from one side or another. they must,
 as biscarrat says, be in this grotto.”
 “but then,” said one of the young men, “why don’t they give tongue?”
 “it is strange!” muttered another.
 “well, but,” said a fourth, “let us go into this grotto. does it happen to
 be forbidden we should enter it?”
 “no,” replied biscarrat. “only, as it looks as dark as a wolf’s mouth, we
 might break our necks in it.”
 “witness the dogs,” said a guard, “who seem to have broken theirs.”
 “what the devil can have become of them?” asked the young men in chorus.
 and every master called his dog by his name, whistled to him in his
 favorite mode, without a single one replying to either call or whistle.
 “it is perhaps an enchanted grotto,” said biscarrat; “let us see.” and,
 jumping from his horse, he made a step into the grotto.
 “stop! stop! i will accompany you,” said one of the guards, on seeing
 biscarrat disappear in the shades of the cavern’s mouth.
 “no,” replied biscarrat, “there must be something extraordinary in the
 place—don’t let us risk ourselves all at once. if in ten minutes you
 do not hear of me, you can come in, but not all at once.”
 “be it so,” said the young man, who, besides, did not imagine that
 biscarrat ran much risk in the enterprise, “we will wait for you.” and
 without dismounting from their horses, they formed a circle round the
 grotto.
 biscarrat entered then alone, and advanced through the darkness till he
 came in contact with the muzzle of porthos’s musket. the resistance which
 his chest met with astonished him; he naturally raised his hand and laid
 hold of the icy barrel. at the same instant, yves lifted a knife against
 the young man, which was about to fall upon him with all force of a
 breton’s arm, when the iron wrist of porthos stopped it half-way. then,
 like low muttering thunder, his voice growled in the darkness, “i will not
 have him killed!”
 biscarrat found himself between a protection and a threat, the one almost
 as terrible as the other. however brave the young man might be, he could
 not prevent a cry escaping him, which aramis immediately suppressed by
 placing a handkerchief over his mouth. “monsieur de biscarrat,” said he,
 in a low voice, “we mean you no harm, and you must know that if you have
 recognized us; but, at the first word, the first groan, the first whisper,
 we shall be forced to kill you as we have killed your dogs.”
 “yes, i recognize you, gentlemen,” said the officer, in a low voice. “but
 why are you here—what are you doing, here? unfortunate men! i
 thought you were in the fort.”
 “and you, monsieur, you were to obtain conditions for us, i think?”
 “i did all i was able, messieurs, but—”
 “but what?”
 “but there are positive orders.”
 “to kill us?”
 biscarrat made no reply. it would have cost him too much to speak of the
 cord to gentlemen. aramis understood the silence of the prisoner.
 “monsieur biscarrat,” said he, “you would be already dead if we had not
 regard for your youth and our ancient association with your father; but
 you may yet escape from the place by swearing that you will not tell your
 companions what you have seen.”
 “i will not only swear that i will not speak of it,” said biscarrat, “but
 i still further swear that i will do everything in the world to prevent my
 companions from setting foot in the grotto.”
 “biscarrat! biscarrat!” cried several voices from the outside, coming like
 a whirlwind into the cave.
 “reply,” said aramis.
 “here i am!” cried biscarrat.
 “now, begone; we depend on your loyalty.” and he left his hold of the
 young man, who hastily returned towards the light.
 “biscarrat! biscarrat!” cried the voices, still nearer. and the shadows of
 several human forms projected into the interior of the grotto. biscarrat
 rushed to meet his friends in order to stop them, and met them just as
 they were adventuring into the cave. aramis and porthos listened with the
 intense attention of men whose life depends upon a breath of air.
 “oh! oh!” exclaimed one of the guards, as he came to the light, “how pale
 you are!”
 “pale!” cried another; “you ought to say corpse-color.”
 “i!” said the young man, endeavoring to collect his faculties.
 “in the name of heaven! what has happened?” exclaimed all the voices.
 “you have not a drop of blood in your veins, my poor friend,” said one of
 them, laughing.
 “messieurs, it is serious,” said another, “he is going to faint; does any
 one of you happen to have any salts?” and they all laughed.
 this hail of jests fell round biscarrat’s ears like musket-balls in a melee.
 he recovered himself amidst a deluge of interrogations.
 “what do you suppose i have seen?” asked he. “i was too hot when i entered
 the grotto, and i have been struck with a chill. that is all.”
 “but the dogs, the dogs; have you seen them again—did you see
 anything of them—do you know anything about them?”
 “i suppose they have got out some other way.”
 “messieurs,” said one of the young men, “there is in that which is going
 on, in the paleness and silence of our friend, a mystery which biscarrat
 will not, or cannot reveal. only, and this is certain, biscarrat has seen
 something in the grotto. well, for my part, i am very curious to see what
 it is, even if it is the devil! to the grotto! messieurs, to the grotto!”
 “to the grotto!” repeated all the voices. and the echo of the cavern
 carried like a menace to porthos and aramis, “to the grotto! to the
 grotto!”
 biscarrat threw himself before his companions. “messieurs! messieurs!”
 cried he, “in the name of heaven! do not go in!”
 “why, what is there so terrific in the cavern?” asked several at once.
 “come, speak, biscarrat.”
 “decidedly, it is the devil he has seen,” repeated he who had before
 advanced that hypothesis.
 “well,” said another, “if he has seen him, he need not be selfish; he may
 as well let us have a look at him in turn.”
 “messieurs! messieurs! i beseech you,” urged biscarrat.
 “nonsense! let us pass!”
 “messieurs, i implore you not to enter!”
 “why, you went in yourself.”
 then one of the officers, who—of a riper age than the others—had
 till this time remained behind, and had said nothing, advanced.
 “messieurs,” said he, with a calmness which contrasted with the animation
 of the young men, “there is in there some person, or something, that is
 not the devil; but which, whatever it may be, has had sufficient power to
 silence our dogs. we must discover who this some one is, or what this
 something is.”
 biscarrat made a last effort to stop his friends, but it was useless. in
 vain he threw himself before the rashest; in vain he clung to the rocks to
 bar the passage; the crowd of young men rushed into the cave, in the steps
 of the officer who had spoken last, but who had sprung in first, sword in
 hand, to face the unknown danger. biscarrat, repulsed by his friends,
 unable to accompany them, without passing in the eyes of porthos and
 aramis for a traitor and a perjurer, with painfully attentive ear and
 unconsciously supplicating hands leaned against the rough side of a rock
 which he thought must be exposed to the fire of the musketeers. as to the
 guards, they penetrated further and further, with exclamations that grew
 fainter as they advanced. all at once, a discharge of musketry, growling
 like thunder, exploded in the entrails of the vault. two or three balls
 were flattened against the rock on which biscarrat was leaning. at the
 same instant, cries, shrieks, imprecations burst forth, and the little
 troop of gentlemen reappeared—some pale, some bleeding—all
 enveloped in a cloud of smoke, which the outer air seemed to suck from the
 depths of the cavern. “biscarrat! biscarrat!” cried the fugitives, “you
 knew there was an ambuscade in that cavern, and you did not warn us!
 biscarrat, you are the cause that four of us are murdered men! woe be to
 you, biscarrat!”
 “you are the cause of my being wounded unto death,” said one of the young
 men, letting a gush of scarlet life-blood vomit in his palm, and
 spattering it into biscarrat’s livid face. “my blood be on your head!” and
 he rolled in agony at the feet of the young man.
 “but, at least, tell us who is there?” cried several furious voices.
 biscarrat remained silent. “tell us, or die!” cried the wounded man,
 raising himself upon one knee, and lifting towards his companion an arm
 bearing a useless sword. biscarrat rushed towards him, opening his breast
 for the blow, but the wounded man fell back not to rise again, uttering a
 groan which was his last. biscarrat, with hair on end, haggard eyes, and
 bewildered head, advanced towards the interior of the cavern, saying, “you
 are right. death to me, who have allowed my comrades to be assassinated. i
 am a worthless wretch!” and throwing away his sword, for he wished to die
 without defending himself, he rushed head foremost into the cavern. the
 others followed him. the eleven who remained out of sixteen imitated his
 example; but they did not go further than the first. a second discharge
 laid five upon the icy sand; and as it was impossible to see whence this
 murderous thunder issued, the others fell back with a terror that can be
 better imagined than described. but, far from flying, as the others had
 done, biscarrat remained safe and sound, seated on a fragment of rock, and
 waited. there were only six gentlemen left.
 “seriously,” said one of the survivors, “is it the devil?”
 “ma foi! it is much worse,” said another.
 “ask biscarrat, he knows.”
 “where is biscarrat?” the young men looked round them, and saw that
 biscarrat did not answer.
 “he is dead!” said two or three voices.
 “oh! no!” replied another, “i saw him through the smoke, sitting quietly
 on a rock. he is in the cavern; he is waiting for us.”
 “he must know who are there.”
 “and how should he know them?”
 “he was taken prisoner by the rebels.”
 “that is true. well! let us call him, and learn from him whom we have to
 deal with.” and all voices shouted, “biscarrat! biscarrat!” but biscarrat
 did not answer.
 “good!” said the officer who had shown so much coolness in the affair. “we
 have no longer any need of him; here are reinforcements coming.”
 in fact, a company of guards, left in the rear by their officers, whom the
 ardor of the chase had carried away—from seventy-five to eighty men—arrived
 in good order, led by their captain and the first lieutenant. the five
 officers hastened to meet their soldiers; and, in language the eloquence
 of which may be easily imagined, they related the adventure, and asked for
 aid. the captain interrupted them. “where are your companions?” demanded
 he.
 “dead!”
 “but there were sixteen of you!”
 “ten are dead. biscarrat is in the cavern, and we are five.”
 “biscarrat is a prisoner?”
 “probably.”
 “no, for here he is—look.” in fact, biscarrat appeared at the
 opening of the grotto.
 “he is making a sign to come on,” said the officer. “come on!”
 “come on!” cried all the troop. and they advanced to meet biscarrat.
 “monsieur,” said the captain, addressing biscarrat, “i am assured that you
 know who the men are in that grotto, and who make such a desperate
 defense. in the king’s name i command you to declare what you know.”
 “captain,” said biscarrat, “you have no need to command me. my word has
 been restored to me this very instant; and i came in the name of these
 men.”
 “to tell me who they are?”
 “to tell you they are determined to defend themselves to the death, unless
 you grant them satisfactory terms.”
 “how many are there of them, then?”
 “there are two,” said biscarrat.
 “there are two—and want to impose conditions upon us?”
 “there are two, and they have already killed ten of our men.”
 “what sort of people are they—giants?”
 “worse than that. do you remember the history of the bastion
 saint-gervais, captain?”
 “yes; where four musketeers held out against an army.”
 “well, these are two of those same musketeers.”
 “and their names?”
 “at that period they were called porthos and aramis. now they are styled
 m. d’herblay and m. du vallon.”
 “and what interest have they in all this?”
 “it is they who were holding bell-isle for m. fouquet.”
 a murmur ran through the ranks of the soldiers on hearing the two words
 “porthos and aramis.” “the musketeers! the musketeers!” repeated they. and
 among all these brave men, the idea that they were going to have a
 struggle against two of the oldest glories of the french army, made a
 shiver, half enthusiasm, two-thirds terror, run through them. in fact,
 those four names—d’artagnan, athos, porthos, and aramis—were
 venerated among all who wore a sword; as, in antiquity, the names of
 hercules, theseus, castor, and pollux were venerated.
 “two men—and they have killed ten in two discharges! it is
 impossible, monsieur biscarrat!”
 “eh! captain,” replied the latter, “i do not tell you that they have not
 with them two or three men, as the musketeers of the bastion saint-gervais
 had two or three lackeys; but, believe me, captain, i have seen these men,
 i have been taken prisoner by them—i know they themselves alone are
 all-sufficient to destroy an army.”
 “that we shall see,” said the captain, “and that in a moment, too.
 gentlemen, attention!”
 at this reply, no one stirred, and all prepared to obey. biscarrat alone
 risked a last attempt.
 “monsieur,” said he, in a low voice, “be persuaded by me; let us pass on
 our way. those two men, those two lions you are going to attack, will
 defend themselves to the death. they have already killed ten of our men;
 they will kill double the number, and end by killing themselves rather
 than surrender. what shall we gain by fighting them?”
 “we shall gain the consciousness, monsieur, of not having allowed eighty
 of the king’s guards to retire before two rebels. if i listened to your
 advice, monsieur, i should be a dishonored man; and by dishonoring myself
 i should dishonor the army. forward, my men!”
 and he marched first as far as the opening of the grotto. there he halted.
 the object of this halt was to give biscarrat and his companions time to
 describe to him the interior of the grotto. then, when he believed he had
 a sufficient acquaintance with the place, he divided his company into
 three bodies, which were to enter successively, keeping up a sustained
 fire in all directions. no doubt, in this attack they would lose five
 more, perhaps ten; but, certainly, they must end by taking the rebels,
 since there was no issue; and, at any rate, two men could not kill eighty.
 “captain,” said biscarrat, “i beg to be allowed to march at the head of
 the first platoon.”
 “so be it,” replied the captain; “you have all the honor. i make you a
 present of it.”
 “thanks!” replied the young man, with all the firmness of his race.
 “take your sword, then.”
 “i shall go as i am, captain,” said biscarrat, “for i do not go to kill, i
 go to be killed.”
 and placing himself at the head of the first platoon, with head uncovered
 and arms crossed,—“march, gentlemen,” said he.
 chapter xlix. an homeric song.
 it is time to pass to the other camp, and to describe at once the
 combatants and the field of battle. aramis and porthos had gone to the
 grotto of locmaria with the expectation of finding there their canoe ready
 armed, as well as the three bretons, their assistants; and they at first
 hoped to make the bark pass through the little issue of the cavern,
 concealing in that fashion both their labors and their flight. the arrival
 of the fox and dogs obliged them to remain concealed. the grotto extended
 the space of about a hundred toises, to that little slope
 dominating a creek. formerly a temple of the celtic divinities, when
 belle-isle was still called kalonese, this grotto had beheld more than one
 human sacrifice accomplished in its mystic depths. the first entrance to
 the cavern was by a moderate descent, above which distorted rocks formed a
 weird arcade; the interior, very uneven and dangerous from the
 inequalities of the vault, was subdivided into several compartments, which
 communicated with each other by means of rough and jagged steps, fixed
 right and left, in uncouth natural pillars. at the third compartment the
 vault was so low, the passage so narrow, that the bark would scarcely have
 passed without touching the side; nevertheless, in moments of despair,
 wood softens and stone grows flexible beneath the human will. such was the
 thought of aramis, when, after having fought the fight, he decided upon
 flight—a flight most dangerous, since all the assailants were not
 dead; and that, admitting the possibility of putting the bark to sea, they
 would have to fly in open day, before the conquered, so interested on
 recognizing their small number, in pursuing their conquerors. when the two
 discharges had killed ten men, aramis, familiar with the windings of the
 cavern, went to reconnoiter them one by one, and counted them, for the
 smoke prevented seeing outside; and he immediately commanded that the
 canoe should be rolled as far as the great stone, the closure of the
 liberating issue. porthos collected all his strength, took the canoe in
 his arms, and raised it up, whilst the bretons made it run rapidly along
 the rollers. they had descended into the third compartment; they had
 arrived at the stone which walled the outlet. porthos seized this gigantic
 stone at its base, applied his robust shoulder, and gave a heave which
 made the wall crack. a cloud of dust fell from the vault, with the ashes
 of ten thousand generations of sea birds, whose nests stuck like cement to
 the rock. at the third shock the stone gave way, and oscillated for a
 minute. porthos, placing his back against the neighboring rock, made an
 arch with his foot, which drove the block out of the calcareous masses
 which served for hinges and cramps. the stone fell, and daylight was
 visible, brilliant, radiant, flooding the cavern through the opening, and
 the blue sea appeared to the delighted bretons. they began to lift the
 bark over the barricade. twenty more toises, and it would glide
 into the ocean. it was during this time that the company arrived, was
 drawn up by the captain, and disposed for either an escalade or an
 assault. aramis watched over everything, to favor the labors of his
 friends. he saw the reinforcements, counted the men, and convinced himself
 at a single glance of the insurmountable peril to which fresh combat would
 expose them. to escape by sea, at the moment the cavern was about to be
 invaded, was impossible. in fact, the daylight which had just been
 admitted to the last compartments had exposed to the soldiers the bark
 being rolled towards the sea, the two rebels within musket-shot; and one
 of their discharges would riddle the boat if it did not kill the
 navigators. besides, allowing everything,—if the bark escaped with
 the men on board of it, how could the alarm be suppressed—how could
 notice to the royal lighters be prevented? what could hinder the poor
 canoe, followed by sea and watched from the shore, from succumbing before
 the end of the day? aramis, digging his hands into his gray hair with
 rage, invoked the assistance of god and the assistance of the demons.
 calling to porthos, who was doing more work than all the rollers—whether
 of flesh or wood—“my friend,” said he, “our adversaries have just
 received a reinforcement.”
 “ah, ah!” said porthos, quietly, “what is to be done, then?”
 “to recommence the combat,” said aramis, “is hazardous.”
 “yes,” said porthos, “for it is difficult to suppose that out of two, one
 should not be killed; and certainly, if one of us was killed, the other
 would get himself killed also.” porthos spoke these words with that heroic
 nature which, with him, grew grander with necessity.
 aramis felt it like a spur to his heart. “we shall neither of us be killed
 if you do what i tell you, friend porthos.”
 “tell me what?”
 “these people are coming down into the grotto.”
 “yes.”
 “we could kill about fifteen of them, but no more.”
 “how many are there in all?” asked porthos.
 “they have received a reinforcement of seventy-five men.”
 “seventy-five and five, eighty. ah!” sighed porthos.
 “if they fire all at once they will riddle us with balls.”
 “certainly they will.”
 “without reckoning,” added aramis, “that the detonation might occasion a
 collapse of the cavern.”
 “ay,” said porthos, “a piece of falling rock just now grazed my shoulder.”
 “you see, then?”
 “oh! it is nothing.”
 “we must determine upon something quickly. our bretons are going to
 continue to roll the canoe towards the sea.”
 “very well.”
 “we two will keep the powder, the balls, and the muskets here.”
 “but only two, my dear aramis—we shall never fire three shots
 together,” said porthos, innocently, “the defense by musketry is a bad
 one.”
 “find a better, then.”
 “i have found one,” said the giant, eagerly; “i will place myself in
 ambuscade behind the pillar with this iron bar, and invisible,
 unattackable, if they come in floods, i can let my bar fall upon their
 skulls, thirty times in a minute. hein! what do you think of the
 project? you smile!”
 “excellent, dear friend, perfect! i approve it greatly; only you will
 frighten them, and half of them will remain outside to take us by famine.
 what we want, my good friend, is the entire destruction of the troop. a
 single survivor encompasses our ruin.”
 “you are right, my friend, but how can we attract them, pray?”
 “by not stirring, my good porthos.”
 “well! we won’t stir, then; but when they are all together—”
 “then leave it to me, i have an idea.”
 “if it is so, and your idea proves a good one—and your idea is most
 likely to be good—i am satisfied.”
 “to your ambuscade, porthos, and count how many enter.”
 “but you, what will you do?”
 “don’t trouble yourself about me; i have a task to perform.”
 “i think i hear shouts.”
 “it is they! to your post. keep within reach of my voice and hand.”
 porthos took refuge in the second compartment, which was in darkness,
 absolutely black. aramis glided into the third; the giant held in his hand
 an iron bar of about fifty pounds weight. porthos handled this lever,
 which had been used in rolling the bark, with marvelous facility. during
 this time, the bretons had pushed the bark to the beach. in the further
 and lighter compartment, aramis, stooping and concealed, was busy with
 some mysterious maneuver. a command was given in a loud voice. it was the
 last order of the captain commandant. twenty-five men jumped from the
 upper rocks into the first compartment of the grotto, and having taken
 their ground, began to fire. the echoes shrieked and barked, the hissing
 balls seemed actually to rarefy the air, and then opaque smoke filled the
 vault.
 “to the left! to the left!” cried biscarrat, who, in his first assault,
 had seen the passage to the second chamber, and who, animated by the smell
 of powder, wished to guide his soldiers in that direction. the troop,
 accordingly, precipitated themselves to the left—the passage
 gradually growing narrower. biscarrat, with his hands stretched forward,
 devoted to death, marched in advance of the muskets. “come on! come on!”
 exclaimed he, “i see daylight!”
 “strike, porthos!” cried the sepulchral voice of aramis.
 porthos breathed a heavy sigh—but he obeyed. the iron bar fell full
 and direct upon the head of biscarrat, who was dead before he had ended
 his cry. then the formidable lever rose ten times in ten seconds, and made
 ten corpses. the soldiers could see nothing; they heard sighs and groans;
 they stumbled over dead bodies, but as they had no conception of the cause
 of all this, they came forward jostling each other. the implacable bar,
 still falling, annihilated the first platoon, without a single sound to
 warn the second, which was quietly advancing; only, commanded by the
 captain, the men had stripped a fir, growing on the shore, and, with its
 resinous branches twisted together, the captain had made a flambeau. on
 arriving at the compartment where porthos, like the exterminating angel,
 had destroyed all he touched, the first rank drew back in terror. no
 firing had replied to that of the guards, and yet their way was stopped by
 a heap of dead bodies—they literally walked in blood. porthos was
 still behind his pillar. the captain, illumining with trembling pine-torch
 this frightful carnage, of which he in vain sought the cause, drew back
 towards the pillar behind which porthos was concealed. then a gigantic
 hand issued from the shade, and fastened on the throat of the captain, who
 uttered a stifle rattle; his stretched-out arms beating the air, the torch
 fell and was extinguished in blood. a second after, the corpse of the
 captain dropped close to the extinguished torch, and added another body to
 the heap of dead which blocked up the passage. all this was effected as
 mysteriously as though by magic. at hearing the rattling in the throat of
 the captain, the soldiers who accompanied him had turned round, caught a
 glimpse of his extended arms, his eyes starting from their sockets, and
 then the torch fell and they were left in darkness. from an unreflective,
 instinctive, mechanical feeling, the lieutenant cried:
 “fire!”
 immediately a volley of musketry flamed, thundered, roared in the cavern,
 bringing down enormous fragments from the vaults. the cavern was lighted
 for an instant by this discharge, and then immediately returned to pitchy
 darkness rendered thicker by the smoke. to this succeeded a profound
 silence, broken only by the steps of the third brigade, now entering the
 cavern.
 chapter l: the death of a titan.
 at the moment when porthos, more accustomed to the darkness than these
 men, coming from open daylight, was looking round him to see if through
 this artificial midnight aramis were not making him some signal, he felt
 his arm gently touched, and a voice low as a breath murmured in his ear,
 “come.”
 “oh!” said porthos.
 “hush!” said aramis, if possible, yet more softly.
 and amidst the noise of the third brigade, which continued to advance, the
 imprecations of the guards still left alive, the muffled groans of the
 dying, aramis and porthos glided unseen along the granite walls of the
 cavern. aramis led porthos into the last but one compartment, and showed
 him, in a hollow of the rocky wall, a barrel of powder weighing from
 seventy to eighty pounds, to which he had just attached a fuse. “my
 friend,” said he to porthos, “you will take this barrel, the match of
 which i am going to set fire to, and throw it amidst our enemies; can you
 do so?”
 “parbleu!” replied porthos; and he lifted the barrel with one hand.
 “light it!”
 “stop,” said aramis, “till they are all massed together, and then, my
 jupiter, hurl your thunderbolt among them.”
 “light it,” repeated porthos.
 “on my part,” continued aramis, “i will join our bretons, and help them to
 get the canoe to the sea. i will wait for you on the shore; launch it
 strongly, and hasten to us.”
 “light it,” said porthos, a third time.
 “but do you understand me?”
 “parbleu!” said porthos again, with laughter that he did not even
 attempt to restrain, “when a thing is explained to me i understand it;
 begone, and give me the light.”
 aramis gave the burning match to porthos, who held out his arm to him, his
 hands being engaged. aramis pressed the arm of porthos with both his
 hands, and fell back to the outlet of the cavern where the three rowers
 awaited him.
 porthos, left alone, applied the spark bravely to the match. the spark—a
 feeble spark, first principle of conflagration—shone in the darkness
 like a glow-worm, then was deadened against the match which it set fire
 to, porthos enlivening the flame with his breath. the smoke was a little
 dispersed, and by the light of the sparkling match objects might, for two
 seconds, be distinguished. it was a brief but splendid spectacle, that of
 this giant, pale, bloody, his countenance lighted by the fire of the match
 burning in surrounding darkness! the soldiers saw him, they saw the barrel
 he held in his hand—they at once understood what was going to
 happen. then, these men, already choked with horror at the sight of what
 had been accomplished, filled with terror at thought of what was about to
 be accomplished, gave out a simultaneous shriek of agony. some endeavored
 to fly, but they encountered the third brigade, which barred their
 passage; others mechanically took aim and attempted to fire their
 discharged muskets; others fell instinctively upon their knees. two or
 three officers cried out to porthos to promise him his liberty if he would
 spare their lives. the lieutenant of the third brigade commanded his men
 to fire; but the guards had before them their terrified companions, who
 served as a living rampart for porthos. we have said that the light
 produced by the spark and the match did not last more than two seconds;
 but during these two seconds this is what it illumined: in the first
 place, the giant, enlarged in the darkness; then, at ten paces off, a heap
 of bleeding bodies, crushed, mutilated, in the midst of which some still
 heaved in the last agony, lifting the mass as a last respiration inflating
 the sides of some old monster dying in the night. every breath of porthos,
 thus vivifying the match, sent towards this heap of bodies a
 phosphorescent aura, mingled with streaks of purple. in addition to this
 principal group scattered about the grotto, as the chances of death or
 surprise had stretched them, isolated bodies seemed to be making ghastly
 exhibitions of their gaping wounds. above ground, bedded in pools of
 blood, rose, heavy and sparkling, the short, thick pillars of the cavern,
 of which the strongly marked shades threw out the luminous particles. and
 all this was seen by the tremulous light of a match attached to a barrel
 of powder, that is to say, a torch which, whilst throwing a light on the
 dead past, showed death to come.
 as i have said, this spectacle did not last above two seconds. during this
 short space of time an officer of the third brigade got together eight men
 armed with muskets, and, through an opening, ordered them to fire upon
 porthos. but they who received the order to fire trembled so that three
 guards fell by the discharge, and the five remaining balls hissed on to
 splinter the vault, plow the ground, or indent the pillars of the cavern.
 a burst of laughter replied to this volley; then the arm of the giant
 swung round; then was seen whirling through the air, like a falling star,
 the train of fire. the barrel, hurled a distance of thirty feet, cleared
 the barricade of dead bodies, and fell amidst a group of shrieking
 soldiers, who threw themselves on their faces. the officer had followed
 the brilliant train in the air; he endeavored to precipitate himself upon
 the barrel and tear out the match before it reached the powder it
 contained. useless! the air had made the flame attached to the conductor
 more active; the match, which at rest might have burnt five minutes, was
 consumed in thirty seconds, and the infernal work exploded. furious
 vortices of sulphur and nitre, devouring shoals of fire which caught every
 object, the terrible thunder of the explosion, this is what the second
 which followed disclosed in that cavern of horrors. the rocks split like
 planks of deal beneath the axe. a jet of fire, smoke, and debris
 sprang from the middle of the grotto, enlarging as it mounted. the large
 walls of silex tottered and fell upon the sand, and the sand itself, an
 instrument of pain when launched from its hard bed, riddled the faces with
 its myriad cutting atoms. shrieks, imprecations, human life, dead bodies—all
 were engulfed in one terrific crash.
 the three first compartments became one sepulchral sink into which fell
 grimly back, in the order of their weight, every vegetable, mineral, or
 human fragment. then the lighter sand and ash came down in turn,
 stretching like a winding sheet and smoking over the dismal scene. and
 now, in this burning tomb, this subterranean volcano, seek the king’s
 guards with their blue coats laced with silver. seek the officers,
 brilliant in gold, seek for the arms upon which they depended for their
 defense. one single man has made of all of those things a chaos more
 confused, more shapeless, more terrible than the chaos which existed
 before the creation of the world. there remained nothing of the three
 compartments—nothing by which god could have recognized his
 handiwork. as for porthos, after having hurled the barrel of powder amidst
 his enemies, he had fled, as aramis had directed him to do, and had gained
 the last compartment, into which air, light, and sunshine penetrated
 through the opening. scarcely had he turned the angle which separated the
 third compartment from the fourth when he perceived at a hundred paces
 from him the bark dancing on the waves. there were his friends, there
 liberty, there life and victory. six more of his formidable strides, and
 he would be out of the vault; out of the vault! a dozen of his vigorous
 leaps and he would reach the canoe. suddenly he felt his knees give way;
 his knees seemed powerless, his legs to yield beneath him.
 “oh! oh!” murmured he, “there is my weakness seizing me again! i can walk
 no further! what is this?”
 aramis perceived him through the opening, and unable to conceive what
 could induce him to stop thus—“come on, porthos! come on,” he cried;
 “come quickly!”
 “oh!” replied the giant, making an effort that contorted every muscle of
 his body—“oh! but i cannot.” while saying these words, he fell upon
 his knees, but with his mighty hands he clung to the rocks, and raised
 himself up again.
 “quick! quick!” repeated aramis, bending forward towards the shore, as if
 to draw porthos towards him with his arms.
 “here i am,” stammered porthos, collecting all his strength to make one
 step more.
 “in the name of heaven! porthos, make haste! the barrel will blow up!”
 “make haste, monseigneur!” shouted the bretons to porthos, who was
 floundering as in a dream.
 but there was no time; the explosion thundered, earth gaped, the smoke
 which hurled through the clefts obscured the sky; the sea flowed back as
 though driven by the blast of flame which darted from the grotto as if
 from the jaws of some gigantic fiery chimera; the reflux took the bark out
 twenty toises; the solid rocks cracked to their base, and separated
 like blocks beneath the operation of the wedge; a portion of the vault was
 carried up towards heaven, as if it had been built of cardboard; the green
 and blue and topaz conflagration and black lava of liquefactions clashed
 and combated an instant beneath a majestic dome of smoke; then oscillated,
 declined, and fell successively the mighty monoliths of rock which the
 violence of the explosion had not been able to uproot from the bed of
 ages; they bowed to each other like grave and stiff old men, then
 prostrating themselves, lay down forever in their dusty tomb.
 this frightful shock seemed to restore porthos the strength that he had
 lost; he arose, a giant among granite giants. but at the moment he was
 flying between the double hedge of granite phantoms, these latter, which
 were no longer supported by the corresponding links, began to roll and
 totter round our titan, who looked as if precipitated from heaven amidst
 rocks which he had just been launching. porthos felt the very earth
 beneath his feet becoming jelly-tremulous. he stretched both hands to
 repulse the falling rocks. a gigantic block was held back by each of his
 extended arms. he bent his head, and a third granite mass sank between his
 shoulders. for an instant the power of porthos seemed about to fail him,
 but this new hercules united all his force, and the two walls of the
 prison in which he was buried fell back slowly and gave him place. for an
 instant he appeared, in this frame of granite, like the angel of chaos,
 but in pushing back the lateral rocks, he lost his point of support, for
 the monolith which weighed upon his shoulders, and the boulder, pressing
 upon him with all its weight, brought the giant down upon his knees. the
 lateral rocks, for an instant pushed back, drew together again, and added
 their weight to the ponderous mass which would have been sufficient to
 crush ten men. the hero fell without a groan—he fell while answering
 aramis with words of encouragement and hope, for, thanks to the powerful
 arch of his hands, for an instant he believed that, like enceladus, he
 would succeed in shaking off the triple load. but by degrees aramis beheld
 the block sink; the hands, strung for an instant, the arms stiffened for a
 last effort, gave way, the extended shoulders sank, wounded and torn, and
 the rocks continued to gradually collapse.
 “porthos! porthos!” cried aramis, tearing his hair. “porthos! where are
 you? speak!”
 “here, here,” murmured porthos, with a voice growing evidently weaker,
 “patience! patience!”
 scarcely had he pronounced these words, when the impulse of the fall
 augmented the weight; the enormous rock sank down, pressed by those others
 which sank in from the sides, and, as it were, swallowed up porthos in a
 sepulcher of badly jointed stones. on hearing the dying voice of his
 friend, aramis had sprung to land. two of the bretons followed him, with
 each a lever in his hand—one being sufficient to take care of the
 bark. the dying rattle of the valiant gladiator guided them amidst the
 ruins. aramis, animated, active and young as at twenty, sprang towards the
 triple mass, and with his hands, delicate as those of a woman, raised by a
 miracle of strength the corner-stone of this great granite grave. then he
 caught a glimpse, through the darkness of that charnel-house, of the still
 brilliant eye of his friend, to whom the momentary lifting of the mass
 restored a momentary respiration. the two men came rushing up, grasped
 their iron levers, united their triple strength, not merely to raise it,
 but sustain it. all was useless. they gave way with cries of grief, and
 the rough voice of porthos, seeing them exhaust themselves in a useless
 struggle, murmured in an almost cheerful tone those supreme words which
 came to his lips with the last respiration, “too heavy!”
 after which his eyes darkened and closed, his face grew ashy pale, the
 hands whitened, and the colossus sank quite down, breathing his last sigh.
 with him sank the rock, which, even in his dying agony he had still held
 up. the three men dropped the levers, which rolled upon the tumulary
 stone. then, breathless, pale, his brow covered with sweat, aramis
 listened, his breast oppressed, his heart ready to break.
 nothing more. the giant slept the eternal sleep, in the sepulcher which
 god had built about him to his measure.
 chapter li. porthos’s epitaph.
 aramis, silent and sad as ice, trembling like a timid child, arose
 shivering from the stone. a christian does not walk on tombs. but, though
 capable of standing, he was not capable of walking. it might be said that
 something of dead porthos had just died within him. his bretons surrounded
 him; aramis yielded to their kind exertions, and the three sailors,
 lifting him up, carried him to the canoe. then, having laid him down upon
 the bench near the rudder, they took to their oars, preferring this to
 hoisting sail, which might betray them.
 on all that leveled surface of the ancient grotto of locmaria, one single
 hillock attracted their eyes. aramis never removed his from it; and, at a
 distance out in the sea, in proportion as the shore receded, that menacing
 proud mass of rock seemed to draw itself up, as formerly porthos used to
 draw himself up, raising a smiling, yet invincible head towards heaven,
 like that of his dear old honest valiant friend, the strongest of the
 four, yet the first dead. strange destiny of these men of brass! the most
 simple of heart allied to the most crafty; strength of body guided by
 subtlety of mind; and in the decisive moment, when vigor alone could save
 mind and body, a stone, a rock, a vile material weight, triumphed over
 manly strength, and falling upon the body, drove out the mind.
 worthy porthos! born to help other men, always ready to sacrifice himself
 for the safety of the weak, as if god had only given him strength for that
 purpose; when dying he only thought he was carrying out the conditions of
 his compact with aramis, a compact, however, which aramis alone had drawn
 up, and which porthos had only known to suffer by its terrible solidarity.
 noble porthos! of what good now are thy chateaux overflowing with
 sumptuous furniture, forests overflowing with game, lakes overflowing with
 fish, cellars overflowing with wealth! of what service to thee now thy
 lackeys in brilliant liveries, and in the midst of them mousqueton, proud
 of the power delegated by thee! oh, noble porthos! careful heaper-up of
 treasure, was it worth while to labor to sweeten and gild life, to come
 upon a desert shore, surrounded by the cries of seagulls, and lay thyself,
 with broken bones, beneath a torpid stone? was it worth while, in short,
 noble porthos, to heap so much gold, and not have even the distich of a
 poor poet engraven upon thy monument? valiant porthos! he still, without
 doubt, sleeps, lost, forgotten, beneath the rock the shepherds of the
 heath take for the gigantic abode of a dolmen. and so many twining
 branches, so many mosses, bent by the bitter wind of ocean, so many
 lichens solder thy sepulcher to earth, that no passers-by will imagine
 such a block of granite could ever have been supported by the shoulders of
 one man.
 aramis, still pale, still icy-cold, his heart upon his lips, looked, even
 till, with the last ray of daylight, the shore faded on the horizon. not a
 word escaped him, not a sigh rose from his deep breast. the superstitious
 bretons looked upon him, trembling. such silence was not that of a man, it
 was the silence of a statue. in the meantime, with the first gray lines
 that lighted up the heavens, the canoe hoisted its little sail, which,
 swelling with the kisses of the breeze, and carrying them rapidly from the
 coast, made bravest way towards spain, across the dreaded gulf of gascony,
 so rife with storms. but scarcely half an hour after the sail had been
 hoisted, the rowers became inactive, reclining on their benches, and,
 making an eye-shade with their hands, pointed out to each other a white
 spot which appeared on the horizon as motionless as a gull rocked by the
 viewless respiration of the waves. but that which might have appeared
 motionless to ordinary eyes was moving at a quick rate to the experienced
 eye of the sailor; that which appeared stationary upon the ocean was
 cutting a rapid way through it. for some time, seeing the profound torpor
 in which their master was plunged, they did not dare to rouse him, and
 satisfied themselves with exchanging their conjectures in whispers.
 aramis, in fact, so vigilant, so active—aramis, whose eye, like that
 of the lynx, watched without ceasing, and saw better by night than by day—aramis
 seemed to sleep in this despair of soul. an hour passed thus, during which
 daylight gradually disappeared, but during which also the sail in view
 gained so swiftly on the bark, that goenne, one of the three sailors,
 ventured to say aloud:
 “monseigneur, we are being chased!”
 aramis made no reply; the ship still gained upon them. then, of their own
 accord, two of the sailors, by the direction of the patron yves, lowered
 the sail, in order that that single point upon the surface of the waters
 should cease to be a guide to the eye of the enemy pursuing them. on the
 part of the ship in sight, on the contrary, two more small sails were run
 up at the extremities of the masts. unfortunately, it was the time of the
 finest and longest days of the year, and the moon, in all her brilliancy,
 succeeded inauspicious daylight. the balancelle, which was pursuing
 the little bark before the wind, had then still half an hour of twilight,
 and a whole night almost as light as day.
 “monseigneur! monseigneur! we are lost!” said the captain. “look! they see
 us plainly, though we have lowered sail.”
 “that is not to be wondered at,” murmured one of the sailors, “since they
 say that, by the aid of the devil, the paris-folk have fabricated
 instruments with which they see as well at a distance as near, by night as
 well as by day.”
 aramis took a telescope from the bottom of the boat, focussed it silently,
 and passing it to the sailor, “here,” said he, “look!” the sailor
 hesitated.
 “don’t be alarmed,” said the bishop, “there is no sin in it; and if there
 is any sin, i will take it on myself.”
 the sailor lifted the glass to his eye, and uttered a cry. he believed
 that the vessel, which appeared to be distant about cannon-shot, had at a
 single bound cleared the whole distance. but, on withdrawing the
 instrument from his eye, he saw that, except the way which the balancelle
 had been able to make during that brief instant, it was still at the same
 distance.
 “so,” murmured the sailor, “they can see us as we see them.”
 “they see us,” said aramis, and sank again into impassibility.
 “what!—they see us!” said yves. “impossible!”
 “well, captain, look yourself,” said the sailor. and he passed him the
 glass.
 “monseigneur assures me that the devil has nothing to do with this?” asked
 yves.
 aramis shrugged his shoulders.
 the skipper lifted the glass to his eye. “oh! monseigneur,” said he, “it
 is a miracle—there they are; it seems as if i were going to touch
 them. twenty-five men at least! ah! i see the captain forward. he holds a
 glass like this, and is looking at us. ah! he turns round, and gives an
 order; they are rolling a piece of cannon forward—they are loading
 it—pointing it. misericorde! they are firing at us!”
 and by a mechanical movement, the skipper put aside the telescope, and the
 pursuing ship, relegated to the horizon, appeared again in its true
 aspect. the vessel was still at the distance of nearly a league, but the
 maneuver sighted thus was not less real. a light cloud of smoke appeared
 beneath the sails, more blue than they, and spreading like a flower
 opening; then, at about a mile from the little canoe, they saw the ball
 take the crown off two or three waves, dig a white furrow in the sea, and
 disappear at the end of it, as inoffensive as the stone with which, in
 play, a boy makes ducks and drakes. it was at once a menace and a warning.
 “what is to be done?” asked the patron.
 “they will sink us!” said goenne, “give us absolution, monseigneur!” and
 the sailors fell on their knees before him.
 “you forget that they can see you,” said he.
 “that is true!” said the sailors, ashamed of their weakness. “give us your
 orders, monseigneur, we are prepared to die for you.”
 “let us wait,” said aramis.
 “how—let us wait?”
 “yes; do you not see, as you just now said, that if we endeavor to fly,
 they will sink us?”
 “but, perhaps,” the patron ventured to say, “perhaps under cover of night,
 we could escape them.”
 “oh!” said aramis, “they have, no doubt, greek fire with which to lighten
 their own course and ours likewise.”
 at the same moment, as if the vessel was responsive to the appeal of
 aramis, a second cloud of smoke mounted slowly to the heavens, and from
 the bosom of that cloud sparkled an arrow of flame, which described a
 parabola like a rainbow, and fell into the sea, where it continued to
 burn, illuminating a space of a quarter of a league in diameter.
 the bretons looked at each other in terror. “you see plainly,” said
 aramis, “it will be better to wait for them.”
 the oars dropped from the hands of the sailors, and the bark, ceasing to
 make way, rocked motionless upon the summits of the waves. night came on,
 but still the ship drew nearer. it might be imagined it redoubled its
 speed with darkness. from time to time, as a vulture rears its head out of
 its nest, the formidable greek fire darted from its sides, and cast its
 flame upon the ocean like an incandescent snowfall. at last it came within
 musket-shot. all the men were on deck, arms in hand; the cannoniers were
 at their guns, the matches burning. it might be thought they were about to
 board a frigate and to fight a crew superior in number to their own, not
 to attempt the capture of a canoe manned by four people.
 “surrender!” cried the commander of the balancelle, with the aid of
 his speaking-trumpet.
 the sailors looked at aramis. aramis made a sign with his head. yves waved
 a white cloth at the end of a gaff. this was like striking their flag. the
 pursuer came on like a race-horse. it launched a fresh greek fire, which
 fell within twenty paces of the little canoe, and threw a light upon them
 as white as sunshine.
 “at the first sign of resistance,” cried the commander of the balancelle,
 “fire!” the soldiers brought their muskets to the present.
 “did we not say we surrendered?” said yves.
 “alive, alive, captain!” cried one excited soldier, “they must be taken
 alive.”
 “well, yes—living,” said the captain. then turning towards the
 bretons, “your lives are safe, my friends!” cried he, “all but the
 chevalier d’herblay.”
 aramis stared imperceptibly. for an instant his eye was fixed upon the
 depths of the ocean, illumined by the last flashes of the greek fire,
 which ran along the sides of the waves, played on the crests like plumes,
 and rendered still darker and more terrible the gulfs they covered.
 “do you hear, monseigneur?” said the sailors.
 “yes.”
 “what are your orders?”
 “accept!”
 “but you, monseigneur?”
 aramis leaned still more forward, and dipped the ends of his long white
 fingers in the green limpid waters of the sea, to which he turned with
 smiles as to a friend.
 “accept!” repeated he.
 “we accept,” repeated the sailors; “but what security have we?”
 “the word of a gentleman,” said the officer. “by my rank and by my name i
 swear that all except m. le chevalier d’herblay shall have their lives
 spared. i am lieutenant of the king’s frigate the ‘pomona,’ and my name is
 louis constant de pressigny.”
 with a rapid gesture, aramis—already bent over the side of the bark
 towards the sea—drew himself up, and with a flashing eye, and a
 smile upon his lips, “throw out the ladder, messieurs,” said he, as if the
 command had belonged to him. he was obeyed. when aramis, seizing the rope
 ladder, walked straight up to the commander, with a firm step, looked at
 him earnestly, made a sign to him with his hand, a mysterious and unknown
 sign at sight of which the officer turned pale, trembled, and bowed his
 head, the sailors were profoundly astonished. without a word aramis then
 raised his hand to the eyes of the commander and showed him the collet of
 a ring he wore on the ring-finger of his left hand. and while making this
 sign aramis, draped in cold and haughty majesty, had the air of an emperor
 giving his hand to be kissed. the commandant, who for a moment had raised
 his head, bowed a second time with marks of the most profound respect.
 then stretching his hand out, in his turn, towards the poop, that is to
 say, towards his own cabin, he drew back to allow aramis to go first. the
 three bretons, who had come on board after their bishop, looked at each
 other, stupefied. the crew were awed to silence. five minutes after, the
 commander called the second lieutenant, who returned immediately, ordering
 the head to be put towards corunna. whilst this order was being executed,
 aramis reappeared upon the deck, and took a seat near the bastingage.
 night had fallen; the moon had not yet risen, yet aramis looked
 incessantly towards belle-isle. yves then approached the captain, who had
 returned to take his post in the stern, and said, in a low and humble
 voice, “what course are we to follow, captain?”
 “we take what course monseigneur pleases,” replied the officer.
 aramis passed the night leaning upon the bastingage. yves, on
 approaching him next morning, remarked that “the night must have been a
 very damp one, for the wood on which the bishop’s head had rested was
 soaked with dew.” who knows?—that dew was, it may be, the first
 tears that had ever fallen from the eyes of aramis!
 what epitaph would have been worth that, good porthos?
 chapter lii. m. de gesvres’s round.
 d’artagnan was little used to resistance like that he had just
 experienced. he returned, profoundly irritated, to nantes. irritation,
 with this vigorous man, usually vented itself in impetuous attack, which
 few people, hitherto, were they king, were they giants, had been able to
 resist. trembling with rage, he went straight to the castle, and asked an
 audience with the king. it might be about seven o’clock in the morning,
 and, since his arrival at nantes, the king had been an early riser. but on
 arriving at the corridor with which we are acquainted, d’artagnan found m.
 de gesvres, who stopped him politely, telling him not to speak too loud
 and disturb the king. “is the king asleep?” said d’artagnan. “well, i will
 let him sleep. but about what o’clock do you suppose he will rise?”
 “oh! in about two hours; his majesty has been up all night.”
 d’artagnan took his hat again, bowed to m. de gesvres, and returned to his
 own apartments. he came back at half-past nine, and was told that the king
 was at breakfast. “that will just suit me,” said d’artagnan. “i will talk
 to the king while he is eating.”
 m. de brienne reminded d’artagnan that the king would not see any one at
 meal-time.
 “but,” said d’artagnan, looking askant at brienne, “you do not know,
 perhaps, monsieur, that i have the privilege of entree anywhere—and
 at any hour.”
 brienne took the captain’s hand kindly, and said, “not at nantes, dear
 monsieur d’artagnan. the king, in this journey, has changed everything.”
 d’artagnan, a little softened, asked about what o’clock the king would
 have finished his breakfast.
 “we don’t know.”
 “eh?—don’t know! what does that mean? you don’t know how much time
 the king devotes to eating? it is generally an hour; and, if we admit that
 the air of the loire gives an additional appetite, we will extend it to an
 hour and a half; that is enough, i think. i will wait where i am.”
 “oh! dear monsieur d’artagnan, the order of the day is not to allow any
 person to remain in this corridor; i am on guard for that particular
 purpose.”
 d’artagnan felt his anger mounting to his brain a second time. he went out
 quickly, for fear of complicating the affair by a display of premature
 ill-humor. as soon as he was out he began to reflect. “the king,” said he,
 “will not receive me, that is evident. the young man is angry; he is
 afraid, beforehand, of the words that i may speak to him. yes; but in the
 meantime belle-isle is besieged, and my two friends by now probably taken
 or killed. poor porthos! as to master aramis, he is always full of
 resources, and i am easy on his account. but, no, no; porthos is not yet
 an invalid, nor is aramis in his dotage. the one with his arm, the other
 with his imagination, will find work for his majesty’s soldiers. who knows
 if these brave men may not get up for the edification of his most
 christian majesty a little bastion of saint-gervais! i don’t despair of
 it. they have cannon and a garrison. and yet,” continued d’artagnan, “i
 don’t know whether it would not be better to stop the combat. for myself
 alone i will not put up with either surly looks or insults from the king;
 but for my friends i must put up with everything. shall i go to m.
 colbert? now, there is a man i must acquire the habit of terrifying. i
 will go to m. colbert.” and d’artagnan set forward bravely to find m.
 colbert, but was informed that he was working with the king, at the castle
 of nantes. “good!” cried he, “the times have come again in which i
 measured my steps from de treville to the cardinal, from the cardinal to
 the queen, from the queen to louis xiii. truly is it said that men, in
 growing old, become children again!—to the castle, then!” he
 returned thither. m. de lyonne was coming out. he gave d’artagnan both
 hands, but told him that the king had been busy all the preceding evening
 and all night, and that orders had been given that no one should be
 admitted. “not even the captain who takes the order?” cried d’artagnan. “i
 think that is rather too strong.”
 “not even he,” said m. de lyonne.
 “since that is the case,” replied d’artagnan, wounded to the heart; “since
 the captain of the musketeers, who has always entered the king’s chamber,
 is no longer allowed to enter it, his cabinet, or his salle-a-manger,
 either the king is dead, or his captain is in disgrace. do me the favor,
 then, m. de lyonne, who are in favor, to return and tell the king,
 plainly, i send him my resignation.”
 “d’artagnan, beware of what you are doing!”
 “for friendship’s sake, go!” and he pushed him gently towards the cabinet.
 “well, i will go,” said lyonne.
 d’artagnan waited, walking about the corridor in no enviable mood. lyonne
 returned.
 “well, what did the king say?” exclaimed d’artagnan.
 “he simply answered, ‘’tis well,’” replied lyonne.
 “that it was well!” said the captain, with an explosion. “that is to say,
 that he accepts it? good! now, then, i am free! i am only a plain citizen,
 m. de lyonne. i have the pleasure of bidding you good-bye! farewell,
 castle, corridor, ante-chamber! a bourgeois, about to breathe at
 liberty, takes his farewell of you.”
 and without waiting longer, the captain sprang from the terrace down the
 staircase, where he had picked up the fragments of gourville’s letter.
 five minutes after, he was at the hostelry, where, according to the custom
 of all great officers who have lodgings at the castle, he had taken what
 was called his city-chamber. but when he arrived there, instead of
 throwing off his sword and cloak, he took his pistols, put his money into
 a large leather purse, sent for his horses from the castle-stables, and
 gave orders that would ensure their reaching vannes during the night.
 everything went on according to his wishes. at eight o’clock in the
 evening, he was putting his foot in the stirrup, when m. de gesvres
 appeared, at the head of twelve guards, in front of the hostelry.
 d’artagnan saw all from the corner of his eye; he could not fail seeing
 thirteen men and thirteen horses. but he feigned not to observe anything,
 and was about to put his horse in motion. gesvres rode up to him.
 “monsieur d’artagnan!” said he, aloud.
 “ah, monsieur de gesvres! good evening!”
 “one would say you were getting on horseback.”
 “more than that,—i am mounted,—as you see.”
 “it is fortunate i have met with you.”
 “were you looking for me, then?”
 “mon dieu! yes.”
 “on the part of the king, i will wager?”
 “yes.”
 “as i, three days ago, went in search of m. fouquet?”
 “oh!”
 “nonsense! it is of no use being over-delicate with me; that is all labor
 lost. tell me at once you are come to arrest me.”
 “to arrest you?—good heavens! no.”
 “why do you come to accost me with twelve horsemen at your heels, then?”
 “i am making my round.”
 “that isn’t bad! and so you pick me up in your round, eh?”
 “i don’t pick you up; i meet with you, and i beg you to come with me.”
 “where?”
 “to the king.”
 “good!” said d’artagnan, with a bantering air; “the king is disengaged.”
 “for heaven’s sake, captain,” said m. de gesvres, in a low voice to the
 musketeer, “do not compromise yourself! these men hear you.”
 d’artagnan laughed aloud, and replied:
 “march! people who are arrested are placed between the six first guards
 and the six last.”
 “but as i am not arresting you,” said m. de gesvres, “you will march
 behind, with me, if you please.”
 “well,” said d’artagnan, “that is very polite, duke, and you are right in
 being so; for if ever i had had to make my rounds near your chambre-de-ville,
 i should have been courteous to you, i assure you, on the word of a
 gentleman! now, one favor more; what does the king want with me?”
 “oh, the king is furious!”
 “very well! the king, who has thought it worth while to be angry, may take
 the trouble to grow calm again; that is all. i shan’t die of that, i will
 swear.”
 “no, but—”
 “but—i shall be sent to keep company with unfortunate m. fouquet. mordioux!
 that is a gallant man, a worthy man! we shall live very sociably together,
 i will be sworn.”
 “here we are at our place of destination,” said the duke. “captain, for
 heaven’s sake be calm with the king!”
 “ah! ah! you are playing the brave man with me, duke!” said d’artagnan,
 throwing one of his defiant glances over gesvres. “i have been told that
 you are ambitious of uniting your guards with my musketeers. this strikes
 me as a splendid opportunity.”
 “i will take exceeding good care not to avail myself of it, captain.”
 “and why not, pray?”
 “oh, for many reasons—in the first place, for this: if i were to
 succeed you in the musketeers after having arrested you—”
 “ah! then you admit you have arrested me?”
 “no, i don’t.”
 “say met me, then. so, you were saying if you were to succeed me
 after having arrested me?”
 “your musketeers, at the first exercise with ball cartridges, would fire
 my way, by mistake.”
 “oh, as to that i won’t say; for the fellows do love me a little.”
 gesvres made d’artagnan pass in first, and took him straight to the
 cabinet where louis was waiting for his captain of the musketeers, and
 placed himself behind his colleague in the ante-chamber. the king could be
 heard distinctly, speaking aloud to colbert in the same cabinet where
 colbert might have heard, a few days before, the king speaking aloud with
 m. d’artagnan. the guards remained as a mounted picket before the
 principal gate; and the report was quickly spread throughout the city that
 monsieur le capitaine of the musketeers had been arrested by order of the
 king. then these men were seen to be in motion, and as in the good old
 times of louis xiii. and m. de treville, groups were formed, and
 staircases were filled; vague murmurs, issuing from the court below, came
 rolling to the upper stories, like the distant moaning of the waves. m. de
 gesvres became uneasy. he looked at his guards, who, after being
 interrogated by the musketeers who had just got among their ranks, began
 to shun them with a manifestation of innocence. d’artagnan was certainly
 less disturbed by all this than m. de gesvres, the captain of the guards.
 as soon as he entered, he seated himself on the ledge of a window whence
 with his eagle glance he saw all that was going on without the least
 emotion. no step of the progressive fermentation which had shown itself at
 the report of his arrest escaped him. he foresaw the very moment the
 explosion would take place; and we know that his previsions were in
 general correct.
 “it would be very whimsical,” thought he, “if, this evening, my
 praetorians should make me king of france. how i should laugh!”
 but, at the height, all was stopped. guards, musketeers, officers,
 soldiers, murmurs, uneasiness, dispersed, vanished, died away; there was
 an end of menace and sedition. one word had calmed the waves. the king had
 desired brienne to say, “hush, messieurs! you disturb the king.”
 d’artagnan sighed. “all is over!” said he; “the musketeers of the present
 day are not those of his majesty louis xiii. all is over!”
 “monsieur d’artagnan, you are wanted in the ante-chamber of the king,”
 proclaimed an usher.
 chapter liii. king louis xiv.
 the king was seated in his cabinet, with his back turned towards the door
 of entrance. in front of him was a mirror, in which, while turning over
 his papers, he could see at a glance those who came in. he did not take
 any notice of the entrance of d’artagnan, but spread above his letters and
 plans the large silk cloth he used to conceal his secrets from the
 importunate. d’artagnan understood this by-play, and kept in the
 background; so that at the end of a minute the king, who heard nothing,
 and saw nothing save from the corner of his eye, was obliged to cry, “is
 not m. d’artagnan there?”
 “i am here, sire,” replied the musketeer, advancing.
 “well, monsieur,” said the king, fixing his pellucid eyes on d’artagnan,
 “what have you to say to me?”
 “i, sire!” replied the latter, who watched the first blow of his adversary
 to make a good retort; “i have nothing to say to your majesty, unless it
 be that you have caused me to be arrested, and here i am.”
 the king was going to reply that he had not had d’artagnan arrested, but
 any such sentence appeared too much like an excuse, and he was silent.
 d’artagnan likewise preserved an obstinate silence.
 “monsieur,” at length resumed the king, “what did i charge you to go and
 do at belle-isle? tell me, if you please.”
 the king while uttering these words looked intently at his captain. here
 d’artagnan was fortunate; the king seemed to place the game in his hands.
 “i believe,” replied he, “that your majesty does me the honor to ask what
 i went to belle-isle to accomplish?”
 “yes, monsieur.”
 “well! sire, i know nothing about it; it is not of me that question should
 be asked, but of that infinite number of officers of all kinds, to whom
 have been given innumerable orders of all kinds, whilst to me, head of the
 expedition, nothing precise was said or stated in any form whatever.”
 the king was hurt: he showed it by his reply. “monsieur,” said he, “orders
 have only been given to such as were judged faithful.”
 “and, therefore, i have been astonished, sire,” retorted the musketeer,
 “that a captain like myself, who ranks with a marechal of france, should
 have found himself under the orders of five or six lieutenants or majors,
 good to make spies of, possibly, but not at all fit to conduct a warlike
 expedition. it was upon this subject i came to demand an explanation of
 your majesty, when i found the door closed against me, which, the final
 insult offered to a brave man, has led me to quit your majesty’s service.”
 “monsieur,” replied the king, “you still believe that you are living in an
 age when kings were, as you complain of having been, under the orders and
 at the discretion of their inferiors. you seem to forget that a king owes
 an account of his actions to none but god.”
 “i forget nothing, sire,” said the musketeer, wounded by this lesson.
 “besides, i do not see in what an honest man, when he asks of his king how
 he has ill-served him, offends him.”
 “you have ill-served me, monsieur, by siding with my enemies against me.”
 “who are your enemies, sire?”
 “the men i sent you to fight.”
 “two men the enemies of the whole of your majesty’s army! that is
 incredible.”
 “you have no power to judge of my will.”
 “but i have to judge of my own friendships, sire.”
 “he who serves his friends does not serve his master.”
 “i so well understand this, sire, that i have respectfully offered your
 majesty my resignation.”
 “and i have accepted it, monsieur,” said the king. “before being separated
 from you i was willing to prove to you that i know how to keep my word.”
 “your majesty has kept more than your word, for your majesty has had me
 arrested,” said d’artagnan, with his cold, bantering air; “you did not
 promise me that, sire.”
 the king would not condescend to perceive the pleasantry, and continued,
 seriously, “you see, monsieur, to what grave steps your disobedience
 forces me.”
 “my disobedience!” cried d’artagnan, red with anger.
 “it is the mildest term that i can find,” pursued the king. “my idea was
 to take and punish rebels; was i bound to inquire whether these rebels
 were your friends or not?”
 “but i was,” replied d’artagnan. “it was a cruelty on your majesty’s part
 to send me to capture my friends and lead them to your gibbets.”
 “it was a trial i had to make, monsieur, of pretended servants, who eat my
 bread and should defend my person. the trial has succeeded ill,
 monsieur d’artagnan.”
 “for one bad servant your majesty loses,” said the musketeer, with
 bitterness, “there are ten who, on that same day, go through a like
 ordeal. listen to me, sire; i am not accustomed to that service. mine is a
 rebel sword when i am required to do ill. it was ill to send me in pursuit
 of two men whose lives m. fouquet, your majesty’s preserver, implored you
 to save. still further, these men were my friends. they did not attack
 your majesty, they succumbed to your blind anger. besides, why were they
 not allowed to escape? what crime had they committed? i admit you may
 contest with me the right of judging their conduct. but why suspect me
 before the action? why surround me with spies? why disgrace me before the
 army? why me, in whom till now you showed the most entire confidence—who
 for thirty years have been attached to your person, and have given you a
 thousand proofs of my devotion—for it must be said, now that i am
 accused—why reduce me to see three thousand of the king’s soldiers
 march in battle against two men?”
 “one would say you have forgotten what these men have done to me!” said
 the king, in a hollow voice, “and that it was no merit of theirs i was not
 lost.”
 “sire, one would imagine you forget that i was there.”
 “enough, monsieur d’artagnan, enough of these dominating interests which
 arise to keep the sun itself from my interests. i am founding a state in
 which there shall be but one master, as i promised you; the moment is at
 hand for me to keep my promise. you wish to be, according to your tastes
 or private friendships, free to destroy my plans and save my enemies? i
 will thwart you or will drop you—seek a more compliant master. i
 know full well that another king would not conduct himself as i do, and
 would allow himself to be dominated by you, at the risk of sending you
 some day to keep company with m. fouquet and the rest; but i have an
 excellent memory, and for me, services are sacred titles to gratitude, to
 impunity. you shall only have this lesson, monsieur d’artagnan, as the
 punishment of your want of discipline, and i will not imitate my
 predecessors in anger, not having imitated them in favor. and, then, other
 reasons make me act mildly towards you; in the first place, because you
 are a man of sense, a man of excellent sense, a man of heart, and that you
 will be a capital servant to him who shall have mastered you; secondly,
 because you will cease to have any motives for insubordination. your
 friends are now destroyed or ruined by me. these supports on which your
 capricious mind instinctively relied i have caused to disappear. at this
 moment, my soldiers have taken or killed the rebels of belle-isle.”
 d’artagnan became pale. “taken or killed!” cried he. “oh! sire, if you
 thought what you tell, if you were sure you were telling me the truth, i
 should forget all that is just, all that is magnanimous in your words, to
 call you a barbarous king, and an unnatural man. but i pardon you these
 words,” said he, smiling with pride; “i pardon them to a young prince who
 does not know, who cannot comprehend what such men as m. d’herblay, m. du
 vallon, and myself are. taken or killed! ah! ah! sire! tell me, if the
 news is true, how much has it cost you in men and money. we will then
 reckon if the game has been worth the stakes.”
 as he spoke thus, the king went up to him in great anger, and said,
 “monsieur d’artagnan, your replies are those of a rebel! tell me, if you
 please, who is king of france? do you know any other?”
 “sire,” replied the captain of the musketeers, coldly, “i very well
 remember that one morning at vaux you addressed that question to many
 people who did not answer to it, whilst i, on my part, did answer to it.
 if i recognized my king on that day, when the thing was not easy, i think
 it would be useless to ask the question of me now, when your majesty and i
 are alone.”
 at these words louis cast down his eyes. it appeared to him that the shade
 of the unfortunate philippe passed between d’artagnan and himself, to
 evoke the remembrance of that terrible adventure. almost at the same
 moment an officer entered and placed a dispatch in the hands of the king,
 who, in his turn, changed color, while reading it.
 “monsieur,” said he, “what i learn here you would know later; it is better
 i should tell you, and that you should learn it from the mouth of your
 king. a battle has taken place at belle-isle.”
 “is it possible?” said d’artagnan, with a calm air, though his heart was
 beating fast enough to choke him. “well, sire?”
 “well, monsieur—and i have lost a hundred and ten men.”
 a beam of joy and pride shone in the eyes of d’artagnan. “and the rebels?”
 said he.
 “the rebels have fled,” said the king.
 d’artagnan could not restrain a cry of triumph. “only,” added the king, “i
 have a fleet which closely blockades belle-isle, and i am certain not a
 bark can escape.”
 “so that,” said the musketeer, brought back to his dismal idea, “if these
 two gentlemen are taken—”
 “they will be hanged,” said the king, quietly.
 “and do they know it?” replied d’artagnan, repressing his trembling.
 “they know it, because you must have told them yourself; and all the
 country knows it.”
 “then, sire, they will never be taken alive, i will answer for that.”
 “ah!” said the king, negligently, and taking up his letter again. “very
 well, they will be dead, then, monsieur d’artagnan, and that will come to
 the same thing, since i should only take them to have them hanged.”
 d’artagnan wiped the sweat which flowed from his brow.
 “i have told you,” pursued louis xiv., “that i would one day be an
 affectionate, generous, and constant master. you are now the only man of
 former times worthy of my anger or my friendship. i will not spare you
 either sentiment, according to your conduct. could you serve a king,
 monsieur d’artagnan, who should have a hundred kings, his equals, in the
 kingdom? could i, tell me, do with such weak instruments the great things
 i meditate? did you ever see an artist effect great works with an unworthy
 tool? far from us, monsieur, the old leaven of feudal abuse! the fronde,
 which threatened to ruin monarchy, has emancipated it. i am master at
 home, captain d’artagnan, and i shall have servants who, lacking, perhaps,
 your genius, will carry devotion and obedience to the verge of heroism. of
 what consequence, i ask you, of what consequence is it that god has given
 no sense to arms and legs? it is to the head he has given genius, and the
 head, you know, the rest obey. i am the head.”
 d’artagnan started. louis xiv. continued as if he had seen nothing,
 although this emotion had not by any means escaped him. “now, let us
 conclude between us two the bargain i promised to make with you one day
 when you found me in a very strange predicament at blois. do me justice,
 monsieur, when you admit i do not make any one pay for the tears of shame
 that i then shed. look around you; lofty heads have bowed. bow yours, or
 choose such exile as will suit you. perhaps, when reflecting upon it, you
 will find your king has a generous heart, who reckons sufficiently upon
 your loyalty to allow you to leave him dissatisfied, when you possess a
 great state secret. you are a brave man; i know you to be so. why have you
 judged me prematurely? judge me from this day forward, d’artagnan, and be
 as severe as you please.”
 d’artagnan remained bewildered, mute, undecided for the first time in his
 life. at last he had found an adversary worthy of him. this was no longer
 trick, it was calculation; no longer violence, but strength; no longer
 passion, but will; no longer boasting, but council. this young man who had
 brought down a fouquet, and could do without a d’artagnan, deranged the
 somewhat headstrong calculations of the musketeer.
 “come, let us see what stops you?” said the king, kindly. “you have given
 in your resignation; shall i refuse to accept it? i admit that it may be
 hard for such an old captain to recover lost good-humor.”
“oh!” replied d’artagnan, in a melancholy tone, “that is not my most
serious care. i hesitate to take back my resignation because i am old in
comparison with you, and have habits difficult to abandon. henceforward,
you must have courtiers who know how to amuse you—madmen who will get
themselves killed to carry out what you call your great works. great
they will be, i feel—but, if by chance i should not think them so?
i have seen war, sire, i have seen peace; i have served richelieu and
mazarin; i have been scorched with your father, at the fire of rochelle;
riddled with sword-thrusts like a sieve, having grown a new skin ten
times, as serpents do. after affronts and injustices, i have a command
which was formerly something, because it gave the bearer the right of
speaking as he liked to his king. but your captain of the musketeers
will henceforward be an officer guarding the outer doors. truly, sire,
if that is to be my employment from this time, seize the opportunity of
our being on good terms, to take it from me. do not imagine that i bear
malice; no, you have tamed me, as you say; but it must be confessed that
in taming me you have lowered me; by bowing me you have convicted me of
weakness. if you knew how well it suits me to carry my head high,
and what a pitiful mien i shall have while scenting the dust of your
carpets! oh! sire, i regret sincerely, and you will regret as i do, the
old days when the king of france saw in every vestibule those insolent
gentlemen, lean, always swearing—cross-grained mastiffs, who could bite
mortally in the hour of danger or of battle. these men were the best of
courtiers to the hand which fed them—they would lick it; but for the
hand that struck them, oh! the bite that followed! a little gold on the
lace of their cloaks, a slender stomach in their hauts-de-chausses,
a little sparkling of gray in their dry hair, and you will behold the
handsome dukes and peers, the haughty marechaux of france. but why
should i tell you all this? the king is master; he wills that i
should make verses, he wills that i should polish the mosaics of his
ante-chambers with satin shoes. mordioux! that is difficult, but i
have got over greater difficulties. i will do it. why should i do it?
because i love money?—i have enough. because i am ambitious?—my career
is almost at an end. because i love the court? no. i will remain here
because i have been accustomed for thirty years to go and take the
orderly word of the king, and to have said to me ‘good evening,
d’artagnan,’ with a smile i did not beg for. that smile i will beg for!
are you content, sire?” and d’artagnan bowed his silver head, upon which
the smiling king placed his white hand with pride.
“thanks, my old servant, my faithful friend,” said he. “as, reckoning
from this day, i have no longer any enemies in france, it remains with
me to send you to a foreign field to gather your marshal’s baton. depend
upon me for finding you an opportunity. in the meanwhile, eat of my very
best bread, and sleep in absolute tranquillity.”
 “that is all kind and well!” said d’artagnan, much agitated. “but those
 poor men at belle-isle? one of them, in particular—so good! so
 brave! so true!”
 “do you ask their pardon of me?”
 “upon my knees, sire!”
 “well! then, go and take it to them, if it be still in time. but do you
 answer for them?”
 “with my life, sire.”
 “go, then. to-morrow i set out for paris. return by that time, for i do
 not wish you to leave me in the future.”
 “be assured of that, sire,” said d’artagnan, kissing the royal hand.
 and with a heart swelling with joy, he rushed out of the castle on his way
 to belle-isle.
 chapter liv. m. fouquet’s friends.
 the king had returned to paris, and with him d’artagnan, who, in
 twenty-four hours, having made with greatest care all possible inquiries
 at belle-isle, succeeded in learning nothing of the secret so well kept by
 the heavy rock of locmaria, which had fallen on the heroic porthos. the
 captain of the musketeers only knew what those two valiant men—these
 two friends, whose defense he had so nobly taken up, whose lives he had so
 earnestly endeavored to save—aided by three faithful bretons, had
 accomplished against a whole army. he had seen, spread on the neighboring
 heath, the human remains which had stained with clouted blood the
 scattered stones among the flowering broom. he learned also that a bark
 had been seen far out at sea, and that, like a bird of prey, a royal
 vessel had pursued, overtaken, and devoured the poor little bird that was
 flying with such palpitating wings. but there d’artagnan’s certainties
 ended. the field of supposition was thrown open. now, what could he
 conjecture? the vessel had not returned. it is true that a brisk wind had
 prevailed for three days; but the corvette was known to be a good sailer
 and solid in its timbers; it had no need to fear a gale of wind, and it
 ought, according to the calculation of d’artagnan, to have either returned
 to brest, or come back to the mouth of the loire. such was the news,
 ambiguous, it is true, but in some degree reassuring to him personally,
 which d’artagnan brought to louis xiv., when the king, followed by all the
 court, returned to paris.
 louis, satisfied with his success—louis, more mild and affable as he
 felt himself more powerful—had not ceased for an instant to ride
 beside the carriage door of mademoiselle de la valliere. everybody was
 anxious to amuse the two queens, so as to make them forget this
 abandonment by son and husband. everything breathed the future, the past
 was nothing to anybody. only that past was like a painful bleeding wound
 to the hearts of certain tender and devoted spirits. scarcely was the king
 reinstalled in paris, when he received a touching proof of this. louis
 xiv. had just risen and taken his first repast when his captain of the
 musketeers presented himself before him. d’artagnan was pale and looked
 unhappy. the king, at the first glance, perceived the change in a
 countenance generally so unconcerned. “what is the matter, d’artagnan?”
 said he.
 “sire, a great misfortune has happened to me.”
 “good heavens! what is that?”
 “sire, i have lost one of my friends, m. du vallon, in the affair of
 belle-isle.”
 and, while speaking these words, d’artagnan fixed his falcon eye upon
 louis xiv., to catch the first feeling that would show itself.
 “i knew it,” replied the king, quietly.
 “you knew it, and did not tell me!” cried the musketeer.
 “to what good? your grief, my friend, was so well worthy of respect. it
 was my duty to treat it gently. to have informed you of this misfortune,
 which i knew would pain you so greatly, d’artagnan, would have been, in
 your eyes, to have triumphed over you. yes, i knew that m. du vallon had
 buried himself beneath the rocks of locmaria; i knew that m. d’herblay had
 taken one of my vessels with its crew, and had compelled it to convey him
 to bayonne. but i was willing you should learn these matters in a direct
 manner, in order that you might be convinced my friends are with me
 respected and sacred; that always in me the man will sacrifice himself to
 subjects, whilst the king is so often found to sacrifice men to majesty
 and power.”
 “but, sire, how could you know?”
 “how do you yourself know, d’artagnan?”
 “by this letter, sire, which m. d’herblay, free and out of danger, writes
 me from bayonne.”
 “look here,” said the king, drawing from a casket placed upon the table
 closet to the seat upon which d’artagnan was leaning, “here is a letter
 copied exactly from that of m. d’herblay. here is the very letter, which
 colbert placed in my hands a week before you received yours. i am well
 served, you may perceive.”
 “yes, sire,” murmured the musketeer, “you were the only man whose star was
 equal to the task of dominating the fortune and strength of my two
 friends. you have used your power, sire, you will not abuse it, will you?”
 “d’artagnan,” said the king, with a smile beaming with kindness, “i could
 have m. d’herblay carried off from the territories of the king of spain,
 and brought here, alive, to inflict justice upon him. but, d’artagnan, be
 assured i will not yield to this first and natural impulse. he is free—let
 him continue free.”
 “oh, sire! you will not always remain so clement, so noble, so generous as
 you have shown yourself with respect to me and m. d’herblay; you will have
 about you counselors who will cure you of that weakness.”
 “no, d’artagnan, you are mistaken when you accuse my council of urging me
 to pursue rigorous measures. the advice to spare m. d’herblay comes from
 colbert himself.”
 “oh, sire!” said d’artagnan, extremely surprised.
 “as for you,” continued the king, with a kindness very uncommon to him, “i
 have several pieces of good news to announce to you; but you shall know
 them, my dear captain, the moment i have made my accounts all straight. i
 have said that i wish to make, and would make, your fortune; that promise
 will soon become reality.”
 “a thousand times thanks, sire! i can wait. but i implore you, whilst i go
 and practice patience, that your majesty will deign to notice those poor
 people who have for so long a time besieged your ante-chamber, and come
 humbly to lay a petition at your feet.”
 “who are they?”
 “enemies of your majesty.” the king raised his head.
 “friends of m. fouquet,” added d’artagnan.
 “their names?”
 “m. gourville, m. pelisson, and a poet, m. jean de la fontaine.”
 the king took a moment to reflect. “what do they want?”
 “i do not know.”
 “how do they appear?”
 “in great affliction.”
 “what do they say?”
 “nothing.”
 “what do they do?”
 “they weep.”
 “let them come in,” said the king, with a serious brow.
 d’artagnan turned rapidly on his heel, raised the tapestry which closed
 the entrance to the royal chamber, and directing his voice to the
 adjoining room, cried, “enter.”
 the three men d’artagnan had named immediately appeared at the door of the
 cabinet in which were the king and his captain. a profound silence
 prevailed in their passage. the courtiers, at the approach of the friends
 of the unfortunate superintendent of finances, drew back, as if fearful of
 being affected by contagion with disgrace and misfortune. d’artagnan, with
 a quick step, came forward to take by the hand the unhappy men who stood
 trembling at the door of the cabinet; he led them in front of the king’s
 fauteuil, who, having placed himself in the embrasure of a window,
 awaited the moment of presentation, and was preparing himself to give the
 supplicants a rigorously diplomatic reception.
 the first of the friends of fouquet’s to advance was pelisson. he did not
 weep, but his tears were only restrained that the king might better hear
 his voice and prayer. gourville bit his lips to check his tears, out of
 respect for the king. la fontaine buried his face in his handkerchief, and
 the only signs of life he gave were the convulsive motions of his
 shoulders, raised by his sobs.
 the king preserved his dignity. his countenance was impassible. he even
 maintained the frown which appeared when d’artagnan announced his enemies.
 he made a gesture which signified, “speak;” and he remained standing, with
 his eyes fixed searchingly on these desponding men. pelisson bowed to the
 ground, and la fontaine knelt as people do in churches. this dismal
 silence, disturbed only by sighs and groans, began to excite in the king,
 not compassion, but impatience.
 “monsieur pelisson,” said he, in a sharp, dry tone. “monsieur gourville,
 and you, monsieur—” and he did not name la fontaine, “i cannot,
 without sensible displeasure, see you come to plead for one of the
 greatest criminals it is the duty of justice to punish. a king does not
 allow himself to soften save at the tears of the innocent, the remorse of
 the guilty. i have no faith either in the remorse of m. fouquet or the
 tears of his friends, because the one is tainted to the very heart, and
 the others ought to dread offending me in my own palace. for these
 reasons, i beg you, monsieur pelisson, monsieur gourville, and you,
 monsieur—, to say nothing that will not plainly proclaim the respect
 you have for my will.”
 “sire,” replied pelisson, trembling at these words, “we are come to say
 nothing to your majesty that is not the most profound expression of the
 most sincere respect and love that are due to a king from all his
 subjects. your majesty’s justice is redoubtable; every one must yield to
 the sentences it pronounces. we respectfully bow before it. far from us
 the idea of coming to defend him who has had the misfortune to offend your
 majesty. he who has incurred your displeasure may be a friend of ours, but
 he is an enemy to the state. we abandon him, but with tears, to the
 severity of the king.”
 “besides,” interrupted the king, calmed by that supplicating voice, and
 those persuasive words, “my parliament will decide. i do not strike
 without first having weighed the crime; my justice does not wield the
 sword without employing first a pair of scales.”
 “therefore we have every confidence in that impartiality of the king, and
 hope to make our feeble voices heard, with the consent of your majesty,
 when the hour for defending an accused friend strikes.”
 “in that case, messieurs, what do you ask of me?” said the king, with his
 most imposing air.
 “sire,” continued pelisson, “the accused has a wife and family. the little
 property he had was scarcely sufficient to pay his debts, and madame
 fouquet, since her husband’s captivity, is abandoned by everybody. the
 hand of your majesty strikes like the hand of god. when the lord sends the
 curse of leprosy or pestilence into a family, every one flies and shuns
 the abode of the leprous or plague-stricken. sometimes, but very rarely, a
 generous physician alone ventures to approach the ill-reputed threshold,
 passes it with courage, and risks his life to combat death. he is the last
 resource of the dying, the chosen instrument of heavenly mercy. sire, we
 supplicate you, with clasped hands and bended knees, as a divinity is
 supplicated! madame fouquet has no longer any friends, no longer any means
 of support; she weeps in her deserted home, abandoned by all those who
 besieged its doors in the hour of prosperity; she has neither credit nor
 hope left. at least, the unhappy wretch upon whom your anger falls
 receives from you, however culpable he may be, his daily bread though
 moistened by his tears. as much afflicted, more destitute than her
 husband, madame fouquet—the lady who had the honor to receive your
 majesty at her table—madame fouquet, the wife of the ancient
 superintendent of your majesty’s finances, madame fouquet has no longer
 bread.”
 here the mortal silence which had chained the breath of pelisson’s two
 friends was broken by an outburst of sobs; and d’artagnan, whose chest
 heaved at hearing this humble prayer, turned round towards the angle of
 the cabinet to bite his mustache and conceal a groan.
 the king had preserved his eye dry and his countenance severe; but the
 blood had mounted to his cheeks, and the firmness of his look was visibly
 diminished.
 “what do you wish?” said he, in an agitated voice.
 “we come humbly to ask your majesty,” replied pelisson, upon whom emotion
 was fast gaining, “to permit us, without incurring the displeasure of your
 majesty, to lend to madame fouquet two thousand pistoles collected among
 the old friends of her husband, in order that the widow may not stand in
 need of the necessaries of life.”
 at the word widow, pronounced by pelisson whilst fouquet was still
 alive, the king turned very pale;—his pride disappeared; pity rose
 from his heart to his lips; he cast a softened look upon the men who knelt
 sobbing at his feet.
 “god forbid,” said he, “that i should confound the innocent with the
 guilty. they know me but ill who doubt my mercy towards the weak. i strike
 none but the arrogant. do, messieurs, do all that your hearts counsel you
 to assuage the grief of madame fouquet. go, messieurs—go!”
 the three now rose in silence with dry eyes. the tears had been scorched
 away by contact with their burning cheeks and eyelids. they had not the
 strength to address their thanks to the king, who himself cut short their
 solemn reverences by entrenching himself suddenly behind the fauteuil.
 d’artagnan remained alone with the king.
 “well,” said he, approaching the young prince, who interrogated him with
 his look. “well, my master! if you had not the device which belongs to
 your sun, i would recommend you one which m. conrart might translate into
 eclectic latin, ‘calm with the lowly; stormy with the strong.’”
 the king smiled, and passed into the next apartment, after having said to
 d’artagnan, “i give you the leave of absence you must want to put the
 affairs of your friend, the late m. du vallon, in order.”
 chapter lv. porthos’s will.
 at pierrefonds everything was in mourning. the courts were deserted—the
 stables closed—the parterres neglected. in the basins, the
 fountains, formerly so jubilantly fresh and noisy, had stopped of
 themselves. along the roads around the chateau came a few grave personages
 mounted on mules or country nags. these were rural neighbors, cures and
 bailiffs of adjacent estates. all these people entered the chateau
 silently, handed their horses to a melancholy-looking groom, and directed
 their steps, conducted by a huntsman in black, to the great dining-room,
 where mousqueton received them at the door. mousqueton had become so thin
 in two days that his clothes moved upon him like an ill-fitting scabbard
 in which the sword-blade dances at each motion. his face, composed of red
 and white, like that of the madonna of vandyke, was furrowed by two silver
 rivulets which had dug their beds in his cheeks, as full formerly as they
 had become flabby since his grief began. at each fresh arrival, mousqueton
 found fresh tears, and it was pitiful to see him press his throat with his
 fat hand to keep from bursting into sobs and lamentations. all these
 visits were for the purpose of hearing the reading of porthos’s will,
 announced for that day, and at which all the covetous friends of the dead
 man were anxious to be present, as he had left no relations behind him.
 the visitors took their places as they arrived, and the great room had
 just been closed when the clock struck twelve, the hour fixed for the
 reading of the important document. porthos’s procureur—and that was
 naturally the successor of master coquenard—commenced by slowly
 unfolding the vast parchment upon which the powerful hand of porthos had
 traced his sovereign will. the seal broken—the spectacles put on—the
 preliminary cough having sounded—every one pricked up his ears.
 mousqueton had squatted himself in a corner, the better to weep and the
 better to hear. all at once the folding-doors of the great room, which had
 been shut, were thrown open as if by magic, and a warlike figure appeared
 upon the threshold, resplendent in the full light of the sun. this was
 d’artagnan, who had come alone to the gate, and finding nobody to hold his
 stirrup, had tied his horse to the knocker and announced himself. the
 splendor of daylight invading the room, the murmur of all present, and,
 more than all, the instinct of the faithful dog, drew mousqueton from his
 reverie; he raised his head, recognized the old friend of his master, and,
 screaming with grief, he embraced his knees, watering the floor with his
 tears. d’artagnan raised the poor intendant, embraced him as if he had
 been a brother, and, having nobly saluted the assembly, who all bowed as
 they whispered to each other his name, he went and took his seat at the
 extremity of the great carved oak hall, still holding by the hand poor
 mousqueton, who was suffocating with excess of woe, and sank upon the
 steps. then the procureur, who, like the rest, was considerably agitated,
 commenced.
 porthos, after a profession of faith of the most christian character,
 asked pardon of his enemies for all the injuries he might have done them.
 at this paragraph, a ray of inexpressible pride beamed from the eyes of
 d’artagnan.
 he recalled to his mind the old soldier; all those enemies of porthos
 brought to earth by his valiant hand; he reckoned up the numbers of them,
 and said to himself that porthos had acted wisely, not to enumerate his
 enemies or the injuries done to them, or the task would have been too much
 for the reader. then came the following schedule of his extensive lands:
 “i possess at this present time, by the grace of god—
 “. the domain of pierrefonds, lands, woods, meadows, waters, and forests,
 surrounded by good walls.
 “. the domain of bracieux, chateaux, forests, plowed lands, forming three
 farms.
 “. the little estate du vallon, so named because it is in the valley.”
 (brave porthos!)
 “. fifty farms in touraine, amounting to five hundred acres.
 “. three mills upon the cher, bringing in six hundred livres each.
 “. three fish-pools in berry, producing two hundred livres a year.
 “as to my personal or movable property, so called because it can be moved,
 as is so well explained by my learned friend the bishop of vannes—”
 (d’artagnan shuddered at the dismal remembrance attached to that name)—the
 procureur continued imperturbably—“they consist—”
 “. in goods which i cannot detail here for want of room, and which
 furnish all my chateaux or houses, but of which the list is drawn up by my
 intendant.”
 every one turned his eyes towards mousqueton, who was still lost in grief.
 “. in twenty horses for saddle and draught, which i have particularly at
 my chateau of pierrefonds, and which are called—bayard, roland,
 charlemagne, pepin, dunois, la hire, ogier, samson, milo, nimrod, urganda,
 armida, flastrade, dalilah, rebecca, yolande, finette, grisette, lisette,
 and musette.
 “. in sixty dogs, forming six packs, divided as follows: the first, for
 the stag; the second, for the wolf; the third, for the wild boar; the
 fourth, for the hare; and the two others, for setters and protection.
 “. in arms for war and the chase contained in my gallery of arms.
 “. my wines of anjou, selected for athos, who liked them formerly; my
 wines of burgundy, champagne, bordeaux, and spain, stocking eight cellars
 and twelve vaults, in my various houses.
 “. my pictures and statues, which are said to be of great value, and
 which are sufficiently numerous to fatigue the sight.
 “. my library, consisting of six thousand volumes, quite new, and have
 never been opened.
 “. my silver plate, which is perhaps a little worn, but which ought to
 weigh from a thousand to twelve hundred pounds, for i had great trouble in
 lifting the coffer that contained it and could not carry it more than six
 times round my chamber.
 “. all these objects, in addition to the table and house linen, are
 divided in the residences i liked the best.”
 here the reader stopped to take breath. every one sighed, coughed, and
 redoubled his attention. the procureur resumed:
 “i have lived without having any children, and it is probable i never
 shall have any, which to me is a cutting grief. and yet i am mistaken, for
 i have a son, in common with my other friends; that is, m. raoul auguste
 jules de bragelonne, the true son of m. le comte de la fere.
 “this young nobleman appears to me extremely worthy to succeed the valiant
 gentleman of whom i am the friend and very humble servant.”
 here a sharp sound interrupted the reader. it was d’artagnan’s sword,
 which, slipping from his baldric, had fallen on the sonorous flooring.
 every one turned his eyes that way, and saw that a large tear had rolled
 from the thick lid of d’artagnan, half-way down to his aquiline nose, the
 luminous edge of which shone like a little crescent moon.
 “this is why,” continued the procureur, “i have left all my property,
 movable, or immovable, comprised in the above enumerations, to m. le
 vicomte raoul auguste jules de bragelonne, son of m. le comte de la fere,
 to console him for the grief he seems to suffer, and enable him to add
 more luster to his already glorious name.”
 a vague murmur ran through the auditory. the procureur continued, seconded
 by the flashing eye of d’artagnan, which, glancing over the assembly,
 quickly restored the interrupted silence:
 “on condition that m. le vicomte de bragelonne do give to m. le chevalier
 d’artagnan, captain of the king’s musketeers, whatever the said chevalier
 d’artagnan may demand of my property. on condition that m. le vicomte de
 bragelonne do pay a good pension to m. le chevalier d’herblay, my friend,
 if he should need it in exile. i leave to my intendant mousqueton all of
 my clothes, of city, war, or chase, to the number of forty-seven suits, in
 the assurance that he will wear them till they are worn out, for the love
 of and in remembrance of his master. moreover, i bequeath to m. le vicomte
 de bragelonne my old servant and faithful friend mousqueton, already
 named, providing that the said vicomte shall so act that mousqueton shall
 declare, when dying, he has never ceased to be happy.”
 on hearing these words, mousqueton bowed, pale and trembling; his
 shoulders shook convulsively; his countenance, compressed by a frightful
 grief, appeared from between his icy hands, and the spectators saw him
 stagger and hesitate, as if, though wishing to leave the hall, he did not
 know the way.
 “mousqueton, my good friend,” said d’artagnan, “go and make your
 preparations. i will take you with me to athos’s house, whither i shall go
 on leaving pierrefonds.”
 mousqueton made no reply. he scarcely breathed, as if everything in that
 hall would from that time be foreign. he opened the door, and slowly
 disappeared.
 the procureur finished his reading, after which the greater part of those
 who had come to hear the last will of porthos dispersed by degrees, many
 disappointed, but all penetrated with respect. as for d’artagnan, thus
 left alone, after having received the formal compliments of the procureur,
 he was lost in admiration of the wisdom of the testator, who had so
 judiciously bestowed his wealth upon the most necessitous and the most
 worthy, with a delicacy that neither nobleman nor courtier could have
 displayed more kindly. when porthos enjoined raoul de bragelonne to give
 d’artagnan all that he would ask, he knew well, our worthy porthos, that
 d’artagnan would ask or take nothing; and in case he did demand anything,
 none but himself could say what. porthos left a pension to aramis, who, if
 he should be inclined to ask too much, was checked by the example of
 d’artagnan; and that word exile, thrown out by the testator,
 without apparent intention, was it not the mildest, most exquisite
 criticism upon that conduct of aramis which had brought about the death of
 porthos? but there was no mention of athos in the testament of the dead.
 could the latter for a moment suppose that the son would not offer the
 best part to the father? the rough mind of porthos had fathomed all these
 causes, seized all these shades more clearly than law, better than custom,
 with more propriety than taste.
 “porthos had indeed a heart,” said d’artagnan to himself with a sigh. as
 he made this reflection, he fancied he hard a groan in the room above him;
 and he thought immediately of poor mousqueton, whom he felt it was a
 pleasing duty to divert from his grief. for this purpose he left the hall
 hastily to seek the worthy intendant, as he had not returned. he ascended
 the staircase leading to the first story, and perceived, in porthos’s own
 chamber, a heap of clothes of all colors and materials, upon which
 mousqueton had laid himself down after heaping them all on the floor
 together. it was the legacy of the faithful friend. those clothes were
 truly his own; they had been given to him; the hand of mousqueton was
 stretched over these relics, which he was kissing with his lips, with all
 his face, and covered with his body. d’artagnan approached to console the
 poor fellow.
 “my god!” said he, “he does not stir—he has fainted!”
 but d’artagnan was mistaken. mousqueton was dead! dead, like the dog who,
 having lost his master, crawls back to die upon his cloak.
 chapter lvi. the old age of athos.
 while these affairs were separating forever the four musketeers, formerly
 bound together in a manner that seemed indissoluble, athos, left alone
 after the departure of raoul, began to pay his tribute to that foretaste
 of death which is called the absence of those we love. back in his house
 at blois, no longer having even grimaud to receive a poor smile as he
 passed through the parterre, athos daily felt the decline of vigor of a
 nature which for so long a time had seemed impregnable. age, which had
 been kept back by the presence of the beloved object, arrived with that cortege
 of pains and inconveniences, which grows by geometrical accretion. athos
 had no longer his son to induce him to walk firmly, with head erect, as a
 good example; he had no longer, in those brilliant eyes of the young man,
 an ever-ardent focus at which to kindle anew the fire of his looks. and
 then, must it be said, that nature, exquisite in tenderness and reserve,
 no longer finding anything to understand its feelings, gave itself up to
 grief with all the warmth of common natures when they yield to joy. the
 comte de la fere, who had remained a young man to his sixty-second year;
 the warrior who had preserved his strength in spite of fatigue; his
 freshness of mind in spite of misfortune, his mild serenity of soul and
 body in spite of milady, in spite of mazarin, in spite of la valliere;
 athos had become an old man in a week, from the moment at which he lost
 the comfort of his later youth. still handsome, though bent, noble, but
 sad, he sought, since his solitude, the deeper glades where sunshine
 scarcely penetrated. he discontinued all the mighty exercises he had
 enjoyed through life, when raoul was no longer with him. the servants,
 accustomed to see him stirring with the dawn at all seasons, were
 astonished to hear seven o’clock strike before their master quitted his
 bed. athos remained in bed with a book under his pillow—but he did
 not sleep, neither did he read. remaining in bed that he might no longer
 have to carry his body, he allowed his soul and spirit to wander from
 their envelope and return to his son, or to god. 
 his people were sometimes terrified to see him, for hours together,
 absorbed in silent reverie, mute and insensible; he no longer heard the
 timid step of the servant who came to the door of his chamber to watch the
 sleeping or waking of his master. it often occurred that he forgot the day
 had half passed away, that the hours for the two first meals were gone by.
 then he was awakened. he rose, descended to his shady walk, then came out
 a little into the sun, as though to partake of its warmth for a minute in
 memory of his absent child. and then the dismal monotonous walk
 recommenced, until, exhausted, he regained the chamber and his bed, his
 domicile by choice. for several days the comte did not speak a single
 word. he refused to receive the visits that were paid him, and during the
 night he was seen to relight his lamp and pass long hours in writing, or
 examining parchments.
 athos wrote one of these letters to vannes, another to fontainebleau; they
 remained without answers. we know why: aramis had quitted france, and
 d’artagnan was traveling from nantes to paris, from paris to pierrefonds.
 his valet de chambre observed that he shortened his walk every day
 by several turns. the great alley of limes soon became too long for feet
 that used to traverse it formerly a hundred times a day. the comte walked
 feebly as far as the middle trees, seated himself upon a mossy bank that
 sloped towards a sidewalk, and there waited the return of his strength, or
 rather the return of night. very shortly a hundred steps exhausted him. at
 length athos refused to rise at all; he declined all nourishment, and his
 terrified people, although he did not complain, although he wore a smile
 upon his lips, although he continued to speak with his sweet voice—his
 people went to blois in search of the ancient physician of the late
 monsieur, and brought him to the comte de la fere in such a fashion that
 he could see the comte without being himself seen. for this purpose, they
 placed him in a closet adjoining the chamber of the patient, and implored
 him not to show himself, for fear of displeasing their master, who had not
 asked for a physician. the doctor obeyed. athos was a sort of model for
 the gentlemen of the country; the blaisois boasted of possessing this
 sacred relic of french glory. athos was a great seigneur compared with
 such nobles as the king improvised by touching with his artificial scepter
 the patched-up trunks of the heraldic trees of the province.
 people respected athos, we say, and they loved him. the physician could
 not bear to see his people weep, to see flock round him the poor of the
 canton, to whom athos had so often given life and consolation by his kind
 words and his charities. he examined, therefore, from the depths of his
 hiding-place, the nature of that mysterious malady which bent and aged
 more mortally every day a man but lately so full of life and a desire to
 live. he remarked upon the cheeks of athos the hectic hue of fever, which
 feeds upon itself; slow fever, pitiless, born in a fold of the heart,
 sheltering itself behind that rampart, growing from the suffering it
 engenders, at once cause and effect of a perilous situation. the comte
 spoke to nobody; he did not even talk to himself. his thought feared
 noise; it approached to that degree of over-excitement which borders upon
 ecstasy. man thus absorbed, though he does not yet belong to god, already
 appertains no longer to the earth. the doctor remained for several hours
 studying this painful struggle of the will against superior power; he was
 terrified at seeing those eyes always fixed, ever directed on some
 invisible object; was terrified at the monotonous beating of that heart
 from which never a sigh arose to vary the melancholy state; for often pain
 becomes the hope of the physician. half a day passed away thus. the doctor
 formed his resolution like a brave man; he issued suddenly from his place
 of retreat, and went straight up to athos, who beheld him without evincing
 more surprise than if he had understood nothing of the apparition.
 “monsieur le comte, i crave your pardon,” said the doctor, coming up to
 the patient with open arms; “but i have a reproach to make you—you
 shall hear me.” and he seated himself by the pillow of athos, who had
 great trouble in rousing himself from his preoccupation.
 “what is the matter, doctor?” asked the comte, after a silence.
 “the matter is, you are ill, monsieur, and have had no advice.”
 “i! ill!” said athos, smiling.
 “fever, consumption, weakness, decay, monsieur le comte!”
 “weakness!” replied athos; “is it possible? i do not get up.”
 “come, come! monsieur le comte, no subterfuges; you are a good christian?”
 “i hope so,” said athos.
 “is it your wish to kill yourself?”
 “never, doctor.”
 “well! monsieur, you are in a fair way of doing so. thus to remain is
 suicide. get well! monsieur le comte, get well!”
 “of what? find the disease first. for my part, i never knew myself better;
 never did the sky appear more blue to me; never did i take more care of my
 flowers.”
 “you have a hidden grief.”
 “concealed!—not at all; the absence of my son, doctor; that is my
 malady, and i do not conceal it.”
 “monsieur le comte, your son lives, he is strong, he has all the future
 before him—the future of men of merit, of his race; live for him—”
 “but i do live, doctor; oh! be satisfied of that,” added he, with a
 melancholy smile; “for as long as raoul lives, it will be plainly known,
 for as long as he lives, i shall live.”
 “what do you say?”
 “a very simple thing. at this moment, doctor, i leave life suspended
 within me. a forgetful, dissipated, indifferent life would be beyond my
 strength, now i have no longer raoul with me. you do not ask the lamp to
 burn when the match has not illumed the flame; do not ask me to live
 amidst noise and merriment. i vegetate, i prepare myself, i wait. look,
 doctor; remember those soldiers we have so often seen together at the
 ports, where they were waiting to embark; lying down, indifferent, half on
 one element, half on the other; they were neither at the place where the
 sea was going to carry them, nor at the place the earth was going to lose
 them; baggage prepared, minds on the stretch, arms stacked—they
 waited. i repeat it, the word is the one which paints my present life.
 lying down like the soldiers, my ear on the stretch for the report that
 may reach me, i wish to be ready to set out at the first summons. who will
 make me that summons? life or death? god or raoul? my baggage is packed,
 my soul is prepared, i await the signal—i wait, doctor, i wait!”
 the doctor knew the temper of that mind; he appreciated the strength of
 that body; he reflected for the moment, told himself that words were
 useless, remedies absurd, and left the chateau, exhorting athos’s servants
 not to quit him for a moment.
 the doctor being gone, athos evinced neither anger nor vexation at having
 been disturbed. he did not even desire that all letters that came should
 be brought to him directly. he knew very well that every distraction which
 should arise would be a joy, a hope, which his servants would have paid
 with their blood to procure him. sleep had become rare. by intense
 thinking, athos forgot himself, for a few hours at most, in a reverie most
 profound, more obscure than other people would have called a dream. the
 momentary repose which this forgetfulness thus gave the body, still
 further fatigued the soul, for athos lived a double life during these
 wanderings of his understanding. one night, he dreamt that raoul was
 dressing himself in a tent, to go upon an expedition commanded by m. de
 beaufort in person. the young man was sad; he clasped his cuirass slowly,
 and slowly he girded on his sword.
 “what is the matter?” asked his father, tenderly.
 “what afflicts me is the death of porthos, ever so dear a friend,” replied
 raoul. “i suffer here the grief you soon will feel at home.”
 and the vision disappeared with the slumber of athos. at daybreak one of
 his servants entered his master’s apartment, and gave him a letter which
 came from spain.
 “the writing of aramis,” thought the comte; and he read.
 “porthos is dead!” cried he, after the first lines. “oh! raoul, raoul!
 thanks! thou keepest thy promise, thou warnest me!”
 and athos, seized with a mortal sweat, fainted in his bed, without any
 other cause than weakness.
 chapter lvii. athos’s vision.
 when this fainting of athos had ceased, the comte, almost ashamed of
 having given way before this superior natural event, dressed himself and
 ordered his horse, determined to ride to blois, to open more certain
 correspondences with either africa, d’artagnan, or aramis. in fact, this
 letter from aramis informed the comte de la fere of the bad success of the
 expedition of belle-isle. it gave him sufficient details of the death of
 porthos to move the tender and devoted heart of athos to its innermost
 fibers. athos wished to go and pay his friend porthos a last visit. to
 render this honor to his companion in arms, he meant to send to
 d’artagnan, to prevail upon him to recommence the painful voyage to
 belle-isle, to accomplish in his company that sad pilgrimage to the tomb
 of the giant he had so much loved, then to return to his dwelling to obey
 that secret influence which was conducting him to eternity by a mysterious
 road. but scarcely had his joyous servants dressed their master, whom they
 saw with pleasure preparing for a journey which might dissipate his
 melancholy; scarcely had the comte’s gentlest horse been saddled and
 brought to the door, when the father of raoul felt his head become
 confused, his legs give way, and he clearly perceived the impossibility of
 going one step further. he ordered himself to be carried into the sun;
 they laid him upon his bed of moss where he passed a full hour before he
 could recover his spirits. nothing could be more natural than this
 weakness after then inert repose of the latter days. athos took a bouillon,
 to give him strength, and bathed his dried lips in a glassful of the wine
 he loved the best—that old anjou wine mentioned by porthos in his
 admirable will. then, refreshed, free in mind, he had his horse brought
 again; but only with the aid of his servants was he able painfully to
 climb into the saddle. he did not go a hundred paces; a shivering seized
 him again at the turning of the road.
 “this is very strange!” said he to his valet de chambre, who
 accompanied him.
 “let us stop, monsieur—i conjure you!” replied the faithful servant;
 “how pale you are getting!”
 “that will not prevent my pursuing my route, now i have once started,”
 replied the comte. and he gave his horse his head again. but suddenly, the
 animal, instead of obeying the thought of his master, stopped. a movement,
 of which athos was unconscious, had checked the bit.
 “something,” said athos, “wills that i should go no further. support me,”
 added he, stretching out his arms; “quick! come closer! i feel my muscles
 relax—i shall fall from my horse.”
 the valet had seen the movement made by his master at the moment he
 received the order. he went up to him quickly, received the comte in his
 arms, and as they were not yet sufficiently distant from the house for the
 servants, who had remained at the door to watch their master’s departure,
 not to perceive the disorder in the usually regular proceeding of the
 comte, the valet called his comrades by gestures and voice, and all
 hastened to his assistance. athos had gone but a few steps on his return,
 when he felt himself better again. his strength seemed to revive and with
 it the desire to go to blois. he made his horse turn round: but, at the
 animal’s first steps, he sunk again into a state of torpor and anguish.
 “well! decidedly,” said he, “it is willed that i should stay at
 home.” his people flocked around him; they lifted him from his horse, and
 carried him as quickly as possible into the house. everything was prepared
 in his chamber, and they put him to bed.
 “you will be sure to remember,” said he, disposing himself to sleep, “that
 i expect letters from africa this very day.”
 “monsieur will no doubt hear with pleasure that blaisois’s son is gone on
 horseback, to gain an hour over the courier of blois,” replied his valet
 de chambre.
 “thank you,” replied athos, with his placid smile.
 the comte fell asleep, but his disturbed slumber resembled torture rather
 than repose. the servant who watched him saw several times the expression
 of internal suffering shadowed on his features. perhaps athos was
 dreaming.
 the day passed away. blaisois’s son returned; the courier had brought no
 news. the comte reckoned the minutes with despair; he shuddered when those
 minutes made an hour. the idea that he was forgotten seized him once, and
 brought on a fearful pang of the heart. everybody in the house had given
 up all hopes of the courier—his hour had long passed. four times the
 express sent to blois had repeated his journey, and there was nothing to
 the address of the comte. athos knew that the courier only arrived once a
 week. here, then, was a delay of eight mortal days to be endured. he
 commenced the night in this painful persuasion. all that a sick man,
 irritated by suffering, can add of melancholy suppositions to
 probabilities already gloomy, athos heaped up during the early hours of
 this dismal night. the fever rose: it invaded the chest, where the fire
 soon caught, according to the expression of the physician, who had been
 brought back from blois by blaisois at his last journey. soon it gained
 the head. the physician made two successive bleedings, which dislodged it
 for the time, but left the patient very weak, and without power of action
 in anything but his brain. and yet this redoubtable fever had ceased. it
 besieged with its last palpitations the tense extremities; it ended by
 yielding as midnight struck.
 the physician, seeing the incontestable improvement, returned to blois,
 after having ordered some prescriptions, and declared that the comte was
 saved. then commenced for athos a strange, indefinable state. free to
 think, his mind turned towards raoul, that beloved son. his imagination
 penetrated the fields of africa in the environs of gigelli, where m. de
 beaufort must have landed with his army. a waste of gray rocks, rendered
 green in certain parts by the waters of the sea, when it lashed the shore
 in storms and tempest. beyond, the shore, strewed over with these rocks
 like gravestones, ascended, in form of an amphitheater among mastic-trees
 and cactus, a sort of small town, full of smoke, confused noises, and
 terrified movements. all of a sudden, from the bosom of this smoke arose a
 flame, which succeeded, creeping along the houses, in covering the entire
 surface of the town, and increased by degrees, uniting in its red and
 angry vortices tears, screams, and supplicating arms outstretched to
 heaven.
 there was, for a moment, a frightful pele-mele of timbers falling
 to pieces, of swords broken, of stones calcined, trees burnt and
 disappearing. it was a strange thing that in this chaos, in which athos
 distinguished raised arms, in which he heard cries, sobs, and groans, he
 did not see one human figure. the cannon thundered at a distance, musketry
 madly barked, the sea moaned, flocks made their escape, bounding over the
 verdant slope. but not a soldier to apply the match to the batteries of
 cannon, not a sailor to assist in maneuvering the fleet, not a shepherd in
 charge of the flocks. after the ruin of the village, the destruction of
 the forts which dominated it, a ruin and destruction magically wrought
 without the co-operation of a single human being, the flames were
 extinguished, the smoke began to subside, then diminished in intensity,
 paled and disappeared entirely. night then came over the scene; night dark
 upon the earth, brilliant in the firmament. the large blazing stars which
 spangled the african sky glittered and gleamed without illuminating
 anything.
 a long silence ensued, which gave, for a moment, repose to the troubled
 imagination of athos; and as he felt that that which he saw was not
 terminated, he applied more attentively the eyes of his understanding on
 the strange spectacle which his imagination had presented. this spectacle
 was soon continued for him. a mild pale moon rose behind the declivities
 of the coast, streaking at first the undulating ripples of the sea, which
 appeared to have calmed after the roaring it had sent forth during the
 vision of athos—the moon, we say, shed its diamonds and opals upon
 the briers and bushes of the hills. the gray rocks, so many silent and
 attentive phantoms, appeared to raise their heads to examine likewise the
 field of battle by the light of the moon, and athos perceived that the
 field, empty during the combat, was now strewn with fallen bodies.
 an inexpressible shudder of fear and horror seized his soul as he
 recognized the white and blue uniforms of the soldiers of picardy, with
 their long pikes and blue handles, and muskets marked with the fleur-de-lis
 on the butts. when he saw all the gaping wounds, looking up to the bright
 heavens as if to demand back of them the souls to which they had opened a
 passage,—when he saw the slaughtered horses, stiff, their tongues
 hanging out at one side of their mouths, sleeping in the shiny blood
 congealed around them, staining their furniture and their manes,—when
 he saw the white horse of m. de beaufort, with his head beaten to pieces,
 in the first ranks of the dead, athos passed a cold hand over his brow,
 which he was astonished not to find burning. he was convinced by this
 touch that he was present, as a spectator, without delirium’s dreadful
 aid, the day after the battle fought upon the shores of gigelli by the
 army of the expedition, which he had seen leave the coast of france and
 disappear upon the dim horizon, and of which he had saluted with thought
 and gesture the last cannon-shot fired by the duke as a signal of farewell
 to his country.
 who can paint the mortal agony with which his soul followed, like a
 vigilant eye, these effigies of clay-cold soldiers, and examined them, one
 after the other, to see if raoul slept among them? who can express the
 intoxication of joy with which athos bowed before god, and thanked him for
 not having seen him he sought with so much fear among the dead? in fact,
 fallen in their ranks, stiff, icy, the dead, still recognizable with ease,
 seemed to turn with complacency towards the comte de la fere, to be the
 better seen by him, during his sad review. but yet, he was astonished,
 while viewing all these bodies, not to perceive the survivors. to such a
 point did the illusion extend, that this vision was for him a real voyage
 made by the father into africa, to obtain more exact information
 respecting his son.
 fatigued, therefore, with having traversed seas and continents, he sought
 repose under one of the tents sheltered behind a rock, on the top of which
 floated the white fleur-de-lised pennon. he looked for a soldier to
 conduct him to the tent of m. de beaufort. then, while his eye was
 wandering over the plain, turning on all sides, he saw a white form appear
 behind the scented myrtles. this figure was clothed in the costume of an
 officer; it held in its hand a broken sword; it advanced slowly towards
 athos, who, stopping short and fixing his eyes upon it, neither spoke nor
 moved, but wished to open his arms, because in this silent officer he had
 already recognized raoul. the comte attempted to utter a cry, but it was
 stifled in his throat. raoul, with a gesture, directed him to be silent,
 placing his finger on his lips and drawing back by degrees, without athos
 being able to see his legs move. the comte, still paler than raoul,
 followed his son, painfully traversing briers and bushes, stones and
 ditches, raoul not appearing to touch the earth, no obstacle seeming to
 impede the lightness of his march. the comte, whom the inequalities of the
 path fatigued, soon stopped, exhausted. raoul still continued to beckon
 him to follow him. the tender father, to whom love restored strength, made
 a last effort, and climbed the mountain after the young man, who attracted
 him by gesture and by smile.
 at length he gained the crest of the hill, and saw, thrown out in black,
 upon the horizon whitened by the moon, the aerial form of raoul. athos
 reached forth his hand to get closer to his beloved son upon the plateau,
 and the latter also stretched out his; but suddenly, as if the young man
 had been drawn away in his own despite, still retreating, he left the
 earth, and athos saw the clear blue sky shine between the feet of his
 child and the ground of the hill. raoul rose insensibly into the void,
 smiling, still calling with gesture:—he departed towards heaven.
 athos uttered a cry of tenderness and terror. he looked below again. he
 saw a camp destroyed, and all those white bodies of the royal army, like
 so many motionless atoms. and, then, raising his head, he saw the figure
 of his son still beckoning him to climb the mystic void.
 chapter lviii. the angel of death.
