to wear, having no change. when would i be pleased
to lunch? at what hour would i dine? should my present
apartment be retained?—or was it not satisfactory? would i
prefer a ‘suite’ similar to that occupied by his excellency?
all these deferential questions first astonished and then amused
me,—some mysterious agency had evidently conveyed the
rumour of my wealth among those best fitted to receive it,
and here was the first result. in reply i said my movements
were uncertain,—i should be able to give definite instructions
in the course of a few hours, and that in the meantime i
retained my room. the breakfast over i sallied forth to go
to my lawyers, and was just about to order a hansom when i
saw my new friend coming back from his ride. he bestrode
a magnificent chestnut mare, whose wild eyes and strained
quivering limbs showed she was fresh from a hard gallop and
was scarcely yet satisfied to be under close control. she
curveted and danced among the carts and cabs in a somewhat
risky fashion, but she had her master in rimânez, who if he had
looked handsome by night looked still more so by day, with a
[p ]
 slight colour warming the natural pallor of his complexion and
his eyes sparkling with all the zest of exercise and enjoyment.
i waited for his approach, as did also amiel, who as usual
timed his appearance in the hotel corridor in exact accordance
with the moment of his master’s arrival. rimânez smiled as
he caught sight of me, touching his hat with the handle of his
whip by way of salutation.
“you slept late, tempest”—he said, as he dismounted and
threw the reins to a groom who had cantered up after him,—“to-morrow
you must come with me and join what they call
in fashionable slang parlance the liver brigade. once upon
a time it was considered the height of indelicacy and low
breeding to mention the ‘liver’ or any other portion of one’s
internal machinery,—but we have done with all that now,
and we find a peculiar satisfaction in discoursing of disease
and unsavoury medical matters generally. and in the liver
brigade you see at a glance all those interesting fellows who
have sold themselves to the devil for the sake of the flesh-pots
of egypt,—men who eat till they are well-nigh bursting,
and then prance up and down on good horses,—much too
respectable beasts by the way to bear such bestial burdens—in
the hope of getting out of their poisoned blood the evil
they have themselves put in. they think me one of them,
but i am not.”
he patted his mare and the groom led her away, the foam
of her hard ride still flecking her glossy chest and forelegs.
“why do you join the procession then?” i asked him,
laughing and glancing at him with undisguised approval as i
spoke, for he seemed more admirably built than ever in his
well-fitting riding gear—“you are a fraud!”
“i am!” he responded lightly—“and do you know i am
not the only one in london! where are you off to?”
“to those lawyers who wrote to me last night;—bentham
and ellis is the name of the firm. the sooner i interview
them the better,—don’t you think so?”
“yes—but see here,”—and he drew me aside—“you
must have some ready cash. it doesn’t look well to apply
[p ]
 at once for advances,—and there is really no necessity to
explain to these legal men that you were on the verge of
starvation when their letter arrived. take this pocket-book,—remember
you promised to let me be your banker,—and
on your way you might go to some well-reputed tailor and
get properly rigged out. ta-ta!”
he moved off at a rapid pace,—i hurried after him, touched
to the quick by his kindness.
“but wait—i say—lucio!” and i called him thus by his
familiar name for the first time. he stopped at once and
stood quite still.
“well?” he said, regarding me with an attentive smile.
“you don’t give me time to speak”—i answered in a low
voice, for we were standing in one of the public corridors of
the hotel—“the fact is i have some money, or rather i can
get it directly,—carrington sent me a draft for fifty pounds
in his letter—i forgot to tell you about it. it was very good
of him to lend it to me,—you had better have it as security
for this pocket-book,—by-the-bye how much is there inside
it?”
“five hundred, in bank notes of tens and twenties,”—he
responded with business-like brevity.
“five hundred! my dear fellow, i don’t want all that. it’s
too much!”
“better have too much than too little nowadays,”—he
retorted with a laugh—“my dear tempest, don’t make such
a business of it. five hundred pounds is really nothing.
you can spend it all on a dressing-case for example. better
send back john carrington’s draft,—i don’t think much of
his generosity considering that he came into a mine worth
a hundred thousand pounds sterling, a few days before i left
australia.”
i heard this with great surprise, and, i must admit with a
slight feeling of resentment too. the frank and generous
character of my old chum ‘boffles’ seemed to darken
suddenly in my eyes,—why could he not have told me of his
good fortune in his letter? was he afraid i might trouble
[p ]
 him for further loans? i suppose my looks expressed my
thoughts, for rimânez, who had observed me intently, presently
added—
“did he not tell you of his luck? that was not very
friendly of him—but as i remarked last night, money often
spoils a man.”
“oh i daresay he meant no slight by the omission,” i said
hurriedly, forcing a smile—“no doubt he will make it the
subject of his next letter. now as to this five hundred”—
“keep it, man, keep it”—he interposed impatiently—“what
do you talk about security for? haven’t i got you as
security?”
i laughed. “well, i am fairly reliable now”—i said—“and
i’m not going to run away.”
“from me?” he queried, with a half cold half kind glance;
“no,—i fancy not!”
he waved his hand lightly and left me, and i, putting the
leather case of notes in my inner breast-pocket, hailed a
hansom and was driven off rapidly to basinghall street where
my solicitors awaited me.
arrived at my destination, i sent up my name, and was
received at once with the utmost respect by two small chips of
men in rusty black who represented ‘the firm.’ at my request
they sent down their clerk to pay and dismiss my cab, while i,
opening lucio’s pocket book, asked them to change me a ten-pound
note into gold and silver which they did with ready
good-will. then we went into business together. my
deceased relative, whom i had never seen as far as i myself
remembered, but who had seen me as a motherless baby in
my nurse’s arms, had left me everything he possessed unconditionally,
including several rare collections of pictures, jewels
and curios. his will was so concisely and clearly worded
that there were no possibilities of any legal hair-splitting over
it,—and i was informed that in a week or ten days at the
utmost everything would be in order and at my sole
disposition.
“you are a very fortunate man mr tempest;”—said the
[p ]
 senior partner mr bentham, as he folded up the last of the
papers we had been looking through and put it by—“at your
age this princely inheritance may be either a great boon to
you or a great curse,—one never knows. the possession
of such enormous wealth involves great responsibilities.”
i was amused at what i considered the impertinence of this
mere servant of the law in presuming to moralize on my luck.
“many people would be glad to accept such responsibilities
and change places with me”—i said with a flippant air—“you
yourself, for example?”
i knew this remark was not in good taste, but i made it
wilfully, feeling that he had no business to preach to me as it
were on the responsibilities of wealth. he took no offence
however,—he merely gave me an observant side-glance like
that of some meditative crow.
“no mr tempest, no”—he said drily—“i do not think i
should at all be disposed to change places with you. i feel
very well satisfied as i am. my brain is my bank, and brings
me in quite sufficient interest to live upon, which is all that
i desire. to be comfortable, and pay one’s way honestly is
enough for me. i have never envied the wealthy.”
“mr bentham is a philosopher,”—interposed his partner,
mr ellis smiling—“in our profession mr tempest, we see so
many ups and downs of life, that in watching the variable
fortunes of our clients, we ourselves learn the lesson of
content.”
“ah, it is a lesson that i have never mastered till now!”
i responded merrily—“but at the present moment i confess
myself satisfied.”
they each gave me a formal little bow, and mr bentham
shook hands.
“business being concluded, allow me to congratulate you,”
he said politely—“of course, if you should wish at any
time to entrust your legal affairs to other hands, my partner
and myself are perfectly willing to withdraw. your deceased
relative had the highest confidence in us....”
“as i have also, i assure you,”—i interrupted quickly—“pray
[p ]
 do me the favour to continue managing things for me
as you did for my relative, and be assured of my gratitude in
advance.”
both little men bowed again, and this time mr ellis shook
hands.
“we shall do our best for you, mr tempest, shall we not
bentham?” bentham nodded gravely. “and now what
do you say—shall we mention it bentham?—or shall we not
mention it?”
“perhaps,” responded bentham sententiously—“it would
be as well to mention it.”
i glanced from one to the other, not understanding what
they meant. mr ellis rubbed his hands and smiled deprecatingly.
“the fact is mr tempest, your deceased relative had one
very curious idea—he was a shrewd man and a clever one,
but he certainly had one very curious idea—and perhaps if
he had followed it up to any extent, it might—yes, it might
have landed him in a lunatic asylum and prevented his
disposing of his extensive fortune in the—er—the very just
and reasonable manner he has done. happily for himself
and—er—for you, he did not follow it up, and to the last
he retained his admirable business qualities and high sense
of rectitude. but i do not think he ever quite dispossessed
himself of the idea itself, did he bentham?”
bentham gazed meditatively at the round black mark of
the gas-burner where it darkened the ceiling.
“i think not,—no, i think not,” he answered—“i believe
he was perfectly convinced of it.”
“and what was it?” i asked, getting impatient—“did he
want to bring out some patent?—a new notion for a flying-machine,
and get rid of his money in that way?”
“no, no, no!” and mr ellis laughed a soft pleasant little
laugh over my suggestion—“no, my dear sir—nothing of a
purely mechanical or commercial turn captivated his imagination.
he was too,—er—yes, i think i may say too
profoundly opposed to what is called ‘progress’ in the world
[p ]
 to aid it by any new invention or other means whatever.
you see it is a little awkward for me to explain to you what
really seems to be the most absurd and fantastic notion,—but—to
begin with, we never really knew how he made his
money, did we bentham?”
bentham shook his head and pursed his lips closely together.
“we had to take charge of large sums, and advise as to
investments and other matters,—but it was not our business
to inquire where the cash came from in the first place, was
it, bentham?”
again bentham shook his head solemnly.
“we were entrusted with it;”—went on his partner, pressing
the tips of his fingers together caressingly as he spoke—“and
we did our best to fulfil that trust—with—er—with
discretion and fidelity. and it was only after we had been
for many years connected in business that our client mentioned—er—his
idea;—a most erratic and extraordinary
one, which was briefly this,—that he had sold himself to
the devil, and that his large fortune was one result of the
bargain!”
i burst out laughing heartily.
“what a ridiculous notion!” i exclaimed—“poor man!—a
weak spot in his brain somewhere evidently,—or perhaps
he used the expression as a mere figure of speech?”
“i think not;”—responded mr ellis half interrogatively,
still caressing his fingers—“i think our client did not use
the phrase ‘sold to the devil’ as a figure of speech merely,
mr bentham?”
“i am positive he did not,”—said bentham seriously—“he
spoke of the ‘bargain’ as an actual and accomplished fact.”
i laughed again with a trifle less boisterousness.
“well, people have all sorts of fancies now-a-days”—i said;
“what with blavatskyism, besantism and hypnotism, it is
no wonder if some folks still have a faint credence in the silly
old superstition of a devil’s existence. but for a thoroughly
sensible man....”
[p ]“yes—er, yes;”—interrupted mr ellis—“your relative,
mr tempest, was a thoroughly sensible man, and this—er—this
idea was the only fancy that ever appeared to have
taken root in his eminently practical mind. being only an
idea, it seemed hardly worth mentioning—but perhaps it is
well—mr bentham agreeing with me—that we have mentioned
it.”
“it is a satisfaction and relief to ourselves,”—said mr
bentham, “to have had it mentioned.”
i smiled, and thanking them, rose to go. they bowed to
me once more, simultaneously, looking almost like twin
brothers, so identically had their united practice of the law
impressed itself upon their features.
“good-day mr tempest,”—said mr bentham—“i need
scarcely say that we shall serve you as we served our late
client, to the best of our ability. and in matters where
advice may be pleasant or profitable, we may possibly be of
use to you. may we ask whether you require any cash
advances immediately?”
“no, thank you,”—i answered, feeling grateful to my friend
rimânez for having placed me in a perfectly independent
position to confront these solicitors—“i am amply provided.”
they seemed, i fancied, a trifle surprised at this, but were
too discreet to offer any remark. they wrote down my address
at the grand hotel, and sent their clerk to show me to
the door. i gave this man half-a-sovereign to drink my health
which he very cheerfully promised to do,—then i walked
round by the law courts, trying to realize that i was not in
a dizzy dream, but that i was actually and solidly, five times
a millionaire. as luck would have it, in turning a corner i
jostled up against a man coming the other way, the very
publisher who had returned me my rejected manuscript the
day before.
“hullo!” he exclaimed stopping short.
“hullo!” i rejoined.
“where are you off to?” he went on—“going to try and
[p ]
 place that unlucky novel? my dear boy, believe me it will
never do as it is....”
“it will do, it shall do;”—i said calmly—“i am going to
publish it myself.”
he started. “publish it yourself! good heavens!—it will
cost you—ah!—sixty or seventy, perhaps a hundred pounds.”
“i don’t care if it costs me a thousand!”
a red flush came into his face, and his eyes opened in
astonishment.
“i thought ... excuse me ...” he stammered awkwardly;
“i thought money was scarce with you——”
“it was,” i answered drily—“it isn’t now.”
then, his utterly bewildered look, together with the whole
topsy-turviness of things in my altered position, struck me so
forcibly that i burst out laughing, wildly, and with a prolonged
noise and violence that apparently alarmed him, for he began
looking nervously about him in all directions as if meditating
flight. i caught him by the arm.
“look here man,” i said, trying to conquer my almost hysterical
mirth—“i’m not mad—don’t you think it,—i’m only
a—millionaire!” and i began laughing again; the situation
seemed to me so sublimely ridiculous. but the worthy
publisher did not see it at all—and his features expressed so
much genuine alarm that i made a further effort to control
myself and succeeded. “i assure you on my word of honour
i’m not joking—it’s a fact. last night i wanted a dinner,
and you, like a good fellow, offered to give me one,—to-day
i possess five millions of money! don’t stare so! don’t
have a fit of apoplexy! and as i have told you, i
shall publish my book myself at my own expense, and it
shall succeed! oh i’m in earnest, grim earnest, grim as
death!—i’ve more than enough in my pocketbook to pay
for its publication now!”
i loosed my hold of him, and he fell back stupefied and
confused.
“god bless my soul!” he muttered feebly—“it’s like a
dream!—i was never more astonished in my life!”
[p ]“nor i!” i said, another temptation to laughter threatening
my composure,—“but strange things happen in life, as
in fiction. and that book which the builders—i mean the
readers—rejected, shall be the headstone of the corner—or—the
success of the season! what will you take to bring it
out?”
“take? i? i bring it out!”
“yes, you—why not? if i offer you a chance to turn an
honest penny shall your paid pack of ‘readers’ prevent your
accepting it? fie! you are not a slave,—this is a free
country. i know the kind of people who ‘read’ for you,—the
gaunt unlovable spinster of fifty,—the dyspeptic book-worm
who is a ‘literary failure’ and can find nothing else to
do but scrawl growling comments on the manuscript of
promising work,—why in heaven’s name should you rely on
such incompetent opinion? i’ll pay you for the publication
of my book at as stiff a price as you choose and something
over for good-will. and i guarantee you another thing—it
shall not only make my name as an author, but yours as a
publisher. i’ll advertise royally, and i’ll work the press.
everything in this world can be done for money ...”
“stop, stop,”—he interrupted.—“this is so sudden! you
must let me think of it—you must give me time to consider——”
“take a day for your meditations then,” i said—“but no
longer. for if you don’t say yes, i’ll get another man, and
he’ll have the big pickings instead of you! be wise in time,
my friend!—good-day!”
he ran after me.
“stay,—look here! you’re so strange, so wild—so erratic
you know! your head seems quite turned!”
“it is! the right way round this time!”
“dear dear me,” and he smiled benevolently—“why, you
don’t give me a chance to congratulate you. i really do,
you know—i congratulate you sincerely!” and he shook
me by the hand quite fervently. “and as regards the book
i believe there was really no fault found with it in the matter
[p ]
 of literary style or quality,—it was simply too—too transcendental,
and unlikely therefore to suit the public taste.
the domestic-iniquity line is what we find pays best at
present. but i will think about it—where will a letter find
you?”
“grand hotel,” i responded, inwardly amused at his puzzled
and anxious expression—i knew he was already mentally
calculating how much he could make out of me in the pursuit
of my literary whim—“come there, and lunch or dine with
me to-morrow if you like—only send me a word beforehand.
remember, i give you just a day’s grace to decide,—it must
be yes or no, in twenty-four hours!”
and with this i left him, staring vaguely after me like a
man who has seen some nameless wonder drop out of the sky
at his feet. i went on, laughing to myself inaudibly, till i
saw one or two passers-by looking at me so surprisedly that i
came to the conclusion that i must put a disguise on my
thoughts if i would not be taken for a madman. i walked
briskly, and presently my excitement cooled down. i resumed
the normal condition of the phlegmatic englishman who considers
it the height of bad form to display any personal
emotion whatever, and i occupied the rest of the morning in
purchasing some ready-made apparel which by unusual good
luck happened to fit me, and also in giving an extensive, not
to say extravagant order to a fashionable tailor in sackville
street who promised me everything with punctuality and despatch.
i next sent off the rent i owed to the landlady of my
former lodgings, adding five pounds extra by way of recognition
of the poor woman’s long patience in giving me credit,
and general kindness towards me during my stay in her dismal
house,—and this done i returned to the grand in high spirits,
looking and feeling very much the better for my ready-made
outfit. a waiter met me in the corridor and with the most
obsequious deference, informed me that ‘his excellency the
prince’ was waiting luncheon for me in his own apartments.
thither i repaired at once, and found my new friend alone in
his sumptuous drawing-room, standing near the full light of
[p ]
 the largest window and holding in his hand an oblong crystal
case through which he was looking with an almost affectionate
solicitude.
“ah, geoffrey! here you are!” he exclaimed—“i
imagined you would get through your business by lunch time,
so i waited.”
“very good of you!” i said, pleased at the friendly familiarity
he displayed in thus calling me by my christian name—“what
have you got there?”
“a pet of mine,”—he answered, smiling slightly—“did
you ever see anything like it before?”
[p ]vi
i approached and examined the box he held. it
was perforated with finely drilled holes for the admission
of air, and within it lay a brilliant winged insect
coloured with all the tints and half-tints of the rainbow.
“is it alive?” i asked.
“it is alive, and has a sufficient share of intelligence,”—replied
rimânez. “i feed it and it knows me,—that is the
utmost you can say of the most civilized human beings; they
know what feeds them. it is quite tame and friendly as
you perceive,”—and opening the case he gently advanced
his forefinger. the glittering beetle’s body palpitated with
the hues of an opal; its radiant wings expanded, and it rose at
once to its protector’s hand and clung there. he lifted it out
and held it aloft, then shaking it to and fro lightly, he exclaimed—
“off, sprite! fly, and return to me!”
the creature soared away through the room and round and
round the ceiling, looking like a beautiful iridescent jewel, the
whirr of its wings making a faint buzzing sound as it flew. i
watched it fascinated, till after a few graceful movements hither
and thither, it returned to its owner’s still outstretched hand,
and again settled there making no further attempt to fly.
“there is a well-worn platitude which declares that ‘in the
midst of life we are in death’”—said the prince then softly,
bending his dark deep eyes on the insect’s quivering wings—“but
as a matter of fact that maxim is wrong as so many trite
[p ]
 human maxims are. it should be ‘in the midst of death
we are in life.’ this creature is a rare and curious production
of death, but not i believe the only one of its kind.
others have been found under precisely similar circumstances.
i took possession of this one myself in rather a
weird fashion,—will the story bore you?”
“on the contrary”—i rejoined eagerly, my eyes fixed on the
radiant bat-shaped thing that glittered in the light as though
its veins were phosphorescent.
he paused a moment, watching me.
“well,—it happened simply thus,—i was present at the
uncasing of an egyptian female mummy;—her talismans
described her as a princess of a famous royal house. several
curious jewels were tied round her neck, and on her chest
was a piece of beaten gold quarter of an inch thick. underneath
this gold plate, her body was swathed round and
round in an unusual number of scented wrappings; and
when these were removed it was discovered that the mummified
flesh between her breasts had decayed away, and in the
hollow or nest thus formed by the process of decomposition,
this insect i hold was found alive, as brilliant in colour as
it is now!”
i could not repress a slight nervous shudder.
“horrible!” i said—“i confess, if i were you, i should
not care to make a pet of such an uncanny object. i should
kill it, i think.”
he kept his bright intent gaze upon me.
“why?” he asked. “i’m afraid, my dear geoffrey, you
are not disposed to study science. to kill the poor thing
who managed to find life in the very bosom of death, is a
cruel suggestion, is it not? to me, this unclassified insect
is a valuable proof (if i needed one) of the indestructibility
of the germs of conscious existence; it has eyes, and the
senses of taste, smell, touch and hearing,—and it gained
these together with its intelligence, out of the dead flesh of
a woman who lived, and no doubt loved and sinned and
suffered more than four thousand years ago!” he broke
[p ]
 off,—then suddenly added—“all the same i frankly admit to
you that i believe it to be an evil creature. i do indeed!
but i like it none the less for that. in fact i have rather a
fantastic notion about it myself. i am much inclined to
accept the idea of the transmigration of souls, and so i
please my humour sometimes by thinking that perhaps the
princess of that royal egyptian house had a wicked, brilliant,
vampire soul,—and that ... here it is!”
a cold thrill ran through me from head to foot at these
words, and as i looked at the speaker standing opposite me
in the wintry light, dark and tall, with the ‘wicked, brilliant,
vampire soul’ clinging to his hand, there seemed to me to
be a sudden hideousness declared in his excessive personal
beauty. i was conscious of a vague terror, but i attributed it
to the gruesome nature of the story, and, determining to
combat my sensations, i examined the weird insect more
closely. as i did so, its bright beady eyes sparkled, i thought,
vindictively, and i stepped back, vexed with myself at the
foolish fear of the thing which overpowered me.
“it is certainly remarkable,”—i murmured—“no wonder
you value it,—as a curiosity. its eyes are quite distinct,
almost intelligent in fact.”
“no doubt she had beautiful eyes,”—said rimânez smiling.
“she? whom do you mean?”
“the princess, of course!” he answered, evidently amused;
“the dear dead lady,—some of whose personality must
be in this creature, seeing that it had nothing but her body
to nourish itself upon.”
and here he replaced the creature in its crystal habitation
with the utmost care.
“i suppose”—i said slowly, “you, in your pursuit of science,
would infer from this that nothing actually perishes completely?”
“exactly!” returned rimânez emphatically. “there, my
dear tempest, is the mischief,—or the deity,—of things.
nothing can be entirely annihilated;—not even a
thought.”
[p ]i was silent, watching him while he put the glass case with
its uncanny occupant away out of sight.
“and now for luncheon,” he said gaily, passing his arm
through mine—“you look twenty per cent. better than
when you went out this morning, geoffrey, so i conclude
your legal matters are disposed of satisfactorily. and what
else have you done with yourself?”
seated at table with the dark-faced amiel in attendance, i
related my morning’s adventures, dwelling at length on my
chance meeting with the publisher who had on the previous
day refused my manuscript, and who now, i felt sure, would
be only too glad to close with the offer i had made him.
rimânez listened attentively, smiling now and then.
“of course!” he said, when i had concluded. “there is
nothing in the least surprising in the conduct of the worthy
man. in fact i think he showed remarkable discretion and
decency in not at once jumping at your proposition,—his
pleasant hypocrisy in retiring to think it over, shows him to
be a person of tact and foresight. did you ever imagine
that a human being or a human conscience existed that
could not be bought? my good fellow, you can buy a king
if you only give a long price enough; and the pope will sell
you a specially reserved seat in his heaven if you will only
hand him the cash down while he is on earth! nothing is
given free in this world save the air and the sunshine,—everything
else must be bought,—with blood, tears and
groans occasionally,—but oftenest with money.”
i fancied that amiel, behind his master’s chair, smiled
darkly at this,—and my instinctive dislike of the fellow kept
me more or less reticent concerning my affairs till the luncheon
was over. i could not formulate to myself any substantial
reason for my aversion to this confidential servant of the
prince’s,—but do what i would the aversion remained, and
increased each time i saw his sullen, and as i thought, sneering
features. yet he was perfectly respectful and deferential;
i could find no actual fault with him,—nevertheless when at
last he placed the coffee, cognac, and cigars on the table and
[p ]
 noiselessly withdrew, i was conscious of a great relief, and
breathed more freely. as soon as we were alone, rimânez
lit a cigar and settled himself for a smoke, looking over at me
with a personal interest and kindness which made his handsome
face more than ever attractive.
“now let us talk,”—he said—“i believe i am at present the
best friend you have, and i certainly know the world better
than you do. what do you propose to make of your life?
or in other words how do you mean to begin spending your
money?”
i laughed. “well, i shan’t provide funds for the building
of a church, or the endowment of a hospital,”—i said—“i
shall not even start a free library, for these institutions,
besides becoming centres for infectious diseases, generally
get presided over by a committee of local grocers who presume
to consider themselves judges of literature. my dear
prince rimânez, i mean to spend my money on my own
pleasure, and i daresay i shall find plenty of ways to do it.”
rimânez fanned away the smoke of his cigar with one hand,
and his dark eyes shone with a peculiarly vivid light through
the pale grey floating haze.
“with your fortune, you could make hundreds of miserable
people happy;”—he suggested.
“thanks, i would rather be happy myself first”—i answered
gaily—“i daresay i seem to you selfish,—you are philanthropic
i know; i am not.”
he still regarded me steadily.
“you might help your fellow-workers in literature....”
i interrupted him with a decided gesture.
“that i will never do, my friend, though the heavens
should crack! my fellow-workers in literature have kicked
me down at every opportunity, and done their best to keep
me from earning a bare livelihood,—it is my turn at kicking
now, and i will show them as little mercy, as little help, as
little sympathy as they have shown me!”
“revenge is sweet!” he quoted sententiously—“i should
recommend your starting a high-class half-crown magazine.”
[p ]“why?”
“can you ask? just think of the ferocious satisfaction it
would give you to receive the manuscripts of your literary
enemies, and reject them! to throw their letters into the
waste-paper basket, and send back their poems, stories,
political articles and what not, with ‘returned with thanks’
or ‘not up to our mark’ type-written on the backs thereof!
to dig knives into your rivals through the medium of
anonymous criticism! the howling joy of a savage with
twenty scalps at his belt would be tame in comparison to it!
i was an editor once myself, and i know!”
i laughed at his whimsical earnestness.
“i daresay you are right,”—i said—“i can grasp the vengeful
position thoroughly! but the management of a magazine
would be too much trouble to me,—too much of a
tie.”
“don’t manage it! follow the example of all the big
editors, and live out of the business altogether,—but take
the profits! you never see the real editor of a leading daily
newspaper you know,—you can only interview the sub. the
real man is, according to the seasons of the year, at ascot,
in scotland, at newmarket, or wintering in egypt,—he is
supposed to be responsible for everything in his journal, but
he is generally the last person who knows anything about it.
he relies on his ‘staff’—a very bad crutch at times,—and
when his ‘staff’ are in a difficulty, they get out of it by saying
they are unable to decide without the editor. meanwhile
the editor is miles away, comfortably free from worry.
you could bamboozle the public in that way if you
liked.”
“i could, but i shouldn’t care to do so,” i answered—“if
i had a business i would not neglect it. i believe in doing
things thoroughly.”
“so do i!” responded rimânez promptly. “i am a very
thorough-going fellow myself, and whatever my hand findeth
to do, i do it with my might!—excuse me for quoting scripture!”
he smiled, a little ironically i thought, then
[p ]
 resumed—“well, in what, at present does your idea of enjoying
your heritage consist?”
“in publishing my book,” i answered. “that very book
i could get no one to accept,—i tell you, i will make it the
talk of london!”
“possibly you will”—he said, looking at me through
half-closed eyes and a cloud of smoke,—“london easily
talks. particularly on unsavoury and questionable subjects.
therefore,—as i have already hinted,—if your book were
a judicious mixture of zola, huysmans and baudelaire,
or had for its heroine a ‘modest’ maid who considered
honourable marriage a ‘degradation,’ it would be quite sure
of success in these days of new sodom and gomorrah.”
here he suddenly sprang up, and flinging away his cigar,
confronted me. “why do not the heavens rain fire on this
accursed city! it is ripe for punishment,—full of abhorrent
creatures not worth the torturing in hell to which it is said
liars and hypocrites are condemned! tempest, if there is
one human being more than another that i utterly abhor, it
is the type of man so common to the present time, the man
who huddles his own loathly vices under a cloak of assumed
broad-mindedness and virtue. such an one will even deify
the loss of chastity in woman by the name of ‘purity,’—because
he knows that it is by her moral and physical ruin
alone that he can gratify his brutal lusts. rather than be
such a sanctimonious coward i would openly proclaim myself
vile!”
“that is because yours is a noble nature”—i said—“you
are an exception to the rule.”
“an exception? i?”—and he laughed bitterly—“yes, you
are right; i am an exception among men perhaps,—but i
am one with the beasts in honesty! the lion does not
assume the manners of the dove,—he loudly announces his
own ferocity. the very cobra, stealthy though its movements
be, evinces its meaning by a warning hiss or rattle.
the hungry wolf’s bay is heard far down the wind, intimidating
the hurrying traveller among the wastes of snow.
[p ]
 but man gives no clue to his intent—more malignant than
the lion, more treacherous than the snake, more greedy
than the wolf, he takes his fellow-man’s hand in pretended
friendship, and an hour later defames his character behind
his back,—with a smiling face he hides a false and selfish
heart,—flinging his pigmy mockery at the riddle of the
universe, he stands gibing at god, feebly a-straddle on his
own earth-grave—heavens!”—here he stopped short with
a passionate gesture—“what should the eternities do with
such a thankless, blind worm as he!”
his voice rang out with singular emphasis,—his eyes
glowed with a fiery ardour; startled by his impressive manner
i let my cigar die out and stared at him in mute amazement.
what an inspired countenance!—what an imposing figure!—how
sovereignly supreme and almost god-like in his looks he
seemed at the moment;—and yet there was something terrifying
in his attitude of protest and defiance. he caught my
wondering glance,—the glow of passion faded from his face,—he
laughed and shrugged his shoulders.
“i think i was born to be an actor”—he said carelessly—“now
and then the love of declamation masters me. then
i speak—as prime ministers and men in parliament speak—to
suit the humour of the hour, and without meaning a
single word i say!”
“i cannot accept that statement”—i answered him, smiling
a little—“you do mean what you say,—though i fancy you
are rather a creature of impulse.”
“do you really!” he exclaimed—“how wise of you!—good
geoffrey tempest, how very wise of you! but you
are wrong. there never was a being created who was less
impulsive, or more charged with set purpose than i. believe
me or not as you like,—belief is a sentiment that
cannot be forced. if i told you that i am a dangerous
companion,—that i like evil things better than good,—that
i am not a safe guide for any man, what would you
think?”
“i should think you were whimsically fond of
[p ]
 under-estimating your own qualities”—i said, re-lighting my
cigar, and feeling somewhat amused by his earnestness—“and
i should like you just as well as i do now,—perhaps
better,—though that would be difficult.”
at these words, he seated himself, bending his steadfast dark
eyes full upon me.
“tempest, you follow the fashion of the prettiest women
about town,—they always like the greatest scoundrels!”
“but you are not a scoundrel;”—i rejoined, smoking
peacefully.
“no,—i’m not a scoundrel, but there’s a good deal of the
devil in me.”
“all the better!” i said, stretching myself out in my chair
with lazy comfort—“i hope there’s something of him in me
too.”
“do you believe in him?” asked rimânez smiling.
“the devil? of course not!”
“he is a very fascinating legendary personage;”—continued
the prince, lighting another cigar and beginning to puff at it
slowly—“and he is the subject of many a fine story. picture
his fall from heaven!—‘lucifer son of the morning’—what
a title, and what a birthright! to be born of the morning
implies to be a creature formed of translucent light undefiled,
with all the warm rose of a million orbs of day
colouring his bright essence, and all the lustre of fiery
planets flaming in his eyes. splendid and supreme, at the
right hand of deity itself he stood, this majestic arch-angel,
and before his unwearied vision rolled the grandest creative
splendours of god’s thoughts and dreams. all at once he
perceived in the vista of embryonic things a new small
world, and on it a being forming itself slowly as it were
into the angelic likeness,—a being weak yet strong, sublime
yet foolish,—a strange paradox, destined to work its way
through all the phases of life, till imbibing the very breath
and soul of the creator it should touch conscious immortality,—eternal
joy. then lucifer, full of wrath, turned
on the master of the spheres, and flung forth his reckless
[p ]
 defiance, crying aloud—‘wilt thou make of this slight poor
creature an angel even as i? i do protest against thee
and condemn! lo, if thou makest man in our image i
will destroy him utterly, as unfit to share with me the
splendours of thy wisdom,—the glory of thy love!’ and
the voice supreme in accents terrible and beautiful replied;
‘lucifer, son of the morning, full well dost thou know
that never can an idle or wasted word be spoken before
me. for free-will is the gift of the immortals; therefore
what thou sayest, thou must needs do! fall, proud spirit
from thy high estate!—thou and thy companions with
thee!—and return no more till man himself redeem thee!
each human soul that yields unto thy tempting shall be
a new barrier set between thee and heaven; each one
that of its own choice doth repel and overcome thee, shall
lift thee nearer thy lost home! when the world rejects
thee, i will pardon and again receive thee,—but not till
then.’”
“i never heard exactly that version of the legend before,”—i
said,—“the idea that man should redeem the devil is quite
new to me.”
“is it?” and he looked at me fixedly—“well—it is one
form of the story, and by no means the most unpoetical.
poor lucifer! his punishment is of course eternal, and the
distance between himself and heaven must be rapidly increasing
every day,—for man will never assist him to retrieve
his error. man will reject god fast enough and gladly
enough—but never the devil. judge then, how, under the
peculiar circumstances of his doom, this ‘lucifer, son of the
morning,’ satan, or whatever else he is called, must hate
humanity!”
i smiled. “well he has one remedy left to him”—i
observed—“he need not tempt anybody.”
“you forget!—he is bound to keep his word, according to
the legend”—said rimânez—“he swore before god that
he would destroy man utterly,—he must therefore fulfil that
oath, if he can. angels, it would seem, may not swear
[p ]
 before the eternal without endeavouring at least to fulfil
their vows,—men swear in the name of god every day
without the slightest intention of carrying out their
promises.”
“but it’s all the veriest nonsense,”—i said somewhat impatiently—“all
these old legends are rubbish. you tell the
story well, and almost as if you believed in it,—that is
because you have the gift of speaking with eloquence.
nowadays no one believes in either devils or angels;—i, for
example, do not even believe in the soul.”
“i know you do not”—he answered suavely—“and your
scepticism is very comfortable because it relieves you of all
personal responsibility. i envy you! for—i regret to say,
i am compelled to believe in the soul.”
“compelled!” i echoed—“that is absurd—no one can
compel you to accept a mere theory.”
he looked at me with a flitting smile that darkened rather
than lightened his face.
“true! very true! there is no compelling force in the
whole universe,—man is the supreme and independent
creature,—master of all he surveys and owning no other
dominion save his personal desire. true—i forgot! let
us avoid theology, please, and psychology also,—let us talk
about the only subject that has any sense or interest in it—namely,
money. i perceive your present plans are definite,—you
wish to publish a book that shall create a stir and
make you famous. it seems a modest enough campaign!
have you no wider ambitions? there are several ways, you
know, of getting talked about. shall i enumerate them for
your consideration?”
i laughed. “if you like!”
“well, in the first place i should suggest your getting yourself
properly paragraphed. it must be known to the press
that you are an exceedingly rich man. there is an agency
for the circulation of paragraphs,—i daresay they’ll do it
sufficiently well for about ten or twenty guineas.”
i opened my eyes a little at this.
[p ]“oh, is that the way these things are done?”
“my dear fellow, how else should they be done?” he
demanded somewhat impatiently—“do you think anything
in the world is done without money? are the poor, hard-working
journalists your brothers or your bosom friends
that they should lift you into public notice without getting
something for their trouble? if you do not manage them
properly in this way, they’ll abuse you quite heartily and
free of cost,—that i can promise you! i know a ‘literary
agent,’ a very worthy man too, who for a hundred guineas
down, will so ply the paragraph wheel that in a few weeks it
shall seem to the outside public that geoffrey tempest, the
millionaire, is the only person worth talking about, and the
one desirable creature whom to shake hands with is next in
honour to meeting royalty itself.”
“secure him!” i said indolently—“and pay him two
hundred guineas! so shall all the world hear of me!”
“when you have been paragraphed thoroughly,” went on
rimânez—“the next move will be a dash into what is called
‘swagger’ society. this must be done cautiously and by
degrees. you must be presented at the first levée of the
season, and later on, i will get you an invitation to some
great lady’s house, where you will meet the prince of wales
privately at dinner. if you can oblige or please his royal
highness in any way so much the better for you,—he is at
least the most popular royalty in europe, so it should
not be difficult to you to make yourself agreeable. following
upon this event, you must purchase a fine country seat,
and have that fact ‘paragraphed’—then you can rest and
look round,—society will have taken you up, and you will
find yourself in the swim!”
i laughed heartily,—well entertained by his fluent
discourse.
“i should not,” he resumed—“propose your putting yourself
to the trouble of getting into parliament. that is no
longer necessary to the career of a gentleman. but i should
strongly recommend your winning the derby.”
[p ]“i daresay you would!” i answered mirthfully—“it’s an
admirable suggestion,—but not very easy to follow!”
“if you wish to win the derby,” he rejoined quietly—“you
shall win it. i’ll guarantee both horse and jockey!”
something in his decisive tone impressed me, and i leaned
forward to study his features more closely.
“are you a worker of miracles?” i asked him jestingly—“do
you mean it?”
“try me!” he responded—“shall i enter a horse for
you?”
“you can’t; it’s too late,” i said. “you would need to
be the devil himself to do it. besides i don’t care about
racing.”
“you will have to amend your taste then,”—he replied—“that
is, if you want to make yourself agreeable to the english
aristocracy, for they are interested in little else. no really
great lady is without her betting book, though she may be
deficient in her knowledge of spelling. you may make the
biggest literary furore of the season, and that will count as
nothing among ‘swagger’ people, but if you win the derby
you will be a really famous man. personally speaking i
have a great deal to do with racing,—in fact i am devoted
to it. i am always present at every great race,—i never miss
one; i always bet, and i never lose! and now let me
proceed with your social plan of action. after winning
the derby you will enter for a yacht race at cowes, and allow
the prince of wales to beat you just narrowly. then you will
give a grand dinner, arranged by a perfect chef,—and you will
entertain his royal highness to the strains of ‘britannia
rules the waves,’ which will serve as a pretty compliment.
you will allude to the same well-worn song in a graceful
speech,—and the probable result of all this will be one, or
perhaps two royal invitations. so far, so good. with the
heats of summer you will go to homburg to drink the
waters there whether you require them or not,—and in the
autumn you will assemble a shooting-party at the country
seat before-mentioned which you will have purchased, and
[p ]
 invite royalty to join you in killing the poor little partridges.
then your name in society may be considered as made,
and you can marry whatever fair lady happens to be in the
market!”
“thanks!—much obliged!” and i gave way to hearty
laughter—“upon my word lucio, your programme is perfect!
it lacks nothing!”
“it is the orthodox round of social success,” said lucio
with admirable gravity—“intellect and originality have nothing
whatever to do with it,—only money is needed to
perform it all.”
“you forget my book”—i interposed—“i know there is
some intellect in that, and some originality too. surely
that will give me an extra lift up the heights of fashionable
light and leading.”
“i doubt it!” he answered—“i very much doubt it. it
will be received with a certain amount of favour of course,
as a production of a rich man amusing himself with literature
as a sort of whim. but, as i told you before, genius
seldom develops itself under the influence of wealth. then
again ‘swagger’ folks can never get it out of their fuddled
heads that literature belongs to grub street. great poets,
great philosophers, great romancists are always vaguely
alluded to by ‘swagger’ society as ‘those sort of people.’
those sort of people are so ‘interesting’ say the blue-blooded
noodles deprecatingly, excusing themselves as it
were for knowing any members of the class literary. you
can fancy a ‘swagger’ lady of elizabeth’s time asking a
friend—‘o do you mind, my dear, if i bring one master
william shakespeare to see you? he writes plays, and
does something or other at the globe theatre,—in fact i’m
afraid he acts a little—he’s not very well off poor man,—but
these sort of people are always so amusing!’ now
you, my dear tempest, are not a shakespeare, but your
millions will give you a better chance than he ever had in
his life-time, as you will not have to sue for patronage, or
practise a reverence for ‘my lord’ or ‘my lady,’—these
[p ]
 exalted personages will be only too delighted to borrow money
of you if you will lend it.”
“i shall not lend,”—i said.
“nor give?”
“nor give.”
his keen eyes flashed approval.
“i am very glad,” he observed, “that you are determined
not to ‘go about doing good’ as the canting humbugs say,
with your money. you are wise. spend on yourself,—because
your very act of spending cannot but benefit others
through various channels. now i pursue a different course.
i always help charities, and put my name on subscription-lists,—and
i never fail to assist a certain portion of clergy.”
“i rather wonder at that—” i remarked—“especially as
you tell me you are not a christian.”
“yes,—it does seem strange,—doesn’t it?”—he said with
an extraordinary accent of what might be termed apologetic
derision—“but perhaps you don’t look at it in the proper
light. many of the clergy are doing their utmost best to
destroy religion,—by cant, by hypocrisy, by sensuality, by
shams of every description,—and when they seek my help
in this noble work, i give it,—freely!”
i laughed “you must have your joke evidently”—i said,
throwing the end of my finished cigar into the fire—“and i
see you are fond of satirizing your own good actions. hullo,
what’s this?”
for at that moment amiel entered, bearing a telegram for
me on a silver salver. i opened it,—it was from my friend
the publisher, and ran as follows—
“accept book with pleasure. send manuscript immediately.”
i showed this to rimânez with a kind of triumph. he
smiled.
“of course! what else did you expect? only the man
should have worded his telegram differently, for i do not
suppose he would accept the book with pleasure if he had
to lay out his own cash upon it. ‘accept money for publishing
[p ]
 book with pleasure’ should have been the true message of
the wire. well, what are you going to do?”
“i shall see about this at once”—i answered, feeling a
thrill of satisfaction that at last the time of vengeance on
certain of my enemies was approaching—“the book must
be hurried through the press as quickly as possible,—and i
shall take a particular pleasure in personally attending to all
the details concerning it. for the rest of my plans,—”
“leave them to me!” said rimânez laying his finely
shaped white hand with a masterful pressure on my shoulder;
“leave them to me!—and be sure that before very long i
shall have set you aloft like the bear who has successfully
reached the bun on the top of a greased pole,—a spectacle
for the envy of men, and the wonder of angels!”
[p ]vii
the next three or four weeks flew by in a whirl of
excitement, and by the time they were ended i found
it hard to recognize myself in the indolent, listless, extravagant
man of fashion i had so suddenly become. sometimes
at stray and solitary moments the past turned back upon
me like a revolving picture in a glass with a flash of unwelcome
recollection, and i saw myself worn and hungry, and shabbily
clothed, bending over my writing in my dreary lodging,
wretched, yet amid all my wretchedness receiving curious
comfort from my own thoughts which created beauty out of
penury, and love out of loneliness. this creative faculty was
now dormant in me,—i did very little, and thought less. but
i felt certain that this intellectual apathy was but a passing
phase,—a mental holiday and desirable cessation from brain-work
to which i was deservedly entitled after all my sufferings
at the hands of poverty and disappointment. my book was
nearly through the press,—and perhaps the chiefest pleasure
of any i now enjoyed was the correction of the proofs as they
passed under my supervision. yet even this, the satisfaction
of authorship, had its drawback,—and my particular grievance
was somewhat singular. i read my own work with gratification
of course, for i was not behind my contemporaries in thinking
well of myself in all i did,—but my complacent literary egoism
was mixed with a good deal of disagreeable astonishment and
incredulity, because my work, written with enthusiasm and
feeling, propounded sentiments and inculcated theories which
[p ]
 i personally did not believe in. now, how had this happened,
i asked myself? why had i thus invited the public to accept
me at a false valuation? i paused to consider,—and i found
the suggestion puzzling. how came i to write the book at
all, seeing that it was utterly unlike me as i now knew myself?
my pen, consciously or unconsciously, had written down
things which my reasoning faculties entirely repudiated,—such
as belief in a god,—trust in the eternal possibilities of
man’s diviner progress,—i credited neither of these doctrines.
when i imagined such transcendental and foolish dreams i
was poor,—starving,—and without a friend in the world;—remembering
all this, i promptly set down my so-called
‘inspiration’ to the action of an ill-nourished brain. yet
there was something subtle in the teaching of the story, and
one afternoon when i was revising some of the last proof
sheets i caught myself thinking that the book was nobler than
its writer. this idea smote me with a sudden pang,—i
pushed my papers aside, and walking to the window, looked
out. it was raining hard, and the streets were black with
mud and slush,—the foot-passengers were drenched and
miserable,—the whole prospect was dreary, and the fact that
i was a rich man did not in the least lift from my mind the
depression that had stolen on me unawares. i was quite
alone, for i had my own suite of rooms now in the hotel, not
far from those occupied by prince rimânez; i also had my
own servant, a respectable, good sort of fellow whom i rather
liked because he shared to the full the instinctive aversion i
felt for the prince’s man, amiel. then i had my own carriage
and horses with attendant coachman and groom,—so that the
prince and i, though the most intimate friends in the world,
were able to avoid that ‘familiarity which breeds contempt’
by keeping up our own separate establishments. on this
particular afternoon i was in a more miserable humour than
ever my poverty had brought upon me, yet from a strictly
reasonable point of view i had nothing to be miserable about.
i was in full possession of my fortune,—i enjoyed excellent
health, and i had everything i wanted, with the added
[p ]
 consciousness that if my wants increased i could gratify them
easily. the ‘paragraph wheel’ under lucio’s management
had been worked with such good effect that i had seen myself
mentioned in almost every paper in london and the provinces
as the ‘famous millionaire,’—and for the benefit of the public,
who are sadly uninstructed on these matters, i may here state
as a very plain unvarnished truth, that for forty pounds, a
well-known ‘agency’ will guarantee the insertion of any
paragraph, provided it is not libellous, in no less than four
hundred newspapers. the art of ‘booming’ is thus easily
explained, and level-headed people will be able to comprehend
why it is that a few names of authors are constantly mentioned
in the press, while others, perhaps more deserving, remain
ignored. merit counts as nothing in such circumstances,—money
wins the day. and the persistent paragraphing of my
name, together with a description of my personal appearance
and my ‘marvellous literary gifts,’ combined with a deferential
and almost awe-struck allusion to the ‘millions’ which made
me so interesting—(the paragraph was written out by lucio
and handed for circulation to the ‘agency’ aforesaid with
‘money down’)—all this i say brought upon me two inflictions,—first,
any amount of invitations to social and
artistic functions,—and secondly, a continuous stream of
begging-letters. i was compelled to employ a secretary, who
occupied a room near my suite, and who was kept hard at work
all day. needless to say i refused all appeals for money;—no
one had helped me in my distress, with the exception of my
old chum ‘boffles,’—no one save he had given me even so
much as a word of sympathy,—i was resolved now to be as
hard and as merciless as i had found my contemporaries. i
had a certain grim pleasure in reading letters from two or
three literary men, asking for work ‘as secretary or companion,’
or failing that, for the loan of a little cash to ‘tide
over present difficulties.’ one of these applicants was a
journalist on the staff of a well-known paper who had
promised to find me work, and who instead of doing so,
[p ]
 had, as i afterwards learned, strongly dissuaded his editor
from giving me any employment. he never imagined that
tempest the millionaire, and tempest the literary hack, were
one and the same person,—so little do the majority think that
wealth can ever fall to the lot of authors! i wrote to him
myself however and told him what i deemed it well he should
know, adding my sarcastic thanks for his friendly assistance
to me in time of need,—and herein i tasted something of the
sharp delight of vengeance. i never heard from him again,
and i am pretty sure my letter gave him material not only for
astonishment but meditation.
yet with all the advantages over both friends and enemies
which i now possessed i could not honestly say i was happy.
i knew i could have every possible enjoyment and amusement
the world had to offer,—i knew i was one of the most
envied among men, and yet,—as i stood looking out of the
window at the persistently falling rain, i was conscious of a
bitterness rather than a sweetness in the full cup of fortune.
many things that i had imagined would give me intense satisfaction
had fallen curiously flat. for example, i had flooded
the press with the most carefully worded and prominent advertisements
of my forthcoming book, and when i was poor i
had pictured to myself how i should revel in doing this,—now
that it was done i cared nothing at all about it. i
was simply weary of the sight of my own advertised name.
i certainly did look forward with very genuine feeling and
expectation to the publication of my work when that should
be an accomplished fact,—but to-day even that idea had lost
some of its attractiveness owing to this new and unpleasant
impression on my mind that the contents of that book were
as utterly the reverse of my own true thoughts as they could
well be. a fog began to darken down over the streets in
company with the rain,—and disgusted with the weather and
with myself, i turned away from the window and settled
into an arm-chair by the fire, poking the coal till it blazed,
and wondering what i should do to rid my mind of the
gloom that threatened to envelop it in as thick a canopy
[p ]
 as that of the london fog. a tap came at the door, and
in answer to my somewhat irritable “come in!” rimânez
entered.
“what, all in the dark tempest!” he exclaimed cheerfully—“why
don’t you light up?”
“the fire’s enough,”—i answered crossly—“enough at any
rate to think by.”
“and have you been thinking?” he inquired laughing—“don’t
do it. it’s a bad habit. no one thinks now-a-days,—people
can’t stand it—their heads are too frail. once
begin to think and down go the foundations of society,—besides
thinking is always dull work.”
“i have found it so,” i said gloomily—“lucio, there is
something wrong about me somewhere.”
his eyes flashed keen, half-amused inquiry into mine.
“wrong? oh no, surely not! what can there be wrong
about you, tempest? are you not one of the richest men
living?”
i let the satire pass.
“listen, my friend,” i said earnestly—“you know i have
been busy for the last fortnight correcting the proofs of my
book for the press,—do you not?”
he nodded with a smiling air.
“well i have arrived almost at the end of my work and i
have come to the conclusion that the book is not me,—it
is not a reflex of my feelings at all,—and i cannot understand
how i came to write it.”
“you find it stupid perhaps?” said lucio sympathetically.
“no,” i answered with a touch of indignation—“i do not
find it stupid.”
“dull then?”
“no,—it is not dull.”
“melodramatic?”
“no,—not melodramatic.”
“well, my good fellow, if it is not dull or stupid or melodramatic,
what is it!” he exclaimed merrily—“it must be
something!”
[p ]“yes,—it is this,—it is beyond me altogether.” and i
spoke with some bitterness. “quite beyond me. i could
not write it now,—i wonder i could write it then. lucio, i
daresay i am talking foolishly,—but it seems to me i must
have been on some higher altitude of thought when i wrote
the book,—a height from which i have since fallen.”
“i’m sorry to hear this,” he answered, with twinkling eyes—“from
what you say it appears to me you have been guilty
of literary sublimity. oh bad, very bad! nothing can be
worse. to write sublimely is a grievous sin, and one which
critics never forgive. i’m really grieved for you, my friend—i
never thought your case was quite so desperate.”
i laughed in spite of my depression.
“you are incorrigible, lucio!” i said—“but your cheerfulness
is very inspiriting. all i wanted to explain to you
is this,—that my book expresses a certain tone of thought
which purporting to be mine, is not me,—in short, i, in my
present self have no sympathy with it. i must have changed
very much since i wrote it.”
“changed? why yes, i should think so!” and lucio
laughed heartily—“the possession of five millions is bound
to change a man considerably for the better—or worse!
but you seem to be worrying yourself most absurdly about
nothing. not one author in many centuries writes from
his own heart or as he truly feels—when he does, he becomes
well-nigh immortal. this planet is too limited to
hold more than one homer, one plato, one shakespeare.
don’t distress yourself—you are neither of these three! you
belong to the age, tempest,—it is a decadent ephemeral
age, and most things connected with it are decadent and
ephemeral. any era that is dominated by the love of
money only, has a rotten core within it and must perish.
all history tells us so, but no one accepts the lesson of
history. observe the signs of the time,—art is made
subservient to the love of money—literature, politics and
religion the same,—you cannot escape from the general
disease. the only thing to do is to make the best of it,—no
[p ]
 one can reform it—least of all you, who have so much
of the lucre given to your share.”
he paused,—i was silent, watching the bright fire-glow
and the dropping red cinders.
“what i am going to say now,” he proceeded in soft,
almost melancholy accents—“will sound ridiculously trite,—still
it has the perverse prosiness of truth about it. it is
this—in order to write with intense feeling, you must first
feel. very likely when you wrote this book of yours, you
were almost a human hedge-hog in the way of feeling.
every prickly point of you was erect and responsive to the
touch of all influences, pleasant or the reverse, imaginative
or realistic. this is a condition which some people envy
and others would rather dispense with. now that you, as a
hedge-hog, have no further need for either alarm, indignation
or self-defence, your prickles are soothed into an agreeable
passiveness, and you partially cease to feel. that is
all. the ‘change’ you complain of is thus accounted for;—you
have nothing to feel about,—hence you cannot comprehend
how it was that you ever felt.”
i was conscious of irritation at the calm conviction of his
tone.
“do you take me for such a callous creature as all that?”
i exclaimed—“you are mistaken in me, lucio. i feel most
keenly——”
“what do you feel?” he inquired, fixing his eyes steadily
upon me—“there are hundreds of starving wretches in this
metropolis,—men and women on the brink of suicide because
they have no hope of anything in this world or the
next, and no sympathy from their kind—do you feel for
them? do their griefs affect you? you know they do
not,—you know you never think of them,—why should
you? one of the chief advantages of wealth is the ability
it gives us to shut out other people’s miseries from our
personal consideration.”
i said nothing,—for the first time my spirit chafed at
the truth of his words, principally because they were true.
[p ]
 alas, lucio!—if i had only known then what i know
now!
“yesterday,” he went on in the same quiet voice—“a child
was run over here, just opposite this hotel. it was only a
poor child,—mark that ‘only.’ its mother ran shrieking
out of some back-street hard by, in time to see the little
bleeding body carted up in a mangled heap. she struck
wildly with both hands at the men who were trying to lead
her away, and with a cry like that of some hurt savage
animal fell face forward in the mud—dead. she was only
a poor woman,—another ‘only.’ there were three lines in
the paper about it headed ‘sad incident.’ the hotel-porter
here witnessed the scene from the door with as composed a
demeanor as that of a fop at the play, never relaxing the
serene majesty of his attitude,—but about ten minutes after
the dead body of the woman had been carried out of sight,
he, the imperial, gold-buttoned being, became almost crook-backed
in his servile haste to run and open the door of your
brougham, my dear geoffrey, as you drove up to the entrance.
this is a little epitome of life as it is lived now-a-days,—and
yet the canting clerics swear we are all equal in
the sight of heaven! we may be, though it does not look
much like it,—and if we are, it does not matter, as we have
ceased to care how heaven regards us. i don’t want to point
a moral,—i simply tell you the ‘sad incident’ as it occurred,—and
i am sure you are not the least sorry for the fate of
either the child who was run over, or its mother who died
in the sharp agony of a suddenly broken heart. now don’t
say you are, because i know you’re not!”
“how can one feel sorry for people one does not know or
has never seen,—” i began.
“exactly!—how is it possible? and there we have it—how
can one feel, when one’s self is so thoroughly comfortable
as to be without any other feeling save that of material
ease? thus, my dear geoffrey, you must be content to let
your book appear as the reflex and record of your past when
you were in the prickly or sensitive stage,—now you are
[p ]
 encased in a pachydermatous covering of gold, which adequately
protects you from such influences as might have
made you start and writhe, perhaps even roar with indignation,
and in the access of fierce torture, stretch out your
hands and grasp—quite unconsciously—the winged thing
called fame!”
“you should have been an orator,”—i said, rising and
pacing the room to and fro in vexation,—“but to me your
words are not consoling, and i do not think they are true.
fame is easily enough secured.”
“pardon me if i am obstinate;”—said lucio with a deprecatory
gesture—“notoriety is easily secured—very easily.
a few critics who have dined with you and had their fill of
wine, will give you notoriety. but fame is the voice of the
whole civilized public of the world.”
“the public!” i echoed contemptuously—“the public
only care for trash.”
“it is a pity you should appeal to it then;”—he responded
with a smile—“if you think so little of the public why
give it anything of your brain? it is not worthy of so
rare a boon! come, come tempest,—do not join in the
snarl of unsuccessful authors who take refuge, when marked
unsaleable, in pouring out abuse on the public. the public
is the author’s best friend and truest critic. but if you prefer
to despise it, in company with all the very little literature-mongers
who form a mutual admiration society, i tell you
what to do,—print just twenty copies of your book and
present these to the leading reviewers, and when they have
written you up (as they will do—i’ll take care of that) let
your publisher advertise to the effect that the ‘first and
second large editions’ of the new novel by geoffrey
tempest, are exhausted, one hundred thousand copies having
been sold in a week! if that does not waken up the
world in general, i shall be much surprised!”
i laughed,—i was gradually getting into a better humour.
“it would be quite as fair a plan of action as is adopted by
many modern publishers,” i said—“the loud hawking of
[p ]
 literary wares now-a-days reminds me of the rival shouting
of costermongers in a low neighbourhood. but i will not
go quite so far,—i’ll win my fame legitimately if i can.”
“you can’t!” declared lucio with a serene smile—“it’s
impossible. you are too rich. that of itself is not legitimate
in literature, which great art generally elects to wear
poverty in its button-hole as a flower of grace. the fight
cannot be equal in such circumstances. the fact that you
are a millionaire must weigh the balance apparently in your
favour for a time. the world cannot resist money. if i,
for example, became an author, i should probably with my
wealth and influence, burn up every one else’s laurels. suppose
that a desperately poor man comes out with a book at
the same time as you do, he will have scarcely the ghost of
a chance against you. he will not be able to advertise in
your lavish style,—nor will he see his way to dine the critics
as you can. and if he should happen to have more genius
than you, and you succeed, your success will not be legitimate.
but after all, that does not matter much—in art, if
in nothing else, things always right themselves.”
i made no immediate reply, but went over to my table,
rolled up my corrected proofs and directed them to the
printers,—then ringing the bell i gave the packet to my man,
morris, bidding him post it at once. this done, i turned
again towards lucio and saw that he still sat by the fire, but
that his attitude was now one of brooding melancholy, and
that he had covered his eyes with one hand on which the
glow from the flames shone red. i regretted the momentary
irritation i had felt against him for telling me unwelcome
truths,—and i touched him lightly on the shoulder.
“are you in the dumps now lucio?” i said—“i’m afraid
my depression has proved infectious.”
he moved his hand and looked up,—his eyes were large
and lustrous as the eyes of a beautiful woman.
“i was thinking,” he said, with a slight sigh—“of the last
words i uttered just now,—things always right themselves.
curiously enough in art they always do,—no charlatanism
[p ]
 or sham lasts with the gods of parnassus. but in other
matters it is different. for instance i shall never right
myself! life is hateful to me at times, as it is to everybody.”
“perhaps you are in love?” i said with a smile.
he started up.
“in love! by all the heavens and all the earths too, that
suggestion wakes me with a vengeance! in love! what
woman alive do you think could impress me with the notion
that she was anything more than a frivolous doll of pink and
white, with long hair frequently not her own? and as for
the tom-boy tennis-players and giantesses of the era, i do
not consider them women at all,—they are merely the
unnatural and strutting embryos of a new sex which will be
neither male nor female. my dear tempest, i hate women.
so would you if you knew as much about them as i
do. they have made me what i am, and they keep me
so.”
“they are to be much complimented then,”—i observed—“you
do them credit!”
“i do!” he answered slowly—“in more ways than one!”
a faint smile was on his face, and his eyes brightened with
that curious jewel-like gleam i had noticed several times
before. “believe me, i shall never contest with you such a
slight gift as woman’s love, geoffrey. it is not worth fighting
for. and apropos of women, that reminds me,—i have
promised to take you to the earl of elton’s box at the haymarket
to-night,—he is a poor peer, very gouty and somewhat
heavily flavoured with port-wine, but his daughter, lady
sibyl, is one of the belles of england. she was presented
last season and created quite a furore. will you come?”
“i am quite at your disposition”—i said, glad of any
excuse to escape the dullness of my own company and to be
in that of lucio, whose talk, even if its satire galled me occasionally,
always fascinated my mind and remained in my
memory—“what time shall we meet?”
“go and dress now, and join me at dinner,”—he answered;
[p ]
 “and we’ll drive together to the theatre afterwards. the
play is on the usual theme which has lately become popular
with stage-managers,—the glorification of a ‘fallen’ lady,
and the exhibition of her as an example of something superlatively
pure and good, to the astonished eyes of the innocent.
as a play it is not worth seeing,—but perhaps lady
sibyl is.”
he smiled again as he stood facing me,—the light flames of
the fire had died down to a dull uniform coppery red,—we
were almost in darkness, and i pressed the small button near
the mantelpiece that flooded the room with electric light.
his extraordinary beauty then struck me afresh as something
altogether singular and half unearthly.
“don’t you find that people look at you very often as you
pass, lucio?” i asked him suddenly and impulsively.
he laughed. “not at all. why should they? every
man is so intent on his own aims, and thinks so much of
his own personality that he would scarcely forget his ego if
the very devil himself were behind him. women look at
me sometimes, with the affected coy and kitten-like interest
usually exhibited by the frail sex for a personable man.”
“i cannot blame them!” i answered, my gaze still resting
on his stately figure and fine head with as much admiration
as i might have felt for a noble picture or statue—“what of
this lady sibyl we are to meet to-night,—how does she
regard you?”
“lady sibyl has never seen me,”—he replied—“and i
have only seen her at a distance. it is chiefly for the purpose
of an introduction to her that the earl has asked us to
his box this evening.”
“ha ha! matrimony in view!” i exclaimed jestingly.
“yes—i believe lady sibyl is for sale,”—he answered with
the callous coldness that occasionally distinguished him and
made his handsome features look like an impenetrable mask of
scorn—“but up to the present the bids have not been sufficiently
high. and i shall not purchase. i have told you
already, tempest, i hate women.”
[p ]“seriously?”
“most seriously. women have always done me harm,—they
have wantonly hindered me in my progress. and why
i specially abominate them is, that they have been gifted
with an enormous power for doing good, and that they let
this power run to waste and will not use it. their deliberate
enjoyment and choice of the repulsive, vulgar and common-place
side of life disgusts me. they are much less sensitive
than men, and infinitely more heartless. they are the
mothers of the human race, and the faults of the race are
chiefly due to them. that is another reason for my hatred.”
“do you want the human race to be perfect?” i asked
astonished—“because, if you do, you will find that impossible.”
he stood for a moment apparently lost in thought.
“everything in the universe is perfect,”—he said, “except
that curious piece of work—man. have you never thought
out any reason why he should be the one flaw,—the one
incomplete creature in a matchless creation?”
“no, i have not,”—i replied—“i take things as i find
them.”
“so do i,”—and he turned away, “and as i find them, so
they find me! au revoir! dinner in an hour’s time
remember!”
the door opened and closed—he was gone. i remained
alone for a little, thinking what a strange disposition was his,—what
a curious mixture of philosophy, worldliness, sentiment
and satire seemed to run like the veins of a leaf through
the variable temperament of this brilliant, semi-mysterious
personage who had by mere chance become my greatest friend.
we had now been more or less together for nearly a month,
and i was no closer to the secret of his actual nature than i
had been at first. yet i admired him more than ever,—without
his society i felt life would be deprived of half its charm.
for though, attracted as human moths will be by the glare of
my glittering millions, numbers of so-called ‘friends’ now
surrounded me, there was not one among them who so dominated
[p ]
 my every mood and with whom i had so much close
sympathy as this man,—this masterful, half cruel, half kind
companion of my days, who at times seemed to accept all life
as the veriest bagatelle, and myself as a part of the trivial
game.
 a fact.
back
[p ]viii
no man, i think, ever forgets the first time he is brought
face to face with perfect beauty in woman. he may
have caught fleeting glimpses of loveliness on many fair faces
often,—bright eyes may have flashed on him like star-beams,—the
hues of a dazzling complexion may now and then have
charmed him, or the seductive outlines of a graceful figure;—all
these are as mere peeps into the infinite. but when such
vague and passing impressions are suddenly drawn together
in one focus,—when all his dreamy fancies of form and colour
take visible and complete manifestation in one living creature
who looks down upon him as it were from an empyrean of
untouched maiden pride and purity, it is more to his honour
than his shame, if his senses swoon at the ravishing vision,
and he, despite his rough masculinity and brute strength,
becomes nothing but the merest slave to passion. in this
way was i overwhelmed and conquered without any chance of
deliverance when sibyl elton’s violet eyes, lifted slowly from
the shadow of their dark lashes, rested upon me with that
indefinable expression of mingled interest and indifference
which is supposed to indicate high breeding, but which more
frequently intimidates and repulses the frank and sensitive
soul. the lady sibyl’s glance repelled, but i was none the
less attracted. rimânez and i had entered the earl of
elton’s box at the haymarket between the first and second
acts of the play, and the earl himself, an unimpressive, bald-headed,
red-faced old gentleman, with fuzzy white whiskers,
[p ]
 had risen to welcome us, seizing the prince’s hand and shaking
it with particular effusiveness. (i learned afterwards that
lucio had lent him a thousand pounds on easy terms, a fact
which partly accounted for the friendly fervour of his greeting.)
his daughter had not moved; but a minute or two later
when he addressed her somewhat sharply, saying “sibyl!
prince rimânez and his friend, mr geoffrey tempest,” she
turned her head and honoured us both with the chill glance
i have endeavoured to describe, and the very faintest possible
bow as an acknowledgment of our presence. her exquisite
beauty smote me dumb and foolish,—i could find nothing to
say, and stood silent and confused, with a strange sensation of
bewilderment upon me. the old earl made some remark
about the play, which i scarcely heard though i answered
vaguely and at hap-hazard,—the orchestra was playing abominably
as is usual in theatres, and its brazen din sounded like
the noise of the sea in my ears,—i had not much real consciousness
of anything save the wondrous loveliness of the
girl who faced me, clad in pure white, with a few diamonds
shining about her like stray dewdrops on a rose. lucio spoke
to her, and i listened.
“at last, lady sibyl,” he said, bending towards her deferentially.
“at last i have the honour of meeting you. i
have seen you often, as one sees a star,—at a distance.”
she smiled,—a smile so slight and cold that it scarcely
lifted the corners of her lovely lips.
“i do not think i have ever seen you,” she replied. “and
yet there is something oddly familiar in your face. i have
heard my father speak of you constantly,—i need scarcely
say his friends are always mine.”
he bowed.
“to merely speak to lady sibyl elton is counted sufficient
to make the man so privileged happy,” he said. “to
be her friend is to discover the lost paradise.”
she flushed,—then grew suddenly very pale, and shivering,
she drew her cloak towards her. rimânez wrapped its perfumed
silken folds carefully round her beautiful shoulders,—how
[p ]
 i grudged him the dainty task! he then turned to me,
and placed a chair just behind hers.
“will you sit here geoffrey?” he suggested—“i want to
have a moment’s business chat with lord elton.”
recovering my self-possession a little, i hastened to take
the chance he thus generously gave me to ingratiate myself in
the young lady’s favour, and my heart gave a foolish bound
of joy because she smiled encouragingly as i approached
her.
“you are a great friend of prince rimânez?” she asked
softly, as i sat down.
“yes, we are very intimate,” i replied—“he is a delightful
companion.”
“so i should imagine!” and she looked over at him where
he sat next to her father talking earnestly in low tones—“he
is singularly handsome.”
i made no reply. of course lucio’s extraordinary personal
attractiveness was undeniable,—but i rather grudged her
praise bestowed on him just then. her remarks seemed to
me as tactless as when a man with one pretty woman beside
him loudly admires another in her hearing. i did not myself
assume to be actually handsome, but i knew i was better
looking than the ordinary run of men. so out of sudden
pique i remained silent, and presently the curtain rose and
the play was resumed. a very questionable scene was enacted,
the ‘woman with the past’ being well to the front of it. i felt
disgusted at the performance and looked at my companions to
see if they too were similarly moved. there was no sign of
disapproval on lady sibyl’s fair countenance,—her father was
bending forward eagerly, apparently gloating over every detail,—rimânez
wore that inscrutable expression of his in which
no feeling whatever could be discerned. the ‘woman with
the past’ went on with her hysterical sham-heroics, and the
mealy-mouthed fool of a hero declared her to be a ‘pure
angel wronged,’ and the curtain fell amid loud applause. one
energetic hiss came from the gallery, affecting the occupants
of the stalls to scandalized amazement.
[p ]“england has progressed!” said rimânez in soft half-bantering
tones—“once upon a time this play would have
been hooted off the stage as likely to corrupt the social community.
but now the only voice of protest comes from the
‘lower’ classes.”
“are you a democrat, prince?” inquired lady sibyl,
waving her fan indolently to and fro.
“not i! i always insist on the pride and supremacy of
worth,—i do not mean money value, but intellect. and in
this way i foresee a new aristocracy. when the high grows
corrupt, it falls and becomes the low;—when the low
educates itself and aspires, it becomes the high. this is
simply the course of nature.”
“but, god bless my soul!” exclaimed lord elton—“you
don’t call this play low or immoral do you? it’s a realistic
study of modern social life—that’s what it is. these women
you know,—these poor souls with a past—are very interesting!”
“very!” murmured his daughter.—“in fact it would seem
that for women with no such ‘past’ there can be no future!
virtue and modesty are quite out of date, and have no
chance whatever.”
i leaned towards her, half whispering,
“lady sibyl, i am glad to see this wretched play offends you.”
she turned her deep eyes on me in mingled surprise and
amusement.
“oh no, it doesn’t,” she declared—“i have seen so many
like it. and i have read so many novels on just the same
theme! i assure you, i am quite convinced that the so-called
‘bad’ woman is the only popular type of our sex
with men,—she gets all the enjoyment possible out of life,—she
frequently makes an excellent marriage, and has, as the
americans say ‘a good time all round.’ it’s the same thing
with our convicted criminals,—in prison they are much
better fed than the honest working-man. i believe it is
quite a mistake for women to be respectable,—they are only
considered dull.”
[p ]“ah, now you are only joking!” i said with an indulgent
smile. “you know that in your heart you think very
differently!”
she made no answer, as just then the curtain went up again,
disclosing the unclean ‘lady’ of the piece, “having a good
time all round” on board a luxurious yacht. during the unnatural
and stilted dialogue which followed, i withdrew a little
back into the shadow of the box, and all that self-esteem and
assurance of which i had been suddenly deprived by a glance
at lady sibyl’s beauty, came back to me, and a perfectly
stolid coolness and composure succeeded to the first feverish
excitement of my mind. i recalled lucio’s words—“i believe
lady sibyl is for sale”—and i thought triumphantly of
my millions. i glanced at the old earl, abjectly pulling at his
white whiskers while he listened anxiously to what were
evidently money schemes propounded by lucio. then my
gaze came back appraisingly to the lovely curves of lady
sibyl’s milk-white throat, her beautiful arms and bosom, her
rich brown hair of the shade of a ripe chestnut, her delicate
haughty face, languid eyes and brilliant complexion,—and i
murmured inwardly—“all this loveliness is purchaseable, and
i will purchase it!” at that very instant she turned to me
and said—
“you are the famous mr tempest, are you not?”
“famous?” i echoed with a deep sense of gratification—“well,—i
am scarcely that,—yet! my book is not published ...”
her eyebrows arched themselves surprisedly.
“your book? i did not know you had written
one?”
my flattered vanity sank to zero.
“it has been extensively advertised,” i began impressively,—but
she interrupted me with a laugh.
“oh i never read advertisements,—it’s too much trouble.
when i asked if you were the famous mr tempest, i meant
to say were you the great millionaire who has been so much
talked of lately?”
[p ]i bowed a somewhat chill assent. she looked at me inquisitively
over the lace edge of her fan.
“how delightful it must be for you to have so much
money!” she said—“and you are young too, and good-looking.”
pleasure took the place of vexed amour-propre and i
smiled.
“you are very kind, lady sibyl!”
“why?” she asked laughing,—such a delicious little low
laugh—“because i tell you the truth? you are young and
you are good-looking! millionaires are generally such appalling
creatures. fortune, while giving them money, frequently
deprives them of both brains and personal attractiveness.
and now do tell me about your book!”
she seemed to have suddenly dispensed with her former
reserve, and during the last act of the play, we conversed
freely, in whispers which assisted us to become almost confidential.
her manner to me now was full of grace and
charm, and the fascination she exerted over my senses became
complete. the performance over, we all left the box together,
and as lucio was still apparently engrossed with lord elton
i had the satisfaction of escorting lady sibyl to her carriage.
when her father joined her, lucio and i both stood together
looking in at the window of the brougham, and the earl,
getting hold of my hand shook it up and down with boisterous
friendliness.
“come and dine,—come and dine!” he spluttered excitedly;
“come—let me see,—this is tuesday—come on thursday.
short notice and no ceremony! my wife is paralysed i’m
sorry to say,—she can’t receive,—she can only see a few
people now and then when she is in the humour,—her sister
keeps house and does the honours,—aunt charlotte, eh
sibyl?—ha-ha-ha! the deceased wife’s sister’s bill would
never be any use to me, for if my wife were to die i
shouldn’t be anxious to marry miss charlotte fitzroy!
ha ha ha! a perfectly unapproachable woman sir!—a
model,—ha ha! come and dine with us, mr tempest,—lucio,
[p ]
 you bring him along with you, eh? we’ve got a
young lady staying with us,—an american, dollars, accent
and all,—and by jove i believe she wants to marry me
ha ha ha! and is waiting for lady elton to go to a better
world first, ha ha! come along—come and see the little
american, eh? thursday shall it be?”
over the fair features of lady sibyl there passed a faint
shadow of annoyance at her father’s allusion to the “little
american,” but she said nothing. only her looks appeared
to question our intentions as well as to persuade our wills,
and she seemed satisfied when we both accepted the invitation
given. another apoplectic chuckle from the earl and a
couple of handshakes,—a slight graceful bow from her lovely
ladyship, as we raised our hats in farewell, and the elton
equipage rolled away, leaving us to enter our own vehicle,
which amid the officious roarings of street-boys and policemen
had just managed to draw up in front of the theatre. as we
drove off, lucio peered inquisitively at me—i could see the
steely glitter of his fine eyes in the semi-darkness of the
brougham,—and said—
“well?”
i was silent.
“don’t you admire her?” he went on—“i must confess she
is cold,—a very chilly vestal indeed,—but snow often covers
volcanoes! she has good features, and a naturally clear
complexion.”
despite my intention to be reticent, i could not endure this
tame description.
“she is perfectly beautiful,”—i said emphatically. “the
dullest eyes must see that. there is not a fault to be found
with her. and she is wise to be reserved and cold—were
she too lavish of her smiles and too seductive in manner, she
might drive many men not only into folly, but madness.”
i felt rather than saw the cat-like glance he flashed
upon me.
“positively, geoffrey, i believe that notwithstanding the
fact that we are only in february, the wind blows upon you
[p ]
 due south, bringing with it odours of rose and orange-blossom!
i fancy lady sibyl has powerfully impressed
you?”
“did you wish me to be impressed?” i asked.
“i? my dear fellow, i wish nothing that you yourself do
not wish. i accommodate my ways to my friends’ humours.
if asked for my opinion i should say it is rather a pity if
you are really smitten with the young lady, as there are no
obstacles to be encountered. a love-affair, to be conducted
with spirit and enterprise should always bristle with opposition
and difficulty, real or invented. a little secrecy and a
good deal of wrong-doing, such as sly assignations and the
telling of any amount of lies—such things add to the agreeableness
of love-making on this planet—”
i interrupted him.
“see here, lucio, you are very fond of alluding to ‘this’
planet as if you knew anything about other planets”—i said
impatiently. “this planet, as you somewhat contemptuously
call it, is the only one we have any business with.”
he bent his piercing looks so ardently upon me that for the
moment i was startled.
“if that is so,” he answered, “why in heaven’s name do
you not let the other planets alone? why do you strive to
fathom their mysteries and movements? if men, as you
say, have no business with any planet save this one why are
they ever on the alert to discover the secret of mightier
worlds,—a secret which haply it may some day terrify them
to know!”
the solemnity of his voice and the inspired expression of
his face awed me. i had no reply ready, and he went on—
“do not let us talk, my friend, of planets, not even of this
particular pin’s point among them known as earth. let us
return to a better subject—the lady sibyl. as i have
already said, there are no obstacles in the way of your
wooing and winning her, if such is your desire. geoffrey
tempest, as mere author of books would indeed be insolent
to aspire to the hand of an earl’s daughter, but geoffrey
[p ]
 tempest, millionaire, will be a welcome suitor. poor lord
elton’s affairs are in a bad way—he is almost out-at-elbows;—the
american woman who is boarding with him——”
“boarding with him!” i exclaimed—“surely he does not
keep a boarding-house?”
lucio laughed heartily.
“no, no!—you must not put it so coarsely, geoffrey. it
is simply this, that the earl and countess of elton give the
prestige of their home and protection to miss diana chesney
(the american aforesaid) for the trifling sum of two thousand
guineas per annum. the countess being paralyzed, is
obliged to hand over her duties of chaperonage to her sister
miss charlotte fitzroy,—but the halo of the coronet still
hovers over miss chesney’s brow. she has her own suite
of rooms in the house, and goes wherever it is proper for
her to go, under miss fitzroy’s care. lady sibyl does not
like the arrangement, and is therefore never seen anywhere
except with her father. she will not join in companionship
with miss chesney, and has said so pretty plainly.”
“i admire her for it!” i said warmly—“i really am surprised
that lord elton should condescend——”
“condescend to what?” inquired lucio—“condescend to
take two thousand guineas a year? good heavens man,
there are no end of lords and ladies who will readily agree
to perform such an act of condescension. ‘blue’ blood is
getting thin and poor, and only money can thicken it.
diana chesney is worth over a million dollars and if lady
elton were to die conveniently soon, i should not be surprised
to see that ‘little american’ step triumphantly into
her vacant place.”
“what a state of topsy-turveydom!” i said, half angrily.
“geoffrey, my friend, you are really amazingly inconsistent!
is there a more flagrant example of topsy-turveydom than
yourself for instance? six weeks ago, what were you? a
mere scribbler, with flutterings of the wings of genius in your
soul, but many uncertainties as to whether those wings would
ever be strong enough to lift you out of the rut of obscurity
[p ]
 in which you floundered, struggling and grumbling at adverse
fate. now, as millionaire, you think contemptuously of an
earl, because he ventures quite legitimately to add a little to
his income by boarding an american heiress and launching
her into society where she would never get without him.
and you aspire, or probably mean to aspire to the hand of
the earl’s daughter, as if you yourself were a descendant of
kings. nothing can be more topsy-turvey than your condition!”
“my father was a gentleman,” i said, with a touch of
hauteur, “and a descendant of gentlemen. we were never
common folk,—our family was one of the most highly
esteemed in the counties.”
lucio smiled.
“i do not doubt it, my dear fellow,—i do not in the least
doubt it. but a simple ‘gentleman’ is a long way below—or
above—an earl. have it which side you choose!—because
it really doesn’t matter nowadays. we have come to
a period of history when rank and lineage count as nothing
at all, owing to the profoundly obtuse stupidity of those who
happen to possess it. so it chances, that as no resistance
is made, brewers are created peers of the realm, and ordinary
tradesmen are knighted, and the very old families are so
poor that they have to sell their estates and jewels to the
highest bidder, who is frequently a vulgar ‘railway-king’ or
the introducer of some new manure. you occupy a better
position than such, since you inherit your money with the
farther satisfaction that you do not know how it was made.”
“true!” i answered meditatively,—then, with a sudden
flash of recollection i added—“by the way i never told you
that my deceased relative imagined that he had sold his soul
to the devil, and that this vast fortune of his was the
material result!”
lucio burst into a violent fit of laughter.
“no! not possible!” he exclaimed derisively—“what an
idea! i suppose he had a screw loose somewhere! imagine
any sane man believing in a devil! ha, ha, ha! and in
[p ]
 these advanced days too! well, well! the folly of human
imaginations will never end! here we are!”—and he
sprang lightly out as the brougham stopped at the grand
hotel—“i will say good-night to you, tempest. i’ve promised
to go and have a gamble.”
“a gamble? where?”
“at one of the select private clubs. there are any amount
of them in this eminently moral metropolis—no occasion to
go to monte carlo! will you come?”
i hesitated. the fair face of lady sibyl haunted my
mind,—and i felt, with a no doubt foolish sentimentality, that
i would rather keep my thoughts of her sacred, and unpolluted
by contact with things of lower tone.
“not to-night;”—i said,—then half smiling, i added—“it
must be rather a one-sided affair for other men to gamble
with you, lucio! you can afford to lose,—and perhaps they
can’t.”
“if they can’t, they shouldn’t play,”—he answered—“a man
should at least know his own mind and his own capacity; if
he doesn’t, he is no man at all. as far as i have learned by
long experience, those who gamble like it, and when they
like it, i like it. i’ll take you with me to-morrow if you care
to see the fun,—one or two very eminent men are members
of the club, though of course they wouldn’t have it known
for worlds. you shan’t lose much—i’ll see to that.”
“all right,—to-morrow it shall be!”—i responded, for i
did not wish to appear as though i grudged losing a few
pounds at play—“but to-night i think i’ll write some letters
before going to bed.”
“yes—and dream of lady sibyl!” said lucio laughing—“if
she fascinates you as much when you see her again on
thursday you had better begin the siege!”
he waved his hand gaily, and re-entering his carriage, was
driven off at a furious pace through the drifting fog and rain.
[p ]ix
my publisher, john morgeson,—the estimable individual
who had first refused my book, and who now, moved
by self-interest, was devoting his energies assiduously to
the business of launching it in the most modern and approved
style, was not like shakespeare’s cassio, strictly ‘an
honourable man.’ neither was he the respectable chief of a
long-established firm whose system of the cheating of authors,
mellowed by time, had become almost sacred;—he was a
‘new’ man, with new ways, and a good stock of new push
and impudence. all the same, he was clever, shrewd and
diplomatic, and for some reason or other, had secured the
favour of a certain portion of the press, many of the dailies
and weeklies always giving special prominence to his publications
over the heads of other far more legitimately dealing
firms. he entered into a partial explanation of his methods,
when, on the morning after my first meeting with the earl of
elton and his daughter, i called upon him to inquire how
things were going with regard to my book.
“we shall publish next week,”—he said, rubbing his
hands complacently, and addressing me with all the deference
due to my banking account—“and as you don’t mind what
you spend, i’ll tell you just what i propose to do. i intend
to write out a mystifying paragraph of about some seventy
lines or so, describing the book in a vague sort of way as
‘likely to create a new era of thought’—or, ‘ere long everybody
who is anybody will be compelled to read this
[p ]
 remarkable work,’—or ‘as something that must be welcome to
all who would understand the drift of one of the most delicate
and burning questions of the time.’ these are all stock
phrases, used over and over again by the reviewers,—there’s
no copyright in them. and the last one always
‘tells’ wonderfully, considering how old it is, and how often
it has been made to do duty, because any allusion to a
‘delicate and burning question’ makes a number of people
think the novel must be improper, and they send for it at
once!”
he chuckled at his own perspicuity, and i sat silent,
studying him with much inward amusement. this man on
whose decision i had humbly and anxiously waited not so
many weeks ago was now my paid tool,—ready to obey me to
any possible extent for so much cash,—and i listened to him
indulgently while he went on unravelling his schemes for the
gratification of my vanity, and the pocketing of his extras.
“the book has been splendidly advertised”—he went on;
“it could not have been more lavishly done. orders do
not come in very fast yet—but they will,—they will. this
paragraph of mine, which will take the shape of a ‘leaderette,’
i can get inserted in about eight hundred to a
thousand newspapers here and in america. it will cost
you,—say a hundred guineas—perhaps a trifle more. do
you mind that?”
“not in the least!” i replied, still vastly amused.
he meditated a moment,—then drew his chair closer to
mine and lowered his voice a little.
“you understand i suppose, that i shall only issue two
hundred and fifty copies at first?”
this limited number seemed to me absurd, and i protested
vehemently.
“such an idea is ridiculous!” i said—“you cannot supply
the trade with such a scanty edition.”
“wait, my dear sir, wait,—you are too impatient. you do
not give me time to explain. all these two hundred and
fifty will be given away by me in the proper quarters on the
[p ]
 day of publication,—never mind how,—they must be given
away—”
“why?”
“why?” and the worthy morgeson laughed sweetly—“i
see, my dear mr tempest, you are like most men of genius—you
do not understand business. the reason why we
give the first two hundred and fifty copies away is in order
to be able to announce at once in all the papers that ‘the
first large edition of the new novel by geoffrey tempest
being exhausted on the day of publication, a second is in
rapid preparation.’ you see we thus hoodwink the public,
who of course are not in our secrets, and are not to
know whether an edition is two hundred or two thousand.
the second edition will of course be ready behind the
scenes, and will consist of another two hundred and
fifty.”
“do you call that course of procedure honest?” i asked
quietly.
“honest? my dear sir! honest?” and his countenance
wore a virtuously injured expression—“of course it is
honest! look at the daily papers! such announcements
appear every day—in fact they are getting rather too common.
i freely admit that there are a few publishers here and
there who stick up for exactitude and go to the trouble of
not only giving the number of copies in an edition, but
also publishing the date of each one as it was issued,—this
may be principle if they like to call it so, but it involves a
great deal of precise calculation and worry! if the public
like to be deceived, what is the use of being exact! now,
to resume,—your second edition will be sent off ‘on sale
or return’ to provincial booksellers, and then we shall
announce—“in consequence of the enormous demand
for the new novel by geoffrey tempest, the large second
edition is out of print. a third will be issued in the
course of next week.” and so on, and so on, till we get to
the sixth or seventh edition (always numbering two hundred
and fifty each) in three volumes; perhaps we can by skilful
[p ]
 management work it to a tenth. it is only a question
of diplomacy and a little dexterous humbugging of the
trade. then we shall arrive at the one-volume issue, which
will require different handling. but there’s time enough
for that. the frequent advertisements will add to the expense
a bit, but if you don’t mind—”
“i don’t mind anything,” i said—“so long as i have my
fun.”
“your fun?” he queried surprisedly—“i thought it was
fame you wanted, more than fun!”
i laughed aloud.
“i’m not such a fool as to suppose that fame is secured by
advertisement,” i said—“for instance i am one of those
who think the fame of millais as an artist was marred when
he degraded himself to the level of painting the little green
boy blowing bubbles of pears’s soap. that was an advertisement.
and that very incident in his career, trifling
though it seems, will prevent his ever standing on the same
dignified height of distinction with such masters in art as
romney, sir peter lely, gainsborough or reynolds.”
“i believe there is a great deal of justice in what you say;”
and morgeson shook his head wisely—“viewed from a
purely artistic and sentimental standpoint you are right.”
and he became suddenly downcast and dubious. “yes,—it
is a most extraordinary thing how fame does escape people
sometimes just when they seem on the point of grasping it.
they are ‘boomed’ in every imaginable way, and yet after
a time nothing will keep them up. and there are others
again who get kicked and buffeted and mocked and derided——”
“like christ?” i interposed with a half smile. he looked
shocked,—he was a non-conformist,—but remembering in
time how rich i was, he bowed with a meek patience.
“yes”—and he sighed—“as you suggest, mr tempest,
like christ. mocked and derided and opposed at every
turn,—and yet by the queerest caprice of destiny, they succeed
in winning a world-wide fame and power——”
[p ]“like christ again!” i said mischievously, for i loved to
jar his non-conformist conscience.
“exactly!” he paused, looking piously down. then
with a return of secular animation he added—“but i was
not thinking of the great example just then, mr tempest—i
was thinking of a woman.”
“indeed!” i said indifferently.
“yes—a woman, who despite continued abuse and opposition
is rapidly becoming celebrated. you are sure to hear
of her in literary and social circles”—and he gave me a
furtive glance of doubtful inquiry—“but she is not rich, you
know,—only famous. however,—we have nothing to do
with her just now—so let us return to business. the one
uncertain point in the matter of your book’s success is the
attitude of the critics. there are only six leading men who
do the reviews, and between them they cover all the english
magazines and some of the american too, as well as the
london papers. here are their names”—and he handed
me a pencilled memorandum,—“and their addresses, as far
as i can ascertain them, or the addresses of the papers for
which they most frequently write. the man at the head of
the list, david mcwhing, is the most formidable of the lot.
he writes everywhere about everything,—being a scotchman
he’s bound to have his finger in every pie. if you can
secure mcwhing, you need not trouble so much about the
others, as he generally gives the ‘lead,’ and has his own
way with the editors. he is one of the ‘personal friends’
of the editor of the nineteenth century for example, and
you would be sure to get a notice there, which would otherwise
be impossible. no reviewer can review anything for
that magazine unless he is one of the editor’s friends.
you must manage mcwhing, or he might, just for the sake
of ‘showing off,’ cut you up rather roughly.”
“that would not matter,” i said, diverted at the idea of
‘managing mcwhing,’—“a little slating always helps a book
to sell.”
[p ]“in some cases it does,”—and morgeson stroked his thin
beard perplexedly—“but in others it most emphatically does
not. where there is any very decided or daring originality,
adverse criticism is always the most effective. but a work
like yours requires fostering with favour,—wants ‘booming’
in short——”
“i see!” and i felt distinctly annoyed—“you don’t think
my book original enough to stand alone?”
“my dear sir!—you are really—really—! what shall i
say?” and he smiled apologetically—“a little brusque? i
think your book shows admirable scholarship and delicacy of
thought,—if i find fault with it at all, it is perhaps because
i am dense. the only thing it lacks in my opinion is what
i should call tenaciousness, for want of a better expression,—the
quality of holding the reader’s fancy fixed like a nail.
but after all this is a common failing of modern literature;
few authors feel sufficiently themselves to make others feel.”
i made no reply for a moment. i was thinking of lucio’s
remarks on this very same subject.
“well!” i said at last—“if i had no feeling when i wrote
the book, i certainly have none now. why man, i felt
every line of it!—painfully and intensely!”
“ay, ay indeed!” said morgeson soothingly—“or perhaps
you thought you felt, which is another very curious phase of
the literary temperament. you see, to convince people at
all, you must first yourself be convinced. the result of
this is generally a singular magnetic attraction between
author and public. however i am a bad hand at argument,—and
it is possible that in hasty reading i may have
gathered a wrong impression of your intentions. anyhow
the book shall be a success if we can make it so. all i
venture to ask of you is that you should personally endeavour
to manage mcwhing!”
i promised to do my best, and on this understanding we
parted. i realised that morgeson was capable of greater
discernment than i had imagined, and his observations had
given me material for thought which was not altogether
[p ]
 agreeable. for if my book, as he said, lacked tenacity, why
then it would not take root in the public mind,—it would be
merely the ephemeral success of a season,—one of those brief
‘booms’ in literary wares for which i had such unmitigated
contempt,—and fame would be as far off as ever, except that
spurious imitation of it which the fact of my millions had
secured. i was in no good humour that afternoon, and lucio
saw it. he soon elicited the sum and substance of my interview
with morgeson, and laughed long and somewhat uproariously
over the proposed ‘managing’ of the redoubtable
mcwhing. he glanced at the five names of the other leading
critics and shrugged his shoulders.
“morgeson is quite right,”—he said—“mcwhing is intimate
with the rest of these fellows—they meet at the same
clubs, dine at the same cheap restaurants and make love to
the same painted ballet-girls. all in a comfortable little
fraternal union together, and one obliges the other on their
several journals when occasion offers. oh yes! i should
make up to mcwhing if i were you.”
“but how?” i demanded, for though i knew mcwhing’s
name well enough having seen it signed ad nauseam to literary
articles in almost every paper extant, i had never met the man;
“i cannot ask any favour of a press critic.”
“of course not!” and lucio laughed heartily again—“if
you were to do such an idiotic thing what a slating you’d get
for your pains! there’s no sport a critic loves so much as
the flaying of an author who has made the mistake of lowering
himself to the level of asking favours of his intellectual
inferiors! no, no, my dear fellow!—we shall manage mcwhing
quite differently,—i know him, though you do not.”
“come, that’s good news!” i exclaimed—“upon my word
lucio, you seem to know everybody.”
“i think i know most people worth knowing—“ responded
lucio quietly—“though i by no means include mr mcwhing
in the category of worthiness. i happened to make his
personal acquaintance in a somewhat singular and exciting
manner. it was in switzerland, on that awkward ledge of
[p ]
 rock known as the mauvais pas. i had been some weeks
in the neighbourhood on business of my own, and being
surefooted and fearless, was frequently allowed by the guides
to volunteer my services with theirs. in this capacity of
amateur guide, capricious destiny gave me the pleasure of
escorting the timid and bilious mcwhing across the chasms
of the mer de glace, and i conversed with him in the
choicest french all the while, a language of which, despite
his boasted erudition, he was deplorably ignorant. i knew
who he was i must tell you, as i know most of his craft, and
had long been aware of him as one of the authorised
murderers of aspiring genius. when i got him on the
mauvais pas, i saw that he was seized with vertigo; i held
him firmly by the arm and addressed him in sound strong
english thus—‘mr mcwhing, you wrote a damnable and
scurrilous article against the work of a certain poet’ and i
named the man—‘an article that was a tissue of lies from
beginning to end, and which by its cruelty and venom
embittered a life of brilliant promise, and crushed a noble
spirit. now, unless you promise to write and publish in a
leading magazine a total recantation of this your crime when
you get back to england,—if you get back!—giving that
wronged man the ‘honourable mention’ he rightly deserves,—down
you go! i have but to loosen my hold!’ geoffrey,
you should have seen mcwhing then! he whined, he
wriggled, he clung! never was an oracle of the press in
such an unoracular condition. ‘murder!—murder!’ he
gasped, but his voice failed him. above him towered the
snow peaks like the summits of that fame he could not
reach and therefore grudged to others,—below him the
glittering ice-waves yawned in deep transparent hollows of
opaline blue and green,—and afar off the tinkling cowbells
echoed through the still air, suggestive of safe green pastures
and happy homes. ‘murder!’ he whispered gurglingly.
‘nay!’ said i, ‘’tis i should cry murder!—for if ever an
arresting hand held a murderer, mine holds one now!
your system of slaying is worse than that of the midnight
[p ]
 assassin, for the assassin can but kill the body,—you strive
to kill the soul. you cannot succeed, ’tis true, but the
mere attempt is devilish. no shouts, no struggles will
serve you here,—we are alone with eternal nature,—give
the man you have slandered his tardy recognition, or else,
as i said before—down you go!’ well, to make my story
short, he yielded, and swore to do as i bade him,—whereupon
placing my arm round him as though he were my tender
twin-brother, i led him safely off the mauvais pas and down
the kindlier hill, where, what with the fright and the remains
of vertigo, he fell a’weeping grievously. would you believe
it, that before we reached chamounix we had become the
best friends in the world? he explained himself and his
rascally modes of action, and i nobly exonerated him,—we
exchanged cards,—and when we parted, this same author’s bug-bear
mcwhing, overcome with sentiment and whisky toddy
(he is a scotchman you know) swore that i was the grandest
fellow in the world, and that if ever he could serve me he
would. he knew my princely title by this time, but he
would have given me a still higher name. ‘you are not—hic—a
poet yourself?’ he murmured, leaning on me fondly
as he rolled to bed. i told him no. ‘i am sorry—very!’
he declared, the tears of whisky rising to his eyes, ‘if you
had been i would have done a great thing for you,—i
would have boomed you,—for nothing!’ i left him snoring
nobly, and saw him no more. but i think he’ll recognize
me, geoffrey;—i’ll go and look him up personally.
by all the gods!—if he had only known who held him
between life and death upon the mauvais pas!”
i stared, puzzled.
“but he did know”—i said—“did you not say you
exchanged cards?”
“true, but that was afterwards!” and lucio laughed;
“i assure you, my dear fellow, we can ‘manage’
mcwhing!”
i was intensely interested in the story as he told it,—he
had such a dramatic way of speaking and looking, while his
[p ]
 very gestures brought the whole scene vividly before me like a
picture. i spoke out my thought impulsively.
“you would certainly have made a superb actor, lucio!”
“how do you know i am not one?” he asked with a
flashing glance, then he added quickly—“no,—there is no
occasion to paint the face and prance over the boards before
a row of tawdry footlights like the paid mimes, in order to
be histrionically great. the finest actor is he who can play
the comedy of life perfectly, as i aspire to do. to walk
well, talk well, smile well, weep well, groan well, laugh well—and
die well!—it is all pure acting,—because in every
man there is the dumb dreadful immortal spirit who is real,—who
cannot act,—who is,—and who steadily maintains
an infinite though speechless protest against the body’s
lie!”
i said nothing in answer to this outburst,—i was beginning
to be used to his shifting humours and strange utterances,—they
increased the mysterious attraction i had for him, and
made his character a perpetual riddle to me which was not
without its subtle charm. every now and then i realized,
with a faintly startled sense of self-abasement, that i was completely
under his dominance,—that my life was being entirely
guided by his control and suggestion,—but i argued with
myself that surely it was well it should be so, seeing he had so
much more experience and influence than i. we dined
together that night as we often did, and our conversation was
entirely taken up with monetary and business concerns.
under lucio’s advice i was making several important investments,
and these matters gave us ample subject for discussion.
at about eleven o’clock, it being a fine frosty evening and fit
for brisk walking, we went out, our destination being the
private gambling club to which my companion had volunteered
to introduce me as a guest. it was situated at the end of
a mysterious little back street, not far from the respectable
precincts of pall-mall, and was an unpretentious looking
house enough outside, but within, it was sumptuously though
tastelessly furnished. apparently, the premises were presided
[p ]
 over by a woman,—a woman with painted eyes and dyed hair
who received us first of all within the lamp-lighted splendours
of an anglo-japanese drawing-room. her looks and manner
undisguisedly proclaimed her as a demi-mondaine of the most
pronounced type,—one of those ‘pure’ ladies with a ‘past’
who are represented as such martyrs to the vices of men.
lucio said something to her apart,—whereupon she glanced
at me deferentially and smiled,—then rang the bell. a
discreet looking man-servant in sober black made his appearance,
and at a slight sign from his mistress who bowed to me
as i passed her, proceeded to show us upstairs. we trod on
a carpet of the softest felt,—in fact i noticed that everything
was rendered as noiseless as possible in this establishment,
the very doors being covered with thick baize and swinging on
silent hinges. on the upper landing, the servant knocked
very cautiously at a side-door,—a key turned in the lock, and
we were admitted into a long double room, very brilliantly
lit with electric lamps, which at a first glance seemed crowded
with men playing at rouge et noir and baccarat. some looked
up as lucio entered and nodded smilingly,—others glanced
inquisitively at me, but our entrance was otherwise scarcely
noticed. lucio drawing me along by the arm, sat down to
watch the play,—i followed his example and presently found
myself infected by the intense excitement which permeated
the room like the silent tension of the air before a thunderstorm.
i recognised the faces of many well known public
men,—men eminent in politics and society whom one would
never have imagined capable of supporting a gambling club
by their presence and authority. but i took care to betray
no sign of surprise, and quietly observed the games and the
gamesters with almost as impassive a demeanour as that of my
companion. i was prepared to play and to lose,—i was not
prepared however for the strange scene which was soon to
occur and in which i, by force of circumstances was compelled
to take a leading part.
 the author has mr knowles’s own
 written authority for this fact.
back
[p ]x
as soon as the immediate game we were watching
was finished, the players rose, and greeted lucio
with a good deal of eagerness and effusion. i instinctively
guessed from their manner that they looked upon him as
an influential member of the club, a person likely to lend
them money to gamble with, and otherwise to oblige them
in various ways, financially speaking. he introduced me to
them all, and i was not slow to perceive the effect my name
had upon most of them. i was asked if i would join in a
game of baccarat, and i readily consented. the stakes were
ruinously high, but i had no need to falter for that. one of
the players near me was a fair-haired young man, handsome
in face and of aristocratic bearing,—he had been introduced
to me as viscount lynton. i noticed him particularly on
account of the reckless way he had of doubling his stakes
suddenly and apparently out of mere bravado, and when he
lost, as he mostly did, he laughed uproariously as though he
were drunk or delirious. on first beginning to play i was
entirely indifferent as to the results of the game, caring nothing
at all as to whether i had losses or gains. lucio did
not join us, but sat apart, quietly observant, and watching me,
so i fancied, more than anyone. and as chance would have
it, all the luck came my way, and i won steadily. the more
i won the more excited i became, till presently my humour
changed and i was seized by a whimsical desire to lose. i
suppose it was the touch of some better impulse in my nature
[p ]
 that made me wish this for young lynton’s sake. for he
seemed literally maddened by my constant winnings, and continued
his foolhardy and desperate play,—his young face grew
drawn and sharply thin, and his eyes glittered with a hungry
feverishness. the other gamesters, though sharing in his run
of ill-luck, seemed better able to stand it, or perhaps they
concealed their feelings more cleverly,—anyhow i know i
caught myself very earnestly wishing that this devil’s luck of
mine would desert me and set in the young viscount’s direction.
but my wishes were no use,—again and again i gathered
up the stakes, till at last the players rose, viscount lynton
among them.
“well, i’m cleaned out!” he said, with a loud forced laugh.
“you must give me my chance of a revanche to-morrow, mr
tempest!”
i bowed.
“with pleasure!”
he called a waiter at the end of the room to bring him a
brandy and soda, and meanwhile i was surrounded by the rest
of the men, all of them repeating the viscount’s suggestion of
a ‘revanche,’ and strenuously urging upon me the necessity of
returning to the club the next night in order to give them an
opportunity of winning back what they had lost. i readily
agreed, and while we were in the midst of talk, lucio suddenly
addressed young lynton.
“will you make up another game with me?” he inquired.
“i’ll start the bank with this,”—and he placed two crisp notes
of five hundred pounds each on the table.
there was a moment’s silence. the viscount was thirstily
drinking his brandy-and-soda, and glanced over the rim of his
tall tumbler at the notes with covetous bloodshot eyes,—then
he shrugged his shoulders indifferently. “i can’t stake anything,”
he said; “i’ve already told you i’m cleaned out,—‘stony-broke,’
as the slang goes. it’s no use my joining.”
“sit down, sit down, lynton!” urged one man near him.
“i’ll lend you enough to go on with.”
“thanks, i’d rather not!” he returned, flushing a little.
[p ]
 “i’m too much in your debt already. awfully good of you
all the same. you go on, you fellows, and i’ll watch the
play.”
“let me persuade you viscount lynton,” said lucio, looking
at him with his dazzling inscrutable smile—“just for the
fun of the thing! if you do not feel justified in staking
money, stake something trifling and merely nominal, for the
sake of seeing whether the luck will turn”—and here he
took up a counter—“this frequently represents fifty pounds,—let
it represent for once something that is not valuable
like money,—your soul, for example!” a burst of laughter
broke from all the men. lucio laughed softly with them.
“we all have, i hope, enough instruction in modern science
to be aware that there is no such thing as a soul in existence”—he
continued. “therefore, in proposing it as a stake
for this game at baccarat, i really propose less than one hair
of your head, because the hair is a something, and the soul
is a nothing! come! will you risk that non-existent quantity
for the chance of winning a thousand pounds?”
the viscount drained off the last drop of brandy, and
turned upon us, his eyes flushing mingled derision and
defiance.
“done!” he exclaimed; whereupon the party sat down.
the game was brief,—and in its rapid excitement, almost
breathless. six or seven minutes sufficed, and lucio rose,
the winner. he smiled as he pointed to the counter which
had represented viscount lynton’s last stake.
“i have won!” he said quietly. “but you owe me nothing,
my dear viscount, inasmuch as you risked—nothing!
we played this game simply for fun. if souls had any existence
of course i should claim yours;—i wonder what i
should do with it by the way!” he laughed good-humouredly.
“what nonsense, isn’t it!—and how thankful
we ought to be that we live in advanced days like the present,
when such silly superstitions are being swept aside
by the march of progress and pure reason! good-night!
tempest and i will give you, your full revenge to-morrow,—the
[p ]
 luck is sure to change by then, and you will probably
have the victory. again—good-night!”
he held out his hand,—there was a peculiar melting tenderness
in his brilliant dark eyes,—an impressive kindness in his
manner. something—i could not tell what—held us all for
the moment spellbound as if by enchantment, and several of
the players at other tables, hearing of the eccentric stake
that had been wagered and lost, looked over at us curiously
from a distance. viscount lynton, however, professed himself
immensely diverted, and shook lucio’s proffered hand
heartily.
“you are an awfully good fellow!” he said, speaking a little
thickly and hurriedly—“and i assure you seriously if i had a
soul i should be very glad to part with it for a thousand
pounds at the present moment. the soul wouldn’t be an
atom of use to me and the thousand pounds would. but i
feel convinced i shall win to-morrow!”
“i am equally sure you will!” returned lucio affably, “in
the meantime, you will not find my friend here, geoffrey
tempest, a hard creditor,—he can afford to wait. but in
the case of the lost soul,”—here he paused, looking straight
into the young man’s eyes,—“of course i cannot afford to
wait!”
the viscount smiled vaguely at this pleasantry, and almost
immediately afterwards left the club. as soon as the door
had closed behind him, several of the gamesters exchanged
sententious nods and glances.
“ruined!” said one of them in a sotto-voce.
“his gambling debts are more than he can ever pay”—added
another—“and i hear he has lost a clear fifty thousand
on the turf.”
these remarks were made indifferently, as though one
should talk of the weather,—no sympathy was expressed,—no
pity wasted. every gambler there was selfish to the core,
and as i studied their hardened faces, a thrill of honest indignation
moved me,—indignation mingled with shame. i
was not yet altogether callous or cruel-hearted, though as i
[p ]
 look back upon those days which now resemble a wild vision
rather than a reality, i know that i was becoming more and
more of a brutal egoist with every hour i lived. still i was
so far then from being utterly vile, that i inwardly resolved to
write to viscount lynton that very evening, and tell him to
consider his debt to me cancelled, as i should refuse to claim
it. while this thought was passing through my mind, i met
lucio’s gaze fixed steadily upon me. he smiled,—and presently
signed to me to accompany him. in a few minutes we
had left the club, and were out in the cold night air under a
heaven of frostily sparkling stars. standing still for a moment,
my companion laid his hand on my shoulder.
“tempest, if you are going to be kind-hearted or sympathetic
to undeserving rascals, i shall have to part company
with you!” he said, with a curious mixture of satire and
seriousness in his voice—“i see by the expression of your
face that you are meditating some silly disinterested action
of pure generosity. now you might just as well flop down
on these paving stones and begin saying prayers in public.
you want to let lynton off his debt,—you are a fool for your
pains. he is a born scoundrel,—and has never seen his way
to being anything else,—why should you compassionate him?
from the time he first went to college till now, he has been
doing nothing but live a life of degraded sensuality,—he is
a worthless rake, less to be respected than an honest dog!”
“yet some one loves him i daresay!” i said.
“some one loves him!” echoed lucio with inimitable disdain—“bah!
three ballet girls live on him if that is what
you mean. his mother loved him,—but she is dead,—he
broke her heart. he is no good i tell you,—let him pay his
debt in full, even to the soul he staked so lightly. if i were
the devil now, and had just won the strange game we played
to-night, i suppose according to priestly tradition, i should
be piling up the fire for lynton in high glee,—but being
what i am, i say let the man alone to make his own destiny,—let
things take their course,—and as he chose to risk
everything, so let him pay everything.”
[p ]we were by this time walking slowly into pall mall,—i was
on the point of making some reply, when catching sight of a
man’s figure on the opposite side of the way, not far from the
marlborough club, i uttered an involuntary exclamation.
“why there he is!” i said—“there is viscount lynton!”
lucio’s hand closed tightly on my arm.
“you don’t want to speak to him now, surely!”
“no. but i wonder where he’s going? he walks rather
unsteadily.”
“drunk, most probably!”
and lucio’s face presented the same relentless expression
of scorn i had so often seen and marvelled at.
we paused a moment, watching the viscount strolling aimlessly
up and down in front of the clubs,—till all at once he
seemed to come to a sudden resolution, and stopping short,
he shouted,
“hansom!”
a silent-wheeled smart vehicle came bowling up immediately.
giving some order to the driver, he jumped in. the cab approached
swiftly in our direction,—just as it passed us the loud
report of a pistol crashed on the silence.
“good god!” i cried reeling back a step or two—“he
has shot himself!”
the hansom stopped,—the driver sprang down,—club-porters,
waiters, policemen and no end of people starting up
from heaven knows where, were on the scene on an instant,—i
rushed forward to join the rapidly gathering throng, but
before i could do so, lucio’s strong arm was thrown round
me, and he dragged me by main force away.
“keep cool, geoffrey!” he said—“do you want to be called
up to identify? and betray the club and all its members?
not while i am here to prevent you! check your mad
impulses, my good fellow,—they will lead you into no end of
difficulties. if the man’s dead he’s dead, and there’s an end
of it.”
“lucio! you have no heart!” i exclaimed, struggling
violently to escape from his hold—“how can you stop to
[p ]
 reason in such a case! think of it! i am the cause of all
the mischief!—it is my cursed luck at baccarat this evening
that has been the final blow to the wretched young fellow’s
fortunes,—i am convinced of it!—i shall never forgive
myself—”
“upon my word, geoffrey, your conscience is very tender!”
he answered, holding my arm still more closely and hurrying
me away despite myself—“you must try and toughen it a
little if you want to be successful in life. your ‘cursed
luck’ you think, has caused lynton’s death? surely it is a
contradiction in terms to call luck ‘cursed,’—and as for the
viscount, he did not need that last game at baccarat to emphasise
his ruin. you are not to blame. and for the sake
of the club, if for nothing else, i do not intend either you or
myself to be mixed up in a case of suicide. the coroner’s
verdict always disposes of these incidents comfortably in two
words—‘temporary insanity.’”
i shuddered. my soul sickened as i thought that within
a few yards of us was the bleeding corpse of the man i had
so lately seen alive and spoken with,—and notwithstanding
lucio’s words i felt as if i had murdered him.
“‘temporary insanity’”—repeated lucio again, as if speaking
to himself—“all remorse, despair, outraged honour, wasted
love, together with the scientific modern theory of reasonable
nothingness—life a nothing, god a nothing,—when
these drive the distracted human unit to make of himself
also a nothing, ‘temporary insanity’ covers up his plunge
into the infinite with an untruthful pleasantness. however,
after all, it is as shakespeare says, a mad world!”
i made no answer. i was too overcome by my own miserable
sensations. i walked along almost unconscious of
movement, and as i stared bewilderedly up at the stars they
danced before my sight like fireflies whirling in a mist of
miasma. presently a faint hope occurred to me.
“perhaps,” i said, “he has not really killed himself? it
may be only an attempt?”
“he was a capital shot”—returned lucio composedly,—“that
[p ]
 was his one quality. he has no principles,—but he
was a good marksman. i cannot imagine his missing
aim.”
“it is horrible! an hour ago alive, ... and now ... i
tell you, lucio, it is horrible!”
“what is? death? it is not half so horrible as life lived
wrongly,”—he responded, with a gravity that impressed me
in spite of my emotion and excitement—“believe me, the
mental sickness and confusion of a wilfully degraded existence
are worse tortures than are contained in the priestly
notions of hell. come come, geoffrey, you take this matter
too much to heart,—you are not to blame. if lynton has
given himself the ‘happy dispatch’ it is really the best thing
he could do,—he was of no use to anybody, and he is well
out of it. it is positively weak of you to attach importance
to such a trifle. you are only at the beginning of your
career——”
“well, i hope that career will not lead me into any more
such tragedies as the one enacted to-night,”—i said passionately—“if
it does, it will be entirely against my
will!”
lucio looked at me curiously.
“nothing can happen to you against your will”—he replied;
“i suppose you wish to imply that i am to blame for introducing
you to the club? my good fellow, you need not
have gone there unless you had chosen to do so! i did not
bind and drag you there! you are upset and unnerved,—come
into my room and take a glass of wine,—you will feel
more of a man afterwards.”
we had by this time reached the hotel, and i went with
him passively. with equal passiveness i drank what he gave
me, and stood, glass in hand, watching him with a kind of
morbid fascination as he threw off his fur-lined overcoat and
confronted me, his pale handsome face strangely set and
stern, and his dark eyes glittering like cold steel.
“that last stake of lynton’s, ... to you—” i said falteringly—“his
soul——”
[p ]“which he did not believe in, and which you do not believe
in!” returned lucio, regarding me fixedly. “why do you
now seem to tremble at a mere sentimental idea? if fantastic
notions such as god, the soul, and the devil were real
facts, there would perhaps be cause for trembling, but being
only the brainsick imaginations of superstitious mankind,
there is nothing in them to awaken the slightest anxiety or
fear.”
“but you”—i began—“you say you believe in the
soul?”
“i? i am brainsick!” and he laughed bitterly—“have
you not found that out yet? much learning hath driven
me mad, my friend! science has led me into such deep
wells of dark discovery, that it is no wonder if my senses
sometimes reel,—and i believe—at such insane moments—in
the soul!”
i sighed heavily.
“i think i will go to bed,” i answered. “i am tired out,—and
absolutely miserable!”
“alas, poor millionaire!” said lucio gently,—“i am
sorry, i assure you, that the evening has ended so
disastrously.”
“so am i!” i returned despondently.
“imagine it!” he went on, dreamily regarding me—“if my
beliefs,—my crack-brained theories,—were worth anything,—which
they are not—i could claim the only positive existing
part of our late acquaintance viscount lynton! but,—where
and how to send in my account with him? if i were
satan now....”
i forced a faint smile.
“you would have cause to rejoice!” i said.
he moved two paces towards me, and laid his hands gently
on my shoulders.
“no, geoffrey”—and his rich voice had a strange soft
music in it—“no, my friend! if i were satan i should
probably lament!—for every lost soul would of necessity
remind me of my own fall, my own despair,—and set another
[p ]
 bar between myself and heaven! remember,—the very
devil was an angel once!”
his eyes smiled, and yet i could have sworn there were
tears in them. i wrung his hand hard,—i felt that notwithstanding
his assumed coldness and cynicism, the fate of young
lynton had affected him profoundly. my liking for him
gained new fervour from this impression, and i went to bed
more at ease with myself and things in general. during the
few minutes i spent in undressing i became even able to
contemplate the tragedy of the evening with less regret and
greater calmness,—for it was certainly no use worrying over
the irrevocable,—and, after all, what interest had the viscount’s
life for me? none. i began to ridicule myself for my own
weakness and disinterested emotion,—and presently, being
thoroughly fatigued, fell sound asleep. towards morning
however, perhaps about four or five o’clock, i woke suddenly
as though touched by an invisible hand. i was shivering
violently, and my body was bathed in a cold perspiration. in
the otherwise dark room there was something strangely luminous,
like a cloud of white smoke or fire. i started up, rubbing
my eyes,—and stared before me for a moment, doubting the
evidence of my own senses. for, plainly visible and substantially
distinct, at a distance of perhaps five paces from my
bed, stood three figures, muffled in dark garments and closely
hooded. so solemnly inert they were,—so heavily did their
sable draperies fall about them that it was impossible to tell
whether they were men or women,—but what paralysed me
with amazement and terror was the strange light that played
around and above them,—the spectral, wandering, chill radiance
that illumined them like the rays of a faint wintry moon. i
strove to cry out,—but my tongue refused to obey me—and
my voice was strangled in my throat. the three remained
absolutely motionless,—and again i rubbed my eyes, wondering
if this were a dream or some hideous optical delusion.
trembling in every limb, i stretched my hand towards the
bell intending to ring violently for assistance,—when—a
voice, low and thrilling with intense anguish, caused me to
[p ]
 shrink back appalled, and my arm fell nerveless at my side.
“misery!”
the word struck the air with a harsh reproachful clang, and
i nearly swooned with the horror of it. for now one of the
figures moved, and a face gleamed out from beneath its
hooded wrappings—a face white as whitest marble and fixed
into such an expression of dreadful despair as froze my blood.
then came a deep sigh that was more like a death-groan,
and again the word, “misery!” shuddered upon the
silence.
mad with fear, and scarcely knowing what i did, i sprang
from the bed, and began desperately to advance upon these
fantastic masqueraders, determined to seize them and demand
the meaning of this practical and untimely jest,—when
suddenly all three lifted their heads and turned
their faces on me,—such faces!—indescribably awful in
their pallid agony,—and a whisper more ghastly than a
shriek, penetrated the very fibres of my consciousness—“misery!”
with a furious bound i flung myself upon them,—my
hands struck empty space. yet there—distinct as ever—they
stood, glowering down upon me, while my clenched fists beat
impotently through and beyond their seemingly corporeal
shapes! and then—all at once—i became aware of their
eyes,—eyes that watched me pitilessly, stedfastly, and disdainfully,—eyes
that like witch-fires, seemed to slowly burn terrific
meanings into my very flesh and spirit. convulsed and almost
frantic with the strain on my nerves, i abandoned myself to
despair,—this awful sight meant death i thought,—my last
hour had surely come! then—i saw the lips of one of those
dreadful faces move ... some superhuman instinct in me
leaped to life, ... in some strange way i thought i knew, or
guessed the horror of what that next utterance would be, ...
and with all my remaining force i cried out—
“no! no! not that eternal doom! ... not
yet!”
[p ]fighting the vacant air, i strove to beat back those intangible
weird shapes that loomed above me, withering up
my soul with the fixed stare of their angry eyes, and with a
choking call for help, i fell, as it were, into a pit of darkness,
where i lay mercifully unconscious.
[p ]xi
how the ensuing hours between this horrible episode
and full morning elapsed i do not know. i was
dead to all impressions. i woke at last, or rather recovered
my senses to see the sunlight pouring pleasantly through the
half-drawn curtains at my window, and to find myself in bed
in as restful a position as though i had never left it. was it
then merely a vision i had seen?—a ghastly sort of nightmare?
if so, it was surely the most abhorrent illusion ever evolved
from dreamland! it could not be a question of health, for i
had never felt better in my life. i lay for some time quiescent,
thinking over the matter, with my eyes fixed on that part of
the room where those three shapes had seemingly stood;
but i had lately got into such a habit of cool self-analysis,
that by the time my valet brought my early cup of coffee, i
had decided that the whole thing was a dreadful fantasy, born
of my own imagination, which had no doubt been unduly
excited by the affair of viscount lynton’s suicide. i soon
learned that there was no room left for doubt as to that
unhappy young nobleman’s actual death. a brief account of
it was in the morning papers, though as the tragedy had
occurred so late at night there were no details. a vague
hint of ‘money difficulties’ was thrown out in one journal,—but
beyond that, and the statement that the body had been
conveyed to the mortuary there to await an inquest, there was
nothing said, either personal or particular. i found lucio in
the smoking-room, and it was he who first silently pointed
[p ]
 out to me the short paragraph headed ‘suicide of a
viscount.’
“i told you he was a good shot!” he commented.
i nodded. somehow i had ceased to feel much interest
in the subject. my emotion of the previous evening had
apparently exhausted all my stock of sympathy and left me
coldly indifferent. absorbed in myself and my own concerns,
i sat down to talk and was not long before i had given a full
and circumstantial account of the spectral illusion which had
so unpleasantly troubled me during the night. lucio listened,
smiling oddly.
“that old tokay was evidently too strong for you!” he
said, when i had concluded my story.
“did you give me old tokay?” i responded laughing—“then
the mystery is explained! i was already overwrought,
and needed no stimulant. but what tricks the imagination
plays us to be sure! you have no idea of the distinct
manner in which those three phantoms asserted themselves!
the impression was extraordinarily vivid.”
“no doubt!” and his dark eyes studied me curiously.
“impressions often are very vivid. see what a marvellously
real impression this world makes upon us, for example!”
“ah! but then the world is real!” i answered.
“is it? you accept it as such, i daresay, and things are
as they appear to each separate individual. no two human
beings think alike; hence there may be conflicting opinions
as to the reality or non-reality of this present world. but
we will not take unnecessary plunges into the infinite question
of what is, as contrasted with what appears to be. i
have some letters here for your consideration. you have
lately spoken of buying a country estate—what say you to
willowsmere court in warwickshire? i have had my eye
on that place for you,—it seems to me just the very thing.
it is a magnificent old pile; part of it dates from elizabeth’s
time. it is in excellent repair; the grounds are most picturesque,
the classic river avon winds with rather a broad
sweep through the park,—and the whole thing, with a great
[p ]
 part of the furniture included, is to be sold for a mere song;—fifty
thousand pounds cash. i think you had better
go in for it; it would just suit your literary and poetic
tastes.”
was it my fancy, or had his musical voice the faintest touch
of a sneer as he uttered the last words? i would not allow
myself to think this possible, and answered quickly,—
“anything you recommend must be worth looking at, and
i’ll certainly go and see it. the description sounds well,
and shakespeare’s country always appeals to me. but
wouldn’t you like to secure it for yourself?”
he laughed.
“not i! i live nowhere for long. i am of a roving disposition,
and am never happy tied down to one corner of
the earth. but i suggest willowsmere to you for two
reasons,—first that it is charming and perfectly appointed;
secondly, that it will impress lord elton considerably if he
knows you are going to buy it.”
“how so?”
“why, because it used to be his property”—returned lucio
quietly—“till he got into the hands of the jews. he gave
them willowsmere as security for loans, and latterly they
have stepped in as owners. they’ve sold most of the pictures,
china, bric-a-brac and other valuables. by the way,
have you noticed how the legended god still appears to
protect the house of israel? particularly the ‘base usurer’
who is allowed to get the unhappy christian into his clutches
nine times out of ten? and no remedy drops from heaven!
the jew always triumphs. rather inconsistent isn’t it, on
the part of an equitable deity!” his eyes flashed strange
scorn. anon he resumed—“as a result of lord elton’s unfortunate
speculations, and the jews’ admirable shrewdness,
willowsmere, as i tell you is in the market, and fifty thousand
pounds will make you the envied owner of a place
worth a hundred thousand.”
“we dine at the eltons’ to-night, do we not?” i asked
musingly.
[p ]“we do. you cannot have forgotten that engagement and
lady sibyl so soon surely!” he answered laughing.
“no, i have not forgotten”—i said at last, after a little
silence. “and i will buy this willowsmere. i will telegraph
instructions to my lawyers at once. will you give me the
name and address of the agents?”
“with pleasure, my dear boy!” and lucio handed me a
letter containing the particulars concerning the sale of the
estate and other items. “but are you not making up your
mind rather suddenly? hadn’t you better inspect the property
first? there may be things you object to——”
“if it were a rat-infested barrack,” i said resolutely—“i
would still buy it! i shall settle the matter at once. i wish
to let lord elton know this very night that i am the future
owner of willowsmere!”
“good!”—and my companion thrust his arm through mine
as we left the smoking-room together—“i like your swiftness
of action geoffrey. it is admirable! i always respect
determination. even if a man makes up his mind to go to
hell, i honour him for keeping to his word, and going there
straight as a die!”
i laughed, and we parted in high good-humour,—he to fulfil
a club engagement, i to telegraph precise instructions to my
legal friends messrs bentham and ellis, for the immediate
purchase in my name at all costs, risks or inconveniences,
of the estate known as willowsmere court in the county of
warwick.
that evening i dressed with more than common care, giving
my man morris almost as much trouble as if i had been a
fidgetty woman. he waited upon me however with exemplary
patience, and only when i was quite ready did he
venture to utter what had evidently been on his mind for
some time.
“excuse me sir,”—he then observed—“but i daresay
you’ve noticed that there’s something unpleasant-like about
the prince’s valet, amiel?”
“well, he’s rather a down-looking fellow if that’s what you
[p ]
 mean,”—i replied—“but i suppose there’s no harm in
him.”
“i don’t know about that sir,”—answered morris severely;
“he does a great many strange things i do assure you.
downstairs with the servants he goes on something surprising.
sings and acts and dances too, as if he were a
whole music-hall.”
“really!” i exclaimed in surprise—“i should never have
thought it.”
“nor should i sir, but it’s a fact.”
“he must be rather an amusing fellow then,”—i continued,
wondering that my man should take the accomplishments of
amiel in such an injured manner.
“oh, i don’t say anything against his amusingness,”—and
morris rubbed his nose with a doubtful air—“it’s all very
well for him to cut capers and make himself agreeable if he
likes,—but it’s the deceit of him that surprises me sir.
you’d think to look at him that he was a decent sort of
dull chap with no ideas beyond his duty, but really sir, it’s
quite the contrary, if you’ll believe me. the language he
uses when he’s up to his games downstairs is something
frightful! and he actually swears he learnt it from the
gentlemen of the turf, sir! last night he was play acting,
and taking off all the fashionable folks,—then he took to
hypnotising—and upon my word it made my blood run
cold.”
“why, what did he do?” i asked with some curiosity.
“well, sir, he took one of the scullery-maids and sat her
in a chair and just pointed at her. pointed at her and
grinned, for all the world like a devil out of a pantomime.
and though she is generally a respectable sober young
woman, if she didn’t get up with a screech and commence
dancing round and round like a lunatic, while he kept on
pointing. and presently she got to jumping and lifting her
skirts that high that it was positively scandalous! some of
us tried to stop her and couldn’t; she was like mad, till all
at once number twenty-two bell rang—that’s the prince’s
[p ]
 room,—and he just caught hold of her, set her down in her
chair again and clapped his hands. she came to directly,
and didn’t know a bit what she’d been doing. then twenty-two
bell rang again, and the fellow rolled up his eyes
like a clergyman and said, ‘let us pray!’ and off he
went.”
i laughed.
“he seems to have a share of humour at anyrate,”—i said;
“i should not have thought it of him. but do you think
these antics of his are mischievous?”
“well that scullery girl is very ill to-day,”—replied morris;
“i expect she’ll have to leave. she has what she calls the
‘jumps’ and none of us dare tell her how she got them.
no sir, believe me or not as you like, there’s something
very queer about that amiel. and another thing i want to
know is this—what does he do with the other servants?”
“what does he do with the other servants?” i repeated
bewilderedly—“what on earth do you mean?”
“well sir, the prince has a chef of his own hasn’t he?”
said morris enumerating on his fingers—“and two personal
attendants besides amiel,—quiet fellows enough who help
in the waiting. then he has a coachman and groom. that
makes six servants altogether. now none of these except
amiel are ever seen in the hotel kitchens. the chef sends
all the meals in from somewhere, in a heated receptacle—and
the two other fellows are never seen except when waiting
at table, and they don’t live in their own rooms all day,
though they may sleep there,—and nobody knows where
the carriage and horses are put up, or where the coachman
and groom lodge. certain it is that both they and the chef
board out. it seems to me very mysterious.”
i began to feel quite unreasonably irritated.
“look here, morris,” i said—“there’s nothing more useless
or more harmful than the habit of inquiring into other
people’s affairs. the prince has a right to live as he likes,
and do as he pleases with his servants—i am sure he pays
royally for his privileges. and whether his cook lives in or
[p ]
 out, up in the skies or down in a cellar is no matter of mine.
he has been a great traveller and no doubt has his peculiarities;
and probably his notions concerning food are very
particular and fastidious. but i don’t want to know anything
about his ménage. if you dislike amiel, it’s easy to
avoid him, but for goodness sake don’t go making mysteries
where none exist.”
morris looked up, then down, and folded one of my coats
with special care. i saw i had effectually checked his flow of
confidence.
“very well, sir,”—he observed, and said no more.
i was rather diverted than otherwise at my servant’s solemn
account of amiel’s peculiarities as exhibited among his own
class,—and when we were driving to lord elton’s that evening
i told something of the story to lucio. he laughed.
“amiel’s spirits are often too much for him,”—he said—“he
is a perfect imp of mischief and cannot always control
himself.”
“why, what a wrong estimate i have formed of him!” i
said—“i thought he had a peculiarly grave and somewhat
sullen disposition.”
“you know the trite saying—appearances are deceptive?”
went on my companion lightly—“it’s extremely true. the
professed humourist is nearly always a disagreeable and
heavy man personally. as for amiel, he is like me in the
respect of not being at all what he seems. his only fault
is a tendency to break the bounds of discipline, but otherwise
he serves me well, and i do not inquire further. is morris
disgusted or alarmed?”
“neither i think,” i responded laughing—“he merely
presents himself to me as an example of outraged respectability.”
“ah then, you may be sure that when the scullery-maid
was dancing, he observed her steps with the closest nicety;”
said lucio—“very respectable men are always particular
of inspection into these matters! soothe his ruffled feelings,
my dear geoffrey, and tell him that amiel is the very soul
[p ]
 of virtue! i have had him in my service for a long time,
and can urge nothing against his character as a man. he
does not pretend to be an angel. his tricks of speech and
behaviour are the result of a too constant repression of his
natural hilarity, but he is really an excellent fellow. he
dabbled in hypnotic science when he was with me in india;
i have often warned him of the danger there is in practising
this force on the uninitiated. but—a scullery-maid!—heavens!—there
are so many scullery-maids! one more or
less with the ‘jumps’ will not matter. this is lord
elton’s.”
the carriage stopped before a handsome house situated a
little back from park lane. we were admitted by a man-servant
gorgeous in red plush, white silk hose and powdered
wig, who passed us on majestically to his twin-brother in
height and appearance, though perhaps a trifle more disdainful
in bearing, and he in his turn ushered us upstairs with the
air of one who should say “see to what ignominious degradation
a cruel fate reduces so great a man!” in the drawing-room
we found lord elton, standing on the hearth-rug with
his back to the fire, and directly opposite him in a low arm
chair, reclined an elegantly attired young lady with very small
feet. i mention the feet, because as i entered they were the
most prominent part of her person, being well stretched out
from beneath the would-be concealment of sundry flounced
petticoats towards the warmth of the fire which the earl rather
inconsiderately screened from view. there was another lady
in the room sitting bolt upright with hands neatly folded on
her lap, and to her we were first of all introduced when lord
elton’s own effusive greetings were over.
“charlotte, allow me,—my friends, prince lucio rimânez—mr
geoffrey tempest; gentlemen, my sister-in-law, miss
charlotte fitzroy.”
we bowed; the lady gave us a dignified bend of the head.
she was an imposing looking spinster, with a curious expression
on her features which was difficult to construe. it was
pious and prim, but it also suggested the idea that she must
[p ]
 have seen something excessively improper once in her life and
had never been able to forget it. the pursed-up mouth, the
round pale-coloured eyes and the chronic air of insulted virtue
which seemed to pervade her from head to foot all helped to
deepen this impression. one could not look at miss charlotte
long without beginning to wonder irreverently what it was that
had in her long past youth so outraged the cleanly proprieties
of her nature as to leave such indelible traces on her countenance.
but i have since seen many english women look so,
especially among the particularly ‘high bred,’ old and plain-featured
of the “upper ten.” very different was the saucy
and bright physiognomy of the younger lady to whom we were
next presented, and who, raising herself languidly from her
reclining position, smiled at us with encouraging familiarity as
we made our salutations.
“miss diana chesney,”—said the earl glibly—“you perhaps
know her father, prince,—you must have heard of him
at any rate—the famous nicodemus chesney, one of the
great railway-kings.”
“of course i know him”—responded lucio warmly—“who
does not! i have met him often. a charming man, gifted
with most remarkable humour and vitality—i remember him
perfectly. we saw a good deal of each other in washington.”
“did you though?” said miss chesney with a somewhat
indifferent interest,—“he’s a queer sort of man to my thinking;
rather a cross between the ticket-collector and custom-house
officer combined, you know! i never see him but what i
feel i must start on a journey directly—railways seem to be
written all over him. i tell him so. i say ‘pa, if you didn’t
carry railway-tracks in your face you’d be better looking.’
and you found him humorous, did you?”
laughing at the novel and free way in which this young person
criticised her parent, lucio protested that he did.
“well i don’t,”—confessed miss chesney—“but that may
be because i’ve heard all his stories over and over again,
and i’ve read most of them in books besides,—so they’re
not much account to me. he tells some of them to the
[p ]
 prince of wales whenever he can get a chance,—but he
don’t try them off on me any more. he’s a real clever man
too; he’s made his pile quicker than most. and you’re
quite right about his vitality,—my!—his laugh takes you
into the middle of next week!”
her bright eyes flashed merrily as she took a comprehensive
survey of our amused faces.
“think i’m irreverent, don’t you?” she went on—“but you
know pa’s not a ‘stage parent’ all dressed out in lovely
white hair and benedictions,—he’s just an accommodating
railway-track, and he wouldn’t like to be reverenced. do
sit down, won’t you?”—then turning her pretty head coquettishly
towards her host—“make them sit down, lord elton,—i
hate to see men standing. the superior sex, you know!
besides you’re so tall,” she added, glancing with unconcealed
admiration at lucio’s handsome face and figure, “that it’s
like peering up an apple-tree at the moon to look at you!”
lucio laughed heartily, and seated himself near her—i
followed his example; the old earl still kept his position,
legs a-straddle, on the hearth-rug, and beamed benevolence
upon us all. certainly diana chesney was a captivating
creature; one of those surface-clever american women who
distinctly divert men’s minds without in the least rousing their
passions.
“so you’re the famous mr tempest?” she said, surveying
me critically—“why, it’s simply splendid for you isn’t it? i
always say it’s no use having a heap of money unless you’re
young,—if you’re old, you only want it to fill your doctor’s
pockets while he tries to mend your poor tuckered-out constitution.
i once knew an old lady who was left a legacy of
a hundred thousand pounds when she was ninety-five. poor
old dear, she cried over it. she just had sense enough to
understand what a good time she couldn’t have. she lived
in bed, and her only luxury was a halfpenny bun dipped in
milk for her tea. it was all she cared for.”
“a hundred thousand pounds would go a long way in
buns!” i said smiling.
[p ]“wouldn’t it just!” and the fair diana laughed—“but
i guess you’ll want something a little more substantial for
your cash mr tempest! a fortune in the prime of life is
worth having. i suppose you’re one of the richest men about
just now, aren’t you?”
she put the question in a perfectly naïve frank manner and
seemed to be unconscious of any undue inquisitiveness in it.
“i may be one of the richest,”—i replied, and as i spoke
the thought flashed suddenly across me how recently i had
been one of the poorest!—“but my friend here, the prince,
is far richer than i.”
“is that so!” and she stared straight at lucio, who met
her gaze with an indulgent, half satirical smile—“well now!
i guess pa’s no better than a sort of pauper after all! why,
you must have the world at your feet!”
“pretty much so,”—replied lucio composedly—“but then,
my dear miss chesney, the world is so very easily brought
to one’s feet. surely you know that?”
and he emphasized the words by an expressive look of his
fine eyes.
“i guess you mean compliments,”—she replied unconcernedly—“i
don’t like them as a rule, but i’ll forgive you
this once!”
“do!” said lucio, with one of his dazzling smiles that
caused her to stop for a moment in her voluble chatter and
observe him with mingled fascination and wonderment.
“and you too are young, like mr tempest,”—she resumed
presently.
“pardon me!” interrupted lucio—“i am many years
older.”
“really!” exclaimed lord elton at this juncture—“you
don’t look it, does he charlotte?”
miss fitzroy thus appealed to, raised her elegant tortoise-shell-framed
glasses to her eyes and peered critically at us both.
“i should imagine the prince to be slightly the senior of
mr tempest”—she remarked in precise high-bred accents—“but
only very slightly.”
[p ]“anyhow,” resumed miss chesney “you’re young enough,
to enjoy your wealth aren’t you?”
“young enough, or old enough;—just as you please;”—said
lucio with a careless shrug—“but as it happens—i do
not enjoy it!”
miss chesney’s whole aspect now expressed the most lively
astonishment.
“what does money do for you?” went on lucio, his eyes
dilating with that strange and wistful expression which had
often excited my curiosity—“the world is at your feet,
perhaps; yes—but what a world! what a trumpery clod
of kickable matter! wealth acts merely as a kind of mirror
to show you human nature at its worst. men skulk and
fawn about you, and lie twenty times in as many hours in
the hope to propitiate you and serve their own interests;
princes of the blood willingly degrade themselves and their
position to borrow cash of you,—your intrinsic merit (if you
have any) is thought nothing of,—your full pockets are your
credentials with kings, prime ministers and councillors! you
may talk like a fool, laugh like a hyena and look like a
baboon, but if the chink-chink of your gold be only sufficiently
loud, you may soon find yourself dining with the queen
if such be your ambition. if, on the contrary you happen
to be truly great, brave, patient, and enduring, with a spark
in you of that genius which strengthens life and makes it
better worth living,—if you have thoughts which take shape
in work that shall endure when kingdoms are swept away
like dust before the wind, and if, with all this you are yet
poor in current coin, why then,—you shall be spurned by
all the crowned dummies of the world,—you shall be snubbed
by the affluent starch-maker and the crœsus who lives on a
patent pill,—the tradesman from whom you buy bedsteads
and kitchen ware, can look down upon you with lordly scorn,
for does he not by virtue of his wealth alone, drive a four-in-hand,
and chat on easy and almost patronizing terms with
the prince of wales? the wealthy denizens of snob-land
delight in ignoring nature’s elected noblemen.”
[p ]“but supposing” said miss chesney quickly, “you happen
to be a nature’s nobleman yourself, and have the advantage
of wealth besides, surely you must fairly allow that to be
rather a good thing, mustn’t you?”
lucio laughed a little—
“i will retort upon you in your own words fair lady, and
say ‘i guess you mean compliments.’ what i venture to
imply however, is that even when wealth does fall to the lot
of one of these ‘nature’s noblemen,’ it is not because of his
innate nobility that he wins social distinction. it is simply
because he is rich. that is what vexes me. i for example,
have endless friends who are not my friends so much as the
friends of my income. they do not trouble to inquire as
to my antecedents,—what i am or where i came from is of
no importance. neither are they concerned in how i live
or what i do; whether i am sick or well, happy or unhappy,
is equally with them a matter of indifference. if they knew
more about me, it would perhaps be better in the long run.
but they do not want to know,—their aims are simple and
unconcealed,—they wish to make as much out of me, and
secure as much advantage to themselves by their acquaintance
with me as possible. and i give them their full way,—they
get all they want,—and more!”
his musical voice lingered with a curiously melancholy
impressiveness on the last word,—and this time, not only
miss chesney, but we all, looked at him as though drawn by
some irresistible magnetic spell, and for a moment there was
silence.
“very few people have any real friends,”—said lord elton
presently. “and in that respect i suppose we’re none of us
worse off than socrates, who used to keep two chairs only in
his house ‘one for myself, and another for a friend—when i
find him!’ but you are a universal favourite lucio,—a
most popular fellow—and i think you’re rather hard on
your set. people must look after themselves you know—eh?”
lucio bowed his head gravely.
[p ]“they must indeed,” he replied—“especially as the
latest news of science is that god has given up the
business.”
miss fitzroy looked displeased,—but the earl laughed
uproariously. at that moment a step was heard outside,
approaching the open doorway of the drawing-room, and miss
chesney’s quick ears caught the sound. she shook herself
out of her reclining attitude instantly and sat erect.
“it’s sibyl!” she said with a half-laughing half-apologetic
flash of her brown eyes at us all—“i never can loll before
sibyl!”
my heart beat fast as the woman whom poets might have
called the goddess of their dreams, but whom i was now disposed
to consider as an object of beauty lawfully open to my
purchase, entered, clad in simple white, unrelieved by any
ornaments save a golden waistbelt of antique workmanship,
and a knot of violets nestled among the lace at her bosom.
she looked far lovelier than when i had first seen her at the
theatre; there was a deeper light in her eyes and a more
roseate flush on her cheeks, while her smile as she greeted us
was positively dazzling. something in her presence, her
movements, her manner, sent such a tide of passion through
me that for a moment my brain whirled in a dizzy maze, and
despite the cold calculations i had made in my own mind as
to the certainty i had of winning her for my wife, there was a
wondrous charm of delicate dignity and unapproachableness
about her that caused me for the moment to feel ashamed,
and inclined to doubt even the power of wealth to move this
exquisite lily of maidenhood from her sequestered peace.
ah, what fools men are! how little do we dream of the
canker at the hearts of these women ‘lilies’ that look so pure
and full of grace!
“you are late, sibyl,” said her aunt severely.
“am i?” she responded with languid indifference—“so
sorry! papa, are you an extemporized fire-screen?”
lord elton hastily moved to one side, rendered suddenly
conscious of his selfish monopoly of the blaze.
[p ]“are you not cold, miss chesney?” continued lady sibyl,
in accents of studied courtesy—“would you not like to come
nearer the fire?”
diana chesney had become quite subdued, almost timid
in fact.
“thank-you!”—she murmured, and her eyes drooped with
what might have been called retiring maiden modesty, had
not miss chesney’s qualities soared far beyond that trite
description.
“we heard some shocking news this morning, mr tempest,”
said lady sibyl, looking at lucio rather than at me—“no
doubt you read it in the papers,—an acquaintance of ours,
viscount lynton, shot himself last night.”
i could not repress a slight start. lucio gave me a warning
glance, and took it upon himself to reply.
“yes, i read a brief account of the affair—terrible indeed!
i also knew him slightly.”
“did you? well, he was engaged to a friend of mine,”
went on lady sibyl—“i myself think she has had a lucky
escape, because though he was an agreeable man enough in
society, he was a great gambler, and very extravagant, and
he would have run through her fortune very quickly. but
she cannot be brought to see it in that light,—she is dreadfully
upset. she had set her heart on being a viscountess.”
“i guess,” said miss chesney demurely, with a sly sparkle
of her eyes—“it’s not only americans who run after titles.
since i’ve been over here i’ve known several real nice girls
marry downright mean dough-heads just for the sake of
being called ‘my lady’ or ‘your grace.’ i like a title very
well myself—but i also like a man attached to it.”
the earl smothered a chuckling laugh,—lady sibyl gazed
meditatively into the fire and went on as though she had not
heard.
“of course my friend will have other chances,—she is
young and handsome—but i really think, apart from the
social point of view, that she was a little in love with the
viscount——”
[p ]“nonsense! nonsense!” said her father somewhat testily.
“you always have some romantic notion or other in your
head sibyl,—one ‘season’ ought to have cured you of sentiment—ha-ha-ha!
she always knew he was a dissolute rascal,
and she was going to marry him with her eyes wide open to
the fact. when i read in the papers that he had blown his
brains out in a hansom, i said ‘bad taste—bad taste! spoiling
a poor cabby’s stock-in-trade to satisfy a selfish whim!’
ha-ha!—but i thought it was a good riddance of bad rubbish.
he would have made any woman’s life utterly miserable.”
“no doubt he would!” responded lady sibyl, listlessly;
“but, all the same, there is such a thing as love sometimes.”
she raised her beautiful liquid eyes to lucio’s face, but
he was not looking her way, and her stedfast gaze met mine
instead. what my looks expressed i know not; but i saw
the rich blood mantle warmly in her cheeks, and a tremor
seemed to pass through her frame,—then she grew very pale.
at that moment one of the gorgeous footmen appeared at the
doorway.
“dinner is served, my lud.”
“good!” and the earl proceeded to ‘pair’ us all. “prince,
will you take miss fitzroy,—mr tempest, my daughter falls
to your escort,—i will follow with miss chesney.”
we set off in this order down the stairs, and as i walked
behind lucio with lady sibyl on my arm, i could not help
smiling at the extreme gravity and earnestness with which
he was discussing church matters with miss charlotte, and
the sudden enthusiasm that apparently seized that dignified
spinster at some of his remarks on the clergy, which took the
form of the most affectionate and respectful eulogies, and were
totally the reverse of the ideas he had exchanged with me on
the same subject. some spirit of mischief was evidently moving
him to have a solemn joke with the high-bred lady he
escorted, and i noted his behaviour with a good deal of inward
amusement.
[p ]“then you know the dear canon?” i heard miss charlotte
say.
“most intimately!” replied lucio with fervour—“and i
assure you i am thankful to have the privilege of knowing
him. a truly perfect man!—almost a saint—if not quite!”
“so pure-minded!” sighed the spinster.
“so free from every taint of hypocrisy!” murmured lucio
with intense gravity.
“ah yes! yes indeed! and so——”
here they passed into the dining-room and i could hear
no more. i followed with my beautiful partner, and in another
minute we were all seated at table.
[p ]xii
the dinner went on in the fashion of most dinners
at great houses,—commencing with arctic stiffness
and formality, thawing slightly towards the middle course,
and attaining to just a pleasant warmth of mutual understanding
when ices and dessert gave warning of its approaching
close. conversation at first flagged unaccountably, but
afterwards brightened under lucio’s influence to a certain
gaiety. i did my best to entertain lady sibyl, but found her
like most ‘society’ beauties, somewhat of a vague listener.
she was certainly cold, and in a manner irresponsive,—moreover
i soon decided that she was not particularly clever.
she had not the art of sustaining or appearing to sustain
interest in any one subject; on the contrary, she had, like
many of her class, an irritating habit of mentally drifting
away from you into an absorbed reverie of her own in which
you had no part, and which plainly showed you how little
she cared for anything you or anyone else happened to be
saying. many little random remarks of hers however implied
that in her apparently sweet nature there lurked a vein of
cynicism and a certain contempt for men, and more than
once her light words stung my sense of self-love almost to
resentment, while they strengthened the force of my resolve
to win her and bend that proud spirit of hers to the meekness
befitting the wife of a millionaire and—a genius. a
genius? yes,—god help me!—that is what i judged myself
to be. my arrogance was two-fold,—it arose not only
[p ]
 from what i imagined to be my quality of brain, but also
from the knowledge of what my wealth could do. i was
perfectly positive that i could buy fame,—buy it as easily as
one buys a flower in the market,—and i was more than
positive that i could buy love. in order to commence
proving the truth of this, i threw out a ‘feeler’ towards my
object.
“i believe,” i said suddenly, addressing the earl—“you
used to live in warwickshire at willowsmere court did you
not?”
lord elton flushed an apoplectic red, and swallowed a gulp
of champagne hastily.
“yes-er-yes. i—er had the place for some time,—rather
a bore to keep up,—wants quite an army of
servants.”
“just so;” i replied with a nod of appreciative comprehension—“i
presume it will require a considerable domestic
retinue. i have arranged to purchase it.”
lady sibyl’s frigid composure was at last disturbed—she
looked strangely agitated,—and the earl stared till his eyes
seemed likely to fall out of his head.
“you? you are going to buy willowsmere?” he
ejaculated.
“yes. i have wired to my lawyers to settle the matter as
quickly as possible”—and i glanced at lucio whose steel-bright
eyes were fixed on the earl with curious intentness,—“i
like warwickshire,—and as i shall entertain a great deal i
think the place will suit me perfectly.”
there was a moment’s silence. miss charlotte fitzroy
sighed deeply, and the lace bow on her severely parted hair
trembled visibly. diana chesney looked up with inquisitive
eyes and a little wondering smile.
“sibyl was born at willowsmere,”—said the earl presently
in rather a husky voice.
“a new charm is added to its possession by that knowledge,”—i
said gently, bowing to lady sibyl as i spoke—“have
you many recollections of the place?”
[p ]“indeed, indeed i have!” she answered with a touch of
something like passion vibrating in her accents—“there is
no corner of the world i love so well! i used to play on
the lawns under the old oak-trees, and i always gathered
the first violets and primroses that came out on the banks
of the avon. and when the hawthorn was in full flower
i used to make believe that the park was fairyland and i
the fairy queen——”
“as you were and are!” interposed lucio suddenly.
she smiled and her eyes flashed,—then she went on more
quietly—
“it was all very foolish, but i loved willowsmere, and love
it still. and i often saw in the fields on the other side of
the river which did not belong to the estate, a little girl
about my own age, playing all by herself and making long
daisy-chains and buttercup balls,—a little girl with long
fair curls and a sweet baby face. i wanted to know her
and speak to her, but my nurse would never let me because
she was supposed to be ‘beneath’ me.” lady sibyl’s lip
curled scornfully at this recollection. “yet she was well-born;
she was the orphan child of a very distinguished
scholar and gentleman, and had been adopted by the
physician who attended her mother’s deathbed, she having
no living relatives left to take care of her. and she—that
little fair-haired girl,—was mavis clare.”
as this name was uttered, a sort of hush fell on our party
as though an ‘angelus’ had rung; and lucio looking across
at me with peculiar intentness asked,
“have you never heard of mavis clare, tempest?”
i thought a moment before replying. yes,—i had heard
the name,—connected with literature in some dim and distant
way, but i could not remember when or how. for i
never paid any attention to the names of women who chose
to associate themselves with the arts, as i had the usual
masculine notion that all they did, whether in painting,
music or writing, must of necessity be trash and unworthy
[p ]
 of comment. women, i loftily considered, were created to
amuse men,—not to instruct them.
“mavis clare is a genius,”—lady sibyl said presently—“if
mr tempest has not heard of her, there is no
doubt he will hear. i often regret that i never made her
acquaintance in those old days at willowsmere,—the
stupidity of my nurse often rankles in my mind. ‘beneath
me’—indeed!—and how very much she is above me now!
she still lives down there,—her adopted parents are dead
and she rents the lovely little house they inhabited. she
has bought some extra land about it and improved the place
wonderfully. indeed i have never seen a more ideal poet’s
corner than lily cottage.”
i was silent, feeling somewhat in the background on account
of my ignorance as to the gifts and the position of the
individual they all seemed to recognize as a celebrity of
importance.
“rather an odd name, mavis, isn’t it?”—i at last ventured
to observe.
“yes,—but it suits her wonderfully. she sings quite as
sweetly as any thrush, so she merits her designation.”
“what has she done in literature?” i continued.
“oh,—only a novel!” replied lucio with a smile—“but
it has a quality unusual to novels; it lives! i hope,
tempest, that your forthcoming work will enjoy the same
vitality.”
here lord elton who had been more or less brooding
darkly over his glass of wine ever since i had mentioned
my purchase of willowsmere, roused himself from his
reverie.
“why, god bless my soul!” he exclaimed—“you don’t
mean to tell me you have written a novel mr tempest?”
(was it possible he had never noticed all the prominent
advertisements of my book in every paper, i thought
indignantly!) “what do you want to do that for, with
your immense position?”
[p ]“he hankers after fame!” said lucio half kindly, half
satirically.
“but you’ve got fame!” declared the earl emphatically—“everybody
knows who you are by this time.”
“ah, my dear lord, that is not enough for the aspirations
of my gifted friend”—responded lucio, speaking for me, his
eyes darkening with that mystic shadow of mingled sorrow
and scorn which so frequently clouded their lustrous brilliancy;
“he does not particularly care for the ‘immense position’
that is due to wealth alone, because that does not lift him a
jot higher than maple of tottenham court road. he seeks
to soar beyond the furniture man,—and who shall blame
him? he would be known for that indescribable quality
called genius,—for high thoughts, poetry, divine instincts,
and prophetic probings into the heart of humanity,—in short,
for the power of the pen, which topples down great kingdoms
like card-houses and sticks foolscaps on the heads of
kings. generally it is the moneyless man or woman who is
endowed with this unpurchaseable power,—this independence
of action and indifference to opinion,—the wealthy
seldom do anything but spend or hoard. but tempest
means to unite for once in his own person the two most
strenuously opposed forces in nature,—genius and cash,—or
in other words, god and mammon.”
lady sibyl turned her head towards me;—there was a look
of doubt and wonder on her beautiful face.
“i am afraid,”—she said half smiling, “that the claims of
society will take up too much of your time, mr tempest, to
allow you to continue the writing of books. i remember you
told me the other evening that you were about to publish a
novel. i suppose you were—originally i mean—an author
by profession?”
a curious sense of anger burned dully within me. ‘originally’
an author? was i not one still? was i to be given
credit for nothing but my banking-book? ‘originally’?
why, i had never been an actual ‘author’ till now,—i had
simply been a wandering literary hack,—a stray ‘super’ of
[p ]
 grub street, occasionally engaged to write articles ‘to order’
on any subject that came uppermost, at a starvation rate of
pay, without any visible prospect of rising from that lowest
and dirtiest rung of the literary ladder. i felt myself growing
red, then pale,—and i saw that lucio was looking at me
fixedly.
“i am an author, lady sibyl”—i said at last—“and i hope
i may soon prove my right to be acknowledged as one.
‘author’ is in my opinion, a prouder title than king, and
i do not think any social claims will deter me from following
the profession of literature, which i look upon as the
highest in the world.”
lord elton fidgetted uneasily in his chair.
“but your people”—he said—“your family—are they
literary?”
“no members of my family are now living,”—i answered
somewhat stiffly—“my father was john tempest of rexmoor.”
“indeed!” and the earl’s face brightened considerably—“dear
me, dear me! i used to meet him often in the hunting
field years ago. you come of a fine old stock, sir!—the
tempests of rexmoor are well and honourably known
in county chronicles.”
i said nothing, feeling a trifle heated in temper, though i
could not have quite explained why.
“one begins to wonder,”—said lucio then in his soft
smooth accents—“when one is the descendant of a good
english county family,—a distinct cause for pride!—and
moreover has the still more substantial fact of a large fortune
to support that high lineage, why one should trouble to fight
for merely literary honours! you are far too modest in
your ambitions, tempest!—high-seated as you are upon
bank-notes and bullion, with all the glory of effulgent
county chronicles behind you, you still stoop to clutch the
laurel! fie, my dear fellow! you degrade yourself by
this desire to join the company of the immortals!”
his satirical tone was not lost upon the company; and i,
[p ]
 who saw that in his own special way he was defending the
claims of literature against those of mere place and money,
felt soothed and grateful. the earl looked a trifle
annoyed.
“that’s all very fine,” he said—“but you see it isn’t as if
mr tempest were driven by necessity to write for his
living”—
“one may love work for the work’s sake without any actual
necessity for doing it,”—i interposed—“for example,—this
mavis clare you speak of,—is she,—a woman,—driven
by necessity?”
“mavis clare hasn’t a penny in the world that she does not
earn,”—said lord elton gruffly—“i suppose that if she did
not write she would starve.”
diana chesney laughed.
“i guess she’s a long way off starvation just now,”—she
remarked, her brown eyes twinkling—“why, she’s as proud
as the proudest,—drives in the park in her victoria and pair
with the best in the land, and knows all the ‘swagger’
people. she’s nowhere near grub street i should say. i
hear she’s a splendid business woman, and more than a
match for the publishers all round.”
“well i should rather doubt that,”—said the earl with
a chuckle. “it needs the devil himself to match the
publishers.”
“you are right!”—said lucio—“in fact i daresay that in
the various ‘phases’ or transmigrations of the spirit into
differing forms of earthy matter, the devil (should he exist
at all) has frequently become a publisher,—and a particularly
benevolent publisher too!—by way of diversion.”
we all smiled.
“well, i should imagine mavis clare to be a match for
anybody or anything,”—said lady sibyl—“of course she is
not rich,—but she spends her money wisely and to effective
advantage. i do not know her personally,—i wish i did;
but i have read her books, which are quite out of the
[p ]
 common. she is a most independent creature too; quite
indifferent to opinions”—
“i suppose she must be extremely plain then”—i observed;
“plain women always try to do something more or less
startling in order to attract the attention denied to their
personality.”
“true,—but that would not apply to miss clare. she is
pretty, and knows how to dress besides.”
“such a virtue in literary women!” exclaimed diana
chesney—“some of them are such dowdies!”
“most people of culture,” went on lady sibyl—“in our
set at any rate, are accustomed to look upon miss clare as
quite an exception to the usual run of authors. she is
charming in herself as well as in her books, and she goes
everywhere. she writes with inspiration,—and always has
something so new to say—”
“that of course all the critics are down upon her?” queried
lucio.
“oh, naturally! but we never read reviews.”
“nor anyone else i should hope,”—said lord elton with a
laugh—“except the fellows who write them, ha—ha—ha! i
call it damned impertinence—excuse the word—on the part
of a newspaper hack to presume to teach me what i ought
to read, or what i ought to appreciate. i’m quite capable
of forming my own judgment on any book that ever was
written. but i avoid all the confounded ‘new’ poets,—avoid
‘em like poison, sir—ha—ha! anything but a ‘new’
poet; the old ones are good enough for me! why sir,
these reviewers who give themselves such airs with a
pennorth of ink and a pen, are mostly half-grown half-educated
boys who for a couple of guineas a week undertake
to tell the public what they think of such and such a
book, as if anyone cared a jot about their green opinions!
ridiculous—quite ridiculous!—what do they take the public
for i wonder! editors of responsible journals ought to know
better than to employ such young coxcombs just because
they can get them cheap——”
[p ]at this juncture the butler came up behind his master’s
chair and whispered a few words. the earl’s brow clouded,—then
he addressed his sister-in-law,—
“charlotte, lady elton sends word that she will come into
the drawing-room to-night. perhaps you had better go and
see that she is made comfortable.” and, as miss charlotte
rose, he turned to us saying—“my wife is seldom well enough
to see visitors, but this evening she feels inclined for a little
change and distraction from the monotony of her sick-room.
it will be very kind of you two gentlemen to entertain her,—she
cannot speak much, but her hearing and sight are excellent,
and she takes great interest in all that is going on.
dear dear me!” and he heaved a short troubled sigh—“she
used to be one of the brightest of women!”
“the sweet countess!” murmured miss chesney with
patronizing tenderness—“she is quite lovely still!”
lady sibyl glanced at her with a sudden haughty frown
which showed me plainly what a rebellious temper the young
beauty held in control; and i fell straightway more in love,—according
to my idea of love,—than ever. i confess i like a
woman to have a certain amount of temper. i cannot endure
your preternaturally amiable female who can find nothing in
all the length or breadth of the globe to move her to any
other expression than a fatuous smile. i love to see the
danger-flash in bright eyes,—the delicate quiver of pride in the
lines of a lovely mouth, and the warm flush of indignation on
fair cheeks. it all suggests spirit, and untamed will; and
rouses in a man the love of mastery that is born in his nature,
urging him to conquer and subdue that which seems unconquerable.
and all the desire of such conquest was
strong within me, when at the close of dinner i rose
and held the door open for the ladies to pass out of the
room. as the fair sibyl went, the violets she wore at her
bosom dropped. i picked them up and made my first
move.
“may i keep these?” i said in a low tone.
her breath came and went quickly,—but she looked
[p ]
 straight in my eyes with a smile that perfectly comprehended
my hidden meaning.
“you may!” she answered.
i bowed,—closed the door behind her, and secreting the
flowers, returned, well-satisfied, to my place at table.
[p ]xiii
left with myself and lucio, lord elton threw off
all reserve, and became not only familiar, but fawning
in his adulation of us both. an abject and pitiable
desire to please and propitiate us expressed itself in his every
look and word; and i firmly believe that if i had coolly and
brutally offered to buy his fair daughter by private treaty for
a hundred thousand pounds, that sum to be paid down to him
on the day of marriage, he would have gladly agreed to sell.
apart however from his personal covetousness, i felt and
knew that my projected courtship of lady sibyl would of
necessity resolve itself into something more or less of a
market bargain, unless indeed i could win the girl’s love. i
meant to try and do this, but i fully realized how difficult,
nay, almost impossible it would be for her to forget the fact
of my unhampered and vast fortune, and consider me for myself
alone. herein is one of the blessings of poverty which
the poor are frequently too apt to forget. a moneyless man
if he wins a woman’s love knows that such love is genuine
and untainted by self-interest; but a rich man can never be
truly certain of love at all. the advantages of a wealthy
match are constantly urged upon all marriageable girls by
both their parents and friends,—and it would have to be a
very unsophisticated feminine nature indeed that could contemplate
a husband possessing five millions of money, without
a touch of purely interested satisfaction. a very wealthy
man can never be sure even of friendship,—while the highest,
[p ]
 strongest and noblest kind of love is nearly always denied to
him, in this way carrying out the fulfilment of those strange
but true words—“how hardly shall he that is a rich man,
enter the kingdom of heaven!” the heaven of a
woman’s love, tried and proved true through disaster and
difficulty,—of her unflinching faithfulness and devotion in
days of toil and bitter anguish,—of her heroic self-abnegation,
sweetness and courage through the darkest hours of doubt
and disappointment;—this bright and splendid side of
woman’s character is reserved by divine ordinance for the
poor man. the millionaire can indeed wed whomsoever he
pleases among all the beauties of the world,—he can deck his
wife in gorgeous apparel, load her with jewels and look upon
her in all the radiance of her richly adorned loveliness as one
may look upon a perfect statue or matchless picture,—but he
can never reach the deeper secrets of her soul or probe the
well-springs of her finer nature. i thought this even thus
early in the beginning of my admiration for lady sibyl elton,
though i did not then dwell upon it as i have often done
since. i was too elated with the pride of wealth to count the
possibilities of subtle losses amid so many solid gains; and i
enjoyed to the full and with a somewhat contemptuous malice
the humble prostration of a ‘belted earl’ before the dazzling
mine of practically unlimited cash as represented to him in
the persons of my brilliant comrade and myself. i took a
curious sort of pleasure in patronizing him, and addressed
him with a protecting air of indulgent kindness whereat he
seemed gratified. inwardly i laughed as i thought how
differently matters would have stood, supposing i had been
indeed no more than ‘author’! i might have proved to be
one of the greatest writers of the age, but if, with that, i had
been poor or only moderately well off, this same half bankrupt
earl who privately boarded an american heiress for two
thousand guineas a year, would have deemed it a ‘condescension’
to so much as invite me to his house,—would
have looked down upon me from his titled nothingness and
perhaps carelessly alluded to me as ‘a man who writes—er—yes—er—rather
[p ]
 clever i believe!’ and then would have
thought no more about me. for this very cause as ‘author’
still, though millionaire, i took a fantastic pleasure in humiliating
his lordship as much as possible, and i found the best
way to do this was to talk about willowsmere. i saw that he
winced at the very name of his lost estate, and that notwithstanding
this, he could not avoid showing his anxiety as to
my intentions with regard to its occupation. lucio, whose
wisdom and foresight had suggested my becoming the purchaser
of the place, assisted me in the most adroit fashion to
draw him out and to make his character manifest, and by the
time we had finished our cigars and coffee i knew that the
‘proud’ earl of elton, who could trace his lineage to the
earliest days of the crusaders, was as ready to bend his back
and crawl in the dust for money as the veriest hotel-porter
expectant of a sovereign ‘tip.’ i had never entertained a
high opinion of the aristocracy, and on this occasion it was
certainly not improved, but remembering that the spendthrift
nobleman beside me was the father of lady sibyl, i treated
him on the whole with more respect than his mean and
grasping nature deserved.
on returning to the drawing-room after dinner i was struck
by the chill weirdness that seemed to be imparted to it by the
addition of lady elton’s couch, which, placed near the fire,
suggested a black sarcophagus in bulk and outline. it was
practically a narrow bed on wheels, though partially disguised
by a silk coverlet draped skilfully so as to somewhat hide its
coffin-like shape. the extended figure of the paralysed
countess herself presented a death-like rigidity; but her face
as she turned it towards us on our entrance, was undisfigured
as yet and distinctly handsome, her eyes especially being
large, clear, and almost brilliant. her daughter introduced
us both in a low tone, and she moved her head slightly
by way of acknowledgment, studying us curiously the while.
“well, my dear”—said lord elton briskly, “this is an
unexpected pleasure! it is nearly three months since you
honoured us with your company. how do you feel?”
[p ]“better,” she replied slowly, yet distinctly, her gaze now
fixed with wondering intentness on prince rimânez.
“mother found the room rather cold”—explained lady
sibyl—“so we brought her as near to the fire as possible. it
is cold”—and she shivered—“i fancy it must be freezing
hard.”
“where is diana?” asked the earl, looking about in search
of that lively young lady.
“miss chesney has gone to her own room to write a letter;”
replied his daughter somewhat frigidly—“she will be back
directly.”
at this moment lady elton feebly raised her hand and
pointed to lucio, who had moved aside to answer some
question asked of him by miss charlotte.
“who is that?” she murmured.
“why, mother dear, i told you”—said lady sibyl gently—“that
is prince lucio rimânez, papa’s great friend.”
the countess’s pallid hand still remained lifted, as though
it were frozen in air.
“what is he?” the slow voice again inquired,—and then
the hand dropped suddenly like a dead thing.
“now helena, you must not excite yourself”—said her
husband, bending over her couch with real or assumed anxiety;
“surely you remember all i have told you about the prince?
and also about this gentleman, mr geoffrey tempest?”
she nodded, and her eyes, turning reluctantly away from
rimânez, regarded me fixedly.
“you are a very young man to be a millionaire,”—were
her next words, uttered with evident difficulty—“are you
married?”
i smiled, and answered in the negative. her looks wandered
from me to her daughter’s face,—then back to me again with
a singularly intent expression. finally, the potent magnetism
of lucio’s presence again attracted her, and she indicated
him by a gesture.
“ask your friend ... to come here ... and speak to
me.”
[p ]rimânez turned instinctively at her request, and with his
own peculiar charm and gallant grace of bearing, came to the
side of the paralysed lady, and taking her hand, kissed it.
“your face seems familiar to me,”—she said, speaking
now, as it seemed, with greater ease—“have i ever met you
before?”
“dear lady, you may have done so”—he replied in dulcet
tones and with a most captivating gentleness of manner—“it
occurs to me, now i think of it, that years ago, i saw once,
as a passing vision of loveliness, in the hey-day of youth and
happiness, helena fitzroy, before she was countess of elton.”
“you must have been a mere boy—a child,—at that time!”
she murmured faintly smiling.
“not so!—for you are still young, madame, and i am old.
you look incredulous? alas, why is it i wonder, i may not
look the age i am! most of my acquaintances spend a great
part of their lives in trying to look the age they are not; and
i never came across a man of fifty who was not proud to be
considered thirty-nine. my desires are more laudable,—yet
honourable eld refuses to impress itself upon my features.
it is quite a sore point with me i assure you.”
“well, how old are you really?” asked lady sibyl smiling
at him.
“ah, i dare not tell you!” he answered, returning the smile;
“but i ought to explain that in my countings i judge age
by the workings of thought and feeling, more than by the
passing of years. thus it should not surprise you to hear
that i feel myself old,—old as the world!”
“but there are scientists who say that the world is young;”
i observed, “and that it is only now beginning to feel its
forces and put forth its vigour.”
“such optimistic wise-acres are wrong,” he answered,—“the
world is a veritable husk of a planet; humanity has
nearly completed all its allotted phases, and the end is
near.”
“the end?” echoed lady sibyl,—“do you believe the
world will ever come to an end?”
[p ]“i do, most certainly. or, to be more correct, it will not
actually perish, but will simply change. and the change
will not agree with the constitution of its present inhabitants.
they will call the transformation the day of judgment. i
should imagine it would be a fine sight.”
the countess gazed at him wonderingly,—lady sibyl
seemed amused.
“i would rather not witness it,”—said lord elton gruffly.
“oh, why?” and rimânez looked about with quite a cheerful
air—“a final glimpse of the planet ere we ascend or descend
to our future homes elsewhere, would be something
to remember! madame”—here he addressed lady elton;
“are you fond of music?”
the invalid smiled gratefully, and bent her head in acquiescence.
miss chesney had just entered the room and heard
the question.
“do you play?” she exclaimed vivaciously, touching him
on the arm with her fan.
he bowed. “i do. in an erratic sort of fashion. i also
sing. music has always been one of my passions. when i
was very young,—ages ago,—i used to imagine i could hear
the angel israfel chanting his strophes amid the golden glow
of heavenly glory,—himself white-winged and wonderful, with
a voice out-ringing beyond the verge of paradise!”
as he spoke, a sudden silence fell upon us all. something
in his accent touched my heart to a strange sense of sorrow
and yearning, and the countess of elton’s dark eyes, languid
with long suffering, grew soft as though with repressed tears.
“sometimes,” he continued more lightly—“just at odd
moments—i like to believe in paradise. it is a relief, even
to a hardened sinner like myself, to fancy that there may
exist something in the way of a world better than this one.”
“surely sir,” said miss charlotte fitzroy severely—“you
believe in heaven?”
he looked at her and smiled slightly.
“madame, forgive me! i do not believe in the clerical
heaven. i know you will be angry with me for this frank
[p ]
 confession! but i cannot picture the angels in white
smocks with goose wings, or the deity as a somewhat
excitable personage with a beard. personally i should
decline to go to any heaven which was only a city with
golden streets; and i should object to a sea of glass, resenting
it as a want of invention on the part of the creative
intelligence. but——do not frown, dear miss fitzroy!—i
do believe in heaven all the same,—a different kind of
heaven,—i often see it in my dreams!”
he paused, and again we were all silent, gazing at him.
lady sibyl’s eyes indeed, rested upon him with such absorbed
interest, that i became somewhat irritated, and was glad, when
turning towards the countess once more, he said quietly.
“shall i give you some music now, madame?”
she murmured assent, and followed him with a vaguely
uneasy glance as he crossed over to the grand piano and sat
down. i had never heard him either play or sing; in fact so
far as his accomplishments went, i knew nothing of him as
yet except that he was a perfect master of the art of horsemanship.
with the first few bars he struck i half started from
my chair in amazement;—could a mere pianoforte produce
such sounds?—or was there some witchery hidden in the
commonplace instrument, unguessed by any other performer?
i stared around me, bewildered,—i saw miss charlotte drop
her knitting abstractedly,—diana chesney, lying lazily back
in one corner of the sofa, half closed her eyelids in dreamy
ecstasy,—lord elton stood near the fire resting one arm on
the mantelpiece and shading his fuzzy brows with his hand,—and
lady sibyl sat beside her mother, her lovely face pale
with emotion, while on the worn features of the invalided lady
there was an expression of mingled pain and pleasure difficult
to describe. the music swelled into passionate cadence,—melodies
crossed and re-crossed each other like rays of light
glittering among green leaves,—voices of birds and streams
and tossing waterfalls chimed in with songs of love and playful
merriment;—anon came wilder strains of grief and angry
clamour; cries of despair were heard echoing through the
[p ]
 thunderous noise of some relentless storm,—farewells everlastingly
shrieked amid sobs of reluctant shuddering agony;—and
then, as i listened, before my eyes a black mist gathered
slowly, and i thought i saw great rocks bursting asunder into
flame, and drifting islands in a sea of fire,—faces, wonderful,
hideous, beautiful, peered at me out of a darkness denser than
night, and in the midst of this there came a tune, complete in
sweetness and suggestion,—a piercing sword-like tune that
plunged into my very heart and rankled there,——my breath
failed me,—my senses swam,—i felt that i must move, speak,
cry out, and implore that this music, this horribly insidious
music should cease ere i swooned with the voluptuous poison
of it,—when, with a full chord of splendid harmony that rolled
out upon the air like a breaking wave, the intoxicating sounds
ebbed away into silence. no one spoke,—our hearts were
yet beating too wildly with the pulsations roused by that
wondrous lyric storm. diana chesney was the first to break
the spell.
“well, that beats everything i’ve ever heard!” she murmured
tremulously.
i could say nothing,—i was too occupied with my own
thoughts. something in the music had instilled itself into
my blood, or so i fancied, and the clinging subtle sweetness
of it, moved me to strange emotions that were neither wise, nor
worthy of a man. i looked at lady sibyl; she was very
pale,—her eyes were cast down and her hands were trembling.
on a sudden impulse i rose and went to rimânez where he
still sat at the piano, his hands dumbly wandering over the keys.
“you are a great master”—i said—“a wonderful performer!
but do you know what your music suggests?”
he met my fixed gaze, shrugged his shoulders, and shook
his head.
“crime!” i whispered—“you have roused in me evil
thoughts of which i am ashamed. i did not think that was
possible to so divine an art.”
he smiled, and his eyes glittered with the steely brightness
of stars on a wintry night.
[p ]“art takes its colours from the mind, my dear friend;”—he
said—“if you discover evil suggestions in my music, the
evil, i fear, must be in your own nature.”
“or in yours!” i said quickly.
“or in mine;”—he agreed coldly—“i have often told you
i am no saint.”
i stood hesitatingly, looking at him. for one moment his
great personal beauty appeared hateful to me, though i knew
not why. then the feeling of distrust and repulsion slowly
passed, leaving me humiliated and abashed.
“pardon me, lucio!” i murmured regretfully—“i spoke
in haste; but truly your music almost put me in a state of
frenzy,—i never heard anything in the least like it——”
“nor i,”—said lady sibyl, who just then moved towards
the piano—“it was marvellous! do you know, it quite
frightened me?”
“i am sorry!” he answered with a penitent air—“i know
i am quite a failure as a pianist—i am not sufficiently
‘restrained,’ as the press men would say.”
“a failure? good god!” exclaimed lord elton at this
juncture—“why, if you played like that in public, you’d drive
everyone frantic!”
“with alarm?” queried lucio, laughing—“or with
disgust?”
“nonsense! you know what i mean very well. i have
always had a contempt for the piano as an instrument, but
by jove! i never heard such music as yours even in a full
orchestra. it is extraordinary!—it is positively magnificent!
where in the world did you study?”
“in nature’s conservatoire;”—replied rimânez lazily.
“my first ‘maestro’ was an amiable nightingale. he,
singing on a branch of fir when the moon was full,
explained with liquid-noted patience, how to construct
and produce a pure roulade, cadenza and trill,—and
when i had learned thus far, he showed me all the most
elaborate methods of applying rhythmic tune to the upward
and downward rush of the wind, thus supplying me with
[p ]
 perfect counterpoint. chords i learned from old neptune,
who was good enough to toss a few of his largest billows to
the shore for my special benefit. he nearly deafened me
with his instructions, being somewhat excitable and loud-voiced,—but
on finding me an apt pupil, he drew back his
waves to himself with so much delicacy among the pebbles
and sand, that at once i mastered the secret of playing
arpeggi. once too i had a finishing lesson from a dream,—a
mystic thing with wild hair and wings—it sang one word
in my ears, and the word was unpronounceable in mortal
speech,—but after many efforts i discovered it lurking in the
scale of sound. the best part of it all was, that my instructors
asked no fees!”
“i think you are a poet as well as a musician,”—said lady
sibyl.
“a poet! spare me!—my dear young lady, why are you so
cruel as to load me with so vile an imputation! better be
a murderer than a poet,—one is treated with much more
respect and courteous consideration,—by the press at anyrate.
the murderer’s breakfast-menu will be given due
place in many of the most estimable journals,—but the
poet’s lack of both breakfast and dinner will be deemed his
fitting reward. call me a live-stock producer, a horse-breeder,
a timber-merchant,—anything but a poet! why
even tennyson became an amateur milkman to somewhat
conceal and excuse the shame and degradation of writing
verse!”
we all laughed.
“well, you must admit,” said lord elton, “that we’ve had
rather too much of poets lately. it’s no wonder we’re sick
of them, and that poetry has fallen into disrepute. poets
are such a quarrelsome lot too—effeminate, puling, unmanly
humbugs!”
“you are speaking of the newly ‘discovered’ ones of
course,” said lucio—“yes, they are a weedy collection. i
have sometimes thought that out of pure philanthropy i
would start a bon-bon manufactory, and employ them to
[p ]
 write mottoes for the crackers. it would keep them out of
mischief and provide them with a little pocket-money, for as
matters stand they do not make a farthing by their books.
but i do not call them ‘poets’ at all,—they are mere
rhymers. one or two real poets do exist, but, like the
prophets of scripture, they are not ‘in society,’ nor can they
get their logs rolled by any of their contemporaries. they
are not favourites with any ‘set’; that is why i am afraid my
dear friend tempest will never be accepted as the genius he
is; society will be too fond of him to let him go down into
dust and ashes to gather the laurel.”
“it is not necessary to go down into dust and ashes for
that,” i said.
“i assure you it is!—” he answered gaily—“positively
imperative. the laurel flourishes best so,—it will not grow
in a hot-house.”
at that moment diana chesney approached.
“lady elton would like to hear you sing, prince—” she
said—“will you give us that pleasure? do! something
quite simple, you know,—it will set our nerves straight after
your terribly beautiful music! you’d hardly believe it perhaps,—but
i really feel quite unstrung!”
he folded his hands with a droll air of penitence.
“forgive me!” he said, “i’m always, as the church service
says, doing those things i ought not to do.”
miss chesney laughed, a trifle nervously.
“oh, i forgive you!” she replied—“on condition that you
sing.”
“i obey!” and with that he turned again to the piano, and
playing a strange wild minor accompaniment sang the following
stanzas:
sleep, my belovëd, sleep!
be patient!—we shall keep
our secret closely hid
beneath the coffin-lid,—
there is no other place in earth or air
for such a love as ours, or such despair!
[p ]
 and neither hell nor heaven shall care to win
our loathëd souls, rejoicing in their sin!
sleep!—for my hand is sure,—
the cold steel bright and pure
strikes through thy heart and mine
shedding our blood like wine;—
sin’s sweetness is too sweet, and if the shame
of love must be our curse, we hurl the blame
back on the gods who gave us love with breath
and tortured us from passion into death!
this strange song, sung in the most glorious of baritones,
full and rich, and vibrating with power and sweetness,
had a visibly thrilling effect upon us all. again we were
struck dumb with surprise and something like fear,—and again
diana chesney broke the silence.
“you call that simple!” she said, half petulantly.
“quite so. love and death are the simplest things in the
world”—replied lucio.—“the ballad is a mere trifle,—it
is entitled ‘the last love-song’ and is supposed to be
the utterance of a lover about to kill his mistress and himself.
such events happen every day,—you know that by
the newspapers,—they are perfectly common-place——”
he was interrupted by a sharp clear voice ringing imperatively
across the room—
“where did you learn that song?”
[p ]xiv
it was the paralysed countess who spoke. she had
managed to partly raise herself on her couch, and her
face expressed positive terror. her husband hurried to
her side,—and, with a curiously cynical smile on his lips,
rimânez rose from the piano. miss charlotte, who had sat
rigidly upright and silent for some time, hastened to attend
upon her sister, but lady elton was singularly excited, and
appeared to have gained a sudden access of unnatural vigour.
“go away,—i’m not ill,”—she said impatiently—“i feel
better,—much better than i have done for months. the
music does me good.” and addressing her husband, she
added—“ask your friend to come and sit here by me,—i
want to talk to him. he has a magnificent voice,—and—i
know that song he sang,—i remember reading it—in a
manuscript album—long ago. i want to know where he
found it—”
rimânez here advanced with his gentle tread and courteous
bearing, and lord elton gave him a chair beside the invalid.
“you are working miracles on my wife,”—he said—“i
have not seen her so animated for years.”
and leaving the two to talk, he crossed over to where lady
sibyl, myself and miss chesney were all seated in a group,
chatting more or less unrestrainedly.
“i have just been expressing the hope that you and your
daughter will pay me a visit at willowsmere, lord elton,”
i said.
[p ]his brows contracted a little, but he forced a smile. “we
shall be delighted,”—he mumbled—“when do you take
possession?”
“as soon as it is at all feasible”—i replied—“i shall wait
in town till the next levée is over, as both my friend and
myself have arranged to be presented.”
“oh—ah—yes!—er—yes! that is always advisable.
and it’s not half such a troublesome business as a drawing-room
is for the ladies. it’s soon over,—and low bodices
are not de rigeur—ha—ha—ha! who is your presenter?”
i named a distinguished personage, closely connected with
the court, and the earl nodded.
“a very good man,—you could not have a better”—he
said complacently—“and this book of yours,—when does it
come out?”
“next week.”
“we must get it,—we must certainly get it,”—said lord
elton, assuming interest,—“sybil, you must put it down on
your library list.”
she assented, though, as i thought a trifle indifferently.
“on the contrary you must allow me to present it to you;”
i said—“it will be a pleasure to me which i hope you will
not deny.”
“you are very kind,”—she answered, lifting her beautiful
eyes to mine as she spoke—“but the librarian at mudie’s is
sure to send it—he knows i read everything. though i confess
i never buy any books except those by mavis clare.”
again that woman’s name! i felt annoyed, but took care
not to show my annoyance.
“i shall be jealous of mavis clare,” i said playfully.
“most men are!” she replied quietly.
“you are indeed an enthusiastic partisan of hers!” i
exclaimed, somewhat surprised.
“yes, i suppose i am. i like to see any member of my
sex distinguish herself as nobly as she does. i have no
genius of my own, and that is one of the reasons why i
honour it so much in other women.”
[p ]i was about to make some suitable compliment by way of
response to this remark, when we were all violently startled
from our seats by a most horrible cry,—a gasping scream such
as might be wrung from some tortured animal. aghast at
the sound we stood for a moment inert, staring at rimânez,
who came quickly towards us with an air of grave concern.
“i am afraid,” he said softly—“that the countess is not so
well,—perhaps you had better go to her—”
another shriek interrupted his words, and transfixed with
horror we saw lady elton struggling in the throes of some
sudden and terrific convulsion, her hands beating the air as if
she were fighting with an unseen enemy. in one second her
face underwent such hideous contortions as robbed it of all
human semblance, and between the agonized pantings of her
difficult breath, her half-choked voice could be heard uttering
wild cries—
“mercy!—mercy!—oh god—god! tell sibyl!—pray—pray
to god,—pray—”
and with that she fell heavily back, speechless and unconscious.
all was instant confusion. lady sibyl rushed to her
mother’s side, with miss charlotte,—diana chesney hung
back trembling and afraid,—lord elton sprang to the bell and
rang it furiously.
“fetch the doctor!” he cried to the startled servant—“lady
elton has had another shock! she must be taken to
her room at once!”
“can i be of any service?” i inquired, with a side-glance
at rimânez, who stood gravely apart, a statuesquely composed
figure of silence.
“no no,—thanks all the same!” and the earl pressed my
hand gratefully—“she should not have come downstairs,—it
has been too exciting for her. sybil, don’t look at her, my
dear—it will only unnerve you,—miss chesney, pray go to
your room,—charlotte can do all that is possible——”
as he spoke two of the men-servants came in to carry the
insensible countess upstairs,—and as they slowly bore her
[p ]
 on her coffin-like couch past me, one of them drew the coverlet
across her face to conceal it. but not so quickly that i
could not see the awful change impressed upon it,—the indelible
horror that was stamped on the drawn features,—horror
such as surely never was seen except in a painter’s idea
of some lost soul in torment. the eyes were rolled up and
fixed in their sockets like balls of glass, and in them also was
frozen the same frenzied desperate look of fear. it was a
dreadful face!—so dreadful in its ghastly immovableness that
i was all at once reminded of my hideous vision of the previous
night, and the pallid countenances of the three phantoms
that had scared me in my sleep. lady elton’s looks now
resembled theirs! sickened and appalled i averted my eyes,
and was glad to see rimânez taking farewell of his host, the
while he expressed his regret and sympathy with him in his
domestic affliction. i myself, approaching lady sibyl, pressed
her cold and trembling hand in mine, and respectfully kissed it.
“i am deeply sorry!” i murmured—“i wish i could do
anything to console you!”
she looked at me with dry calm eyes.
“thank-you. but the doctors have always said that my
mother would have another shock depriving her of speech.
it is very sad; she will probably live for some years like
that.”
i again expressed my sympathy.
“may i come and inquire about you all to-morrow?” i
asked.
“it will be very kind of you,”—she answered quietly.
“shall i see you if i come?” i said in a lower tone.
“if you wish it,—certainly!”
our eyes met; and i knew by instinct that she read my
thoughts. i pressed her hand again and was not repulsed,—then
bowing profoundly, i left her to make my adieux to lord
elton and miss chesney, who seemed terribly upset and
frightened. miss charlotte fitzroy had left the room in
attendance on her sister, and she did not return to bid us
good-night. rimânez lingered a moment behind me to say
[p ]
 another word or two to the earl, and when he joined me in
the hall and threw on his opera-coat, he was smiling to himself
somewhat singularly.
“an unpleasant end for helena, countess of elton”—he
said, when we were in our brougham, driving away—“paralysis
is perhaps the worst of all the physical punishments that can
befall a ‘rapid’ lady.”
“was she ‘rapid’?”
“well,—perhaps ‘rapid’ is too mild a term, but i can find
no other;”—he answered—“when she was young,—she is
barely fifty now,—she did everything that could be done by
woman at her worst and wildest. she had scores of lovers,—and
i believe one of them cleared off her husband’s turf-debts,—the
earl consenting gladly,—on a rather pressing
occasion.”
“what disgraceful conduct!” i exclaimed.
he looked at me with an expression of cynical amusement.
“think so? the ‘upper ten’ quite condone that sort of
thing in their own set now-a-days. it is all right. if a lady
has lovers, and her husband beams benevolence on the
situation what can be said? nothing. how very tender
your conscience is, geoffrey!”
i sat silent, thinking. my companion lit a cigarette and
offered me one. i took it mechanically without lighting it.
“i made a mistake this evening,”—he went on—“i should
not have sung that ‘last love-song.’ the fact is, the words
were written by one of her ladyship’s former admirers, a man
who was something of a poet in his way,—and she had an
idea that she was the only person living who had ever seen
the lines. she wanted to know if i knew the man who
composed them, and i was able to say that i did—very
intimately. i was just explaining how it was, and why i
knew him so well, when the distressing attack of convulsions
came on, and finished our conversation.”
“she looked horrible!” i said.
“the paralysed helen of a modern troy? yes,—her
countenance at the last was certainly not attractive. beauty
[p ]
 combined with wantonness frequently ends in the drawn
twitch, fixed eye and helpless limbs of life-in-death. it is
nature’s revenge on the outraged body,—and do you know,
eternity’s revenge on the impure soul is extremely similar?”
“what do you know about it?” i said, smiling in spite of
myself as i looked at his fine face, expressive of perfect health
and splendid intellectuality—“your absurd fancies about the
soul are the only traces of folly i discover in you.”
“really? well i am glad i have something of the fool in
my disposition,—foolishness being the only quality that
makes wisdom possible. i confess i have odd, very odd
notions about the soul.”
“i will excuse them—“ i said, laughing—god forgive me,
in my own insensate blind conceit,—the while he regarded
me fixedly—“in fact i will excuse anything for the sake of
your voice. i do not flatter you, lucio,—you sing like an
angel.”
“don’t use impossible comparisons;”—he replied—“have
you ever heard an angel sing?”
“yes!” i answered smiling—“i have,—this very night!”
he turned deadly pale.
“a very open compliment!” he said, forcing a laugh,—and
with almost rough haste, he suddenly let down the window of
the carriage though the night was bitter cold—“this vehicle
is suffocating me,—let us have some air. see how the stars
are shining!—like great crown jewels—deity’s regalia!
hard frost, like hard times, brings noble works into prominence.
yonder, far off, is a star you can hardly perceive;
red as a cinder at times and again blue as the lightning,—i
can always discover it, though many cannot. it is algol,—judged
by superstitious folk to be an evil star. i love it
chiefly on account of its bad reputation,—it is no doubt
much maligned. it may be a cold quarter of hell where
weeping spirits sit frozen in ice made of their own congealed
tears,—or it may be a preparatory school for heaven—who
knows! yonder too, shines venus,—your star geoffrey!—for
you are in love my friend!—come confess it! are you not?”
[p ]“i am not sure;”—i answered slowly—“the phrase ‘in
love’ scarcely describes my present feeling....”
“you have dropped these,”—he said suddenly, picking up
a fast fading knot of violets from the floor of the brougham
and holding them towards me. he smiled, as i uttered an
exclamation of annoyance. they were lady sibyl’s flowers
which i had inadvertently let fall, and i saw he knew it. i
took them from his hand in silence.
“my dear fellow, do not try to hide your intentions from
your best friend,”—he said seriously and kindly—“you
wish to marry the earl of elton’s beautiful daughter, and
you shall. trust me!—i will do everything i can to promote
your desire.”
“you will?” i exclaimed with unconcealed delight, for i
fully recognised the influence he had over sibyl’s father.
“i will, i promise—” he answered gravely—“i assure
you that such a marriage would be one after my own heart.
i’ll do all i can for you,—and i have made many matches
in my time!”
my heart beat high with triumph,—and when we parted
that night i wrung his hand fervently and told him i was
devoutly grateful to the fates for sending me such a good
friend as he was.
“grateful to—whom did you say?” he asked with a whimsical
look.
“to the fates!”
“are you really? they are very ugly sisters i believe.
perhaps they were your ghostly visitors of last night!”
“god forbid!” i ejaculated.
“ah! god never forbids the fulfilment of his own laws!”
he answered—“to do so he would have to destroy himself.”
“if he exists at all!” i said carelessly.
“true! if—!”
and with this, we separated to our different quarters in the
‘grand.’
[p ]xv
after that evening i became a regular and welcome
visitor at lord elton’s house, and was soon on
terms of the most friendly intimacy with all the members of
his family, including even the severely pious miss charlotte
fitzroy. it was not difficult for me to see that my matrimonial
aspirations were suspected,—and though the encouragement
i received from lady sibyl herself was so slight as to
make me doubtful whether after all my hopes of winning her
would ever be realized, the earl made no secret of his delight
at the idea of securing me as a son-in-law. such wealth as
mine was not to be met with every day,—and even had i
been a blackleg of the turf or a retired jockey, instead of an
‘author,’ i should, with five millions at my back, have been
considered quite as desirable a suitor for the lady sibyl’s
hand. rimânez scarcely ever went with me to the eltons’
now, pleading as excuse much pressing business and many
social engagements. i was not altogether sorry for this.
greatly as i admired and honoured him, his extraordinary
physical beauty and fascination of manner were in dangerous
contrast to my merely ‘ordinary good-looking’ personality,
and it seemed to me impossible that any woman, seeing much
of him, could be expected to give me the preference. all the
same i had no fear that he would ever voluntarily become my
rival,—his antipathy to women was too deep-rooted and sincere
for that. on this point indeed his feelings were so strong and
passionate that i often wondered why the society sirens who
[p ]
 eagerly courted his attention remained so blind and unconscious
to the chill cynicism that lurked beneath his seeming
courtesy,—the cutting satire that was coupled with apparent
compliment, and the intensity of hatred that flamed under the
assumed expression of admiring homage in his flashing eyes.
however it was not my business to point out to those who
could not, or would not, see the endless peculiarities of my
friend’s variable disposition. i did not pay much heed to
them even so far as i myself was concerned, for i had grown
accustomed to the quick changes he was wont to ring on all
the gamut of human feeling, and absorbed in my own life-schemes
i did not trouble myself to intimately study the man
who had in a couple of months become my fidus achates. i
was engrossed at the moment in doing all i could to increase
the earl of elton’s appreciative sense of my value as a man
and a millionaire, and to this end i paid some of his pressing
debts, lent him a large sum of money without demanding
interest or promise of repayment, and stocked his cellar with
presents of such rare old wines as he had not been able to
afford to purchase for himself for many years. thus was confidence
easily engendered between us, even to that point of
affection which displayed itself in his lordship’s readiness to
thrust his arm through mine when we sauntered together down
piccadilly, and his calling me ‘my dear boy’ in public. never
shall i forget the bewildered amazement of the scrubby little
editor of a sixpenny magazine who met me face to face thus
accompanied in the park one morning! that he knew the
earl of elton by sight was evident, and that he also knew me
his apoplectic stare confessed. he had pompously refused to
even read any of my offered contributions on the ground that
i had ‘no name,’—and now—! he would have given a month’s
salary if i had but condescended to recognize him! i did not
so condescend,—but passed him by, listening to, and laughing
with my intended future father-in-law, who was retailing an
extremely ancient joke for my benefit. the incident was
slight, even trumpery,—yet it put me in a good humour, for
one of the chiefest pleasures i had out of my wealth was the
[p ]
 ability to repay with vengeful interest all the contempt and insult
that had beaten me back from every chance of earning a
livelihood while i was poor.
in all my visits to the eltons, i never saw the paralysed
countess again. since the last terrible visitation of her dread
disease, she had not moved. she merely lived and breathed—no
more. lord elton told me that the worst part of her
illness at present, so far as it affected those who had to attend
upon her, was the particularly hideous alteration of her face.
“the fact is,” he said, not without a shudder—“she’s
dreadful to look at,—positively dreadful!—no longer human,
you know. she used to be a lovely woman,—now she is
literally frightful. her eyes especially;—they are as scared
and wild as if she had seen the devil. quite an awful expression
i assure you!—and it never alters. the doctors
can do nothing—and of course it’s very trying for sibyl, and
everybody.”
i assented sympathetically; and realising that a house holding
such a figure of living death within it must of necessity be
more or less gloomy and depressing to a young and vigorous
nature, i lost no opportunity of giving lady sibyl whatever
slight pleasures were in my power to procure, for her distraction
and entertainment. costly flowers, boxes for the opera and
‘first nights’ at the play,—every sort of attention that a man can
pay to a woman without being considered officious or intrusive
i offered, and was not repulsed. everything progressed well
and favourably towards the easy attainment of my wishes,—i
had no difficulties, no troubles of any kind,—and i voluntarily
led a life of selfishly absorbed personal gratification, being commended
and encouraged therein by a whole host of flatterers
and interested acquaintances. willowsmere court was mine,
and every newspaper in the kingdom had commented on the
purchase, in either servile or spiteful paragraphs. my lawyers
had warmly congratulated me on the possession of so admirable
a property which they, in strict accordance with what
they conceived to be their duty, had personally inspected
and approved. the place was now in the hands of a firm of
[p ]
 decorators and furnishers, recommended by rimânez, and it
was expected to be in perfect order for my habitation in early
summer, at which time i purposed entertaining a large house-party
of more or less distinguished people.
meantime, what i had once considered would be the great
event of my life, took place,—namely the publication of my
book. trumpeted forth by the most heraldic advertisements,
it was at last launched on the uncertain and fluctuating tide
of public favour, and special ‘advance’ copies were sent to
the office of every magazine and journal in london. the day
after this was done, lucio, as i now familiarly called him, came
in to my room with a mysterious and mischievous air.
“geoffrey,” he said—“i’m going to lend you five hundred
pounds!”
i looked up with a smile.
“what for?”
he held out a cheque towards me. glancing at it i saw
that the sum he mentioned was filled in and endorsed with his
signature, but that the name of the person to whom the money
was to be made payable, had not yet been written.
“well? what does it mean?”
“it means”—replied he—“that i am going to see mr
mcwhing this morning. i have an appointment with him
at twelve. you, as geoffrey tempest, the author of the
book mr mcwhing is going to criticise and make a ‘boom’
of, could not possibly put your name to such a cheque. it
would not be ‘good form’—it might crop up afterwards and
so betray ‘the secrets of the prison-house.’ but for me it
is another affair. i am going to ‘pose’ as your businessman—your
‘literary agent’ who pockets ten per cent. of the
profits and wants to make a ‘big thing’ out of you, and i’m
going to talk the matter over with the perfectly practical
mcwhing who has, like every true scot, a keen eye for the
main chance. of course it will be in confidence,—strict
confidence!” and he laughed—“it’s all a question of business
you know,—in these commercial days, literature has
become a trade like everything else, and even critics only
[p ]
 work for what pays them. as indeed why should they
not?”
“do you mean to tell me mcwhing will take that five
hundred?” i asked dubiously.
“i mean to tell you nothing of the kind. i would not put
the matter so coarsely for the world! this money is not
for mcwhing,—it is for a literary charity.”
“indeed! i thought you had an idea perhaps of offering
a bribe....”
“bribe! good heavens! bribe a critic! impossible,
my good geoffrey!—such a thing was never heard of—never,
never, never!” and he shook his head and rolled up
his eyes with infinite solemnity—“no no! press people
never take money for anything—not even for ‘booming’ a
new gold-mining company,—not even for putting a notice of
a fashionable concert into the morning post. everything
in the english press is the just expression of pure and lofty
sentiment, believe me! this little cheque is for a charity
of which mr mcwhing is chief patron,—you see the civil
list pensions all go by favour to the wrong persons nowadays;
to the keeping of lunatic versifiers and retired
actresses who never could act—the actual bona-fide ‘genius’
never gets anything out of government, and moreover would
scorn to take a farthing from that penurious body, which
grudges him anything higher than a money-recognition. it
is as great an insult to offer a beggarly pension of fifty or a
hundred pounds a year to a really great writer as to give
him a knighthood,—and we cannot fall much lower than to
be a knight, as knights go. the present five hundred
pounds will help to relieve certain ‘poor and proud’ but
pressing literary cases known to mcwhing alone!” his
expression at this moment was so extraordinary, that i entirely
failed to fathom it. “i have no doubt i shall be able to
represent the benevolent and respectable literary agent to
perfection—of course i shall insist on my ten per cent.!”—and
he began laughing again. “but i can’t stop to discuss
the matter now with you—i’m off. i promised mcwhing
[p ]
 to be with him at twelve o’clock precisely, and it’s now half-past-eleven.
i shall probably lunch with him, so don’t
wait for me. and concerning the five hundred, you
needn’t be in my debt an hour longer than you like—i’ll
take a cheque for the money back from you this
evening.”
“all right”—i said—“but perhaps the great oracle of the
cliques will reject your proposals with scorn.”
“if he does, then is utopia realized!”—replied lucio,
carefully drawing on his gloves as he spoke—“where’s a copy
of your book? ah—here’s one—smelling newly of the
press,” and he slipped the volume into his overcoat pocket;
“allow me, before departure, to express the opinion that you
are a singularly ungrateful fellow, geoffrey! here am i, perfectly
devoted to your interests,—and despite my princedom
actually prepared to ‘pose’ to mcwhing as your
‘acting manager’ pro tem, and you haven’t so much as a
thank-you to throw at me!”
he stood before me smiling, the personification of kindness
and good humour. i laughed a little.
“mcwhing will never take you for an acting manager or
literary agent,”—i said—“you don’t look it. if i seem
churlish i’m sorry—but the fact is i am disgusted ...”
“at what?” he inquired, still smiling.
“oh, at the humbug of everything,”—i answered impatiently;
“the stupid farce of it all. why shouldn’t a book
get noticed on its own merits without any appeal to cliquism
and influential wire-pulling on the press?”
“exactly!” and he delicately flicked a grain of dust off his
coat while speaking—“and why shouldn’t a man get received
in society on his own merits, without any money to recommend
him or any influential friend to back him up?”
i was silent.
“the world is as it is made,”—he went on, regarding me
fixedly—“it is moved by the lowest and pettiest motives,—it
works for the most trivial, ridiculous and perishable aims.
it is not a paradise. it is not a happy family of united and
[p ]
 affectionate brethren. it is an over-populated colony of
jabbering and quarrelsome monkeys, who fancy they are
men. philosophers in old days tried to teach it that the
monkey-type should be exterminated for the growth and
encouragement of a nobler race,—but they preached in
vain—there never were enough real men alive to overcome
the swarming majority of the beasts. god himself, they say,
came down from heaven to try and set wrong things right,
and to restore if possible his own defaced image to the
general aspect of humanity,—and even he failed.”
“there is very little of god in this world”—i said bitterly;
“there is much more devil!”
he smiled,—a musing, dreamy smile that transfigured his
countenance and made him look like a fine apollo absorbed
in the thought of some new and glorious song.
“no doubt!” he said, after a little pause—“mankind
certainly prefer the devil to any other deity,—therefore if
they elect him as their representative, it is scarcely to be
wondered at that he governs where he is asked to govern.
and yet—do you know geoffrey—this devil,—if there is
one,—can hardly, i think, be quite so bad as his detractors
say. i myself don’t believe he is a whit worse than a nineteenth-century
financier!”
i laughed aloud at the comparison.
“after that,” i said—“you had better go to mcwhing. i
hope you will tell him that i am the triple essence of all the
newest ‘discoveries’ rolled into one!”
“never fear!” returned lucio,—“i’ve learned all my
stock-phrases by heart—a ‘star of the first magnitude’ etc.,—i’ve
read the athenæum till i’ve got the lingo of the literary
auctioneer well-nigh perfect, and i believe i shall acquit
myself admirably. au revoir!”
he was gone; and i, after a little desultory looking over
my papers, went out to lunch at arthur’s, of which club i was
now a member. on my way i stopped to look in at a bookseller’s
window to see if my ‘immortal’ production was yet on
show. it was not,—and the volume put most conspicuously
[p ]
 to the front among all the ‘newest books’ was one entitled
‘differences. by mavis clare.’ acting on a sudden impulse
i went in to purchase it.
“has this a good sale?“ i asked, as the volume was handed
to me.
the clerk at the counter opened his eyes wide.
“sale?” he echoed—“well, i should think so—rather!
why everybody’s reading it!”
“indeed!” and i turned over the uncut pages carelessly—“i
see no allusion whatever to it in the papers.”
the clerk smiled and shrugged his shoulders.
“no—and you’re not likely to, sir”—he said—“miss clare
is too popular to need reviews. besides, a large number of
the critics,—the ‘log-rollers’ especially, are mad against her
for her success, and the public know it. only the other day
a man came in here from one of the big newspaper offices
and told me he was taking a few notes on the books which
had the largest sales,—would i tell him which author’s works
were most in demand? i said miss clare took the lead,—as
she does,—and he got into a regular rage. said he—‘that’s
the answer i’ve had all along the line, and however
true it is, it’s no use to me because i dare not mention it.
my editor would instantly scratch it out—he hates miss
clare.’ ‘a precious editor you’ve got!’ i said, and he
looked rather queer. there’s nothing like journalism, sir,
for the suppression of truth!”
i smiled, and went away with my purchase, convinced that
i had wasted a few shillings on a mere piece of woman’s
trash. if this mavis clare was indeed so ‘popular,’ then her
work must naturally be of the ‘penny dreadful’ order, for i,
like many another literary man, laboured under the ludicrous
inconsistency of considering the public an ‘ass’ while i myself
desired nothing so much as the said ‘ass’s’ applause and
approval!—and therefore i could not imagine it capable of
voluntarily selecting for itself any good work of literature
without guidance from the critics. of course i was wrong;
the great masses of the public in all nations are always led by
[p ]
 some instinctive sense of right, that moves them to reject the
false and unworthy, and select the true. completely prepared,
like most men of my type to sneer and cavil at the
book, chiefly because it was written by a feminine hand, i sat
down in a retired corner of the club reading-room, and began
to cut and skim the pages. i had not read many sentences
before my heart sank with a heavy sense of fear and,—jealousy!—the
slow fire of an insidious envy began to
smoulder in my mind. what power had so gifted this
author—this mere woman,—that she should dare to write
better than i! and that she should force me, by the magic
of her pen to mentally acknowledge, albeit with wrath and
shame, my own inferiority! clearness of thought, brilliancy
of style, beauty of diction, all these were hers, united to consummate
ease of expression and artistic skill,—and all at once,
in the very midst of reading, such a violent impulse of insensate
rage possessed me that i flung the book down,
dreading to go on with it. the potent, resistless, unpurchaseable
quality of genius!—ah, i was not yet so blinded by my
own conceit as to be unable to recognize that divine fire
when i saw it flashing up from every page as i saw it now;
but, to be compelled to give that recognition to a woman’s
work, galled and irritated me almost beyond endurance.
women, i considered, should be kept in their places as men’s
drudges or toys—as wives, mothers, nurses, cooks, menders
of socks and shirts, and housekeepers generally,—what right
had they to intrude into the realms of art and snatch the
laurels from their masters’ brows! if i could but get the
chance of reviewing this book, i thought to myself savagely!—i
would misquote, misrepresent, and cut it to shreds with a
joy too great for words! this mavis clare, ‘unsexed,’ as
i at once called her in my own mind simply because she had
the power i lacked,—wrote what she had to say with a
gracious charm, freedom, and innate consciousness of strength,—a
strength which forced me back upon myself and filled
me with the bitterest humiliation. without knowing her i
hated her,—this woman who could win fame without the aid
[p ]
 of money, and who was crowned so brightly and visibly to
the world that she was beyond criticism. i took up her book
again and tried to cavil at it,—over one or two dainty bits of
poetic simile and sentiment i laughed,—enviously. when i
left the club later in the day, i took the book with me,
divided between a curious desire to read it honestly through
with justice to it and its author, and an impulse to tear it
asunder and fling it into the road to be crushed in the mud
under rolling cab and cart wheels. in this strange humour
rimânez found me, when at about four o’clock he returned
from his mission to david mcwhing, smiling and—triumphant.
“congratulate me geoffrey!” he exclaimed as he entered
my room—“congratulate me, and yourself! i am minus
the five hundred pound cheque i showed you this morning!”
“mcwhing has pocketed it then,”—i said sullenly—“all
right! much good may it do him, and his ‘charity’!”
rimânez gave me a quick observant glance.
“why, what has happened to you since we parted?” he
inquired, throwing off his overcoat and sitting down opposite
to me—“you seem out of temper! yet you ought to be a
perfectly happy man—for your highest ambition is about to
be gratified. you said you wished to make your book and
yourself ‘the talk of london,’—well, within the next two or
three weeks you will see yourself praised in a very large
number of influential newspapers as the newest discovered
‘genius’ of the day, only a little way removed from shakespeare
himself (three of the big leading magazines are guaranteed to
say that) and all this through the affability of mr mcwhing,
and the trifling sum of five hundred pounds! and are you
not satisfied? really, my friend, you are becoming difficult!—i
warned you that too much good fortune spoils a man.”
with a sudden movement i flung down mavis clare’s book
before him.
“look at this”—i said—“does she pay five hundred
pounds to david mcwhing’s charity?”
he took up the volume and glanced at it.
[p ]“certainly not. but then,—she gets slandered—not
criticized!”
“what does that matter!” i retorted—“the man from
whom i bought this book says that everybody is reading it.”
“exactly!” and rimânez surveyed me with a curious expression,
half of pity, half of amusement—“but you know
the old axiom, my dear geoffrey?—‘you may lead a horse
to the water but you cannot make him drink.’ which statement,
interpreted for the present occasion, means that
though certain log-rollers, headed by our estimable friend
mcwhing, may drag the horse—i.e. the public, up to their
own particularly prepared literary trough, they cannot force
it to swallow the mixture. the horse frequently turns tail
and runs away in search of its own provender,—it has done
so in the case of miss clare. when the public choose an
author for themselves, it is a dreadful thing of course for
other authors,—but it really can’t be helped!”
“why should they choose mavis clare?” i demanded
gloomily.
“ah, why indeed!” he echoed smiling—“mcwhing would
tell you they do it out of sheer idiotcy;—the public would
answer that they choose her because she has genius.”
“genius!” i repeated scornfully—“the public are perfectly
incapable of recognizing such a quality!”
“you think so?” he said still smiling—“you really think
so? in that case it’s very odd isn’t it, how everything that
is truly great in art and literature becomes so widely known
and honoured, not only in this country but in every civilized
land where people think or study? you must remember
that all the very famous men and women have been steadily
‘written down’ in their day, even to the late english
laureate, tennyson, who was ‘criticized’ for the most
part in the purest billingsgate,—it is only the mediocrities
who are ever ‘written up.’ it seems as if the
stupid public really had a hand in selecting these ‘great,’
for the reviewers would never stand them at any price, till
driven to acknowledge them by the popular force majeure.
[p ]
 but considering the barbarous want of culture and utter
foolishness of the public, geoffrey, what i wonder at, is that
you should care to appeal to it at all!”
i sat silent,—inwardly chafing under his remarks.
“i am afraid—” he resumed, rising and taking a white
flower from one of the vases on the table to pin in his button-hole—“that
miss clare is going to be a thorn in your side,
my friend! a man rival in literature is bad enough,—but a
woman rival is too much to endure with any amount of
patience! however you may console yourself with the
certainty that she will never get ‘boomed,’—while you—thanks
to my tender fostering of the sensitive and high-principled
mcwhing, will be the one delightful and unique
‘discovery’ of the press for at least one month, perhaps two,
which is about as long as any ‘new star of the first magnitude’
lasts in the latter-day literary skies. shooting-stars all
of them!—such as poor old forgotten béranger sang of—
“les etoiles qui filent,
‘qui filent,—qui filent—et disparaissent!’”
“except—mavis clare!” i said.
“true! except mavis clare!” and he laughed aloud,—a
laugh that jarred upon me because there was a note of
mockery in it—“she is a small fixture in the vast heavens,—or
so it seems—revolving very contentedly and smoothly
in her own appointed orbit,—but she is not and never will
be attended by the brilliant meteor-flames that will burst
round you, my excellent fellow, at the signal of mcwhing!
fie geoffrey!—get over your sulks! jealous of a woman!
be ashamed,—is not woman the inferior creature?, and shall
the mere spectre of a feminine fame cause a five-fold
millionaire to abase his lofty spirit in the dust? conquer
your strange fit of the spleen, geoffrey, and join me at
dinner!”
he laughed again as he left the room,—and again his
laughter irritated me. when he had gone, i gave way to the
base and unworthy impulse that had for some minutes been
[p ]
 rankling within me, and sitting down at my writing table,
penned a hasty note to the editor of a rather powerful magazine,
a man whom i had formerly known and worked for. he
was aware of my altered fortunes and the influential position
i now occupied, and i felt confident he would be glad to
oblige me in any matter if he could. my letter, marked
‘private and confidential’ contained the request that i might
be permitted to write for his next number, an anonymous
‘slashing’ review of the new novel entitled ‘differences’ by
mavis clare.
[p ]xvi
it is almost impossible for me to describe the feverish,
irritated and contradictory state of mind in which i
now began to pass my days. with the absolute fixity of my
fortunes, my humours became more changeful than the wind,
and i was never absolutely contented for two hours together.
i joined in every sort of dissipation common to men of the
day, who with the usual inanity of noodles, plunged into the
filth of life merely because to be morally dirty was also at the
moment fashionable and much applauded by society. i
gambled recklessly, solely for the reason that gambling was
considered by many leaders of the ‘upper ten’ as indicative
of ‘manliness’ and ‘showing grit.’
“i hate a fellow who grudges losing a few pounds at play,”—said
one of these ‘distinguished’ titled asses to me once—“it
shows such a cowardly and currish disposition.”
guided by this ‘new’ morality, and wishing to avoid the
possibility of being called “cowardly and currish,” i indulged
in baccarat and other ruinous games almost every night,
willingly losing the ‘few pounds’ which in my case meant a
few hundreds, for the sake of my occasional winnings, which
placed a number of ‘noble’ rakes and blue-blooded blacklegs
in my power for ‘debts of honour,’ which are supposed to be
more strictly attended to and more punctually paid than any
debts in the world, but which, as far as i am concerned, are
still owing. i also betted heavily, on everything that could be
made the subject of a bet,—and not to be behind my peers
[p ]
 in ‘style’ and ‘knowledge of the world’ i frequented low
houses and allowed a few half-nude brandy-soaked dancers
and vulgar music-hall ‘artistes’ to get a couple of thousand
pounds worth of jewels out of me, because this sort of thing
was called ‘seeing life’ and was deemed part of a ‘gentleman’s’
diversion. heavens!—what beasts we all were, i and
my aristocratic boon companions!—what utterly worthless,
useless, callous scoundrels!—and yet,—we associated with the
best and the highest in the land;—the fairest and noblest
ladies in london received us in their houses with smiles and
softly-worded flatteries—we—whose presence reeked with
vice; we, ‘young men of fashion’ whom, if he had known
our lives as they were, an honest cobbler working patiently
for daily bread, might have spat upon, in contempt and
indignation that such low rascals should be permitted to
burden the earth! sometimes, but very seldom, rimânez
joined our gambling and music-hall parties, and on such
occasions i noticed that he, as it were, ‘let himself go’ and
became the wildest of us all. but though wild he was never
coarse,—as we were; his deep and mellow laughter had a
sonorous richness in it that was totally unlike the donkey’s
‘hee-haw’ of our ‘cultured’ mirth,—his manners were never
vulgar; and his fluent discourse on men and things, now witty
and satirical, now serious almost to pathos, strangely affected
many of those who heard him talk, myself most of all. once,
i remember, when we were returning late from some foolish
carouse,—i with three young sons of english peers, and
rimânez walking beside us,—we came upon a poorly clad
girl sobbing and clinging to the iron railing outside a closed
church door.
“oh god!” she wailed—“oh dear god! do help
me!”
one of my companions seized her by the arm with a lewd
jest, when all at once rimânez stepped between.
“leave her alone!” he said sternly—“let her find god if
she can!”
the girl looked up at him terrified, her eyes streaming with
[p ]
 tears, and he dropped two or three gold pieces into her hand.
she broke out crying afresh.
“oh god bless you!” she cried wildly—“god bless
you!”
he raised his hat and stood uncovered in the moonlight,
his dark beauty softened by a strangely wistful expression.
“i thank you!” he said simply—“you make me your
debtor.”
and he passed on; we followed, somewhat subdued
and silenced, though one of my lordling friends sniggered
idiotically.
“you paid dearly for that blessing, rimânez!” he said—“you
gave her three sovereigns;—by jove! i’d have had
something more than a blessing if i had been you.”
“no doubt!” returned rimânez—“you deserve more,—much
more! i hope you will get it! a blessing would be
of no advantage whatever to you;—it is, to me.”
how often i have thought of this incident since! i was
too dense to attach either meaning or importance to it then,—self-absorbed
as i was, i paid no attention to circumstances
which seemed to have no connection with my own life and
affairs. and in all my dissipations and so-called amusements,
a perpetual restlessness consumed me,—i obtained no real
satisfaction out of anything except my slow and somewhat
tantalizing courtship of lady sibyl. she was a strange girl;
she knew my intentions towards her well enough; yet she
affected not to know. each time i ventured to treat her with
more than the usual deference, and to infuse something of the
ardour of a lover into my looks or manner, she feigned surprise.
i wonder why it is that some women are so fond of
playing the hypocrite in love? their own instinct teaches
them when men are amorous; but unless they can run the
fox to earth, or in other words, reduce their suitors to the
lowest pitch of grovelling appeal, and force them to such
abasement that the poor passion-driven fools are ready to
fling away life, and even honour, dearer than life, for their
sakes, their vanity is not sufficiently gratified. but who, or
[p ]
 what am i that i should judge of vanity,—i whose egregious
and flagrant self-approbation was of such a character that it
blinded me to the perception and comprehension of everything
in which my own ego was not represented! and yet,—with
all the morbid interest i took in myself, my surroundings,
my comfort, my social advancement, there was one thing
which soon became a torture to me,—a veritable despair and
loathing,—and this, strange to say, was the very triumph i had
most looked forward to as the crown and summit of all my
ambitious dreams. my book,—the book i had presumed to
consider a work of genius,—when it was launched on the tide
of publicity and criticism, resolved itself into a sort of literary
monster that haunted my days and nights with its hateful
presence; the thick, black-lettered, lying advertisements scattered
broadcast by my publisher, flared at me with an offensive
insistence in every paper i casually opened. and the praise
of the reviewers! ... the exaggerated, preposterous, fraudulent
‘boom’! good god!—how sickening it was!—how fulsome!
every epithet of flattery bestowed upon me filled me with
disgust, and one day when i took up a leading magazine and
saw a long article upon the ‘extraordinary brilliancy and
promise’ of my book, comparing me to a new æschylus and
shakespeare combined, with the signature of david mcwhing
appended to it, i could have thrashed that erudite and
assuredly purchased scot within an inch of his life. the
chorus of eulogy was well-nigh universal; i was the ‘genius
of the day’—the ‘hope of the future generation,’—i was the
“book of the month,”—the greatest, the wittiest, most versatile,
most brilliant scribbling pigmy that had ever honoured a
pot of ink by using it! of course i figured as mcwhing’s
‘discovery,’—five hundred pounds bestowed on his mysterious
‘charity’ had so sharpened his eyesight that he had perceived
me shining brightly on the literary horizon before anyone else
had done so. the press followed his ‘lead’ obediently,—for
though the press,—the english press at least,—is distinctly
unbribable, the owners of newspapers are not insensible to the
advantages of largely paying advertisements. moreover, when
[p ]
 mr mcwhing announced me as his ‘find’ in the oracular
style which distinguished him, some other literary gentlemen
came forward and wrote effective articles about me, and sent
me their compositions carefully marked. i took the hint,—wrote
at once to thank them, and invited them to dinner.
they came, and feasted royally with rimânez and myself;—(one
of them wrote an ‘ode’ to me afterwards),—and at the
conclusion of the revels, we sent two of the ‘oracles’ home,
considerably overcome by champagne, in a carriage with
amiel to look after them, and help them out at their own
doors. and my ‘boom’ expanded,—london ‘talked’ as i had
said it should; the growling monster metropolis discussed me
and my work in its own independent and peculiar fashion.
the ‘upper ten’ subscribed to the circulating libraries, and
these admirable institutions made a two or three hundred
copies do for all demands, by the simple expedient of
keeping subscribers waiting five or six weeks till they
grew tired of asking for the book, and forgot all about
it. apart from the libraries, the public did not take me
up. from the glowing criticisms that appeared in all the
papers, it might have been supposed that ‘everybody who
was anybody’ was reading my ‘wonderful’ production.
such however was not the case. people spoke of me as ‘the
great millionaire,’ but they were indifferent to the bid i had
made for literary fame. the remark they usually made to
me wherever i went was—“you have written a novel, haven’t
you? what an odd thing for you to do!”—this, with a
laugh;—“i haven’t read it,—i’ve so little time—i must ask
for it at the library.” of course a great many never did ask,
not deeming it worth their while; and i whose money, combined
with the resistless influence of rimânez, had started
the favourable criticisms that flooded the press, found out
that the majority of the public never read criticisms at all.
hence, my anonymous review of mavis clare’s book made
no effect whatever on her popularity, though it appeared in
the most prominent manner. it was a sheer waste of labour,—for
everywhere this woman author was still looked upon as
a creature of altogether finer clay than ordinary, and still her
[p ]
 book was eagerly devoured and questioned and admired; and
still it sold by thousands, despite a lack of all favourable
criticism or prominent advertisement. no one guessed that
i had written what i am now perfectly willing to admit was a
brutally wanton misrepresentation of her work,—no one,
except rimânez. the magazine in which it appeared was a
notable one, circulating in every club and library, and he,
taking it up casually one afternoon, turned to that article
at once.
“you wrote this!” he said, fixing his eyes upon me,—“it
must have been a great relief to your mind!”
i said nothing.
he read on in silence for a little; then laying down the
magazine looked at me with a curiously scrutinizing expression.
“there are some human beings so constituted,” he said,
“that if they had been with noah in the ark according to the
silly old legend, they would have shot the dove bearing the
olive-leaf, directly it came in sight over the waste of waters.
you are of that type geoffrey.”
“i do not see the force of your comparison,” i murmured.
“do you not? why, what harm has this mavis clare done
to you? your positions are entirely opposed. you are a
millionaire; she is a hard-working woman dependent on her
literary success for a livelihood, and you, rolling in wealth
do your best to deprive her of the means of existence. does
this redound to your credit? she has won her fame by her
own brain and energy alone,—and even if you dislike her
book need you abuse her personally as you have done in
this article? you do not know her; you have never seen
her, ...”
“i hate women who write!” i said vehemently.
“why? because they are able to exist independently?
would you have them all the slaves of man’s lust or convenience?
my dear geoffrey, you are unreasonable. if you
admit that you are jealous of this woman’s celebrity and
grudge it to her, then i can understand your spite, for jealousy
[p ]
 is capable of murdering a fellow-creature with either the
dagger or the pen.”
i was silent.
“is the book such wretched stuff as you make it out to
be?” he asked presently.
“i suppose some people might admire it,”—i said curtly,
“i do not.”
this was a lie; and of course he knew it was a lie. the
work of mavis clare had excited my most passionate envy,—while
the very fact that sibyl elton had read her book before
she had thought of looking at mine, had accentuated the
bitterness of my feelings.
“well,” said rimânez at last, smiling as he finished reading
my onslaught—“all i can say geoffrey, is that this will not
touch mavis clare in the least. you have overshot the mark,
my friend! her public will simply cry “what a shame!”
and clamour for her work more than ever. and as for the
woman herself,—she has a merry heart, and she will laugh
at it. you must see her some day.”
“i don’t want to see her,” i said.
“probably not. but you will scarcely be able to avoid
doing so when you live at willowsmere court.”
“one is not obliged to know everybody in the neighbourhood,”—i
observed superciliously.
lucio laughed aloud.
“how well you carry your fortunes, geoffrey!” he said—“for
a poor devil of a grub-street hack who lately was at a
loss for a sovereign, how perfectly you follow the fashions of
your time! if there is one man more than another that
moves me to wondering admiration it is he who asserts his
wealth strenuously in the face of his fellows, and who comports
himself in this world as though he could bribe death
and purchase the good-will of the creator. it is such
splendid effrontery,—such superlative pride! now i,
though over-wealthy myself, am so curiously constituted
that i cannot wear my bank-notes in my countenance as
it were,—i have put in a claim for intellect as well as
[p ]
 gold,—and sometimes, do you know, in my travels round the
world, i have been so far honoured as to be taken for quite
a poor man! now you will never have that chance again;—you
are rich and you look it!”
“and you,—” i interrupted him suddenly, and with some
warmth—“do you know what you look? you imply that i
assert my wealth in my face; do you know what you assert
in your every glance and gesture?”
“i cannot imagine!” he said smiling.
“contempt for us all!” i said—“immeasurable contempt,—even
for me, whom you call friend. i tell you the truth,
lucio,—there are times, when in spite of our intimacy i feel
that you despise me. i daresay you do; you have an extraordinary
personality united to extraordinary talents; you
must not however expect all men to be as self-restrained and
as indifferent to human passions as yourself.”
he gave me a swift, searching glance.
“expect!” he echoed—“my good fellow, i expect nothing
at all,—from men. they, on the contrary,—at least all those
i know—expect everything from me. and they get it,—generally.
as for ‘despising’ you, have i not said that i
admire you? i do. i think there is something positively
stupendous in the brilliant progress of your fame and rapid
social success.”
“my fame!” i repeated bitterly—“how has it been
obtained? what is it worth?”
“that is not the question;” he retorted with a little smile;
“how unpleasant it must be for you to have these gouty
twinges of conscience geoffrey! of course no fame is
actually worth much now-a-days,—because it is not classic
fame, strong in reposeful old-world dignity,—it is blatant
noisy notoriety merely. but yours, such as it is, is perfectly
legitimate, judged by its common-sense commercial aspect,
which is the only aspect in which anyone looks at anything.
you must bear in mind that no one works out of disinterestedness
in the present age,—no matter how purely
benevolent an action may appear on the surface, self lies
[p ]
 at the bottom of it. once grasp this fact, and you will
perceive that nothing could be fairer or more straightforward
than the way you have obtained your fame. you have not
‘bought’ the incorruptible british press; you could not do
that; that is impossible, for it is immaculate, and bristles
stiffly all over with honourable principles. there is no english
paper existing that would accept a cheque for the insertion
of a notice or a paragraph; not one!” his eyes twinkled
merrily,—then he went on—“no,—it is only the foreign
press that is corrupt, so the british press says;—john bull
looks on virtuously aghast at journalists who, in dire stress
of poverty, will actually earn a little extra pay for writing
something or somebody ‘up’ or ‘down.’ thank heaven,
he employs no such journalists; his pressmen are the very
soul of rectitude, and will stoically subsist on a pound a
week rather than take ten for a casual job ‘to oblige a
friend.’ do you know geoffrey, when the judgment day
arrives, who will be among the first saints to ascend to
heaven with the sounding of trumpets?”
i shook my head, half vexed, half amused.
“all the english (not foreign) editors and journalists!”
said lucio with an air of pious rapture—“and why? because
they are so good, so just, so unprejudiced! their foreign
brethren will be reserved for the eternal dance of devils of
course—but the britishers will pace the golden streets
singing alleluia! i assure you i consider british journalists
generally the noblest examples of incorruptibility in the
world—they come next to the clergy as representatives of
virtue, and exponents of the three evangelical counsels,—voluntary
poverty, chastity, and obedience!” such mockery
glittered in his eyes, that the light in them might have been
the reflection of clashing steel. “be consoled, geoffrey,”
he resumed—“your fame is honourably won. you have
simply, through me, approached one critic who writes in
about twenty newspapers and influences others to write
in other twenty,—that critic being a noble creature, (all
critics are noble creatures) has a pet ‘society’ for the relief
[p ]
 of authors in need (a noble scheme you will own) and to
this charity i subscribe out of pure benevolence, five hundred
pounds. moved by my generosity and consideration,
(particularly as i do not ask what becomes of the five hundred)
mcwhing ‘obliges’ me in a little matter. the editors
of the papers for which he writes accept him as a wise and
witty personage; they know nothing about the charity or
the cheque,—it is not necessary for them to know. the
whole thing is really quite a reasonable business arrangement;—it
is only a self-tormenting analyst like you who
would stop to think of such a trifle a second time.”
“if mcwhing really and conscientiously admired my book
for itself;” i began.
“why should you imagine he does not?” asked lucio—“myself,
i believe that he is a perfectly sincere and honorable
man. i think he means all he says and writes. i
consider that if he had found your work not worthy of his
commendation, he would have sent me back that cheque for
five hundred pounds, torn across in a noble scorn!”
and with this, throwing himself back in his chair, he laughed
till the tears came into his eyes.
but i could not laugh; i was too weary and depressed. a
heavy sense of despair was on my mind; i felt that the hope
which had cheered me in my days of poverty,—the hope of
winning real fame, so widely different a thing to notoriety,
had vanished. there was some quality in the subtle glory
which could not be won by either purchase or influence. the
praise of the press could not give it. mavis clare, working
for her bread, had it,—i, with millions of money, had not.
like a fool i had thought to buy it; i had yet to learn that all
the best, greatest, purest and worthiest things in life are beyond
all market-value and that the gifts of the gods are not for sale.
about a fortnight after the publication of my book, we went
to court, my comrade and i, and were presented by a distinguished
officer connected with the immediate and intimate
surroundings of the royal household. it was a brilliant scene
enough,—but, without doubt, the most brilliant personage
[p ]
 there was rimânez. i was fairly startled at the stately and
fascinating figure he made in his court suit of black velvet and
steel ornaments; accustomed as i was to his good looks, i had
never seen them so enhanced by dress as on this occasion. i
had been tolerably well satisfied with my own appearance in
the regulation costume till i saw him; then my personal
vanity suffered a decided shock, and i realized that i merely
served as a foil to show off and accentuate the superior
attractions of my friend. but i was not envious of him in
any way,—on the contrary i openly expressed the admiration
i frankly felt.
he seemed amused. “my dear boy, it is all flunkeydom;”
he said—“all sham and humbug. look at this—” and he
drew his light court rapier from its sheath—“there is no real
use in this flimsy blade,—it is merely an emblem of dead
chivalry. in old times, if a man insulted you, or insulted a
woman you admired, out flashed a shining point of tempered
toledo steel that could lunge—so!” and he threw himself
into a fencing attitude of incomparable grace and ease—“and
you pricked the blackguard neatly through the ribs or arm
and gave him cause to remember you. but now—” and he
thrust the rapier back in its place—“men carry toys like these
as a melancholy sign to show what bold fellows they were
once, and what spiritless cravens they are now,—relying no
more on themselves for protection, but content to go about
yelling ‘police! police!’ at the least threat of injury to their
worthless persons. come, it’s time we started, geoffrey!—let
us go and bow our heads before another human unit
formed precisely like ourselves, and so act in defiance
of death and the deity, who declare all men to be
equal!”
we entered our carriage and were soon on our way to st
james’s palace.
“his royal highness the prince of wales is not exactly
the creator of the universe;”—said lucio suddenly, looking
out of the window as we approached the line of soldiery on
guard outside.
[p ]“why no!” i answered laughing—“what do you say that
for?”
“because there is as much fuss about him as if he were,—in
fact, more. the creator does not get half as much attention
bestowed upon him as albert edward. we never
attire ourselves in any special way for entering the presence
of god; we don’t put so much as a clean mind on.”
“but then,”—i said indifferently—“god is non est,—and
albert edward is est.”
he smiled,—and his eyes had a scornful gleam in their
dark centres.
“that is your opinion?” he queried—“well, it is not
original,—many choice spirits share it with you. there is
at least one good excuse for people who make no preparation
to enter the presence of god,—in going to church, which is
called the ‘house of god,’ they do not find god at all;
they only discover the clergyman. it is somewhat of a
disappointment.”
i had no time to reply, as just then the carriage stopped,
and we alighted at the palace. through the intervention of
the high court official who presented us, we got a good place
among the most distinguished arrivals, and during our brief
wait, i was considerably amused by the study of their faces
and attitudes. some of the men looked nervous,—others conceited;
one or two radical notabilities comported themselves
with an air as if they and they alone were to be honoured for
allowing royalty to hold these functions at all; a few gentlemen
had evidently donned their levée dress in haste and carelessness,
for the pieces of tissue-paper in which their steel or
gilt coat-buttons had been wrapped by the tailor to prevent
tarnish, were still unremoved. discovering this fortunately
before it was too late, they occupied themselves by taking off
these papers and casting them on the floor,—an untidy process
at best, and one that made them look singularly ridiculous and
undignified. each man present turned to stare at lucio; his
striking personality attracted universal attention. when we
at last entered the throne-room, and took our places in line, i
[p ]
 was careful to arrange that my brilliant companion should go
up before me, as i had a strong desire to see what sort of an
effect his appearance would produce on the royal party. i
had an excellent view of the prince of wales from where i
myself waited; he made an imposing and kingly figure enough,
in full uniform with his various orders glittering on his broad
breast; and the singular resemblance discovered by many
people in him to henry viii. struck me more forcibly
than i should have thought possible. his face however
expressed a far greater good-humour than the pictured
lineaments of the capricious but ever popular ‘bluff king
hal,’—though on this occasion there was a certain shade of
melancholy, even sternness on his brow, which gave a firmer
character to his naturally mobile features,—a shadow, as i
fancied of weariness, tempered with regret,—the look of one
dissatisfied, yet resigned. a man of blunted possibilities he
seemed to me,—of defeated aims, and thwarted will. few of
the other members of the royal family surrounding him on
the daïs, possessed the remarkable attraction he had for any
observant student of physiognomy,—most of them were, or
assumed to be, stiff military figures merely who bent their
heads as each guest filed past with an automatic machine-like
regularity implying neither pleasure, interest, nor good-will.
but the heir-apparent to the greatest empire in the world expressed
in his very attitude and looks, an unaffected and courteous
welcome to all,—surrounded as he was, and as such in
his position must ever be, by toadies, parasites, sycophants,
hypocritical self-seekers, who would never run the least risk to
their own lives to serve him, unless they could get something
personally satisfactory out of it, his presence impressed itself
upon me as full of the suggestion of dormant but none the
less resolute power. i cannot even now explain the singular
excitation of mind that seized me as our turn to be presented
arrived;—i saw my companion advance, and heard the lord
chamberlain announce his name;—‘prince lucio rimânez’;
and then;—why then,—it seemed as if all the movement
in the brilliant room suddenly came to a pause! every eye
[p ]
 was fixed on the stately form and noble countenance of my
friend as he bowed with such consummate courtliness and
grace as made all other salutations seem awkward by comparison.
for one moment he stood absolutely still in front of
the royal daïs,—facing the prince as though he sought to impress
him with the fact of his presence there,—and across the
broad stream of sunshine which had been pouring into the
room throughout the ceremony, there fell the sudden shadow
of a passing cloud. a fleeting impression of gloom and silence
chilled the atmosphere,—a singular magnetism appeared to
hold all eyes fixed on rimânez; and not a man either going
or coming, moved. this intense hush was brief as it was
curious and impressive;—the prince of wales started slightly,
and gazed at the superb figure before him with an expression
of eager curiosity and almost as if he were ready to break the
frigid bonds of etiquette and speak,—then controlling himself
with an evident effort he gave his usual dignified acknowledgment
of lucio’s profound reverence, whereupon my comrade
passed on,—slightly smiling. i followed next,—but naturally
made no impression beyond the fact of exciting a smothered
whisper from some-one among the lesser royalties who caught
the name ‘geoffrey tempest,’ and at once murmured the
magic words “five millions!”—words which reached my ears
and moved me to the usual weary contempt which was with
me growing into a chronic malady. we were soon out of the
palace, and while waiting for our carriage in the covered
court-yard entrance, i touched rimânez on the arm.
“you made a veritable sensation lucio!”
“did i?” he laughed. “you flatter me geoffrey.”
“not at all. why did you stop so long in front of the
daïs?”
“to please my humour!” he returned indifferently—“and
partly, to give his royal highness the chance of remembering
me the next time he sees me.”
“but he seemed to recognise you,”—i said—“have you
met him before?”
his eyes flashed. “often! but i have never till now
[p ]
 made a public appearance at st james’s. court costume
and ‘company manners’ make a difference to the looks of
most men,—and i doubt,—yes, i very much doubt, whether,
even with his reputed excellent memory for faces, the prince
really knew me to-day for what i am!”
[p ]xvii
it must have been about a week or ten days after the
prince of wales’s levée that i had the strange scene
with sibyl elton i am about to relate; a scene that left a
painful impression on my mind and should have been sufficient
to warn me of impending trouble to come had i not
been too egotistical to accept any portent that presaged ill to
myself. arriving at lord elton’s house one evening, and
ascending the stairs to the drawing-room as was now my
usual custom, unannounced and without ceremony, i found
diana chesney there alone and in tears.
“why, what’s the matter?” i exclaimed in a rallying tone,
for i was on very friendly and familiar terms with the little
american—“you, of all people in the world, having a private
‘weep’! has our dear railway papa ‘bust up’?”
she laughed, a trifle hysterically.
“not just yet, you bet!” she answered, lifting her wet eyes
to mine and showing that mischief still sparkled brightly in
them,—“there’s nothing wrong with the funds as far as i
know. i’ve only had a,——well, a sort of rumpus here with
sibyl.”
“with sibyl?”
“yes,”—and she rested the point of her little embroidered
shoe on a footstool and looked at it critically—“you see it’s
the catsup’s ‘at home’ to-night, and i’m invited and
sibyl’s invited; miss charlotte is knocked up with nursing
the countess, and of course i made sure that sibyl would
[p ]
 go. well, she never said a word about it till she came
down to dinner, and then she asked me what time i wanted
the carriage. i said ‘aren’t you going too?’ and she
looked at me in that provoking way of hers,—you know!—a
look that takes you in from your topmost hair to your
shoe-edge,—and answered ‘did you think it possible!’
well, i flared up, and said of course i thought it possible,—why
shouldn’t it be possible? she looked at me in the
same way again and said—‘to the catsups? with you!’
now, you know, mr tempest, that was real downright rudeness,
and more than i could stand so i just gave way to my
mind. ‘look here,’ i said—‘though you are the daughter
of an earl, you needn’t turn up your nose at mrs catsup.
she isn’t half bad,—i don’t speak of her money,—but she’s
a real good sort, and has a kind heart, which it appears to
me is more than you have. mrs catsup would never treat
me as unkindly as you do.’ and then i choked,—i could
have burst out in a regular yell, if i hadn’t thought the footman
might be outside the door listening. and sibyl only
smiled, that patent ice-refrigerator smile of hers, and asked—‘would
you prefer to live with mrs catsup?’ of course
i told her no,—nothing would induce me to live with mrs
catsup, and then she said—‘miss chesney, you pay my
father for the protection and guarantee of his name and
position in english social circles, but the companionship
of my father’s daughter was not included in the bargain.
i have tried to make you understand as distinctly as
i can that i will not be seen in society with you,—not
because i dislike you,—far from it,—but simply
because people would say i was acting as your paid
companion. you force me to speak plainly, and i am
sorry if i offend. as for mrs catsup, i have only met her
once, and she seemed to me very common and ill-bred.
besides i do not care for the society of tradespeople.’
and with that she got up and sailed out,—and i heard her
order the carriage for me at ten. it’s coming round directly,
and just look at my red eyes! it’s awfully hard on me,—i
[p ]
 know old catsup made his pile out of varnish, but varnish
is as good as anything else in the general market.
 and——and——it’s
all out now, mr tempest,—and you can tell sibyl
what i’ve said if you like; i know you’re in love with her!”
i stared, bewildered by her voluble and almost breathless
outburst.
“really, miss chesney,” i began formally.
“oh yes, miss chesney, miss chesney—it’s all very well!”
she repeated impatiently, snatching up a gorgeous evening
cloak which i mutely volunteered to put on, an offer she as
mutely accepted—“i’m only a girl, and it isn’t my fault if
i’ve got a vulgar man for a father who wants to see me
married to an english nobleman before he dies,—that’s his
look-out—i don’t care about it. english noblemen are a
ricketty lot in my opinion. but i’ve as good a heart as anyone,
and i could love sibyl if she’d let me, but she won’t.
she leads the life of an ice-berg, and doesn’t care a rap for
anyone. she doesn’t care for you, you know!—i wish she
did,—she’d be more human!”
“i’m very sorry for all this,”—i said, smiling into the
piquante face of the really sweet-natured girl, and gently
fastening the jewelled clasp of her cloak at her throat—“but
you mustn’t mind it so much. you are a dear little soul
diana,—kind and generous and impulsive and all the rest
of it,—but,—well——english people are very apt to misunderstand
americans. i can quite enter into your feelings,—still
you know lady sibyl is very proud——”
“proud!” she interrupted—“my! i guess it must feel
something splendid to have an ancestor who was piked
through the body on bosworth field, and left there for the
birds to eat. it seems to give a kind of stiffness in the back
to all the family ever afterwards. shouldn’t wonder if the
descendants of the birds who ate him felt kinder stuck up
about it too!”
i laughed,—she laughed with me, and was quite herself
again.
“if i told you my ancestor was a pilgrim father, you
[p ]
 wouldn’t believe me i expect!” she said, the corners of her
mouth dimpling.
“i should believe anything from your lips!” i declared
gallantly.
“well, believe that, then! swallow it down if you can!
i can’t! he was a pilgrim father in the mayflower, and
he fell on his knees and thanked god as soon as he touched
dry land in the true pilgrim-father way. but he couldn’t
hold a candle to the piked man at bosworth.”
here we were interrupted by the entrance of a footman.
“the carriage is waiting, miss.”
“thanks,—all right. good-night mr tempest,—you’d
better send word to sibyl you are here; lord elton is
dining out, but sibyl will be at home all the evening.”
i offered her my arm, and escorted her to the carriage,
feeling a little sorry for her as she drove off in solitary state
to the festive ‘crush’ of the successful varnisher. she was a
good girl, a bright girl, a true girl,—vulgar and flippant at
times, yet on the whole sincere in her better qualities of
character and sentiment,—and it was this very sincerity which,
being quite unconventional and not at all la mode, was misunderstood,
and would always be misunderstood by the higher
and therefore more hypocritically polished circles of english
society.
i returned to the drawing-room slowly and meditatively,
telling one of the servants on my way to ask lady sibyl if she
could see me for a few moments. i was not kept waiting
long; i had only paced the room twice up and down when
she entered, looking so strangely wild and beautiful that i
could scarcely forbear uttering an exclamation of wonder.
she wore white as was always her custom in the evenings,—her
hair was less elaborately dressed than usual, and clustered
over her brow in loose wavy masses,—her face was exceedingly
pale, and her eyes appeared larger and darker by comparison—her
smile was vague and fleeting like that of a sleep-walker.
she gave me her hand; it was dry and burning.
“my father is out—” she began.
[p ]“i know. but i came to see you. may i stay a little?”
she murmured assent, and sinking listlessly into a chair, began
to play with some roses in a vase on the table beside
her.
“you look tired lady sibyl,”—i said gently—“are you
not well?”
“i am quite well—” she answered—“but you are right in
saying i am tired. i am dreadfully tired!”
“you have been doing too much perhaps?—your attendance
on your mother tries you——”
she laughed bitterly.
“attendance on my mother!—pray do not credit me with
so much devotion. i never attend on my mother. i cannot
do it; i am too much of a coward. her face terrifies
me; and whenever i do venture to go near her, she tries to
speak, with such dreadful, such ghastly efforts, as make her
more hideous to look at than anyone can imagine. i should
die of fright if i saw her often. as it is, when i do see her
i can scarcely stand—and twice i have fainted with the
horror of it. to think of it!—that that living corpse with
the fearful fixed eyes and distorted mouth should actually
be my mother!”
she shuddered violently, and her very lips paled as she
spoke. i was seriously concerned, and told her so.
“this must be very bad for your health,”—i said, drawing
my chair closer to hers—“can you not get away for a
change?”
she looked at me in silence. the expression of her eyes
thrilled me strangely,—it was not tender or wistful, but fierce,
passionate and commanding.
“i saw miss chesney for a few moments just now”—i
resumed,—“she seemed very unhappy.”
“she has nothing to be unhappy about—” said sibyl
coldly—“except the time my mother takes in dying. but
she is young; she can afford to wait a little for the elton
coronet.”
“is not——may not this be a mistaken surmise of yours?”
[p ]
 i ventured gently—“whatever her faults, i think the girl
admires and loves you.”
she smiled scornfully.
“i want neither her love nor her admiration,”—she said—“i
have few women-friends and those few are all hypocrites
whom i mistrust. when diana chesney is my step-mother,
we shall still be strangers.”
i felt i was on delicate ground, and that i could not continue
the conversation without the risk of giving offence.
“where is your friend?” asked sibyl suddenly, apparently
to change the subject—“why does he so seldom come here
now?”
“rimânez? well, he is a very queer fellow, and at times
takes an abhorrence for all society. he frequently meets
your father at the club, and i suppose his reason for not
coming here is that he hates women.”
“all women?” she queried with a little smile.
“without exception!”
“then he hates me?”
“i did not say that—” i answered quickly—“no one could
hate you, lady sibyl,—but truly, as far as prince rimânez
is concerned, i expect he does not abate his aversion to
womankind (which is his chronic malady) even for you.”
“so he will never marry?” she said musingly.
i laughed. “oh, never! that you may be quite sure of.”
still playing with the roses near her, she relapsed into
silence. her breath came and went quickly; i saw her long
eyelashes quiver against the pale rose-leaf tint of her cheeks,—the
pure outline of her delicate profile suggested to my mind
one of fra angelico’s meditative saints or angels. all at once,
while i yet watched her admiringly, she suddenly sprang erect,
crushing a rose in her hand,—her head thrown back, her eyes
flashing, her whole frame trembling.
“oh, i cannot bear it!” she cried wildly—“i cannot bear
it!”
i started up astonished, and confronted her.
“sibyl!”
[p ]“oh, why don’t you speak, and fill up the measure of my
degradation!” she went on passionately—“why don’t you tell
me, as you tell my father, your purpose in coming here?—why
don’t you say to me, as you say to him, that your
sovereign choice has fastened upon me,—that i am the
woman out of all the world you have elected to marry!
look at me!” and she raised her arms with a tragic gesture;
“is there any flaw in the piece of goods you wish to purchase?
this face is deemed worthy of the fashionable
photographer’s pains; worthy of being sold for a shilling as
one of england’s ‘beauties,’—this figure has served as a
model for the showing-off of many a modiste’s costume,
purchased at half-cost on the understanding that i must
state to my circle of acquaintance the name of the maker or
designer,—these eyes, these lips, these arms are all yours
for the buying! why do you expose me to the shame of
dallying over your bargain?—by hesitating and considering
as to whether, after all, i am worthy of your gold!”
she seemed seized by some hysterical passion that convulsed
her, and in mingled amazement, alarm and distress, i
sprang to her and caught her hands in my own.
“sibyl, sibyl!” i said—“hush—hush! you are overwrought
with fatigue and excitement,—you cannot know
what you are saying. my darling, what do you take me
for?—what is all this nonsense in your mind about buying
and selling? you know i love you,—i have made no
secret of it,—you must have seen it in my face,—and if i
have hesitated to speak, it is because i feared your rejection
of me. you are too good for me, sibyl,—too good for any
man,—i am not worthy to win your beauty and innocence.
my love, my love—do not give way in this manner”—for as
i spoke she clung to me like a wild bird suddenly caged—“what
can i say to you, but that i worship you with all the
strength of my life,—i love you so deeply that i am afraid
to think of it; it is a passion i dare not dwell upon, sibyl,—i
love you too well,—too madly for my own peace——”
i trembled, and was silent,—her soft arms clinging to me
[p ]
 robbed me of a portion of my self-control. i kissed the
rippling waves of her hair; she lifted her head and looked up
at me, her eyes alit with some strange lustre that was not love
as much as fear,—and the sight of her beauty thus yielded as it
were to my possession, broke down the barriers of restraint i
had hitherto imposed upon myself. i kissed her on the lips,—a
long passionate kiss that, to my excited fancy, seemed to
mingle our very beings into one,—but while i yet held her in
my arms, she suddenly released herself and pushed me back.
standing apart from me she trembled so violently that i feared
she would fail,—and i took her hand and made her sit down.
she smiled,—a very wan smile.
“what did you feel then?” she asked.
“when, sibyl?”
“just now,—when you kissed me?”
“all the joys of heaven and fires of hell in a moment!” i
said.
she regarded me with a curious musing frown.
“strange! do you know what i felt?”
i shook my head smiling, and pressed my lips on the soft
small hand i held.
“nothing!” she said, with a kind of hopeless gesture—“i
assure you, absolutely nothing! i cannot feel. i am one
of your modern women,—i can only think,—and analyse.”
“think and analyse as much as you will, my queen,”—i
answered playfully—“if you will only think you can be happy
with me. that is all i desire.”
“can you be happy with me?” she asked—“wait—do
not answer for a moment, till i tell you what i am. you
are altogether mistaken in me.” she was silent for some
minutes, and i watched her anxiously. “i was always intended
for this”—she said slowly at last,—“this, to which i
have now come,—to be the property of a rich man. many
men have looked at me with a view to purchase, but they
could not pay the price my father demanded. pray do
not look so distressed!—what i say is quite true and quite
commonplace,—all the women of the upper classes,—the
[p ]
 unmarried ones,—are for sale now in england as utterly as
the circassian girls in a barbarian slave-market. i see you
wish to protest, and assure me of your devotion,—but there
is no need of this,—i am quite sure you love me,—as much
as any man can love,—and i am content. but you do not
know me really,—you are attracted by my face and form,—and
you admire my youth and innocence, which you think
i possess. but i am not young—i am old in heart and feeling.
i was young for a little while at willowsmere, when i
lived among flowers and birds and all the trustful honest
creatures of the woods and fields,—but one season in town
was sufficient to kill my youth in me,—one season of dinners
and balls, and—fashionable novel-reading. now you have
written a book, and therefore you must know something about
the duties of authorship,—of the serious and even terrible
responsibility writers incur when they send out to the world
books full of pernicious and poisonous suggestion to contaminate
the minds that have hitherto been clean and undiseased.
your book has a noble motive; and for this i
admire it in many parts, though to me it is not as convincing
as it might have been. it is well written too; but i gained
the impression while reading it, that you were not altogether
sincere yourself in the thoughts you strove to inculcate,—and
that therefore you just missed what you should have
gained.”
“i am sure you are right,”—i said, with a wholesome pang
of humiliation—“the book is worthless as literature,—it is
only the ‘boom’ of a season!”
“at any rate,”—she went on, her eyes darkening with the
intensity of her feeling—“you have not polluted your pen with
the vileness common to many of the authors of the day.
i ask you, do you think a girl can read the books that
are now freely published, and that her silly society friends
tell her to read,—‘because it is so dreadfully queer!’—and
yet remain unspoilt and innocent? books that go into the
details of the lives of outcasts?—that explain and analyse
the secret vices of men?—that advocate almost as a sacred
[p ]
 duty ‘free love’ and universal polygamy?—that see no shame
in introducing into the circles of good wives and pure-minded
girls, a heroine who boldly seeks out a man, any man, in
order that she may have a child by him, without the ‘degradation’
of marrying him? i have read all those books,—and
what can you expect of me? not innocence, surely! i
despise men,—i despise my own sex,—i loathe myself for
being a woman! you wonder at my fanaticism for mavis
clare,—it is only because for a time her books give me
back my self-respect, and make me see humanity in a nobler
light,—because she restores to me, if only for an hour, a
kind of glimmering belief in god, so that my mind feels
refreshed and cleansed. all the same, you must not look
upon me as an innocent young girl geoffrey,—a girl such as
the great poets idealized and sang of,—i am a contaminated
creature, trained to perfection in the lax morals and prurient
literature of my day.”
i looked at her in silence, pained, startled, and with a sense
of shock, as though something indefinably pure and precious
had crumbled into dust at my feet. she rose and began pacing
the room restlessly, moving to and fro with a slow yet fierce
grace that reminded me against my wish and will of the movement
of some imprisoned and savage beast of prey.
“you shall not be deceived in me,”—she said, pausing a
moment and eyeing me sombrely—“if you marry me, you
must do so with a full realization of the choice you make.
for with such wealth as yours, you can of course wed any
woman you fancy. i do not say you could find a girl better
than i am; i do not think you could in my ‘set,’ because
we are all alike,—all tarred with the same brush, and filled
with the same merely sensual and materialistic views of life
and its responsibilities as the admired heroines of the
‘society’ novels we read. away in the provinces, among
the middle classes it is possible you might discover a really
good girl of the purest blush-rose innocence,—but then you
might also find her stupid and unentertaining, and you
would not care for that. my chief recommendation is that
[p ]
 i am beautiful,—you can see that; everybody can see that,—and
i am not so affected as to pretend to be unconscious
of the fact. there is no sham about my external appearance;
my hair is not a wig,—my complexion is natural,—my
figure is not the result of the corset-maker’s art,—my
eyebrows and eyelashes are undyed. oh yes,—you can be
sure that the beauty of my body is quite genuine!—but it
is not the outward expression of an equally beautiful soul.
and this is what i want you to understand. i am passionate,
resentful, impetuous,—frequently unsympathetic, and inclined
to morbidness and melancholy, and i confess i have
imbibed, consciously or unconsciously, that complete contempt
of life and disbelief in a god, which is the chief theme
of nearly all the social teachings of the time.”
she ceased,—and i gazed at her with an odd sense of
mingled worship and disillusion, even as a barbarian might
gaze at an idol whom he still loved, but whom he could no
longer believe in as divine. yet what she said was in no way
contrary to my own theories,—how then could i complain?
i did not believe in a god; why should i inconsistently feel
regret that she shared my unbelief? i had involuntarily
clung to the old-fashioned idea that religious faith was a
sacred duty in womanhood; i was not able to offer any
reason for this notion, unless it was the romantic fancy of
having a good woman to pray for one, if one had no time and
less inclination to pray for one’s self. however, it was evident
sibyl was ‘advanced’ enough to do without superstitious
observances; she would never pray for me;—and if we had
children, she would never teach them to make their first
tender appeals to heaven for my sake or hers. i smothered
a slight sigh, and was about to speak, when she came up to
me and laid her two hands on my shoulders. “you look
unhappy, geoffrey,”—she said in gentler accents—“be
consoled!—it is not too late for you to change your
mind!”
i met the questioning glance of her eyes,—beautiful,
lustrous eyes as clear and pure as light itself.
[p ]“i shall never change, sibyl,” i answered—“i love you,—i
shall always love you. but i wish you would not analyse
yourself so pitilessly,—you have such strange ideas—”
“you think them strange?” she said—“you should not,—in
these ‘new women’ days! i believe that, thanks to
newspapers, magazines and ‘decadent’ novels, i am in all
respects eminently fitted to be a wife!” and she laughed
bitterly—“there is nothing in the rôle of marriage that i do
not know, though i am not yet twenty. i have been prepared
for a long time to be sold to the highest bidder, and
what few silly notions i had about love,—the love of the
poets and idealists,—when i was a dreamy child at willowsmere,
are all dispersed and ended. ideal love is dead,—and
worse than dead, being out of fashion. carefully instructed
as i have been in the worthlessness of everything
but money, you can scarcely be surprised at my speaking of
myself as an object of sale. marriage for me is a sale, as
far as my father is concerned,—for you know well enough
that however much you loved me or i loved you, he would
never allow me to marry you if you were not rich, and
richer than most men. i want you to feel that i fully recognize
the nature of the bargain struck; and i ask you not
to expect a girl’s fresh, confiding love from a woman as
warped in heart and mind as i am!”
“sibyl,”—i said earnestly—“you wrong yourself; i am
sure you wrong yourself! you are one of those who can
be in the world yet not of it; your mind is too open and
pure to be sullied, even by contact with evil things. i will
believe nothing you say against your own sweet and noble
character,—and, sibyl, let me again ask you not to distress
me by this constant harping on the subject of my wealth, or
i shall be inclined to look upon it as a curse,—i should
love you as much if i were poor——”
“oh, you might love me”—she interrupted me, with a
strange smile—“but you would not dare to say so!”
i was silent. suddenly she laughed, and linked her arms
caressingly round my neck.
[p ]“there, geoffrey!” she said—“i have finished my discourse,—my
bit of ibsenism, or whatever other ism affects
me,—and we need not be miserable about it. i have said
what was in my mind; i have told you the truth, that in
heart i am neither young nor innocent. but i am no worse
than all my ‘set’ so perhaps you had better make the best
of me. i please your fancy, do i not?”
“my love for you cannot be so lightly expressed, sibyl!” i
answered in rather a pained tone.
“never mind,—it is my humour so to express it”—she
went on—“i please your fancy, and you wish to marry me.
well now, all i ask is, go to my father and buy me at once!
conclude the bargain! and when you have bought me,—don’t
look so tragic!” and she laughed again—“and when
you have paid the clergyman, and paid the bridesmaids
(with monogram lockets or brooches) and paid the guests
(with wedding-cake and champagne) and cleared up all scores
with everybody, even to the last man who shuts the door of
the nuptial brougham,—will you take me away,—far away
from this place—this house, where my mother’s face haunts
me like a ghost in the darkness; where i am tortured by
terrors night and day,—where i hear such strange sounds,
and dream of such ghastly things,—” here her voice suddenly
broke, and she hid her face against my breast—“oh yes,
geoffrey, take me away as quickly as possible! let us
never live in hateful london, but at willowsmere; i may
find some of the old joys there,—and some of the happy
bygone days.”
touched by the appealing pathos of her accents, i pressed
her to my heart, feeling that she was scarcely accountable for
the strange things she said in her evidently overwrought and
excitable condition.
“it shall be as you wish, my darling,” i said—“the sooner
i have you all to myself the better. this is the end of
march,—will you be ready to marry me in june?”
“yes,” she answered, still hiding her face.
“and now sibyl,” i went on—“remember,—there must be
[p ]
 no more talk of money and bargaining. tell me what you
have not yet told me,—that you love me,—and would love
me even if i were poor.”
she looked up, straightly and unflinchingly full into my
eyes.
“i cannot tell you that,”—she said,—“i have told you i
do not believe in love; and if you were poor i certainly
should not marry you. it would be no use!”
“you are frank, sibyl!”
“it is best to be frank, is it not?” and she drew a flower
from the knot at her bosom, and began fastening it in my
coat—“geoffrey what is the good of pretence? you would
hate to be poor, and so should i. i do not understand the
verb ‘to love,’—now and then when i read a book by mavis
clare, i believe love may exist, but when i close the book
my belief is shut up with it. so do not ask for what is not
in me. i am willing—even glad to marry you; that is all
you must expect.”
“all!” i exclaimed, with a sudden mingling of love and
wrath in my blood, as i closed my arms about her and kissed
her passionately—“all!—you impassive ice-flower, it is not
all!—you shall melt to my touch and learn what love is,—do
not think you can escape its influence, you dear, foolish,
beautiful child! your passions are asleep,—they must
wake!”
“for you?” she queried, resting her head back against my
shoulder, and gazing up at me with a dreamy radiance in her
lovely eyes.
“for me!”
she laughed.
“‘oh bid me love, and i will love!’”—she hummed softly
under her breath.
“you will, you must, you shall!” i said ardently. “i will
be your master in the art of loving!”
“it is a difficult art!” she said—“i am afraid it will take
a life-time to complete my training, even with my ‘master.’”
and a smile still lingered in her eyes, giving them a witch-like
[p ]
 glamour, when i kissed her again and bade her good-night.
“you will tell prince rimânez the news?” she said.
“if you wish it.”
“of course i wish it. tell him at once. i should like
him to know.”
i went down the stairs,—she leaned over the balustrade
looking after me.
“good-night geoffrey!” she called softly.
“good-night sibyl!”
“be sure you tell prince rimânez!”
her white figure disappeared; and i walked out of the
house in a chaotic state of mind, divided between pride,
ecstasy and pain,—the engaged husband of an earl’s daughter,—the
lover of a woman who had declared herself incapable
of love and destitute of faith.
[p ]xviii
looking back through the space of only three years
to this particular period of my life, i can remember
distinctly the singular expression of lucio’s face when i
told him that sibyl elton had accepted me. his sudden
smile gave a light to his eyes that i had never seen in
them before,—a brilliant yet sinister glow, strangely suggestive
of some inwardly suppressed wrath and scorn. while i spoke
he was, to my vexation, toying with that uncanny favourite of
his, the ‘mummy-insect,’—and it annoyed me beyond measure
to see the repulsive pertinacity with which the glittering bat-like
creature clung to his hand.
“women are all alike,”—he said with a hard laugh, when
he had heard my news,—“few of them have moral force
enough to resist that temptation of a rich marriage.”
i was irritated at this.
“it is scarcely fair of you to judge everything by the money-standard,”—i
said,—then, after a little pause i added what in
my own heart i knew to be a lie,—“she,—sibyl,—loves me
for myself alone.”
his glance flashed over me like lightning.
“oh!—sets the wind in that quarter! why then, my dear
geoffrey, i congratulate you more heartily than ever. to
conquer the affections of one of the proudest girls in england,
and win her love so completely as to be sure she would
marry you even if you had not a sou to bless yourself with—this
is a victory indeed!—and one of which you may
[p ]
 well be proud. again and yet again i congratulate
you!”
tossing the horrible thing he called his ‘sprite’ off to fly
on one of its slow humming circuits round the room, he shook
my hand fervently, still smiling,—and i,—feeling instinctively
that he was as fully aware of the truth as i was, namely, that
had i been a poor author with nothing but what i could earn
by my brains, the lady sibyl elton would never have looked
at me, much less agreed to marry me,—kept silence lest i
should openly betray the reality of my position.
“you see”—he went on, with a cheerful relentlessness—“i
was not aware that any old-world romance graced the disposition
of one so apparently impassive as your beautiful
fiancée. to love for love’s sake only, is becoming really an
obsolete virtue. i thought lady sibyl was an essentially
modern woman, conscious of her position, and the necessity
there was for holding that position proudly before the world
at all costs,—and that the pretty pastoral sentiments of
poetical phyllises and amandas had no place in her nature.
i was wrong, it seems; and for once i have been mistaken
in the fair sex!” here he stretched out his hand to the
‘sprite,’ that now came winging its way back, and settled at
once on its usual resting-place; “my friend, i assure you, if
you have won a true woman’s true love, you have a far
greater fortune than your millions,—a treasure that none
can afford to despise.”
his voice softened,—his eyes grew dreamy and less scornful,—and
i looked at him in some astonishment.
“why lucio, i thought you hated women?”
“so i do!” he replied quickly—“but do not forget why
i hate them! it is because they have all the world’s possibilities
of good in their hands, and the majority of them
deliberately turn these possibilities to evil. men are influenced
entirely by women, though few of them will own it,—through
women they are lifted to heaven or driven to hell.
the latter is the favourite course, and the one almost
universally adopted.”
[p ]his brow darkened, and the lines round his proud mouth
grew hard and stern. i watched him for a moment,—then
with sudden irrelevance i said—
“put that abominable ‘sprite’ of yours away, will you? i
hate to see you with it!”
“what, my poor egyptian princess!” he exclaimed with a
laugh—“why so cruel to her geoffrey? if you had lived
in her day, you might have been one of her lovers! she
was no doubt a charming person,—i find her charming
still! however, to oblige you—” and here, placing the
insect in its crystal receptacle he carried it away to the other
end of the room. then, returning towards me slowly, he
said—“who knows what the ‘sprite’ suffered as a woman,
geoffrey! perhaps she made a rich marriage, and repented
it! at anyrate i am sure she is much happier in her present
condition!”
“i have no sympathy with such a ghastly fancy,”—i said
abruptly—“i only know that she or it is a perfectly loathsome
object to me.”
“well,—some ‘transmigrated’ souls are loathsome objects
to look at;”—he declared imperturbably—“when they are
deprived of their respectable two-legged fleshly covering, it
is extraordinary what a change the inexorable law of nature
makes in them!”
“what nonsense you talk, lucio!” i said impatiently—“how
can you know anything about it!”
a sudden shadow passed over his face, giving it a strange
pallor and impenetrability.
“have you forgotten”—he said in deliberately measured
accents—“that your friend john carrington, when he wrote
that letter of introduction i brought from him to you, told
you in it, that in all matters scientific i was an ‘absolute
master?’ in these ‘matters scientific’ you have not tested
my skill,—yet you ask—‘how can i know?’ i answer that
i do know—many things of which you are ignorant. do
not presume too much on your own intellectual capability
my friend,—lest i prove it naught!—lest i demonstrate to
[p ]
 you, beyond all possibility of consoling doubt, that the
shreds and strippings of that change you call death, are only
so many embryos of new life which you must live, whether
you will or no!”
somewhat abashed by his words and still more by his
manner, i said—
“pardon me!—i spoke in haste of course,—but you know
my theories—”
“most thoroughly!” and he laughed, with an immediate
resumption of his old manner—“‘every man his own theory’
is the fashionable motto of the hour. each little biped
tells you that he has his ‘own idea’ of god, and equally
‘his own’ idea of the devil. it is very droll! but let us
return to the theme of love. i feel i have not congratulated
you half enough,—for surely fortune favours you singularly.
out of the teeming mass of vain and frivolous femininity,
you have secured a unique example of beauty, truth and
purity,—a woman, who apart from all self-interest and
worldly advantage, weds you, with five millions, for yourself
alone! the prettiest poem in the world could be
made out of such an exquisitely innocent maiden type!
you are one of the luckiest men alive; in fact, you have
nothing more to wish for!”
i did not contradict him, though in my own mind i felt
that the circumstances of my engagement left much to be
desired. i, who scoffed at religion, wished it had formed part
of the character of my future wife,—i, who sneered at sentiment,
craved for some expression of it in the woman whose
beauty attracted my desires. however i determinedly
smothered all the premonitions of my own conscience, and
accepted what each day of my idle and useless life brought
me without considering future consequences.
the papers soon had the news that “a marriage has been
arranged and will shortly take place between sibyl, only
daughter of the earl of elton, and geoffrey tempest, the
famous millionaire.” not ‘famous author’ mark you!—though
i was still being loudly ‘boomed.’ morgeson, my
[p ]
 publisher, could offer me no consolation as to my chances of
winning and keeping a steady future fame. the tenth
edition of my book was announced, but we had not actually
disposed of more than two thousand copies, including a one-volume
issue which had been hastily thrust on the market.
and the work i had so mercilessly and maliciously slated,—‘differences’
by mavis clare was in its thirtieth thousand!
i commented on this with some anger to morgeson, who was
virtuously aggrieved at my complaint.
“dear me, mr tempest, you are not the only writer who
has been ‘boomed’ by the press and who nevertheless does
not sell,”—he exclaimed—“no one can account for the
caprices of the public; they are entirely beyond the most
cautious publisher’s control or calculation. miss clare is a
sore subject to many authors besides yourself,—she always
‘takes’ and no one can help it. i sympathize with you in
the matter heartily, but i am not to blame. at any rate
the reviewers are all with you,—their praise has been almost
unanimous. now mavis clare’s ‘differences,’ though to
my thinking a very brilliant and powerful book, has been
literally cut to pieces whenever it has been noticed at all,—and
yet the public go for her and don’t go for you. it isn’t
my fault. you see people have got compulsory education
now, and i’m afraid they begin to mistrust criticism, preferring
to form their own independent opinions; if this is
so, of course it will be a terrible thing, because the most
carefully organized clique in the world will be powerless.
everything has been done for you that can be done,
mr tempest,—i am sure i regret as much as yourself
that the result has not been all you expected or desired.
many authors would not care so much for the public
approval; the applause of cultured journalism such as
you have obtained, would be more than sufficient for
them.”
i laughed bitterly. ‘the applause of cultured journalism!’
i thought i knew something of the way in which such applause
was won. almost i began to hate my millions,—golden
[p ]
 trash that could only secure me the insincere flattery of fair-weather
friends,—and that could not give me fame,—such
fame as has sometimes been grasped in a moment by a
starving and neglected genius, who in the very arms of death,
succeeds in mastering the world. one day in a fit of disappointment
and petulance i said to lucio—
“you have not kept all your promises, my friend!—you
told me you could give me fame!”
he looked at me curiously.
“did i? well,—and are you not famous?”
“no. i am merely notorious,” i retorted.
he smiled.
“the word fame, my good geoffrey, traced to its origin
means ‘a breath’—the breath of popular adulation. you
have that—for your wealth.”
“but not for my work!”
“you have the praise of the reviewers!”
“what is that worth!”
“everything!” he answered smiling—“in the reviewers’
own opinion!”
i was silent.
“you speak of work;” he went on—“now the nature of
work i cannot exactly express, because it is a divine thing
and is judged by a divine standard. one must consider in
all work two things; first, the object for which it is
undertaken, and secondly the way in which it is performed.
all work should have a high and unselfish intent,—without
this, it perishes and is not considered work at all,—not at
least by the eternal judges invisible. if it is work, truly
and nobly done in every sense of the word, it carries with it
its own reward, and the laurels descend from heaven shaped
ready for wearing,—no earthly power can bestow them. i
cannot give you that fame,—but i have secured you a very
fair imitation of it.”
i was obliged to acquiesce, though more or less morosely,—whereat
i saw that he was somewhat amused. unwilling to
incur his contempt i said no more concerning the subject
[p ]
 that was the nearest to my heart, and wore out many sleepless
hours at night in trying to write a new book,—something
novel and daring, such as should force the public to credit me
with a little loftier status than that obtained by the possession
of a huge banking account. but the creative faculty seemed
dead in me,—i was crushed by a sense of impotence and
failure; vague ideas were in my brain that would not lend
themselves to expression in words,—and such a diseased love
of hypercriticism controlled me, that after a miserably nervous
analysis of every page i wrote, i tore it up as soon as it
was written, thus reducing myself to a state of mind that was
almost unbearable.
early in april i made my first visit to willowsmere, having
received information from the head of the firm of decorators
and furnishers employed there, that their work was close on
completion, and that they would be glad of a visit of inspection
from me. lucio and i went down together for the day, and
as the train rushed through a green and smiling landscape,
bearing us away from the smoke, dirt and noise of the restless
modern babylon, i was conscious of a gradually deepening
peace and pleasure. the first sight of the place i had recklessly
purchased without so much as looking at it, filled me
with delight and admiration. it was a beautiful old house,
ideally english and suggestive of home-happiness. ivy and
jessamine clung to its red walls and picturesque gables,—through
the long vista of the exquisitely wooded grounds, the
silver gleam of the avon river could be discerned, twisting in
and out like a ribbon tied in true love-knots,—the trees and
shrubs were sprouting forth in all their fresh spring beauty,—the
aspect of the country was indescribably bright and soothing,
and i began to feel as if a burden had been suddenly lifted
from my life leaving me free to breathe and enjoy my liberty.
i strolled from room to room of my future abode, admiring the
taste and skill with which the whole place had been fitted and
furnished, down to the smallest detail of elegance, comfort
and convenience. here my sibyl was born, i thought, with a
lover-like tenderness,—here she would dwell again as my wife,
[p ]
 amid the lovely and beloved surroundings of her childhood,—and
we should be happy—yes, we should be happy, despite
all the dull and heartless social doctrines of the modern world.
in the spacious and beautiful drawing-room i stopped to look
out from the windows on the entrancing view of lawn and
woodland that stretched before me,—and as i looked, a warm
sense of gratitude and affection filled me for the friend to
whose good offices i owed this fair domain. turning, i
grasped him by the hand.
“it is all your doing, lucio!” i said—“i feel i can never
thank you enough! without you i should perhaps never
have met sibyl,—i might never have heard of her, or of
willowsmere; and i never could have been as happy as
i am to-day!”
“oh, you are happy then?” he queried with a little smile—“i
fancied you were not!”
“well—i have not been as happy as i expected to be;” i
confessed,—“something in my sudden accession to wealth
seems to have dragged me down rather than lifted me up,——it
is strange——”
“it is not strange at all”—he interrupted,—“on the contrary
it is very natural. as a rule the most miserable people
in the world are the rich.”
“are you miserable, for instance?” i asked, smiling.
his eyes rested on me with a dark and dreary
pathos.
“are you too blind to see that i am?” he answered, his
accents vibrating with intense melancholy—“can you think
i am happy? does the smile i wear,—the disguising smile
men put on as a mask to hide their secret agonies from the
pitiless gaze of unsympathetic fellow-creatures,—persuade
you that i am free from care? as for my wealth,—i have
never told you the extent of it; if i did, it might indeed amaze
you, though i believe it would not now arouse your envy,
considering that your trifling five millions have not been
without effect in depressing your mind. but i,—i could
buy up kingdoms and be none the poorer,—i could throne
[p ]
 and unthrone kings and be none the wiser,—i could crush
whole countries under the iron heel of financial speculation,—i
could possess the world,—and yet estimate it at no
higher value than i do now,—the value of a grain of dust
circling through infinity, or a soap-bubble blown on the
wind!”
his brows knitted,—his face expressed pride, scorn and
sorrow.
“there is some mystery about you lucio;”—i said—“some
grief or loss that your wealth cannot repair—and that
makes you the strange being you are. one day perhaps
you will confide in me ...”
he laughed loudly,—almost fiercely;—and clapped me
heavily on the shoulder.
“i will!” he said—“i will tell you my history! and you,
excellent agnostic as you are, shall ‘minister to a mind
diseased,’ and ‘pluck out the memory of a rooted sorrow!’
what a power of expression there was in shakespeare, the
uncrowned but actual king of england! not the ‘rooted
sorrow’ alone was to be ‘plucked out’ but the very
‘memory’ of it. the apparently simple line holds complex
wisdom; no doubt the poet knew, or instinctively guessed
the most terrible fact in all the universe ...”
“and what is that?”
“the eternal consciousness of memory—” he replied—“god
can not forget,—and in consequence of this, his
creatures may not!”
i forbore to reply, but i suppose my face betrayed my
thoughts, for the cynical smile i knew so well played round
his mouth as he looked at me.
“i go beyond your patience, do i not!” he said, laughing
again—“when i mention god,—who is declared by certain
scientists to be non-existent except as a blind, indifferent
natural force or atom-producer;—you are bored! i can
see that at a glance. pray forgive me! let us resume our
tour of inspection through this charming abode. you will
be very difficult to satisfy if you are not a very emperor of
[p ]
 contentment here;—with a beautiful wife and plenty of cash,
you can well afford to give fame the go-by.”
“i may win it yet!” i said hopefully—“in this place, i
feel i could write something worthy of being written.”
“good! the ‘divine flutterings’ of winged thoughts are
in your brain! apollo grant them strength to fly! and
now let us have luncheon,—afterwards we shall have time
to take a stroll.”
in the dining-room i found an elegant repast prepared,
which rather surprised me, as i had given no orders, having
indeed forgotten to do so. lucio however had, it appeared,
not forgotten, and an advance telegram from him had placed
certain caterers at leamington on their mettle, with the result
that we sat down to a feast as delicate and luxurious as any
two epicures could desire.
“now i want you to do me a favour, geoffrey,”—said lucio,
during our luncheon—“you will scarcely need to reside here
till after your marriage; you have too many engagements in
town. you spoke of entertaining a big house-party down
here,—i wouldn’t do that if i were you,—it isn’t worth while.
you would have to get in a staff of servants, and leave them
all afterwards to their own devices while you are on your
honeymoon. this is what i propose,—give a grand fête
here in honour of your betrothal to lady sibyl, in may—and
let me be the master of the revels!”
i was in the mood to agree to anything,—moreover the
idea seemed an excellent one. i said so and rimânez went
on quickly—
“you understand of course, that if i undertake to do a
thing i always do it thoroughly, and brook no interference
with my plans. now as your marriage will be the signal for
our parting,—at any rate for a time,—i should like to show
my appreciation of your friendship, by organizing a brilliant
affair of the kind i suggest,—and if you will leave it all to
me, i guarantee you shall hold such a fête as has never been
seen or known in england. and it will be a personal satisfaction
to me if you consent to my proposal.”
[p ]“my dear fellow—” i answered—“of course i consent—willingly!
i give you carte blanche,—do as you like; do all
you like! it is most friendly and kind of you! but when
are we to make this sensation?”
“you are to be married in june?” he asked.
“yes,—in the second week of the month.”
“very well. the fête shall be held on the twenty-second
of may,—that will give society time to recover from the effect
of one burst of splendour in order to be ready for another,—namely
the wedding. now we need not talk of this any
more—it is settled,—the rest devolves on me. we’ve got
three or four hours to spare before we take the train back to
town,—suppose we take a saunter through the grounds?”
i assented to this, and accompanied him readily, feeling in
high spirits and good humour. willowsmere and its peaceful
loveliness seemed to cleanse my mind of all corroding influences;—the
blessed silence of the woods and hills, after
the rush and roar of town life, soothed and cheered me, and i
walked beside my companion with a light heart and smiling
face,—happy, and filled with a dim religious faith in the blue
sky, if not in the god beyond it. we sauntered through the
fair gardens which were now mine, and then out through the
park into a lovely little lane,—a true warwickshire lane, where
the celandines were strewing the grass with their bright gold
coinage, and the star-wort thrust up fairy bouquets of white bloom
between buttercups and lover, and where the hawthorn-buds
were beginning to show themselves like minute snow-pellets
among the glossy young green. a thrush warbled melodiously,—a
lark rose from almost our very feet and flung itself joyously
into the sky with a wild outburst of song,—a robin hopped
through a little hole in the hedge to look at us in blithe inquisitiveness
as we passed. all at once lucio stopped and laid his
hand on my shoulder,—his eyes had the beautiful melancholy
of a far-off longing which i could neither understand nor
define.
“listen, geoffrey!” he said—“listen to the silence of the
earth while the lark sings! have you ever observed the
[p ]
 receptive attitude in which nature seems to wait for sounds
divine!”
i did not answer,—the silence around us was indeed impressive;—the
warbling of the thrush had ceased, and only
the lark’s clear voice pealing over-head, echoed sweetly through
the stillness of the lane.
“in the clerical heaven,” went on lucio dreamily—“there
are no birds. there are only conceited human souls braying
forth ‘alleluia’! no flowers are included,—no trees;
only ‘golden streets.’ what a poor and barbarous conception!
as if a world inhabited by deity would not contain
the wonders, graces and beauties of all worlds! even this
little planet is more naturally beautiful than the clerical
heaven,—that is, it is beautiful wherever man is not. i
protest—i have always protested,—against the creation of
man!”
i laughed.
“you protest against your own existence then!” i said.
his eyes darkened slowly to a sombre brooding blackness.
“when the sea roars and flings itself in anger on the
shore, it craves its prey—mankind!—it seeks to wash the
fair earth clean of the puny insect that troubles the planet’s
peace! it drowns the noxious creature when it can, with
the aid of its sympathizing comrade the wind! when the
thunder crashes down a second after the lightning, does it
not seem to you that the very clouds combine in the holy
war? the war against god’s one mistake;—the making of
humanity,—the effort to sweep it out of the universe as one
erases a weak expression in an otherwise perfect poem!
you and i, for example, are the only discords in to-day’s
woodland harmony. we are not particularly grateful for
life,—we certainly are not content with it,—we have not the
innocence of a bird or a flower. we have more knowledge
you will say,—but how can we be sure of that? our wisdom
came from the devil in the first place, according to the
legend of the tree of knowledge,—the fruit of which taught
both good and evil, but which still apparently persuades
[p ]
 man to evil rather than good, and leads him on to a considerable
amount of arrogance besides, for he has an idea
he will be immortal as a god in the hereafter,—ye majestic
heavens!—what an inadequately stupendous fate for a grain
of worthless dust,—a dwarfish atom such as he!”
“well, i have no ideas of immortality”—i said—“i have
told you that often. this life is enough for me,—i want and
expect no other.”
“aye, but if there were another!” answered lucio, fixing
me with a steady look—“and—if you were not asked your
opinion about it—but simply plunged headlong into a state
of terrible consciousness in which you would rather not
be——”
“oh come,” i said impatiently—“do not let us theorise!
i am happy to-day!—my heart is as light as that of the bird
singing in the sky; i am in the very best of humours, and
could not say an unkind word to my worst enemy.”
he smiled.
“is that your humour?” and he took me by the arm—“then
there could be no better opportunity for showing you
this pretty little corner of the world;”—and walking on a
few yards, he dexterously turned me down a narrow path,
leading from the lane, and brought me face to face with a
lovely old cottage, almost buried in the green of the young
spring verdure, and surrounded by an open fence overgrown
with hawthorn and sweet-briar,—“keep firm hold over your
temper geoffrey,—and maintain the benignant tranquillity
of your mind!—here dwells the woman whose name and
fame you hate,—mavis clare!”
[p ]xix
the blood rushed to my face, and i stopped abruptly.
“let us go back,” i said.
“why?”
“because i do not know miss clare and do not want to
know her. literary women are my abhorrence,—they are
always more or less unsexed.”
“you are thinking of the ‘new’ women i suppose,—but
you flatter them,—they never had any sex to lose. the
self-degrading creatures who delineate their fictional heroines
as wallowing in unchastity, and who write freely on subjects
which men would hesitate to name, are unnatural hybrids of
no-sex. mavis clare is not one of them,—she is an ‘old-fashioned’
young woman. mademoiselle derino, the dancer,
is ‘unsexed,’ but you did not object to her on that score,—on
the contrary i believe you have shown your appreciation
of her talents by spending a considerable amount of cash
upon her.”
“that’s not a fair comparison”—i answered hotly—“mademoiselle
derino amused me for a time.”
“and was not your rival in art!” said lucio with a little
malicious smile—“i see! still,—as far as the question of
being ‘unsexed’ goes, i, personally, consider that a woman
who shows the power of her intellect is more to be respected
than the woman who shows the power of her legs. but men
always prefer the legs,—just as they prefer the devil to the
deity. all the same, i think, as we have time to spare, we
may as well see this genius.”
[p ]“genius!” i echoed contemptuously.
“feminine twaddler, then!” he suggested, laughing—“let
us see this feminine twaddler. she will no doubt prove as
amusing as mademoiselle derino in her way. i shall ring
the bell and ask if she is at home.”
he advanced towards the creeper-covered porch,—but i
stood back, mortified and sullen, determined not to accompany
him inside the house if he were admitted. suddenly a blithe
peal of musical laughter sounded through the air, and a clear
voice exclaimed—
“oh tricksy! you wicked boy! take it back directly
and apologise!”
lucio peered through the fence, and then beckoned to me
energetically.
“there she is!” he whispered, “there is the dyspeptic,
sour, savage old blue-stocking,—there, on the lawn,—by
heaven!—she’s enough to strike terror into the heart of any
man—and millionaire!”
i looked where he pointed, and saw nothing but a fair-haired
woman in a white gown, sitting in a low basket-chair, with
a tiny toy terrier on her lap. the terrier was jealously guarding
a large square dog-biscuit nearly as big as himself, and at
a little distance off sat a magnificent rough-coated st bernard,
wagging his feathery tail to and fro, with every sign of good-humour
and enjoyment. the position was evident at a glance,—the
small dog had taken his huge companion’s biscuit from
him and had conveyed it to his mistress,—a canine joke which
seemed to be appreciated and understood by all the parties
concerned. but as i watched the little group, i did not
believe that she whom i saw was mavis clare. that small
head was surely never made for the wearing of deathless
laurels, but rather for a garland of roses, (sweet and perishable)
twined by a lover’s hand. no such slight feminine
creature as the one i now looked upon could ever be capable
of the intellectual grasp and power of ‘differences,’ the book
i secretly admired and wondered at, but which i had anonymously
striven to ‘quash’ in its successful career. the writer
[p ]
 of such a work, i imagined, must needs be of a more or less
strong physique, with pronounced features and an impressive
personality. this butterfly-thing, playing with her dog, was
no type of a ‘blue-stocking,’ and i said as much to lucio.
“that cannot be miss clare,” i said—“more likely a
visitor,—or perhaps the companion-secretary. the novelist
must be very different in appearance to that frivolous young
person in white, whose dress is distinctly parisian, and
who seems to have nothing whatever to do but amuse
herself.”
“tricksy!” said the clear voice again—“take back the
biscuit and apologise!”
the tiny terrier looked round with an innocently abstracted
air, as if in the earnestness of his own thoughts, he had not
quite caught the meaning of the sentence.
“tricksy!” and the voice became more imperative—“take
it back and apologise!”
with a comical expression of resignation to circumstances,
‘tricksy’ seized the large biscuit, and holding it in his teeth
with gingerly care, jumped from his mistress’s knee and trotting
briskly up to the st bernard who was still wagging his tail and
smiling as visibly as dogs often can smile, restored his stolen
goods with three short yapping barks as much as to say
“there! take it!” the st bernard rose in all his majestic
bulk and sniffed at it,—then sniffed his small friend, apparently
in dignified doubt as to which was terrier and which was
biscuit,—then lying down again, he gave himself up to the
pleasure of munching his meal, the while “tricksy” with wild
barks of delight performed a sort of mad war-dance round and
round him by way of entertainment. this piece of dog-comedy
was still going on, when lucio turned away from his point of
observation at the fence, and going up to the gate, rang the
bell. a neat maid-servant answered the summons.
“is miss clare at home?” he asked.
“yes sir. but i am not sure whether she will receive
you,—” the maid replied—“unless you have an
appointment?”
[p ]“we have no appointment,”—said lucio,—“but if you will
take these cards,—” here he turned to me—“geoffrey, give
me one of yours!” i complied, somewhat reluctantly. “if
you will take these cards”—he resumed—“to miss clare,
it is just possible she may be kind enough to see us. if not,
it will be our loss.”
he spoke so gently and with such an ingratiating manner
that i could see the servant was at once prepossessed in his
favour.
“step in, sir, if you please,—” she said smiling and opening
the gate. he obeyed with alacrity,—and i, who a moment
ago had resolved not to enter the place, found myself passively
following him under an archway of sprouting young leaves
and early budding jessamine into ‘lily cottage’—which
was to prove one day, though i knew it not then, the only
haven of peace and security i should ever crave for,—and,
craving, be unable to win!
the house was much larger than it looked from the outside;
the entrance-hall was square and lofty, and panelled
with fine old carved oak, and the drawing-room into which
we were shown was one of the most picturesque and beautiful
apartments i had ever seen. there were flowers everywhere,—books,—rare
bits of china,—elegant trifles that only a
woman of perfect taste would have the sense to select and
appreciate,—on one or two of the side-tables and on the
grand piano were autograph-portraits of many of the greatest
celebrities in europe. lucio strolled about the room, making
soft comments.
“here is the autocrat of all the russias,” he said, pausing
before a fine portrait of the tsar—“signed by the imperial
hand too. now what has the ‘feminine twaddler’ done to
deserve that honour i wonder! here in strange contrast,
is the wild-haired paderewski,—and beside him the perennial
patti,—there is her majesty of italy, and here
we have the prince of wales,—all autographed likenesses.
upon my word, miss clare seems to attract a great many
notabilities around her without the aid of hard cash. i
[p ]
 wonder how she does it, geoffrey?”—and his eyes sparkled
half maliciously—“can it be a case of genius after all? look
at those lilies!” and he pointed to a mass of white bloom
in one of the windows—“are they not far more beautiful
creatures than men and women? dumb—yet eloquent of
purity!—no wonder the painters choose them as the only
flowers suitable for the adornment of angels.”
as he spoke the door opened, and the woman we had seen
on the lawn entered, carrying her toy terrier on one arm. was
she mavis clare? or some-one sent to say that the novelist
could not receive us? i wondered silently, looking at her in
surprise and something of confusion,—lucio advanced with
an odd mingling of humility and appeal in his manner which
was new to me.
“we must apologise for our intrusion, miss clare,”—he
said—“but happening to pass your house, we could not resist
making an attempt to see you. my name is——rimânez”—he
hesitated oddly for a second, then went on—“and this is my
friend mr geoffrey tempest, the author,——” the young lady
raised her eyes to mine with a little smile and courteous bend
of her head—“he has, as i daresay you know, become the
owner of willowsmere court. you will be neighbours, and
i hope, friends. in any case if we have committed a breach
of etiquette in venturing to call upon you without previous
introduction, you must try and forgive us! it is difficult,—to
me impossible,—to pass the dwelling of a celebrity without
offering homage to the presiding genius within.”
mavis clare,—for it was mavis clare,—seemed not to have
heard the intended compliment.
“you are very welcome,” she said simply, advancing with
a pretty grace, and extending her hand to each of us in turn,
“i am quite accustomed to visits from strangers. but i
already know mr tempest very well by reputation. won’t
you sit down?”
she motioned us to chairs in the lily-decked window-corner,
and rang the bell. her maid appeared.
“tea, janet.”
[p ]this order given, she seated herself near us, still holding
her little dog curled up against her like a small ball of silk.
i tried to converse, but could find nothing suitable to say,—the
sight of her filled me with too great a sense of self-reproach
and shame. she was such a quiet graceful creature,
so slight and dainty, so perfectly unaffected and simple in
manner, that as i thought of the slaughtering article i had
written against her work i felt like a low brute who had been
stoning a child. and yet,—after all it was her genius i hated,—the
force and passion of that mystic quality which wherever
it appears, compels the world’s attention,—this was the gift
she had that i lacked and coveted. moved by the most
conflicting sensations i gazed abstractedly out on the shady
old garden,—i heard lucio conversing on trifling matters of
society and literature generally, and every now and then her
bright laugh rang out like a little peal of bells. soon i felt,
rather than saw, that she was looking steadily at me,—and
turning, i met her eyes,—deep dense blue eyes, candidly
grave and clear.
“is this your first visit to willowsmere court?” she asked.
“yes,” i answered, making an effort to appear more at my
ease—“i bought the place,—on the recommendation of my
friend the prince here,—without looking at it.”
“so i heard,”—she said, still observing me curiously—“and
you are satisfied with it?”
“more than satisfied—i am delighted. it exceeds all my
best expectations.”
“mr tempest is going to marry the daughter of the former
owner of willowsmere,”—put in lucio,—“no doubt you
have seen it announced in the papers?”
“yes;”—she responded with a slight smile—“i have seen
it—and i think mr tempest is much to be congratulated.
lady sibyl is very lovely,—i remember her as a beautiful
child when i was a child myself—i never spoke to her, but
i often saw her. she must be charmed at the prospect of
returning as a bride to the old home she loved so well.”
here the servant entered with the tea, and miss clare,
[p ]
 putting down her tiny dog, went to the table to dispense it.
i watched her move across the room with a sense of vague
wonder and reluctant admiration,—she rather resembled a
picture by greuze in her soft white gown with a pale rose
nestled amid the old flemish lace at her throat,—and as she
turned her head towards us, the sunlight caught her fair hair
and turned it to the similitude of a golden halo circling her
brows. she was not a beauty; but she possessed an undoubted
individual charm,—a delicate attractiveness, which
silently asserted itself, as the breath of honeysuckle hidden in
the tangles of a hedge, will delight the wayfarer with sweet
fragrance though the flowers be unseen.
“your book was very clever, mr tempest”—she said
suddenly, smiling at me—“i read it as soon as it came out.
but do you know i think your article was even cleverer?”
i felt myself growing uncomfortably red in the face.
“to what article do you allude, miss clare?” i stammered
confusedly—“i do not write for any magazine.”
“no?” and she laughed gaily—“but you did on this
occasion! you ‘slated’ me very smartly!—i quite enjoyed
it. i found out that you were the author of the philippic,—not
through the editor of the journal—oh no, poor man! he
is very discreet; but through quite another person who must
be nameless. it is very difficult to prevent me from finding
out whatever i wish to know, especially in literary matters!
why, you look quite unhappy!” and her blue eyes danced
with fun as she handed me my cup of tea—“you really don’t
suppose i was hurt by your critique, do you? dear me, no!
nothing of that kind ever affronts me,—i am far too busy
to waste any thought on reviews or reviewers. only your
article was so exceptionally funny!”
“funny?” i echoed stupidly, trying to smile, but failing in
the effort.
“yes, funny!” she repeated—“it was so very angry that it
became amusing. my poor ‘differences’! i am really sorry
it put you into such a temper,—temper does exhaust one’s
energies so!”
[p ]she laughed again and sat down in her former place near
me, regarding me with a frankly open and half humorous
gaze which i found i could not meet with any sort of composure.
to say i felt foolish, would inadequately express my
sense of utter bafflement. this woman with her young unclouded
face, sweet voice and evidently happy nature, was not
at all the creature i had imagined her to be,—and i struggled
to say something,—anything,—that would furnish a reasonable
and coherent answer. i caught lucio’s glance,—one of
satirical amusement,—and my thoughts grew more entangled
than ever. a distraction however occurred in the behaviour
of the dog tricksy, who suddenly took up a position immediately
opposite lucio, and lifting his nose in air began
to howl with a desolate loudness astonishing in so small an
animal. his mistress was surprised.
“tricksy, what is the matter?” she exclaimed, catching
him up in her arms where he hid his face shivering and
moaning;—then she looked steadily at lucio—“i never
knew him do such a thing before”—she said—“perhaps
you do not like dogs, prince rimânez?”
“i am afraid they do not like me!” he replied, deferentially.
“then pray excuse me a moment!” she murmured, and left
the room, to return immediately without her canine favorite.
after this i noticed that her blue eyes often rested on lucio’s
handsome countenance with a bewildered and perplexed expression,
as if she saw something in his very beauty that she
disliked or distrusted. meanwhile i had recovered a little of
my usual self-possession, and i addressed her in a tone which
i meant to be kind, but which i knew was somewhat
patronizing.
“i am very glad, miss clare, that you were not offended at
the article you speak of. it was rather strong i admit,—but
you know we cannot all be of the same opinion ...”
“indeed no!” she said quietly and with a slight smile—“such
a state of things would make a very dull world! i
assure you i was not and am not in the least offended—the
critique was a smart piece of writing, and made not the
[p ]
 slightest effect on me or on my book. you remember what
shelley wrote of critics? no? you will find the passage
in his preface to ‘the revolt of islam,’ and it runs thus,—‘i
have sought to write as i believe that homer, shakespeare,
and milton wrote, with an utter disregard of
anonymous censure. i am certain that calumny and
misrepresentation, though it may move me to compassion
cannot disturb my peace. i shall understand the expressive
silence of those sagacious enemies who dare not trust themselves
to speak. i shall endeavour to extract from the
midst of insult and contempt and maledictions, those
admonitions which may tend to correct whatever imperfections
such censurers may discern in my appeal to the
public. if certain critics were as clear-sighted as they
are malignant, how great would be the benefit to be derived
from their virulent writings! as it is, i fear i shall be
malicious enough to be amused with their paltry tricks and
lame invectives. should the public judge that my composition
is worthless, i shall indeed bow before the tribunal
from which milton received his crown of immortality, and
shall seek to gather, if i live, strength from that defeat, which
may nerve me to some new enterprise of thought which may
not be worthless!’”
as she gave the quotation, her eyes darkened and
deepened,—her face was lighted up as by some inward illumination,—and
i discovered the rich sweetness of the voice
which made the name of ‘mavis’ suit her so well.
“you see i know my shelley!” she said with a little
laugh at her own emotion—“and those words are particularly
familiar to me, because i have had them painted up on a
panel in my study. just to remind me, in case i should
forget, what the really great geniuses of the world thought
of criticism,—because their example is very encouraging and
helpful to a humble little worker like myself. i am not a
press-favourite—and i never get good reviews,—but—” and
she laughed again—“i like my reviewers all the same! if
you have finished your tea, will you come and see them?”
[p ]come and see them! what did she mean? she seemed
delighted at my visible surprise, and her cheeks dimpled with
merriment.
“come and see them!” she repeated—“they generally
expect me at this hour!”
she led the way into the garden,—we followed,—i, in a
bewildered confusion of mind, with all my ideas respecting
‘unsexed females’ and repulsive blue-stockings upset by the
unaffected behaviour and charming frankness of this ‘celebrity’
whose fame i envied, and whose personality i could not but
admire. with all her intellectual gifts she was yet a lovable
woman,—ah mavis!—how lovable and dear i was destined
in misery to know! mavis, mavis!—i whisper your
sweet name in my solitude,—i see you in my dreams, and
kneeling before you i call you angel!—my angel at the gate
of a lost paradise, whose sword of genius turning every way,
keeps me back from all approach to my forfeited tree of
life!
[p ]xx
scarcely had we stepped out on the lawn before
an unpleasant incident occurred which might have
ended dangerously. at his mistress’s approach the big st
bernard dog rose from the sunny corner where he had been
peacefully dozing, and prepared to greet her,—but as soon as
he perceived us he stopped short with an ominous growl.
before miss clare could utter a warning word, he made a
couple of huge bounds and sprang savagely at lucio as though
to tear him in pieces,—lucio with admirable presence of
mind caught him firmly by the throat and forced him backwards.
mavis turned deathly pale.
“let me hold him! he will obey me!” she cried, placing
her little hand on the great dog’s neck—“down, emperor!
down! how dare you! down sir!”
in a moment ‘emperor’ dropped to the ground, and
crouched abjectly at her feet, breathing heavily and trembling
in every limb. she held him by the collar, and looked up at
lucio who was perfectly composed, though his eyes flashed
dangerously.
“i am so very sorry!” she murmured,—“i forgot,—you
told me dogs do not like you. but what a singularly marked
antipathy, is it not? i cannot understand it. emperor is
generally so good-natured,—i must apologize for his bad
conduct—it is quite unusual. i hope he has not hurt you?”
“not at all!” returned lucio affably but with a cold smile;
“i hope i have not hurt him,—or distressed you!”
[p ]she made no reply, but led the st bernard away and was
absent for a few minutes. while she was gone, lucio’s brow
clouded, and his face grew very stern.
“what do you think of her?” he asked me abruptly.
“i hardly know what to think,” i answered abstractedly—“she
is very different to what i imagined. her dogs are
rather unpleasant company!”
“they are honest animals!” he said morosely—“they
are no doubt accustomed to candour in their mistress, and
therefore object to personified lies.”
“speak for yourself!” i said irritably—“they object to
you, chiefly.”
“am i not fully aware of that?” he retorted—“and do i
not speak for myself? you do not suppose i would call
you a personified lie, do you,—even if it were true! i
would not be so uncivil. but i am a living lie, and knowing
it i admit it, which gives me a certain claim to honesty above
the ordinary run of men. this woman-wearer of laurels is a
personified truth!—imagine it!—she has no occasion to pretend
to be anything else than she is! no wonder she is
famous!”
i said nothing, as just then the subject of our conversation
returned, tranquil and smiling, and did her best, with the tact
and grace of a perfect hostess, to make us forget her dog’s
ferocious conduct, by escorting us through all the prettiest
turns and twisting paths of her garden, which was quite a
bower of spring beauty. she talked to us both with equal
ease, brightness and cleverness, though i observed that she
studied lucio with close interest, and watched his looks and
movements with more curiosity than liking. passing under
an arching grove of budding syringas, we presently came to an
open court-yard paved with blue and white tiles, having in its
centre a picturesque dove-cote built in the form of a chinese
pagoda. here pausing, mavis clapped her hands. a cloud
of doves, white, grey, brown, and opalescent answered the
summons, circling round and round her head, and flying down
in excited groups at her feet.
[p ]“here are my reviewers!” she said laughing—“are they
not pretty creatures? the ones i know best are named
after their respective journals,—there are plenty of anonymous
ones of course, who flock in with the rest. here, for
instance, is the ‘saturday review’”—and she picked up a
strutting bird with coral-tinted feet, who seemed to rather like
the attention shown to him—“he fights with all his companions
and drives them away from the food whenever he
can. he is a quarrelsome creature!”—here she stroked
the bird’s head—“you never know how to please him,—he
takes offence at the corn sometimes and will only
eat peas, or vice versa. he quite deserves his name,—go
away, old boy!” and she flung the pigeon in the air and
watched it soaring up and down—“he is such a comical old
grumbler! there is the ‘speaker’”—and she pointed to a
fat fussy fantail—“he struts very well, and fancies he’s important,
you know, but he isn’t. over there is ‘public
opinion,’—that one half-asleep on the wall; next to him is
the ‘spectator,’—you see he has two rings round his eyes
like spectacles. that brown creature with the fluffy wings
all by himself on that flower-pot is the ‘nineteenth century,’—the
little bird with the green neck is the ‘westminster
gazette,’ and the fat one sitting on the platform of the cote
is the ‘pall-mall.’ he knows his name very well—see!”
and she called merrily—“pall mall! come boy!—come
here!” the bird obeyed at once, and flying down from the
cote settled on her shoulder. “there are so many others,—it
is difficult to distinguish them sometimes,”—she continued,—“whenever
i get a bad review i name a pigeon,—it
amuses me. that draggle-tailed one with the muddy feet
is the ‘sketch,’—he is not at all a well-bred bird i must tell
you!—that smart-looking dove with the purple breast is the
‘graphic,’ and that bland old grey thing is the ‘i.l.n.’
short for ‘illustrated london news.’ those three white
ones are respectively ‘daily telegraph,’ ‘morning post,’
and ‘standard.’ now see them all!” and taking a covered
basket from a corner she began to scatter corn and peas and
[p ]
 various grains in lavish quantities all over the court. for a
moment we could scarcely see the sky, so thickly the birds
flocked together, struggling, fighting, swooping downwards,
and soaring upwards,—but the wingëd confusion soon gave
place to something like order when they were all on the
ground and busy, selecting their respective favourite foods
from the different sorts provided for their choice.
“you are indeed a sweet-natured philosopher”—said lucio
smiling, “if you can symbolize your adverse reviewers by a
flock of doves!”
she laughed merrily.
“well, it is a remedy against all irritation,”—she returned;
“i used to worry a good deal over my work, and wonder why
it was that the press people were so unnecessarily hard upon
me, when they showed so much leniency and encouragement
to far worse writers,—but after a little serious consideration,
finding that critical opinion carried no sort of conviction
whatever to the public, i determined to trouble no more
about it,—except in the way of doves!”
“in the way of doves, you feed your reviewers,”—i observed.
“exactly! and i suppose i help to feed them even as
women and men!” she said—“they get something from
their editors for ‘slashing’ my work,—and they probably
make a little more out of selling their ‘review copies.’ so
you see the dove-emblem holds good throughout. but
you have not seen the ‘athenæum,’—oh, you must see
him!”
with laughter still lurking in her blue eyes, she took us out
of the pigeon-court, and led the way round to a sequestered
and shady corner of the garden, where, in a large aviary-cage
fitted up for its special convenience, sat a solemn white owl.
the instant it perceived us, it became angry, and ruffling up
its downy feathers, rolled its glistening yellow eyes vindictively
and opened its beak. two smaller owls sat in the background,
pressed close together,—one grey, the other brown.
“cross old boy!” said mavis, addressing the spiteful-looking
[p ]
 creature in the sweetest of accents—“haven’t you found
any mice to kill to-day? oh, what wicked eyes!—what a
snappy mouth!” then turning to us, she went on—“isn’t
he a lovely owl? doesn’t he look wise?—but as a matter
of fact he’s just as stupid as ever he can be. that is why
i call him the ‘athenæum’! he looks so profound, you’d
fancy he knows everything, but he really thinks of nothing
but killing mice all the time,—which limits his intelligence
considerably!”
lucio laughed heartily, and so did i,—she looked so mischievous
and merry.
“but there are two other owls in the cage”—i said—“what
are their names?”
she held up a little finger in playful warning.
“ah, that would be telling secrets!” she said—“they’re
all the ‘athenæum’—the holy three,—a sort of literary
trinity. but why a trinity i do not venture to explain!—it
is a riddle i must leave you to guess!”
she moved on, and we followed across a velvety grass-plot
bordered with bright spring-flowers, such as crocuses, tulips,
anemones, and hyacinths, and presently pausing she asked—“would
you care to see my work-room?”
i found myself agreeing to this proposition with an almost
boyish enthusiasm. lucio glanced at me with a slight half-cynical
smile.
“miss clare, are you going to name a pigeon after mr
tempest?” he inquired—“he played the part of an adverse
critic, you know—but i doubt whether he will ever do so
again!”
she looked round at me and smiled.
“oh, i have been merciful to mr tempest,”—she replied;
“he is among the anonymous birds whom i do not specially
recognise!”
she stepped into the arched embrasure of an open window
which fronted the view of the grass and flowers, and entering
with her we found ourselves in a large room, octagonal in
shape, where the first object that attracted and riveted the
[p ]
 attention was a marble bust of the pallas athene whose grave
impassive countenance and tranquil brows directly faced the
sun. a desk strewn with papers occupied the left-hand side
of the window-nook,—in a corner draped with olive-green
velvet, the white presence of the apollo belvedere taught in
his inscrutable yet radiant smile, the lesson of love and the
triumphs of fame,—and numbers of books were about, not
ranged in formal rows on shelves as if they were never read,
but placed on low tables and wheeled stands, that they might
be easily taken up and glanced at. the arrangement of the
walls chiefly excited my interest and admiration, for these
were divided into panels, and every panel had, inscribed
upon it in letters of gold, some phrase from the philosophers,
or some verse from the poets. the passage from shelley
which mavis had recently quoted to us, occupied, as she had
said, one panel, and above it hung a beautiful bas-relief of the
drowned poet copied from the monument at via reggio.
another and broader panel held a fine engraving of shakespeare,
and under the picture appeared the lines—
“to thine own self be true,
and it must follow as the night the day,
thou canst not then be false to any man.”
byron was represented,—also keats; but it would have
taken more than a day to examine the various suggestive
quaintnesses and individual charms of this ‘workshop’ as its
owner called it, though the hour was to come when i should
know every corner of it by heart, and look upon it as a
haunted outlaw of bygone ages looked upon ‘sanctuary.’
but now time gave us little pause,—and when we had sufficiently
expressed our pleasure and gratitude for the kindness
with which we had been received, lucio, glancing at his
watch, suggested departure.
“we could stay on here for an indefinite period miss
clare,”—he said with an unwonted softness in his dark eyes;
“it is a place for peace and happy meditation,—a restful
corner for a tired soul.” he checked a slight sigh,—then
[p ]
 went on—“but trains wait for no man, and we are returning
to town to-night.”
“then i will not detain you any longer,” said our young
hostess, leading the way at once by a side-door, through a
passage filled with flowering plants, into the drawing-room
where she had first entertained us—“i hope, mr tempest,”
she added, smiling at me,—“that now we have met, you will
no longer desire to qualify as one of my pigeons! it is
scarcely worth while!”
“miss clare,” i said, now speaking with unaffected sincerity—“i
assure you, on my honour, i am very sorry i wrote
that article against you. if i had only known you as you
are—”
“oh, that should make no difference to a critic!” she
answered merrily.
“it would have made a great difference to me”—i
declared; “you are so unlike the objectionable ‘literary
woman,’—” i paused, and she regarded me smilingly with her
bright clear candid eyes,—then i added—“i must tell you
that sibyl,—lady sibyl elton—is one of your most ardent
admirers.”
“i am very pleased to hear that,”—she said simply—“i am
always glad when i succeed in winning somebody’s approval
and liking.”
“does not everyone approve and admire you?” asked
lucio.
“oh no! by no means! the ‘saturday’ says i only win
the applause of shop-girls!” and she laughed—“poor old
‘saturday’!—the writers on its staff are so jealous of any
successful author. i told the prince of wales what it said
the other day, and he was very much amused.”
“you know the prince?” i asked, in a little surprise.
“well, it would be more correct to say that he knows me,”
she replied—“he has been very amiable in taking some little
interest in my books. he knows a good deal about literature
too,—much more than people give him credit for. he
has been here more than once,—and has seen me feed my
[p ]
 reviewers—the pigeons, you know! he rather enjoyed the
fun i think!”
and this was all the result of the ‘slating’ the press gave to
mavis clare! simply that she named her doves after her
critics, and fed them in the presence of whatever royal or distinguished
visitors she might have (and i afterwards learned
she had many) amid, no doubt, much laughter from those who
saw the ‘spectator’-pigeon fighting for grains of corn, or the
‘saturday review’ pigeon quarrelling over peas! evidently
no reviewer, spiteful or otherwise, could affect the vivacious
nature of such a mischievous elf as she was.
“how different you are—how widely different—to the
ordinary run of literary people!” i said involuntarily.
“i am glad you find me so,”—she answered—“i hope i
am different. as a rule literary people take themselves far
too seriously, and attach too much importance to what they
do. that is why they become such bores. i don’t believe
anyone ever did thoroughly good work who was not perfectly
happy over it, and totally indifferent to opinion. i
should be quite content to write on, if i only had a garret to
live in. i was once very poor,—shockingly poor; and even
now i am not rich, but i’ve got just enough to keep me
working steadily, which is as it should be. if i had more, i
might get lazy and neglect my work,—then you know satan
might step into my life, and it would be a question of idle
hands and mischief to follow, according to the adage.”
“i think you would have strength enough to resist satan,—”
said lucio, looking at her stedfastly, with sombre scrutiny in
his expressive eyes.
“oh, i don’t know about that,—i could not be sure of myself!”
and she smiled—“i should imagine he must be a
dangerously fascinating personage. i never picture him as
the possessor of hoofs and a tail,—common-sense assures
me that no creature presenting himself under such an aspect
would have the slightest power to attract. milton’s conception
of satan is the finest”—and her eyes darkened swiftly
with the intensity of her thoughts—“a mighty angel fallen!—one
[p ]
 cannot but be sorry for such a fall, if the legend were
true!”
there was a sudden silence. a bird sang outside, and
a little breeze swayed the lilies in the window to and
fro.
“good-bye, mavis clare!” said lucio very softly, almost
tenderly. his voice was low and tremulous—his face grave
and pale. she looked up at him in a little surprise.
“good-bye!” she rejoined, extending her small hand. he
held it a moment,—then, to my secret astonishment, knowing
his aversion to women, stooped and kissed it. she flushed
rosily as she withdrew it from his clasp.
“be always as you are mavis clare!”—he said gently—“let
nothing change you! keep that bright nature of yours,—that
unruffled spirit of quiet contentment, and you may wear
the bitter laurel of fame as sweetly as a rose! i have seen
the world; i have travelled far, and have met many famous
men and women,—kings and queens, senators, poets and
philosophers,—my experience has been wide and varied, so
that i am not altogether without authority for what i say,—and
i assure you that the satan of whom you are able to
speak with compassion, can never trouble the peace of a
pure and contented soul. like consorts with like,—a fallen
angel seeks the equally fallen,—and the devil,—if there
be one,—becomes the companion of those only who take
pleasure in his teaching and society. legends say he is
afraid of a crucifix,—but if he is afraid of anything i should
say it must be of that ‘sweet content’ concerning which your
country’s shakespeare sings, and which is a better defence
against evil than the church or the prayers of the clergy! i
speak as one having the right of age to speak,—i am so
many many years older than you!——you must forgive me
if i have said too much!”
she was quite silent; evidently moved and surprised at his
words; and she gazed at him with a vaguely wondering, half-awed
expression,—an expression which changed directly i
myself advanced to make my adieu.
[p ]“i am very glad to have met you, miss clare,”—i said—“i
hope we shall be friends!”
“there is no reason why we should be enemies i think,”
she responded frankly—“i am very pleased you came to-day.
if ever you want to ‘slate’ me again, you know your fate!—you
become a dove,—nothing more! good-bye!”
she saluted us prettily as we passed out, and when the gate
had closed behind us we heard the deep and joyous baying
of the great dog ‘emperor,’ evidently released from ‘durance
vile’ immediately on our departure. we walked on for some
time in silence, and it was not till we had re-entered the
grounds of willowsmere, and were making our way to the
drive where the carriage which was to take us to the station
already awaited us, that lucio said—
“well; now, what do you think of her?”
“she is as unlike the accepted ideal of the female novelist
as she can well be,” i answered, with a laugh.
“accepted ideals are generally mistaken ones,”—he observed,
watching me narrowly—“an accepted ideal of divinity
in some church pictures is an old man’s face set in a triangle.
the accepted ideal of the devil is a nondescript creature,
with horns, hoofs (one of them cloven) and a tail, as miss
clare just now remarked. the accepted ideal of beauty is
the venus de medicis,—whereas your lady sibyl entirely
transcends that much over-rated statue. the accepted
ideal of a poet is apollo,—he was a god,—and no poet in
the flesh ever approaches the god-like! and the accepted
ideal of the female novelist, is an elderly, dowdy, spectacled,
frowsy fright,—mavis clare does not fulfil this description,
yet she is the author of ‘differences.’ now mcwhing,
who thrashes her continually in all the papers he can command,
is elderly, ugly, spectacled and frowsy,—and he is the
author of—nothing! women-authors are invariably supposed
to be hideous,—men-authors for the most part are
hideous. but their hideousness is not noted or insisted
upon,—whereas, no matter how good-looking women-writers
may be, they still pass under press-comment as frights,
[p ]
 because the fiat of press-opinion considers they ought to be
frights, even if they are not. a pretty authoress is an offence,—an
incongruity,—a something that neither men nor women
care about. men don’t care about her, because being clever
and independent, she does not often care about them,—women
don’t care about her, because she has the effrontery to combine
attractive looks with intelligence, and she makes an
awkward rival to those who have only attractive looks without
intelligence. so wags the world!—
o wild world!—circling through æons untold,—
‘mid fires of sunrise and sunset,—through flashes of silver and gold,—
grain of dust in a storm,—atom of sand by the sea,—
what is your worth, o world, to the angels of god and me!
he sang this quite suddenly, his rich baritone pealing out
musically on the warm silent air. i listened entranced.
“what a voice you have!” i exclaimed—“what a glorious
gift!”
he smiled, and sang on, his dark eyes flashing—
o wild world! mote in a burning ray
flung from the spherical heavens millions of spaces away—
sink in the ether or soar! live with the planets or die!—
what should i care for your fate, who am one with the infinite sky!
“what strange song is that?” i asked, startled and thrilled
by the passion of his voice—“it seems to mean nothing!”
he laughed, and took my arm.
“it does mean nothing!” he said—“all drawing-room
songs mean nothing. mine is a drawing-room song—calculated
to waken emotional impulses in the unloved spinster
religiously inclined!”
“nonsense!” i said, smiling.
“exactly! that is what i say. it is nonsense!” here
we came up to the carriage which waited for us—“just twenty
minutes to catch the train, geoffrey! off we go!”
[p ]and off we did go,—i watching the red gabled roofs of
willowsmere court shining in the late sunshine, till a turn
in the road hid them from view.
“you like your purchase?” queried lucio presently.
“i do. immensely!”
“and your rival, mavis clare? do you like her?”
i paused a moment, then answered frankly,
“yes. i like her. and i will admit something more than
that to you now. i like her book. it is a noble work,—worthy
of the most highly-gifted man. i always liked it—and
because i liked it, i slated it.”
“rather a mysterious course of procedure!” and he smiled;
“can you not explain?”
“of course i can explain,”—i said—“explanation is easy.
i envied her power—i envy it still. her popularity caused
me a smarting sense of injury, and to relieve it i wrote that
article against her. but i shall never do anything of the
kind again. i shall let her grow her laurels in peace.”
“laurels have a habit of growing without any permission,”—observed
lucio significantly—“in all sorts of unexpected
places too. and they can never be properly cultivated
in the forcing-house of criticism.”
“i know that!” i said quickly, my thoughts reverting to
my own book, and all the favourable criticisms that had been
heaped upon it—“i have learned that lesson thoroughly, by
heart!”
he looked at me fixedly.
“it is only one of many you may have yet to learn”—he
said—“it is a lesson in fame. your next course of
instruction will be in love!”
he smiled,—but i was conscious of a certain dread and discomfort
as he spoke. i thought of sibyl and her incomparable
beauty——sibyl, who had told me she could not love,—had
we both to learn a lesson? and should we master it?—or
would it master us?
[p ]xxi
the preparations for my marriage now went on apace,—shoals
of presents began to arrive for sibyl as
well as for myself, and i was introduced to an hitherto undemonstrated
phase (as far as i personally was concerned)
of the vulgarity and hypocrisy of fashionable society. everyone
knew the extent of my wealth, and how little real necessity
there was for offering me or my bride-elect costly gifts; nevertheless,
all our so-called ‘friends’ and acquaintances, strove
to outvie each other in the gross cash-value, if not in the good
taste, of their various donations. had we been a young
couple bravely beginning the world on true love, in more
or less uncertainty as to our prospects and future income, we
should have received nothing either useful or valuable,—everyone
would have tried to do the present-giving in as
cheap and mean a way as possible. instead of handsome
services of solid silver, we should have had a meagre collection
of plated teaspoons; instead of costly editions of books
sumptuously enriched with fine steel engravings, we might
possibly have had to express our gratitude for a ten-shilling
family bible. of course i fully realized the actual nature
and object of the lavish extravagance displayed on this occasion
by our social ‘set,’—their gifts were merely so many
bribes, sent with a purpose which was easy enough to fathom.
the donors wished to be invited to the wedding in the first
place,—after that, they sought to be included in our visiting-list,
and foresaw invitations to our dinners and house-parties;—and
[p ]
 more than this they calculated on our influence in
society, and the possible chance there might be in the dim
future of our lending some of them money should pressing
occasion require it. in the scant thankfulness and suppressed
contempt their adulatory offerings excited, sibyl and i were
completely at one. she looked upon her array of glittering
valuables with the utmost weariness and indifference, and
flattered my self-love by assuring me that the only things she
cared at all for were the riviére of sapphires and diamonds
i had given her as a betrothal-pledge, together with an engagement-ring
of the same lustrous gems. yet i noticed
she also had a great liking for lucio’s present, which was a
truly magnificent masterpiece of the jeweller’s art. it was a
girdle in the form of a serpent, the body entirely composed of
the finest emeralds, and the head of rubies and diamonds.
flexible as a reed, when sibyl put it on, it appeared to spring
and coil round her waist like a living thing, and breathe with
her breathing. i did not much care for it myself as an
ornament for a young bride,—it seemed to me quite unsuitable,—but
as everyone else admired it and envied the
possessor of such superb jewels, i said nothing of my own
distaste. diana chesney had shown a certain amount of
delicate sentiment and refinement in her offering,—it was a
very exquisite marble statue of psyche, mounted on a pedestal
of solid silver and ebony. sibyl thanked her, smiling coldly.
“you have given me an emblem of the soul,”—she said;
“no doubt you remembered i have no soul of my own!”
and her airy laugh had chilled poor diana ‘to the marrow,’ as
the warm-hearted little american herself, with tears, assured me.
at this period i saw very little of rimânez. i was
much occupied with my lawyers on the question of ‘settlements.’
messrs bentham and ellis rather objected to the
arrangement by which i gave the half of my fortune to my
intended wife unconditionally; but i would brook no interference,
and the deed was drawn up, signed, sealed and
witnessed. the earl of elton could not sufficiently praise
my ‘unexampled generosity’—my ‘noble character;’—and
[p ]
 walked about, eulogising me everywhere, till he almost turned
himself into a public advertisement of the virtues of his
future son-in-law. he seemed to have taken a new lease
of life,—he flirted with diana chesney openly,—and of his
paralysed spouse with the fixed stare and deathly grin, he
never spoke, and, i imagine, never thought. sibyl herself
was always in the hands of dressmakers and milliners,—and
we only saw each other every day for a few minutes’ hurried
chat. on these occasions she was always charming,—even
affectionate; and yet,—though i was full of passionate
admiration and love for her, i felt that she was mine merely
as a slave might be mine; that she gave me her lips to kiss as
if she considered i had a right to kiss them because i had
bought them, and for no other reason,—that her pretty
caresses were studied, and her whole behaviour the result of
careful forethought and not natural impulsiveness. i tried to
shake off this impression, but it still remained persistently,
and clouded the sweetness of my brief courtship.
meanwhile, slowly and almost imperceptibly, my ‘boomed’
book dropped out of notice. morgeson presented a heavy
bill of publishing costs which i paid without a murmur; now
and then an allusion to my ‘literary triumphs’ cropped up in
one or other of the newspapers, but otherwise no one spoke of
my ‘famous’ work, and few read it. i enjoyed the same sort
of cliquey reputation and public failure attending a certain
novel entitled ‘marius the epicurean.’ the journalists with
whom i had come in contact began to drift away like flotsam
and jetsam; i think they saw i was not likely to give many
more ‘reviewing’ dinners or suppers, and that my marriage
with the earl of elton’s daughter would lift me into an atmosphere
where grub-street could not breathe comfortably or
stretch its legs at ease. the heap of gold on which i sat as
on a throne, divided me gradually from even the back courts
and lower passages leading to the temple of fame,—and
almost unconsciously to myself i retreated step by step,
shading my eyes as it were from the sun, and seeing the
glittering turrets in the distance, with a woman’s slight figure
[p ]
 entering the lofty portico, turning back her laurelled head to
smile sorrowfully and with divinest pity upon me, ere passing
in to salute the gods. yet, if asked about it, everyone on the
press would have said that i had had a great success. i—only
i—realized the bitterness and truth of my failure. i had
not touched the heart of the public;—i had not succeeded in
so waking my readers out of the torpor of their dull and commonplace
every-day lives, that they should turn towards me
with outstretched hands, exclaiming—“more,—more of these
thoughts which comfort and inspire us!—which make us
hear god’s voice proclaiming ‘all’s well!’ above the storms
of life!” i had not done it,—i could not do it. and the
worst part of my feeling on this point was the idea that possibly
i might have done it had i remained poor! the
strongest and healthiest pulse in the composition of a man,—the
necessity for hard work,—had been killed in me. i
knew i need not work; that the society in which i now moved
thought it ridiculous if i did work; that i was expected to
spend money and ‘enjoy’ myself in the idiotic fashion of
what the ‘upper ten’ term enjoyment. my acquaintances
were not slow in suggesting plans for the dissipation of my
surplus cash,—why did i not build for myself a marble palace
on the riviera?—or a yacht to completely outshine the prince
of wales’s ‘britannia’? why did i not start a theatre? or
found a newspaper? not one of my social advisers once proposed
my doing any private personal good with my fortune.
when some terrible case of distress was published, and subscriptions
were raised to relieve the object or objects of suffering,
i invariably gave ten guineas, and allowed myself to be
thanked for my ‘generous assistance.’ i might as well have
given ten pence, for the guineas were no more to me in comparison
than the pence. when funds were started to erect a
statue to some great man who had, in the usual way of the
world, been a victim of misrepresentation till his death, i produced
my ten guineas again, when i could easily have
defrayed the whole cost of the memorial, with honour to
myself, and been none the poorer. with all my wealth i
[p ]
 did nothing noteworthy; i showered no unexpected luck in
the way of the patient, struggling workers in the hard schools
of literature and art; i gave no ‘largesse’ among the poor;—and
when a thin, eager-eyed curate, with a strong earnest
face called upon me one day, to represent, with much nervous
diffidence, the hideous sufferings of some of the sick and
starving in his district down by the docks, and suggested that
i might possibly care to alleviate a few of these direful sorrows
as a satisfaction to myself, as well as for the sake of human
brotherhood, i am ashamed to say i let him go with a
sovereign, for which he heaped coals of fire on my head
by his simple ‘god bless you, and thank you.’ i could see
he was himself in the grip of poverty,—i could have made
him and his poor district gloriously happy by a few strokes of
my pen on a cheque for an amount i should never have
missed,—and yet—i gave him nothing but that one piece of
gold, and so allowed him to depart. he invited me, with
earnest good-will, to go and see his starving flock,—“for, believe
me mr tempest,” said he—“i should be sorry if you
thought, as some of the wealthy are unhappily apt to do,
that i seek money simply to apply it to my own personal
uses. if you would visit the district yourself, and distribute
whatever you pleased with your own hand, it would be infinitely
more gratifying to me, and would have a far better
effect on the minds of the people. for, sir, the poor will not
always be patient under the cruel burdens they have to bear.”
i smiled indulgently, and assured him, not without a touch
of satire in my tone, that i was convinced all clergymen were
honest and unselfish,—and then i sent my servant to bow him
out with all possible politeness. and that very day i remember,
i drank at my luncheon chateau yquem at twenty-five
shillings a bottle.
i enter into these apparently trifling details because they all
help to make up the sum and substance of the deadly consequences
to follow,—and also because i wish to emphasize
the fact that in my actions i only imitated the example of my
compeers. most rich men to-day follow the same course as
[p ]
 i did,—and active personal good to the community is wrought
by very few of them. no great deed of generosity illumines
our annals. royalty itself leads no fashion in this,—the royal
gifts of game and cast-off clothing sent to our hospitals are too
slight and conventional to carry weight. the ‘entertainments
for the poor’ got up by some of the aristocrats at the east
end, are nothing, and less than nothing. they are weak
sops to our tame ‘lion couchant’ offered in doubtful fear and
trembling. for our lion is wakeful and somewhat restive,—there
is no knowing what may happen if the original ferocity
of the beast is roused. a few of our over-rich men might
considerably ease the load of cruel poverty in many quarters
of the metropolis if they united themselves with a noble unselfishness
in the strong and determined effort to do so, and
eschewed red-tapeism and wordy argument. but they remain
inert;—spending solely on their own personal gratification
and amusement,—and meanwhile there are dark signs of
trouble brooding. the poor, as the lean and anxious curate
said, will not always be patient!
i must not here forget to mention, that through some
secret management of rimânez, my name, much to
my own surprise, appeared on the list of competitors
for the derby. how, at so late an hour, this had
been effected, i knew no more than where my horse
‘phosphor’ came from. it was a superb animal, but
rimânez, whose gift to me it was, warned me to be careful
as to the character of the persons admitted into the stables
to view it, and to allow no one but the horse’s own two
attendants to linger near it long on any pretext. speculation
was very rife as to what ‘phosphor’s’ capabilities really were;
the grooms never showed him off to advantage during exercise.
i was amazed when lucio told me his man amiel
would be the jockey.
“good heavens!—not possible!” i exclaimed. “can he
ride?”
“like the very devil!”—responded my friend with a smile:
“he will ride ‘phosphor’ to the winning-post.”
[p ]i was very doubtful in my own mind of this; a horse of
the prime minister’s was to run, and all the betting was on
that side. few had seen ‘phosphor,’ and those few, though
keen admirers of the animal’s appearance, had little opportunity
of judging its actual qualities, thanks to the careful
management of its two attendants, who were dark-faced,
reticent-looking men, somewhat after amiel’s character and
complexion. i myself was quite indifferent as to the result of
the contest. i did not really care whether ‘phosphor’ lost or
won the race. i could afford to lose; and it would be little
to me if i won, save a momentary passing triumph. there
was nothing lasting, intellectual or honourable in the victory,—there
is nothing lasting, intellectual or honourable in anything
connected with racing. however, because it was
‘fashionable’ to be interested in this particular mode of
wasting time and money, i followed the general ‘lead,’ for
the sake of ‘being talked about,’ and nothing more. meanwhile,
lucio, saying little to me concerning it, was busy
planning the betrothal-fête at willowsmere, and designing
all sorts of ‘surprise’ entertainments for the guests. eight
hundred invitations were sent out; and society soon began to
chatter volubly and excitedly on the probable magnificence of
the forthcoming festival. eager acceptances poured in; only
a few of those asked were hindered from attending by illness,
family deaths or previous engagements, and among these
latter, to my regret, was mavis clare. she was going to the
sea-coast to stay with some old friends, and in a prettily-worded
letter explained this, and expressed her thanks for my
invitation, though she found herself unable to accept it. how
curious it was that when i read her little note of refusal i
should experience such a keen sense of disappointment! she
was nothing to me,—nothing but a ‘literary’ woman who, by
strange chance, happened to be sweeter than most women unliterary;
and yet i felt that the fête at willowsmere would lose
something in brightness lacking her presence. i had wanted
to introduce her to sibyl, as i knew i should thus give a
special pleasure to my betrothed,—however, it was not to be,
[p ]
 and i was conscious of an inexplicable personal vexation. in
strict accordance with the promise made, i let rimânez have his
own way entirely with regard to all the arrangements for what
was to be the ne plus ultra of everything ever designed for
the distraction, amusement and wonderment of listless and
fastidious ‘swagger’ people, and i neither interfered, nor
asked any questions, content to rely on my friend’s taste,
imagination and ingenuity. i only understood that all the
plans were being carried out by foreign artists and caterers,—and
that no english firms would be employed. i did venture
once to inquire the reason of this, and got one of lucio’s own
enigmatical replies:—
“nothing english is good enough for the english,”—he
said—“things have to be imported from france to please
the people whom the french themselves angrily designate
as ‘perfide albion.’ you must not have a ‘bill of fare’;
you must have a ‘menu’; and all your dishes must bear
french titles, otherwise they will not be in good form.
you must have french ‘comediennes’ and ‘danseuses’ to
please the british taste, and your silken draperies must be
woven on french looms. lately too, it has been deemed
necessary to import parisian morality as well as parisian
fashions. it does not suit stalwart great britain at all, you
know,—stalwart great britain, aping the manners of paris,
looks like a jolly open-faced, sturdy-limbed giant, with a
doll’s bonnet stuck on his leonine head. but the doll’s
bonnet is just now la mode. some day i believe the giant
will discover it looks ridiculous, and cast it off with a burst
of genuine laughter at his own temporary folly. and without
it, he will resume his original dignity;—the dignity that
best becomes a privileged conqueror who has the sea for
his standing-army.”
“evidently you like england!” i said smiling.
he laughed.
“not in the very least! i do not like england any more
than any other country on the globe. i do not like the
globe itself; and england comes in for a share of my
[p ]
 aversion as one of the spots on the trumpery ball. if i
could have my way, i should like to throne myself on a
convenient star for the purpose and kick out at earth as
she whirls by in space, hoping by that act of just violence
to do away with her for ever!”
“but why?” i asked, amused—“why do you hate the
earth? what has the poor little planet done to merit your
abhorrence?”
he looked at me very strangely.
“shall i tell you? you will never believe me!”
“no matter for that!” i answered smiling—“say on!”
“what has the poor little planet done?” he repeated
slowly—“the poor little planet has done—nothing. but it
is what the gods have done with this same poor little
planet, that awakens my anger and scorn. they have
made it a living sphere of wonders,—endowed it with
beauty borrowed from the fairest corners of highest
heaven,—decked it with flowers and foliage,—taught it
music,—the music of birds and torrents and rolling waves
and falling rains,—rocked it gently in clear ether, among
such light as blinds the eyes of mortals,—guided it out of
chaos, through clouds of thunder and barbëd shafts of
lightning, to circle peacefully in its appointed orbit, lit on
the one hand by the vivid splendours of the sun, and on
the other by the sleepy radiance of the moon;—and more
than all this, they have invested it with a divine soul in
man! oh, you may disbelieve as you will,—but notwithstanding
the pigmy peeps earth takes at the vast and
eternal ocean of science, the soul is here, and all the immortal
forces with it and around it! nay, the gods—i
speak in the plural, after the fashion of the ancient greeks—for
to my thinking there are many gods emanating from
the supreme deity,—the gods, i say, have so insisted on
this fact, that one of them has walked the earth in human
guise, solely for the sake of emphasizing the truth of immortality
to these frail creatures of seemingly perishable
clay! for this i hate the planet;—were there not, and are
[p ]
 there not, other and far grander worlds that a god should
have chosen to dwell on than this one!”
for a moment i was silent, out of sheer surprise.
“you amaze me!” i said at last—“you allude to christ, i
suppose; but everybody is convinced by this time that he
was a mere man like the rest of us; there was nothing
divine about him. what a contradiction you are! why,
i remember you indignantly denied the accusation of being
a christian.”
“of course,—and i deny it still”—he answered quickly—“i
have not a fat living in the church that i should tell a lie
on such a subject. i am not a christian; nor is anyone
living a christian. to quote a very old saying ‘there
never was a christian save one, and he was crucified.’ but
though i am not a christian i never said i doubted the existence
of christ. that knowledge was forced upon me,—with
considerable pressure too!”
“by a reliable authority?” i inquired with a slight sneer.
he made no immediate reply. his flashing eyes looked,
as it were, through me and beyond me at something far away.
the curious pallor that at times gave his face the set look of
an impenetrable mask, came upon him then, and he smiled,—an
awful smile. so might a man smile out of deadly
bravado, when told of some dim and dreadful torture awaiting
him.
“you touch me on a sore point,”—he said at last, slowly,
and in a harsh tone—“my convictions respecting certain
religious phases of man’s development and progress, are
founded on the arduous study of some very unpleasant
truths to which humanity generally shuts its eyes, burying its
head in the desert-sands of its own delusions. these truths
i will not enter upon now. some other time i will initiate
you into a few of my mysteries.”
the tortured smile passed from his face, leaving it intellectually
composed and calm as usual,—and i hastily changed
the subject, for i had made up my mind by this time that my
brilliant friend had, like many exceptionally gifted persons, a
[p ]
 ‘craze’ on one topic, and that topic a particularly difficult
one to discuss as it touched on the superhuman and therefore
(to my thinking) the impossible. my own temperament,
which had, in the days of my poverty, fluctuated between
spiritual striving and material gain, had, with my sudden
access to fortune, rapidly hardened into the character of a
man of the world worldly, for whom all speculations as to the
unseen forces working in and around us, were the merest folly,
not worth a moment’s waste of thought. i should have laughed
to scorn anyone who had then presumed to talk to me about
the law of eternal justice, which with individuals as well as
nations, works, not for a passing ‘phase,’ but for all time
towards good, and not evil,—for no matter how much a man
may strive to blind himself to the fact, he has a portion of the
divine within him, which if he wilfully corrupts by his own
wickedness, he must be forced to cleanse again and yet again,
in the fierce flames of such remorse and such despair as are
rightly termed the quenchless fires of hell!
[p ]xxii
on the afternoon of the twenty-first of may, i went
down, accompanied by lucio, to willowsmere, to be
in readiness for the reception of the social swarm who were to
flock thither the next day. amiel went with us,—but i left
my own man, morris, behind, to take charge of my rooms
in the grand, and to forward late telegrams and special
messages. the weather was calm, warm and bright,—and a
young moon showed her thin crescent in the sky as we got
out at the country station and stepped into the open carriage
awaiting us. the station-officials greeted us with servile
humility, eyeing lucio especially with an almost gaping air of
wonderment; the fact of his lavish expenditure in arranging
with the railway company a service of special trains for the
use of the morrow’s guests, had no doubt excited them to a
speechless extent of admiration as well as astonishment.
when we approached willowsmere, and entered the beautiful
drive, bordered with oak and beech, which led up to the
house, i uttered an exclamation of delight at the festal decorations
displayed, for the whole avenue was spanned with arches
of flags and flowers, garlands of blossoms being even swung
from tree to tree, and interlacing many of the lower branches.
the gabled porch at the entrance of the house was draped
with crimson silk and festooned with white roses,—and as we
alighted, the door was flung open by a smart page in brilliant
scarlet and gold.
“i think,” said lucio to me as we entered—“you will
[p ]
 find everything as complete as this world’s resources will
allow. the retinue of servants here are what is vulgarly
called ‘on the job’; their payment is agreed upon, and
they know their duties thoroughly,—they will give you no
trouble.”
i could scarcely find words to express my unbounded satisfaction,
or to thank him for the admirable taste with which
the beautiful house had been adorned. i wandered about in
an ecstasy of admiration, triumphing in such a visible and
gorgeous display of what great wealth could really do. the
ball-room had been transformed into an elegant bijou theatre,
the stage being concealed by a curtain of thick gold-coloured
silk on which the oft-quoted lines of shakespeare were
embroidered in raised letters,—
“all the world’s a stage,
and all the men and women merely players.”
turning out of this into the drawing-room, i found it decorated
entirely round with banks of roses, red and white, the flowers
forming a huge pyramid at one end of the apartment, behind
which, as lucio informed me, unseen musicians would discourse
sweet harmony.
“i have arranged for a few ‘tableaux vivants’ in the theatre
to fill up a gap of time;”—he said carelessly—“fashionable
folks now-a-days get so soon tired of one amusement that it
is necessary to provide several in order to distract the brains
that cannot think, or discover any means of entertainment in
themselves. as a matter of fact, people cannot even converse
long together because they have nothing to say. oh,
don’t bother to go out in the grounds on a tour of inspection
just now,—leave a few surprises for yourself as well as for
your company to-morrow. come and have dinner!”
he put his arm through mine and we entered the dining-room.
here the table was laid out with costly fruit, flowers
and delicacies of every description,—four men-servants in
scarlet and gold stood silently in waiting, with amiel, in black
as usual, behind his master’s chair. we enjoyed a sumptuous
[p ]
 repast served to perfection, and when it was finished, we
strolled out in the grounds to smoke and talk.
“you seem to do everything by magic, lucio;”—i said,
looking at him wonderingly—“all these lavish decorations,—these
servants—”
“money, my dear fellow,—nothing but money”—he interrupted
with a laugh—“money, the devil’s pass-key! you can
have the retinue of a king without any of a king’s responsibilities,
if you only choose to pay for it. it is merely a
question of cost.”
“and taste!” i reminded him.
“true,—and taste. some rich men there are who have
less taste than a costermonger. i know one who has the
egregious vulgarity to call the attention of his guests to the
value of his goods and chattels. he pointed out for my
admiration one day, an antique and hideous china plate, the
only one of that kind in the world, and told me it was worth
a thousand guineas. ‘break it,’—i said coolly—‘you will
then have the satisfaction of knowing you have destroyed
a thousand guineas’ worth of undesirable ugliness.’ you
should have seen his face! he showed me no more curios!”
i laughed, and we walked slowly up and down for a few
minutes in silence. presently i became aware that my companion
was looking at me intently, and i turned my head
quickly to meet his eyes. he smiled.
“i was just then thinking,” he said, “what you would have
done with your life if you had not inherited this fortune, and
if,—if i had not come your way?”
“i should have starved, no doubt,”—i responded—“died
like a rat in a hole,—of want and wretchedness.”
“i rather doubt that;” he said meditatively—“it is just
possible you might have become a great writer.”
“why do you say that now?” i asked.
“because i have been reading your book. there are fine
ideas in it,—ideas that might, had they been the result of sincere
conviction, have reached the public in time, because they
were sane and healthy. the public will never put up for
[p ]
 long with corrupt ‘fads’ and artificial ‘crazes.’ now you
write of god,—yet according to your own statement, you
did not believe in god even when you wrote the words that
imply his existence,—and that was long before i met you.
therefore the book was not the result of sincere conviction,
and that’s the key-note of your failure to reach the large
audience you desired. each reader can see you do not
believe what you write,—the trumpet of lasting fame never
sounds triumph for an author of that calibre.”
“don’t let us talk about it for heaven’s sake!” i said
irritably—“i know my work lacks something,—and that
something may be what you say or it may not,—i do not
want to think about it. let it perish, as it assuredly will;
perhaps in the future i may do better.”
he was silent,—and finishing his cigar, threw the end away
in the grass where it burned like a dull red coal.
“i must turn in,” he then observed,—“i have a few more
directions to give to the servants for to-morrow. i shall go
to my room as soon as i have done,—so i’ll say good-night.”
“but surely you are taking too much personal trouble,”—i
said—“can’t i help in any way?”
“no, you can’t,”—he answered smiling. “when i undertake
to do anything i like to do it in my own fashion, or not
at all. sleep well, and rise early.”
he nodded, and sauntered slowly away over the dewy grass.
i watched his dark tall figure receding till he had entered the
house; then, lighting a fresh cigar, i wandered on alone through
the grounds, noting here and there flowery arbours and dainty
silk pavilions erected in picturesque nooks and corners for the
morrow. i looked up at the sky; it was clear and bright,—there
would be no rain. presently i opened the wicket-gate
that led into the outer by-road, and walking on slowly, almost
unconsciously, i found myself in a few minutes opposite ‘lily
cottage.’ approaching the gate i looked in,—the pretty old
house was dark, silent and deserted. i knew mavis clare was
away,—and it was not strange that the aspect of her home-nest
emphasized the fact of her absence. a cluster of climbing
[p ]
 roses hanging from the wall, looked as if they were listening
for the first sound of her returning footsteps; across the green
breadth of the lawn where i had seen her playing with her
dogs, a tall sheaf of st john’s lilies stood up white against the
sky, their pure hearts opened to the star-light and the breeze.
the scent of honey-suckle and sweet-briar filled the air with
delicate suggestions,—and as i leaned over the low fence,
gazing vaguely at the long shadows of the trees on the grass,
a nightingale began to sing. the sweet yet dolorous warble
of the ‘little brown lover of the moon,’ palpitated on the
silence in silver-toned drops of melody; and i listened, till
my eyes smarted with a sudden moisture as of tears. strangely
enough, i never thought of my betrothed bride sibyl then, as
surely, by all the precedents of passion, i should have done at
such a moment of dreamful ecstasy. it was another woman’s
face that floated before my memory;—a face not beautiful,—but
merely sweet,—and made radiant by the light of two tender,
wistful, wonderfully innocent eyes,—a face like that of some
new daphne with the mystic laurel springing from her brows.
the nightingale sang on and on,—the tall lilies swayed in the
faint wind as though nodding wise approval of the bird’s wild
music,—and, gathering one briar-rose from the hedge, i turned
away with a curious heaviness at my heart,—a trouble i could
not analyse or account for. i explained my feeling partly to
myself as one of regret that i had ever taken up my pen to
assault, with sneer and flippant jest, the gentle and brilliantly
endowed owner of this little home where peace and pure content
dwelt happily in student-like seclusion;—but this was not
all. there was something else in my mind,—something inexplicable
and sad,—which then i had no skill to define. i
know now what it was,—but the knowledge comes too
late!
returning to my own domains, i saw through the trees a
vivid red light in one of the upper windows of willowsmere.
it twinkled like a lurid star, and i guided my steps by its
brilliancy as i made my way across the winding garden-paths
and terraces back to the house. entering the hall, the page
[p ]
 in scarlet and gold met me, and with a respectful obeisance,
escorted me to my room where amiel was in waiting.
“has the prince retired?” i asked him.
“yes, sir.”
“he has a red lamp in his window has he not?”
amiel looked deferentially meditative. yet i fancied i saw
him smile.
“i think——yes,—i believe he has, sir.”
i asked no more questions, but allowed him to perform his
duties as valet in silence.
“good-night sir!” he said at last, his ferret eyes fastened
upon me with an expressionless look.
“good-night!” i responded indifferently.
he left the room with his usual cat-like stealthy tread, and
when he had gone, i,—moved by a sudden fresh impulse of
hatred for him,—sprang to the door and locked it. then i
listened, with an odd nervous breathlessness. there was not
a sound. for fully quarter of an hour i remained with my
attention more or less strained, expectant of i knew not what;
but the quiet of the house was absolutely undisturbed. with
a sigh of relief i flung myself on the luxurious bed,—a couch
fit for a king, draped with the richest satin elaborately embroidered,—and
falling soundly asleep i dreamed that i was
poor again. poor,—but unspeakably happy,—and hard at
work in the old lodging, writing down thoughts which i knew,
by some divine intuition and beyond all doubt, would bring
me the whole world’s honour. again i heard the sounds of
the violin played by my unseen neighbour next door, and this
time they were triumphal chords and cadences of joy, without
one throb of sorrow. and while i wrote on in an ecstasy of
inspiration, oblivious of poverty and pain, i heard, echoing
through my visions, the round warble of the nightingale, and
saw, in the far distance, an angel floating towards me on
pinions of light, with the face of mavis clare.
[p ]xxiii
the morning broke clear, with all the pure tints of a
fine opal radiating in the cloudless sky. never had
i beheld such a fair scene as the woods and gardens of
willowsmere when i looked upon them that day illumined by
the unclouded sunlight of a spring half-melting into summer.
my heart swelled with pride as i surveyed the beautiful
domain i now owned,—and thought how happy a home it
would make when sibyl, matchless in her loveliness, shared
with me its charm and luxury.
“yes,”—i said half-aloud—“say what philosophers will,
the possession of money does insure satisfaction and power.
it is all very well to talk about fame, but what is fame worth,
if, like carlyle, one is too poor to enjoy it! besides, literature
no longer holds its former high prestige,—there are too
many in the field,—too many newspaper-scribblers, all believing
they are geniuses,—too many ill-educated lady-paragraphists
and ‘new’ women, who think they are as gifted as
georges sand or mavis clare. with sibyl and willowsmere,
i ought to be able to resign the idea of fame—literary fame—with
a good grace.”
i knew i reasoned falsely with myself,—i knew that my
hankering for a place among the truly great of the world, was
as strong as ever,—i knew i craved for the intellectual distinction,
force, and pride which make the thinker a terror and
a power in the land, and which so sever a great poet or great
romancist from the commoner throng that even kings are glad
[p ]
 to do him or her honour,—but i would not allow my thoughts
to dwell on this rapidly vanishing point of unattainable desire.
i settled my mind to enjoy the luscious flavour of the immediate
present, as a bee settles in the cup of honey-flowers,—and,
leaving my bedroom, i went downstairs to breakfast
with lucio in the best and gayest of humours.
“not a cloud on the day!” he said, meeting me with a
smile, as i entered the bright morning-room, whose windows
opened on the lawn—“the fête will be a brilliant success,
geoffrey.”
“thanks to you!” i answered—“personally i am quite in
the dark as to your plans,—but i believe you can do nothing
that is not well done.”
“you honour me!” he said with a light laugh—“you
credit me then with better qualities than the creator! for
what he does, in the opinion of the present generation, is
exceedingly ill done! men have taken to grumbling at him
instead of praising him,—and few have any patience with or
liking for his laws.”
i laughed. “well, you must admit those laws are very
arbitrary!”
“they are. i entirely acknowledge the fact!”
we sat down to table, and were waited upon by admirably-trained
servants who apparently had no idea of anything else
but attendance on our needs. there was no trace of bustle
or excitement in the household,—no sign whatever to denote
that a great entertainment was about to take place that day.
it was not until the close of our meal that i asked lucio
what time the musicians would arrive. he glanced at his
watch.
“about noon i should say,”—he replied—“perhaps
before. but whatever their hour, they will all be in their
places at the proper moment, depend upon it. the people
i employ—both musicians and ‘artistes’—know their business
thoroughly, and are aware that i stand no nonsense.”
a rather sinister smile played round his mouth as he regarded
me. “none of your guests can arrive here till one o’clock,—as
[p ]
 that is about the time the special train will bring the
first batch of them from london,—and the first ‘déjeuner’
will be served in the gardens at two. if you want to amuse
yourself there’s a maypole being put up on the large lawn,—you’d
better go and look at it.”
“a maypole!” i exclaimed—“now that’s a good
idea!”
“it used to be a good idea,”—he answered—“when
english lads and lasses had youth, innocence, health and
fun in their composition, a dance round the maypole hand
in hand, did them good and did nobody harm. but now
there are no lads and lasses,—enervated old men and women
in their teens walk the world wearily, speculating on the uses
of life,—probing vice, and sneering down sentiment, and
such innocent diversions as the maypole no longer appeal
to our jaded youth. so we have to get ‘professionals’ to
execute the may-revels,—of course the dancing is better
done by properly trained legs; but it means nothing, and
is nothing, except a pretty spectacle.”
“and are the dancers here?” i asked, rising and going
towards the window in some curiosity.
“no, not yet. but the may-pole is;—fully decorated.
it faces the woods at the back of the house,—go and see if
you like it.”
i followed his suggestion, and going in the direction indicated,
i soon perceived the gaily-decked object which used
to be the welcome signal of many a village holiday in shakespeare’s
old-world england. the pole was already set up and
fixed in a deep socket in the ground, and a dozen or more
men were at work, unbinding its numerous trails of blossom
and garlands of green, tied with long streamers of vari-coloured
ribbon. it had a picturesque effect in the centre
of the wide lawn bordered with grand old trees,—and
approaching one of the men, i said something to him by
way of approval and admiration. he glanced at me furtively
and unsmilingly, but said nothing,—and i concluded from his
dark and foreign cast of features, that he did not understand
[p ]
 the english language. i noted, with some wonder and slight
vexation that all the workmen were of this same alien and
sinister type of countenance, very much after the unattractive
models of amiel and the two grooms who had my racer
‘phosphor’ in charge. but i remembered what lucio had
told me,—namely, that all the designs for the fête were
carried out by foreign experts and artists,—and after some
puzzled consideration, i let the matter pass from my
mind.
the morning hours flew swiftly by, and i had little time to
examine all the festal preparations with which the gardens
abounded,—so that i was almost as ignorant of what was in
store for the amusement of my guests as the guests themselves.
i had the curiosity to wait about and watch for the coming of
the musicians and dancers, but i might as well have spared
myself this waste of time and trouble, for i never saw them
arrive at all. at one o’clock, both lucio and i were ready
to receive our company,—and at about twenty minutes past
the hour, the first instalment of ‘swagger society’ was emptied
into the grounds. sibyl and her father were among these,—and
i eagerly advanced to meet and greet my bride-elect as
she alighted from the carriage that had brought her from the
station. she looked supremely beautiful that day, and was,
as she deserved to be, the cynosure of all eyes. i kissed her
little gloved hand with a deeper reverence than i would have
kissed the hand of a queen.
“welcome back to your old home, my sibyl!” i said to
her in a low voice tenderly, at which words she paused, looking
up at the red gables of the house with such wistful affection as
filled her eyes with something like tears. she left her hand in
mine, and allowed me to lead her towards the silken-draped,
flower-decked porch, where lucio waited, smiling,—and as
she advanced, two tiny pages in pure white and silver glided
suddenly out of some unseen hiding-place, and emptied two
baskets of pink and white rose-leaves at her feet, thus
strewing a fragrant pathway for her into the house. they
vanished as completely and swiftly as they had appeared,—some
[p ]
 of the guests uttered murmurs of admiration,
while sibyl gazed about her, blushing with surprise and
pleasure.
“how charming of you, geoffrey!” she said, “what a
poet you are to devise so pretty a greeting!”
“i wish i deserved your praise!” i answered, smiling at
her—“but the poet in question is prince rimânez,—he is
the master and ruler of to-day’s revels.”
again the rich colour flushed her cheeks, and she gave
lucio her hand. he bowed over it in courtly fashion,—but
did not kiss it as he had kissed the hand of mavis clare. we
passed into the house, through the drawing-room, and out
again into the gardens, lord elton being loud in his praise of
the artistic manner in which his former dwelling had been
improved and embellished. soon the lawn was sprinkled
with gaily attired groups of people,—and my duties as host
began in hard earnest. i had to be greeted, complimented,
flattered, and congratulated on my approaching marriage by
scores of hypocrites who nearly shook my hand off in their
enthusiasm for my wealth. had i become suddenly poor, i
thought grimly, not one of them would have lent me a
sovereign! the guests kept on arriving in shoals, and when
there were about three or four hundred assembled, a burst of
exquisite music sounded, and a procession of pages in scarlet
and gold, marching two by two appeared, carrying trays full
of the rarest flowers tied up in bouquets, which they offered
to all the ladies present. exclamations of delight arose on
every side,—exclamations which were for the most part high-pitched
and noisy,—for the ‘swagger set’ have long ceased to
cultivate softness of voice or refinement of accent,—and once
or twice the detestable slang word, ‘ripping’ escaped from the
lips of a few dashing dames, reputed to be ‘leaders’ of style.
repose of manner, dignity and elegance of deportment, however,
are no longer to be discovered among the present
‘racing’ duchesses and gambling countesses of the bluest blue
blood of england, so one does not expect these graces of
distinction from them. the louder they can talk, and the
[p ]
 more slang they can adopt from the language of their grooms
and stable-boys, the more are they judged to be ‘in the swim’
and ‘up to date.’ i speak, of course, of the modern scions
of aristocracy. there are a few truly ‘great ladies’ left, whose
maxim is still ‘noblesse oblige,’—but they are quite in the
minority and by the younger generation are voted either ‘old
cats’ or ‘bores.’ many of the ‘cultured’ mob that now
swarmed over my grounds had come out of the sheerest
vulgar curiosity to see what ‘the man with five millions’ could
do in the way of entertaining,—others were anxious to get
news, if possible, of the chances of ‘phosphor’ winning the
derby, concerning which i was discreetly silent. but the
bulk of the crowd wandered aimlessly about, staring impertinently
or enviously at each other, and scarcely looking at
the natural loveliness of the gardens or the woodland scenery
around them. the brainlessness of modern society is never
so flagrantly manifested as at a garden-party, where the restless
trousered and petticoated bipeds move vaguely to and
fro, scarcely stopping to talk civilly or intelligently to one
another for five minutes, most of them hovering dubiously and
awkwardly between the refreshment-pavilion and the band-stand.
in my domain they were deprived of this latter
harbour of refuge, for no musicians could be seen, though
music was heard,—beautiful wild music which came first from
one part of the grounds and then from another, and to which
few listened with any attention. all were, however, happily
unanimous in their enthusiastic appreciation of the excellence
of the food provided for them in the luxurious luncheon tents
of which there were twenty in number. men ate as if they
had never eaten in their lives before, and drank the choice
and exquisite wines with equal greed and gusto. one never
entirely realises the extent to which human gourmandism can
go till one knows a few peers, bishops and cabinet-ministers,
and watches those dignitaries feed ad libitum. soon the
company was so complete that there was no longer any need
for me to perform the fatiguing duty of ‘receiving’; and i
therefore took sibyl in to luncheon, determining to devote
[p ]
 myself to her for the rest of the day. she was in one of her
brightest and most captivating moods,—her laughter rang out
as sweetly joyous as that of some happy child,—she was even
kind to diana chesney, who was also one of my guests, and
who was plainly enjoying herself with all the verve peculiar
to pretty american women, who consider flirtation as much of
a game as tennis. the scene was now one of great brilliancy,
the light costumes of the women contrasting well with the
scarlet and gold liveries of the seemingly innumerable servants
that were now everywhere in active attendance. and, constantly
through the fluttering festive crowd, from tent to tent,
from table to table, and group to group, lucio moved,—his tall
stately figure and handsome face always conspicuous wherever
he stood, his rich voice thrilling the air whenever he spoke.
his influence was irresistible, and gradually dominated the
whole assemblage,—he roused the dull, inspired the witty,
encouraged the timid, and brought all the conflicting elements
of rival position, character and opinion into one uniform
whole, which was unconsciously led by his will as easily as a
multitude is led by a convincing orator. i did not know it
then, but i know now, that metaphorically speaking, he had
his foot on the neck of that ‘society’ mob, as though it were
one prostrate man;—that the sycophants, liars and hypocrites
whose utmost idea of good is wealth and luxurious living,
bent to his secret power as reeds bend to the wind,—and that
he did with them all whatsoever he chose,—as he does to this
very day! god!—if the grinning, guzzling sensual fools had
only known what horrors were about them at the feast!—what
ghastly ministers to pleasurable appetite waited obediently
upon them!—what pallid terrors lurked behind the
gorgeous show of vanity and pride! but the veil was mercifully
down,—and only to me has it since been lifted!
luncheon over, the singing of mirthful voices, tuned to a
kind of village roundelay, attracted the company, now fed to
repletion, towards the lawn at the back of the house, and cries
of delight were raised as the maypole came into view, i myself
joining in the universal applause, for i had not expected to
[p ]
 see anything half so picturesque and pretty. the pole was
surrounded by a double ring of small children,—children so
beautiful in face and dainty in form, that they might very well
have been taken for little fairies from some enchanted woodland.
the boys were clad as tiny foresters, in doublets of
green, with pink caps on their curly locks,—the girls were in
white, with their hair flowing loosely over their shoulders, and
wreaths of may-blossom crowning their brows. as soon as
the guests appeared on the scene, these exquisite little creatures
commenced their dance, each one taking a trail of blossom or
a ribbon pendant from the may-pole, and weaving it with the
others into no end of beautiful and fantastic designs. i looked
on, as amazed and fascinated as anyone present, at the wonderful
lightness and ease with which these children tripped
and ran;—their tiny twinkling feet seemed scarcely to touch
the turf,—their faces were so lovely,—their eyes so bright,
that it was a positive enchantment to watch them. each
figure they executed was more intricate and effective than the
last, and the plaudits of the spectators grew more and more
enthusiastic, till presently came the finale, in which all the
little green foresters climbed up the pole and clung there,
pelting the white-robed maidens below with cowslip-balls,
knots of roses, bunches of violets, posies of buttercups, daisies
and clover, which the girl-children in their turn laughingly
threw among the admiring guests. the air grew thick with
flowers, and heavy with perfume, and resounded with song
and laughter;—and sibyl, standing at my side, clapped her
hands in an ecstasy.
“oh, it is lovely—lovely!” she cried—“is this the prince’s
idea?” then as i answered in the affirmative, she added,
“where, i wonder, did he find such exquisitely pretty little
children!”
as she spoke, lucio himself advanced a step or two in front
of the other spectators and made a slight peremptory sign.
the fairy-like foresters and maidens, with extraordinary
activity, all sprang away from the may-pole, pulling down
the garlands with them, and winding the flowers and ribbons
[p ]
 about themselves so that they looked as if they were all tied
together in one inextricable knot,—this done, they started off
at a rapid run, presenting the appearance of a rolling ball of
blossom, merry pipe-music accompanying their footsteps, till
they had entirely disappeared among the trees.
“oh do call them back again!” entreated sibyl, laying her
hand coaxingly on lucio’s arm,—“i should so like to speak
to two or three of the prettiest!”
he looked down at her with an enigmatical smile.
“you would do them too much honour, lady sibyl,” he
replied—“they are not accustomed to such condescension
from great ladies and would not appreciate it. they are
paid professionals, and, like many of their class, only become
insolent when praised.”
at that moment diana chesney came running across the
lawn, breathless.
“i can’t see them anywhere!” she declared pantingly—“the
dear little darlings! i ran after them as fast as i could;
i wanted to kiss one of those perfectly scrumptious boys, but
they’re gone!—not a trace of them left! it’s just as if they
had sunk into the ground!”
again lucio smiled.
“they have their orders,—” he said curtly—“and they
know their place.”
just then, the sun was obscured by a passing black cloud,
and a peal of thunder rumbled over-head. looks were turned
to the sky, but it was quite bright and placid save for that one
floating shadow of storm.
“only summer thunder,”—said one of the guests—“there
will be no rain.”
and the crowd that had been pressed together to watch the
‘maypole dance’ began to break up in groups, and speculate
as to what diversion might next be provided for them. i,
watching my opportunity, drew sibyl away.
“come down by the river;”—i whispered—“i must have
you to myself for a few minutes.” she yielded to my suggestion,
and we walked away from the mob of our acquaintance,
[p ]
 and entered a grove of trees leading to the banks of
that part of the avon which flowed through my grounds.
here we found ourselves quite alone, and putting my arm
round my betrothed, i kissed her tenderly.
“tell me,” i said with a half-smile—“do you know how to
love yet?”
she looked up with a passionate darkness in her eyes that
startled me.
“yes,—i know!” was her unexpected answer.
“you do!” and i stopped to gaze intently into her fair
face—“and how did you learn?”
she flushed red,—then grew pale,—and clung to me with a
nervous, almost feverish force.
“very strangely!” she replied—“and—quite suddenly!
the lesson was easy, i found;—too easy! geoffrey,”—she
paused, and fixed her eyes full on mine—“i will tell you how
i learnt it, ... but not now, ... some other day.” here
she broke off, and began to laugh rather forcedly. “i will
tell you ... when we are married.” she glanced anxiously
about her,—then, with a sudden abandonment of her usual
reserve and pride, threw herself into my arms and kissed my
lips with such ardour as made my senses reel.
“sibyl—sibyl!” i murmured, holding her close to my
heart——“oh my darling,—you love me!—at last you love
me!”
“hush!—hush!” she said breathlessly—“you must forget
that kiss,——it was too bold of me—it was wrong—i did
not mean it, ... i, ... i was thinking of something else.
geoffrey!”—and her small hand clenched on mine with a
sort of eager fierceness—“i wish i had never learned to
love; i was happier before i knew!”
a frown knitted her brows.
“now”—she went on in the same breathless hurried way—“i
want love! i am starving, thirsting for it! i want to be
drowned in it, lost in it, killed by it! nothing else will
content me!”
i folded her still closer in my arms.
[p ]“did i not say you would change, sibyl?” i whispered—“your
coldness and insensibility to love was unnatural and
could not last,—my darling, i always knew that!”
“you always knew!” she echoed a little disdainfully—“ah,
but you do not know even now what has chanced to
me. nor shall i tell you—yet. oh geoffrey!—” here she
drew herself out of my embrace, and stooping, gathered some
bluebells in the grass—“see these little flowers growing so
purely and peacefully in the shade by the avon!—they
remind me of what i was, here in this very place, long ago.
i was quite as happy, and i think as innocent as these blossoms;
i had no thought of evil in my nature,—and the
only love i dreamed of was the love of the fairy prince for
the fairy princess,—as harmless an idea as the loves of the
flowers themselves. yes!—i was then all i should like to
be now,—all that i am not!”
“you are everything that is beautiful and sweet!”—i told
her, admiringly, as i watched the play of retrospective and
tender expression on her perfect face.
“so you judge,—being a man who is perfectly satisfied
with his own choice of a wife!” she said with a flash of her
old cynicism—“but i know myself better than you know
me. you call me beautiful and sweet,—but you cannot
call me good! i am not good. why, the very love that
now consumes me is——”
“what?” i asked her quickly, seizing her hands with the
blue-bells in them, and gazing searchingly into her eyes—“i
know before you speak, that it is the passion and tenderness
of a true woman!”
she was silent for a moment. then she smiled, with a
bewitching languor.
“if you know, then i need not tell you”—she said—“so,
do not let us stay here any longer talking nonsense;—‘society’
will shake its head over us and accuse us of ‘bad form,’ and
some lady-paragraphist will write to the papers, and, say—‘mr
tempest’s conduct as a host left much to be desired,
as he and his bride-elect were “spooning” all the day.’”
[p ]“there are no lady-paragraphists here,”—i said laughing,
and encircling her dainty waist with one arm as i walked.
“oh, are there not, though!” she exclaimed, laughing
also, “why, you don’t suppose you can give any sort of
big entertainment without them do you? they permeate
society. old lady maravale, for example, who is rather
reduced in circumstances, writes a guinea’s worth of scandal
a week for one of the papers. and she is here,—i saw her
simply gorging herself with chicken salad and truffles an
hour ago!” here pausing, and resting against my arm,
she peered through the trees. “there are the chimneys
of lily cottage where the famous mavis clare lives,” she
said.
“yes, i know,”—i replied readily—“rimânez and i have
visited her. she is away just now, or she would have been
here to-day.”
“do you like her?” sibyl queried.
“very much. she is charming.”
“and ... the prince ... does he like her?”
“well, upon my word,” i answered with a smile—“i think
he likes her more than he does most women! he showed
the most extraordinary deference towards her, and seemed
almost abashed in her presence. are you cold, sibyl?” i
added hastily, for she shivered suddenly and her face grew
pale—“you had better come away from the river,—it is damp
under these trees.”
“yes,—let us go back to the gardens and the sunshine;”—she
answered dreamily—“so your eccentric friend,—the
woman-hater,—finds something to admire in mavis clare!
she must be a very happy creature i think,—perfectly
free, famous, and believing in all good things of life and
humanity, if one may judge from her books.”
“well, taken altogether, life isn’t so very bad!” i observed
playfully.
she made no reply,—and we returned to the lawns where
afternoon tea was now being served to the guests, who were
seated in brilliant scattered groups under the trees or within
[p ]
 the silken pavilions, while the sweetest music,—and the
strangest, if people had only had ears to hear it,—both vocal
and instrumental, was being performed by those invisible
players and singers whose secret whereabouts was unknown
to all, save lucio.
[p ]xxiv
just as the sun began to sink, several little pages came out
of the house, and with low salutations, distributed among
the guests daintily embossed and painted programmes
of the ‘tableaux vivants,’ prepared for their diversion in the
extemporized bijou theatre. numbers of people rose at once
from their chairs on the lawn, eager for this new spectacle,
and began to scramble along and hustle one another in that
effective style of ‘high-breeding’ so frequently exhibited at
her majesty’s drawing-rooms. i, with sibyl, hastily preceded
the impatient, pushing crowd, for i wished to find a good
seat for my beautiful betrothed before the room became full
to over-flowing. there proved however, to be plenty of accommodation
for everybody,—what space there was seemed
capable of limitless expansion, and all the spectators were
comfortably placed without difficulty. soon we were all
studying our programmes with considerable interest, for the
titles of the ‘tableaux’ were somewhat original and mystifying.
they were eight in number, and were respectively headed—‘society,’—‘bravery:
ancient and modern,’—‘a lost
angel,’—‘the autocrat,’—‘a corner of hell,’—‘seeds of
corruption,’—‘his latest purchase,’—and ‘faith and
materialism.’
 it was in the theatre that everyone became at
last conscious of the weirdly beautiful character of the music
that had been surging round them all day. seated under
one roof in more or less enforced silence and attention, the
vague and frivolous throng grew hushed and passive,—the
[p ]
 ‘society’ smirk passed off certain faces that were as trained
to grin as their tongues were trained to lie,—the dreadful
giggle of the unwedded man-hunter was no longer heard,—and
soon the most exaggerated fashion-plate of a woman
forgot to rustle her gown. the passionate vibrations of a
violoncello, superbly played to a double harp accompaniment,
throbbed on the stillness with a beseeching depth of sound,—and
people listened, i saw, almost breathlessly, entranced, as
it were, against their wills, and staring as though they were
hypnotized, in front of them at the gold curtain with its
familiar motto—
“all the world’s a stage
and all the men and women merely players.”
before we had time to applaud the violoncello solo however,
the music changed,—and the mirthful voices of violins and
flutes rang out in a waltz of the giddiest and sweetest tune.
at the same instant a silvery bell tinkled, and the curtain
parted noiselessly in twain, disclosing the first tableau—“society.”
an exquisite female figure, arrayed in evening-dress
of the richest and most extravagant design, stood before
us, her hair crowned with diamonds, and her bosom blazing
with the same lustrous gems. her head was slightly raised,—her
lips were parted in a languid smile,—in one hand she held
up-lifted a glass of foaming champagne,—her gold-slippered
foot trod on an hour-glass. behind her, catching convulsively
at the folds of her train, crouched another woman in rags,
pinched and wretched, with starvation depicted in her face,—a
dead child lay near. and, overshadowing this group, were
two supernatural shapes,—one in scarlet, the other in black,—vast
and almost beyond the stature of humanity,—the scarlet
figure represented anarchy, and its blood-red fingers were advanced
to clutch the diamond crown from ‘society’s’ brow,—the
sable-robed form was death, and even as we looked, it
slowly raised its steely dart in act to strike! the effect was
weird and wonderful,—and the grim lesson the picture conveyed,
[p ]
 was startling enough to make a very visible impression.
no one spoke,—no one applauded,—but people moved restlessly
and fidgetted on their seats,—and there was an audible
sigh of relief as the curtain closed. opening again, it displayed
the second tableau—‘bravery—ancient and modern.’
this was in two scenes;—the first one depicted a nobleman
of elizabeth’s time, with rapier drawn, his foot on the prostrate
body of a coarse ruffian who had evidently, from the grouping,
insulted a woman whose slight figure was discerned shrinking
timidly away from the contest. this was ‘ancient bravery,’—and
it changed rapidly to ‘modern,’ showing us an enervated,
narrow-shouldered, pallid dandy in opera-coat and hat,
smoking a cigarette and languidly appealing to a bulky policeman
to protect him from another young noodle of his own
class, similarly attired, who was represented as sneaking round
a corner in abject terror. we all recognised the force of the
application, and were in a much better humour with this
pictured satire than we had been at the lesson of ‘society.’
next followed ‘a lost angel,’ in which was shown a great
hall in the palace of a king, where there were numbers of
brilliantly attired people, all grouped in various attitudes, and
evidently completely absorbed in their own concerns, so much
so as to be entirely unconscious of the fact that in their very
midst, stood a wondrous angel, clad in dazzling white, with
a halo round her fair hair, and a glory, as of the sunset, on
her half drooping wings. her eyes were wistful,—her face
was pensive and expectant; she seemed to say, “will the
world ever know that i am here?” somehow,—as the
curtain slowly closed again, amid loud applause, for the
picture was extraordinarily beautiful, i thought of mavis
clare, and sighed. sibyl looked up at me.
“why do you sigh?” she said—“it is a lovely fancy,—but
the symbol is wasted in the present audience,—no one with
education believes in angels now-a-days.”
“true!” i assented; yet there was a heaviness at my
heart, for her words reminded me of what i would rather
have forgotten,—namely her own admitted lack of all religious
[p ]
 faith. ‘the autocrat,’ was the next tableau, and represented
an emperor enthroned. at his footstool knelt a piteous crowd
of the starving and oppressed, holding up their lean hands to
him, clasped in anguished petition, but he looked away from
them as though he saw them not. his head was turned to
listen to the side-whisper of one who seemed, by the courtly
bend and flattering smile, to be his adviser and confidant,—yet
that very confidant held secreted behind his back, a drawn
dagger, ready to strike his sovereign to the heart. “russia!”
whispered one or two of the company, as the scene was obscured;
but the scarcely-breathed suggestion quickly passed
into a murmur of amazement and awe as the curtain parted
again to disclose “a corner of hell.” this tableau was indeed
original, and quite unlike what might have been imagined
as the conventional treatment of such a subject. what we
saw was a black and hollow cavern, glittering alternately with
the flashings of ice and fire,—huge icicles drooped from above,
and pale flames leaped stealthily into view from below, and
within the dark embrasure, the shadowy form of a man was
seated, counting out gold, or what seemed to be gold. yet as
coin after coin slipped through his ghostly fingers, each one
was seen to change to fire,—and the lesson thus pictured was
easily read. the lost soul had made its own torture, and was
still at work intensifying and increasing its own fiery agony.
much as this scene was admired for its rembrandt effect of
light and shade, i, personally, was glad when it was curtained
from view; there was something in the dreadful face of the
doomed sinner that reminded me forcibly and unpleasantly of
those ghastly three i had seen in my horrid vision on the
night of viscount lynton’s suicide. ‘seeds of corruption’
was the next picture, and showed us a young and beautiful
girl in her early teens, lying on a luxurious couch en deshabille,
with a novel in her hand, of which the title was plainly seen
by all;—a novel well-known to everyone present, and the
work of a much-praised living author. round her, on the
floor, and cast carelessly on a chair at her side, were other
novels of the same ‘sexual’ type,—all their titles turned
[p ]
 towards us, and the names of their authors equally made
manifest.
“what a daring idea!” said a lady in the seat immediately
behind me—“i wonder if any of those authors are present!”
“if they are they won’t mind!” replied the man next to her
with a smothered laugh—“those sort of writers would merely
take it as a first-class advertisement!”
sibyl looked at the tableau with a pale face and wistful eyes.
“that is a true picture!” she said under her breath—“geoffrey,
it is painfully true!”
i made no answer,—i thought i knew to what she alluded;
but alas!—i did not know how deeply the ‘seeds of corruption’
had been sown in her own nature, or what a harvest
they would bring forth. the curtain closed,—to open again
almost immediately on “his latest purchase.” here we
were shown the interior of a luxurious modern drawing-room,
where about eight or ten men were assembled, in fashionable
evening-dress. they had evidently just risen from a card-table,—and
one of them, a dissipated looking brute, with a
wicked smile of mingled satire and triumph on his face was
pointing to his ‘purchase,’—a beautiful woman. she was
clad in glistening white like a bride,—but she was bound, as
prisoners are bound, to an upright column, on which the
grinning head of a marble silenus leered above her. her
hands were tied tightly together,—with chains of diamonds;
her waist was bound,—with thick ropes of pearls;—a wide
collar of rubies encircled her throat;—and from bosom to
feet she was netted about and tied,—with strings of gold and
gems. her head was flung back defiantly with an assumption
of pride and scorn,—her eyes alone expressed shame, self-contempt,
and despair at her bondage. the man who owned
this white slave was represented, by his attitude, as cataloguing
and appraising her ‘points’ for the approval and applause of
his comrades, whose faces variously and powerfully expressed
the differing emotions of lust, cruelty, envy, callousness, derision,
and selfishness, more admirably than the most gifted
painter could imagine.
[p ]“a capital type of most fashionable marriages!” i heard
some-one say.
“rather!” another voice replied—“the orthodox ‘happy
couple’ to the life!”
i glanced at sibyl. she looked pale,—but smiled as she
met my questioning eyes. a sense of consolation crept
warmly about my heart as i remembered that now, she had,
as she told me ‘learnt to love,’—and that therefore her
marriage with me was no longer a question of material advantage
alone. she was not my ‘purchase,’—she was my
love, my saint, my queen!—or so i chose to think, in my
foolishness and vanity!
the last tableau of all was now to come,—“faith and
materialism,” and it proved to be the most startling of the
series. the auditorium was gradually darkened,—and the
dividing curtain disclosed a ravishingly beautiful scene by the
sea-shore. a full moon cast its tranquil glory over the smooth
waters, and,—rising on rainbow-wings from earth towards the
skies, one of the loveliest creatures ever dreamed of by poet
or painter, floated angel-like upwards, her hands holding a
cluster of lilies clasped to her breast,—her lustrous eyes full of
divine joy, hope, and love. exquisite music was heard,—soft
voices sang in the distance a chorale of rejoicing;—heaven
and earth, sea and air,—all seemed to support the aspiring
spirit as she soared higher and higher, in ever-deepening
rapture, when,—as we all watched that aerial flying form with
a sense of the keenest delight and satisfaction,—a sudden crash
of thunder sounded,—the scene grew dark,—and there was a
distant roaring of angry waters. the light of the moon was
eclipsed,—the music ceased; a faint lurid glow of red shone
at first dimly, then more vividly,—and ‘materialism’ declared
itself,—a human skeleton, bleached white and grinning ghastly
mirth upon us all! while we yet looked, the skeleton itself
dropped to pieces,—and one long twining worm lifted its slimy
length from the wreck of bones, another working its way
through the eye-holes of the skull. murmurs of genuine
horror were heard in the auditorium,—people on all sides
[p ]
 rose from their seats—one man in particular, a distinguished
professor of sciences, pushed past me to get out, muttering
crossly—“this may be very amusing to some of you, but to
me, it is disgusting!”
“like your own theories, my dear professor!” said a rich
laughing voice, as lucio met him on his way, and the bijou
theatre was again flooded with cheerful light—“they are
amusing to some, and disgusting to others!——pardon me!—i
speak of course in jest! but i designed that tableau
specially in your honour!”
“oh, you did, did you?” growled the professor—“well, i
didn’t appreciate it.”
“yet you should have done, for it is quite scientifically
correct,”—declared lucio laughing still. “faith,—with the
wings, whom you saw joyously flying towards an impossible
heaven, is not scientifically correct,—have you not told us
so?—but the skeleton and the worms were quite of your
cult! no materialist can deny the correctness of that ‘complexion
to which we all must come at last.’ positively,
some of the ladies look quite pale! how droll it is, that
while everybody (to be fashionable, and in favour with the
press) must accept materialism as the only creed, they
should invariably become affrighted, or let us say offended,
at the natural end of the body, as completed by material
agencies!”
“well, it was not a pleasant subject, that last tableau,”—said
lord elton, as he came out of the theatre with diana
chesney hanging confidingly on his arm—“you cannot say it
was festal!”
“it was,—for the worms!” replied lucio gaily—“come,
miss chesney,—and you tempest, come along with lady
sibyl,—let us go out in the grounds again, and see my will-o’-the-wisps
lighting up.”
fresh curiosity was excited by this remark; the people
quickly threw off the gruesome and tragic impression made
by the strange ‘tableaux’ just witnessed,—and poured out of
the house into the gardens chattering and laughing more
[p ]
 noisily than ever. it was just dusk,—and as we reached the
open lawn we saw an extraordinary number of small boys,
clad in brown, running about with will-o’-the-wisp lanterns.
their movements were swift and perfectly noiseless,—they
leaped, jumped and twirled like little gnomes over flowerbeds,
under shrubberies, and along the edges of paths and
terraces, many of them climbing trees with the rapidity and
agility of monkeys, and wherever they went they left behind them
a trail of brilliant light. soon, by their efforts, all the grounds
were illuminated with a magnificence that could not have been
equalled even by the historic fêtes at versailles,—tall oaks
and cedars were transformed to pyramids of fire-blossoms,—every
branch was loaded with coloured lamps in the shape of
stars,—rockets hissed up into the clear space showering down
bouquets, wreaths and ribbons of flame,—lines of red and azure
ran glowingly along the grass-borders, and amid the enthusiastic
applause of the assembled spectators, eight huge fire-fountains
of all colours sprang up in various corners of the garden,
while an enormous golden balloon, dazzlingly luminous,
ascended slowly into the air and remained poised above us,
sending from its glittering car hundreds of gem-like birds and
butterflies on fiery wings, that circled round and round for a
moment and then vanished. while we were yet loudly clapping
the splendid effect of this sky-spectacle, a troop of beautiful
girl-dancers in white came running across the grass,
waving long silvery wands that were tipped with electric stars,
and to the sound of strange tinkling music, seemingly played
in the distance on glass bells, they commenced a fantastic
dance of the wildest yet most graceful character. every shade
of opaline colour fell upon their swaying figures from some
invisible agency as they tripped and whirled,—and each time
they waved their wands, ribbons and flags of fire were unrolled
and tossed high in air where they gyrated for a long
time like moving hieroglyphs. the scene was now so startling,
so fairy-like and wonderful, that we were well-nigh struck
speechless with astonishment,—too fascinated and absorbed
even to applaud, we had no conception how time went, or how
[p ]
 rapidly the night descended,—till all at once without the least
warning, an appalling crash of thunder burst immediately
above our heads, and a jagged fork of lightning tore the
luminous fire-balloon to shreds. two or three women began
to scream,—whereupon lucio advanced from the throng of
spectators and stood in full view of all, holding up his hand.
“stage thunder, i assure you!” he said playfully, in a clear
somewhat scornful voice—“it comes and goes at my bidding.
quite a part of the game, believe me!—these sort of things
are only toys for children. again—again, ye petty elements!”
he cried, laughing, and lifting his handsome face and flashing
eyes to the dark heavens—“roar your best and loudest!—roar,
i say!”
such a terrific boom and clatter answered him as baffled
all description,—it was as if a mountain of rock had fallen
into ruins,—but having been assured that the deafening noise
was ‘stage thunder’ merely, the spectators were no longer
alarmed, and many of them expressed their opinion that it was
‘wonderfully well done.’ after this, there gradually appeared
against the sky a broad blaze of red light like the reflection of
some great prairie fire,—it streamed apparently upward from
the ground, bathing us all where we stood, in its blood-like
glow. the white-robed dancing-girls waltzed on and on, their
arms entwined, their lovely faces irradiated by the lurid flame,
while above them now flew creatures with black wings, bats
and owls, and great night-moths, that flapped and fluttered
about for all the world as if they were truly alive and not mere
‘stage properties.’ another flash of lightning,—and one more
booming thud of thunder,——and lo!—the undisturbed and
fragrant night was about us, clear, dewy and calm,—the young
moon smiled pensively in a cloudless heaven,—all the dancing-girls
had vanished,—the crimson glow had changed to
a pure silvery radiance, and an array of pretty pages in
eighteenth century costumes of pale pink and blue, stood
before us with lighted flaming torches, making a long
triumphal avenue, down which lucio invited us to pass.
“on, on fair ladies and gallant gentlemen!” he cried—“this
[p ]
 extemporized path of light leads,—not to heaven—no!
that were far too dull an ending!—but to supper! on!—follow
your leader!”
every eye was turned on his fine figure and striking countenance,
as with one hand he beckoned the guests,—between
the double line of lit torches he stood,—a picture for a painter,
with those dark eyes of his alit with such strange mirth as
could not be defined, and the sweet, half-cruel, wonderfully
attractive smile playing upon his lips;—and with one accord
the whole company trooped pell-mell after him, shouting their
applause and delight. who could resist him!—not one in
that assemblage at least;—there are few ‘saints’ in society!
as i went with the rest, i felt as though i were in some
gorgeous dream,—my senses were all in a whirl,—i was giddy
with excitement and could not stop to think, or to analyse the
emotions by which i was governed. had i possessed the
force or the will to pause and consider, i might possibly have
come to the conclusion that there was something altogether
beyond the ordinary power of man displayed in the successive
wonders of this brilliant ‘gala,’—but i was, like all the rest of
society, bent merely on the pleasure of the moment, regardless
of how it was procured, what it cost me, or how it affected
others. how many i see and know to-day among the worshippers
of fashion and frivolity who are acting precisely as i
acted then! indifferent to the welfare of everyone save themselves,
grudging every penny that is not spent on their own
advantage or amusement, and too callous to even listen to the
sorrows or difficulties or joys of others when these do not in
some way, near or remote, touch their own interests, they
waste their time day after day in selfish trifling, wilfully blind
and unconscious to the fact that they are building up their
own fate in the future,—that future which will prove all the
more a terrible reality in proportion to the extent of our
presumption in daring to doubt its truth.
more than four hundred guests sat down to supper in the
largest pavilion,—a supper served in the most costly manner
and furnished with luxuries that represented the utmost pitch
[p ]
 of extravagance. i ate and drank, with sybil at my side,
hardly knowing what i said or did in the whirling excitement
of the hour,—the opening of champagne-bottles, the clink of
glasses, the clatter of plates, the loud hum of talk interspersed
with monkey-like squeals or goat-like whinnies of laughter,
over-ridden at intervals by the blare of trumpet-music and
drums,—all these sounds were as so much noise of rushing
waters in my ears,—and i often found myself growing
abstracted and in a manner confused by the din. i did not
say much to sibyl,—one cannot very well whisper sentimental
nothings in the ear of one’s betrothed when she is eating
ortolans and truffles. presently, amid all the hubbub, a deep
bell struck twelve times, and lucio stood up at the end of
one of the long tables, a full glass of foaming champagne in
his hand—
“ladies and gentlemen!”
there was a sudden silence.
“ladies and gentlemen!” he repeated, his brilliant eyes
flashing derisively, i thought, over the whole well-fed company,
“midnight has struck and the best of friends must part!
but before we do so, let us not forget that we have met here
to wish all happiness to our host, mr geoffrey tempest and
his bride-elect, the lady sibyl elton.” here there was
vociferous applause. “it is said”—continued lucio, “by
the makers of dull maxims, that ‘fortune never comes with
both hands full’—but in this case the adage is proved false
and put to shame,—for our friend has not only secured the
pleasures of wealth, but the treasures of love and beauty
combined. limitless cash is good, but limitless love is
better, and both these choice gifts have been bestowed on
the betrothed pair whom to-day we honour. i will ask you
to give them a hearty round of cheering,—and then it must
be good-night indeed, though not farewell,—for with the
toast of the bride and bridegroom-elect, i shall also drink
to the time,—not far distant perhaps,—when i shall see
some of you, if not all of you again, and enjoy even more of
your charming company than i have done to-day!”
[p ]he ceased amid a perfect hurricane of applause,—and then
everyone rose and turned towards the table where i sat with
sibyl, and naming our names aloud, drank wine, the men
joining in hearty shouts of “hip, hip, hip hurrah!” yet,—as
i bowed repeatedly in response to the storm of cheering,
and while sibyl smiled and bent her graceful head to right
and left, my heart sank suddenly with a sense of fear. was it
my fancy—or did i hear peals of wild laughter circling round
the brilliant pavilion and echoing away, far away into distance?
i listened, glass in hand. “hip, hip, hip hurrah!”
shouted my guests with gusto. “ha—ha—! ha—ha!”
seemed shrieked and yelled in my ears from the outer air.
struggling against this delusion, i got up and returned thanks
for myself and my future bride in a few brief words which
were received with fresh salvos of applause,—and then we all
became aware that lucio had sprung up again in his place,
and was standing high above us all, with one foot on the table
and the other on the chair, confronting us with a fresh glass
of wine in his hand, filled to the brim. what a face he had
at that moment!—what a smile!
“the parting cup, my friends!” he exclaimed—“to our
next merry meeting!”
with plaudits and laughter the guests eagerly and noisily
responded,—and as they drank, the pavilion was flooded by a
deep crimson illumination as of fire. every face looked
blood-red!—every jewel on every woman flashed like a living
flame!—for one brief instant only,—then it was gone, and
there followed a general stampede of the company,—everybody
hurrying as fast as they could into the carriages that
waited in long lines to take them to the station, the last two
‘special’ trains to london being at one a.m. and one thirty.
i bade sibyl and her father a hurried good-night,—diana
chesney went in the same carriage with them, full of ecstatic
thanks and praise to me for the splendours of the day which
she described in her own fashion as “knowing how to do it,—”
and then the departing crowd of vehicles began to thunder
down the avenue. as they went an arch of light suddenly
[p ]
 spanned willowsmere court from end to end of its red gables,
blazing with all the colours of the rainbow, in the middle of
which appeared letters of pale blue and gold, forming what
i had hitherto considered as a funereal device,
“sic transit gloria mundi! vale!”
but, after all, it was as fairly applicable to the ephemeral
splendours of a fête as it was to the more lasting marble
solemnity of a sepulchre, and i thought little or nothing about
it. so perfect were all the arrangements, and so admirably
were the servants trained, that the guests were not long in
departing,—and the grounds were soon not only empty, but
dark. not a vestige of the splendid illuminations was left
anywhere,—and i entered the house fatigued, and with a dull
sense of bewilderment and fear on me which i could not
explain. i found lucio alone in the smoking-room at the
further end of the oak-panelled hall, a small cosily curtained
apartment with a deep bay window which opened directly on
to the lawn. he was standing in this embrasure with his back
to me, but he turned swiftly round as he heard my steps and
confronted me with such a wild, white, tortured face that i
recoiled from him, startled.
“lucio, you are ill!” i exclaimed—“you have done too
much to-day.”
“perhaps i have!” he answered in a hoarse unsteady
voice, and i saw a strong shudder convulse him as he spoke,—then,
gathering himself together as it were by an effort,
he forced a smile—“don’t be alarmed, my friend!—it is
nothing,—nothing but the twinge of an old deep-seated
malady,—a troublesome disease that is rare among men,
and hopelessly incurable.”
“what is it?” i asked anxiously, for his death-like pallor
alarmed me. he looked at me fixedly, his eyes dilating and
darkening, and his hand fell with a heavy pressure on my
shoulder.
“a very strange illness!” he said, in the same jarring
accents. “remorse! have you never heard of it, geoffrey?
[p ]
 neither medicine nor surgery are of any avail,—it is ‘the
worm that dieth not, and the flame that cannot be quenched.’
tut!—let us not talk of it,—no one can cure me,—no one
will! i am past hope!”
“but remorse,—if you have it, and i cannot possibly
imagine why, for you have surely nothing to regret,—is not
a physical ailment!” i said wonderingly.
“and physical ailments are the only ones worth troubling
about, you think?” he queried, still smiling that strained
and haggard smile—“the body is our chief care,—we cosset
it, and make much of it, feed it and pamper it, and guard it
from so much as a pin-prick of pain if we can,—and thus
we flatter ourselves that all is well,—all must be well! yet
it is but a clay chrysalis, bound to split and crumble with
the growth of the moth-soul within,—the moth that flies
with blind instinctiveness straight into the unknown, and is
dazzled by excess of light! look out here,”—he went on
with an abrupt and softer change of tone—“look out at
the dreamful shadowy beauty of your gardens now! the
flowers are asleep,—the trees are surely glad to be disburdened
of all the gaudy artificial lamps that lately hung
upon their branches,—there is the young moon pillowing
her chin on the edge of a little cloud and sinking to sleep
in the west,—a moment ago there was a late nightingale
awake and singing. you can feel the breath of the roses
from the trellis yonder! all this is nature’s work,—and
how much fairer and sweeter it is now than when the lights
were ablaze and the blare of band-music startled the small
birds in their downy nests!—yet ‘society’ would not appreciate
this cool dusk, this happy solitude;—‘society’ prefers
a false glare to all true radiance. and what is worse it
tries to make true things take a second place as adjuncts to
sham ones,—and there comes in the mischief.”
“it is just like you to run down your own indefatigable
labours in the splendid successes of the day,”—i said
laughing—“you may call it a ‘false glare’ if you like, but it
has been a most magnificent spectacle,—and certainly in
[p ]
 the way of entertainments it will never be equalled or
excelled.”
“it will make you more talked about than even your
‘boomed’ book could do!” said lucio, eyeing me
narrowly.
“not the least doubt of that!” i replied—“society prefers
food and amusement to any literature,—even the greatest.
by-the-by, where are all the ‘artistes,’—the musicians and
dancers?”
“gone!”
“gone!” i echoed amazedly—“already! good heavens!
have they had supper?”
“they have had everything they want, even to their pay,”
said lucio, a trifle impatiently—“did i not tell you geoffrey,
that when i undertake to do anything, i do it thoroughly or
not at all?”
i looked at him,—he smiled, but his eyes were sombre and
scornful.
“all right!” i responded carelessly, not wishing to offend
him,—“have it your own way! but, upon my word, to me
it is all like devil’s magic!”
“what is?” he asked imperturbably.
“everything!—the dancers,—the number of servants and
pages—why, there must have been two or three hundred of
them,—those wonderful ‘tableaux,’—the illuminations,—the
supper,—everything i tell you!—and the most astonishing
part of it now is, that all these people should have cleared out
so soon!”
“well, if you elect to call money devil’s magic, you are
right,”—said lucio.
“but surely in some cases, not even money could procure
such perfection of detail”——i began.
“money can procure anything!”—he interrupted, a thrill
of passion vibrating in his rich voice,—“i told you that long
ago. it is a hook for the devil himself. not that the devil
could be supposed to care about world’s cash personally,—but
he generally conceives a liking for the company of the
[p ]
 man who possesses it;—possibly he knows what that man
will do with it. i speak metaphorically of course,—but no
metaphor can exaggerate the power of money. trust no
man or woman’s virtue till you have tried to purchase it
with a round sum in hard cash! money, my excellent
geoffrey, has done everything for you,—remember that!—you
have done nothing for yourself.”
“that’s not a very kind speech,”—i said, somewhat
vexedly.
“no? and why? because it’s true? i notice most
people complain of ‘unkindness’ when they are told a
truth. it is true, and i see no unkindness in it. you’ve
done nothing for yourself and you’re not expected to do
anything—except,” and he laughed—“except just now to
get to bed, and dream of the enchanting sibyl!”
“i confess i am tired,”—i said, and an unconscious sigh
escaped me—“and you?”
his gaze rested broodingly on the outer landscape.
“i also am tired,” he responded slowly—“but i never get
away from my fatigue, for i am tired of myself. and i
always rest badly. good-night!”
“good-night!” i answered,—and then paused, looking at
him. he returned my look with interest.
“well?” he asked expressively.
i forced a smile.
“well!” i echoed—“i do not know what i should say,—except—that
i wish i knew you as you are. i feel that you
were right in telling me once that you are not what you seem.”
he still kept his eyes fixed upon me.
“as you have expressed the wish,”—he said slowly—“i
promise you you shall know me as i am some-day! it may
be well for you to know,—for the sake of others who may
seek to cultivate my company.”
i moved away to leave the room.
“thanks for all the trouble you have taken to-day,”—i said
in a lighter tone—“though i shall never be able to express
my full gratitude in words.”
[p ]“if you wanted to thank anybody, thank god that you have
lived through it!” he replied.
“why?” i asked, astonished.
“why? because life hangs on a thread,—a society crush
is the very acme of boredom and exhaustion,—and that we
escape with our lives from a general guzzle and giggle is
matter for thanksgiving,—that’s all! and god gets so few
thanks as a rule that you may surely spare him a brief one
for to-day’s satisfactory ending.”
i laughed, seeing no meaning in his words beyond the usual
satire he affected. i found amiel, waiting for me in my bedroom,
but i dismissed him abruptly, hating the look of his
crafty and sullen face, and saying i needed no attendance.
thoroughly fatigued, i was soon in bed and asleep,—and the
terrific agencies that had produced the splendours of the
brilliant festival at which i had figured as host, were not
revealed to me by so much as a warning dream!
[p ]xxv
a few days after the entertainment at willowsmere,
and before the society papers had done talking about
the magnificence and luxury displayed on that occasion, i
woke up one morning, like the great poet byron, “to find
myself famous.” not for any intellectual achievement,—not
for any unexpected deed of heroism,—not for any resolved or
noble attitude in society or politics,—no!—i owed my fame
merely to a quadruped;—‘phosphor’ won the derby. it
was about a neck-and-neck contest between my racer and that
of the prime minister, and for a second or so the result
seemed doubtful,—but, as the two jockeys neared the goal,
amiel, whose thin wiry figure clad in the brightest of bright
scarlet silk, stuck to his horse as though he were a part of it,
put ‘phosphor’ to a pace he had never yet exhibited, appearing
to skim along the ground at literally flying speed, the
upshot being that he scored a triumphant victory, reaching
the winning-post a couple of yards or more ahead of his rival.
acclamations rent the air at the vigour displayed in the
‘finish’—and i became the hero of the day,—the darling of
the populace. i was somewhat amused at the premier’s discomfiture,—he
took his beating rather badly. he did not
know me, nor i him,—i was not of his politics, and i did not
care a jot for his feelings one way or the other, but i was
gratified, in a certain satirical sense, to find myself suddenly
acknowledged as a greater man than he, because i was the
owner of the derby-winner! before i well knew where i
[p ]
 was, i found myself being presented to the prince of wales,
who shook hands with me and congratulated me;—all the
biggest aristocrats in england were willing and eager to be
introduced to me;—and inwardly i laughed at this exhibition
of taste and culture on the part of ‘the gentlemen of england
that live at home at ease.’ they crowded round ‘phosphor,’
whose wild eye warned strangers against taking liberties with
him, but who seemed not a whit the worse for his exertions,
and who apparently was quite ready to run the race over
again with equal pleasure and success. amiel’s dark sly face
and cruel ferret eyes were evidently not attractive to the
majority of the gentlemen of the turf, though his answers to
all the queries put to him, were admirably ready, respectful
and not without wit. but to me the whole sum and substance
of the occasion was the fact that i, geoffrey tempest, once
struggling author, now millionaire, was simply by virtue of my
ownership of the derby-winner, ‘famous’ at last!—or what
society considers famous,—that fame that secures for a man
the attention of ‘the nobility and gentry,’ to quote from
tradesmen’s advertisements,—and also obtains the persistent
adulation and shameless pursuit of all the demi-mondaines
who want jewels and horses and yachts presented to them in
exchange for a few tainted kisses from their carmined lips.
under the shower of compliments i received, i stood, apparently
delighted,—smiling, affable and courteous,—entering
into the spirit of the occasion, and shaking hands with my
lord that, and sir something nobody, and his serene highness
the grand duke so-and-so of beer-land, and his other
serene lowness of small-principality,—but in my secret soul
i scorned these people with their social humbug and hypocrisy,—scorned
them with such a deadly scorn as almost amazed
myself. when presently i walked off the course with lucio,
who as usual seemed to know and to be friends with everybody,
he spoke in accents that were far more grave and gentle
than i had ever heard him use before.
“with all your egotism, geoffrey, there is something
forcible and noble in your nature,—something which rises
[p ]
 up in bold revolt against falsehood and sham. why, in
heaven’s name do you not give it way?”
i looked at him amazed, and laughed.
“give it way? what do you mean? would you have me
tell humbugs that i know them as such?,—and liars that i
discern their lies? my dear fellow, society would become
too hot to hold me!”
“it could not be hotter—or colder—than hell, if you believed
in hell, which you do not,”—he rejoined, in the same
quiet voice—“but i did not assume that you should say
these things straight out and bluntly, to give offence. an
affronting candour is not nobleness,—it is merely coarse.
to act nobly is better than to speak.”
“and what would you have me do?” i asked curiously.
he was silent for a moment, and seemed to be earnestly,
almost painfully considering,—then he answered,—
“my advice will seem to you singular, geoffrey,—but if you
want it, here it is. give, as i said, the noble, and what the
world would call the quixotic part of your nature full way,—do
not sacrifice your higher sense of what is right and just
for the sake of pandering to anyone’s power or influence,—and—say
farewell to me! i am no use to you, save to
humour your varying fancies, and introduce you to those
great,—or small,—personages you wish to know for your
own convenience or advantage,—believe me, it would be
much better for you and much more consoling at the inevitable
hour of death, if you were to let all this false and frivolous
nonsense go, and me with it! leave society to its own
fool’s whirligig of distracted follies,—put royalty in its true
place, and show it that all its pomp, arrogance and glitter
are worthless, and itself a nothing, compared to the upright
standing of a brave soul in an honest man,—and, as christ
said to the rich ruler—‘sell half that thou hast and give to
the poor.’”
i was silent for a minute or so out of sheer surprise, while
he watched me earnestly, his face pale and expectant. a
curious shock of something like compunction startled my
[p ]
 conscience, and for a brief space i was moved to a vague
regret,—regret that with all the enormous capability i possessed
of doing good to numbers of my fellow-creatures with
the vast wealth i owned, i had not attained to any higher
moral attitude than that represented by the frivolous folk who
make up what is called the ‘upper ten’ of society. i took
the same egotistical pleasure in myself and my own doings as
any of them,—and i was to the full as foolishly conventional,
smooth-tongued and hypocritical as they. they acted their
part and i acted mine,—none of us were ever our real selves
for a moment. in very truth, one of the reasons why ‘fashionable’
men and women cannot bear to be alone is, that a solitude
in which they are compelled to look face to face upon
their secret selves becomes unbearable because of the burden
they carry of concealed vice and accusing shame. my
emotion soon passed however, and slipping my arm through
lucio’s, i smiled, as i answered—
“your advice, my dear fellow, would do credit to a salvationist
preacher,—but it is quite valueless to me, because
impossible to follow. to say farewell for ever to you, in
the first place, would be to make myself guilty of the blackest
ingratitude,—in the second instance, society, with all its
ridiculous humbug, is nevertheless necessary for the amusement
of myself and my future wife,—royalty moreover, is
accustomed to be flattered, and we shall not be hurt by joining
in the general inane chorus;—thirdly, if i did as the
visionary jew suggested——”
“what visionary jew?” he asked, his eyes sparkling
coldly.
“why, christ of course!” i rejoined lightly.
the shadow of a strange smile parted his lips.
“it is the fashion to blaspheme!” he said,—“a mark of
brilliancy in literature, and wit in society! i forgot! pray
go on,—if you did as christ suggested——”
“yes,—if i gave half my goods to the poor, i should not
be thanked for it, or considered anything but a fool for my
pains.”
[p ]“you would wish to be thanked?” he said.
“naturally! most people like a little gratitude in return
for benefits.”
“they do. and the creator, who is always giving, is supposed
to like gratitude also,”—he observed—“nevertheless
he seldom gets it!”
“i do not talk of hyperphysical nothingness,”—i said with
impatience—“i am speaking of the plain facts of this world
and the people who live in it. if one gives largely, one
expects to be acknowledged as generous,—but if i were to
divide my fortune, and hand half of it to the poor, the matter
would be chronicled in about six lines in one of the papers,
and society would exclaim ‘what a fool!’”
“then let us talk no more about it,”—said lucio, his
brows clearing, and his eyes gathering again their wonted
light of mockery and mirth—“having won the derby, you
have really done all a nineteenth-century civilization expects
you to do, and for your reward, you will be in universal
demand everywhere. you may hope soon to dine at
marlborough house,—and a little back-stair influence and
political jobbery will work you into the cabinet if you
care for it. did i not tell you i would set you up as
successfully as the bear who has reached the bun on the
top of the slippery pole, a spectacle for the envy of men
and the wonder of angels? well, there you are!—triumphant!—a
great creature geoffrey!—in fact, you are the
greatest product of the age, a man with five millions and
owner of the derby-winner! what is the glory of intellect
compared to such a position as yours! men envy you,—and
as for angels,—if there are any,—you may be sure
they do wonder! a man’s fame guaranteed by a horse, is
something indeed to make an angel stare!”
he laughed uproariously, and from that day he never
spoke again of his singular proposition that i should ‘part
with him,’ and let the “nobler” nature in me have its way.
i was not to know then that he had staked a chance upon
my soul and lost it,—and that from henceforward he took a
[p ]
 determined course with me, implacably on to the appalling
end.
my marriage took place on the appointed day in june
with all the pomp and extravagant show befitting my
position, and that of the woman i had chosen to wed. it is
needless to describe the gorgeousness of the ceremony in
detail,—any fashionable ‘ladies paper’ describing the wedding
of an earl’s daughter to a five-fold millionaire, will give an
idea, in hysterical rhapsody, of the general effect. it was an
amazing scene,—and one in which costly millinery completely
vanquished all considerations of solemnity or sacredness in
the supposed ‘divine’ ordinance. the impressive command:
“i require and charge ye both, as ye will answer at the
dreadful day of judgment,”—did not obtain half so much
awed attention as the exquisite knots of pearls and diamonds
which fastened the bride’s silver-embroidered train to her
shoulders. ‘all the world and his wife’ were present,—that
is, the social world, which imagines no other world
exists, though it is the least part of the community. the
prince of wales honoured us by his presence: two great
dignitaries of the church performed the marriage-rite, resplendent
in redundant fulness of white sleeve and surplice,
and equally imposing in the fatness of their bodies and
unctuous redness of their faces; and lucio was my ‘best
man.’ he was in high, almost wild spirits,—and, during
our drive to the church together, had entertained me all the
way with numerous droll stories, mostly at the expense of
the clergy. when we reached the sacred edifice, he said
laughingly as he alighted—
“did you ever hear it reported, geoffrey, that the devil is
unable to enter a church, because of the cross upon it, or
within it?”
“i have heard some such nonsense,”—i replied, smiling
at the humour expressed in his sparkling eyes and eloquent
features.
“it is nonsense,—for the makers of the legend forgot one
thing;” he continued, dropping his voice to a whisper as
[p ]
 we passed under the carved gothic portico—“the cross may
be present,——but——so is the clergyman! and wherever
a clergyman is, the devil may surely follow!”
i almost laughed aloud at his manner of making this
irreverent observation, and the look with which he accompanied
it. the rich tones of the organ creeping softly on the
flower-scented silence however, quickly solemnized my mood,—and
while i leaned against the altar-rails waiting for my
bride, i caught myself wondering for the hundredth time or
more, at my comrade’s singularly proud and kingly aspect, as
with folded arms and lifted head, he contemplated the lily-decked
altar and the gleaming crucifix upon it, his meditative
eyes bespeaking a curious mingling of reverence and
contempt.
one incident i remember, as standing out particularly in
all the glare and glitter of the brilliant scene, and this
occurred at the signing of our names in the register. when
sibyl, a vision of angelic loveliness in all her bridal white,
affixed her signature to the entry, lucio bent towards
her,—
“as ‘best man’ i claim an old-fashioned privilege!” he
said, and kissed her lightly on the cheek. she blushed a
vivid red,—then suddenly grew ghastly pale,—and with a kind
of choking cry, reeled back in a dead faint in the arms of one
of her bridesmaids. it was some minutes before she was restored
to consciousness,—but she made light both of my alarm
and the consternation of her friends,—and assuring us that
it was nothing but the effect of the heat of the weather and
the excitement of the day, she took my arm and walked
down the aisle smilingly, through the brilliant ranks of her
staring and envious ‘society’ friends, all of whom coveted
her good fortune, not because she had married a worthy or
gifted man,—that would have been no special matter for
congratulation,—but simply because she had married five
millions of money! i was the appendage to the millions—nothing
further. she held her head high and haughtily,
though i felt her tremble as the thundering strains of the
[p ]
 ‘bridal march’ from lohengrin poured sonorous triumph on
the air. she trod on roses all the way,—i remembered that
too, ... afterwards! her satin slipper crushed the hearts
of a thousand innocent things that must surely have been
more dear to god than she;—the little harmless souls of
flowers, whose task in life, sweetly fulfilled, had been to
create beauty and fragrance by their mere existence, expired
to gratify the vanity of one woman to whom nothing was
sacred. but i anticipate,—i was yet in my fool’s dream,—and
imagined that the dying blossoms were happy to perish
thus beneath her tread!
a grand reception was held at lord elton’s house after the
ceremony,—and in the midst of the chattering, the eating and
the drinking, we,—my newly made wife and i,—departed amid
the profuse flatteries and good wishes of our ‘friends’ who,
primed with the very finest champagne, made a very decent
show of being sincere. the last person to say farewell to us
at the carriage-door was lucio,—and the sorrow i felt at
parting with him was more than i could express in words.
from the very hour of the dawning of my good fortune we
had been almost inseparable companions,—i owed my
success in society,—everything, even my bride herself,—to
his management and tact,—and though i had now won for
my life’s partner the most beautiful of women, i could not
contemplate even the temporary breaking of the association
between myself and my gifted and brilliant comrade, without
a keen pang of personal pain amid my nuptial joys. leaning
his arms on the carriage-window, he looked in upon us both,
smiling.
“my spirit will be with you both in all your journeyings!”
he said—“and when you return, i shall be one of the first to
bid you welcome home. your house-party is fixed for september,
i believe?”
“yes,—and you will be the most eagerly desired guest of
all invited!” i replied heartily, pressing his hand.
“fie, for shame!” he retorted laughingly—“be not so
disloyal of speech, geoffrey! are you not going to entertain
[p ]
 the prince of wales?—and shall anyone be more
‘eagerly-desired’ than he? no,—i must play a humble
third or even fourth on your list where royalty is concerned,—my
princedom is alas! not that of wales,—and
the throne i might claim (if i had anyone to help me,
which i have not) is a long way removed from that of
england!”
sibyl said nothing,—but her eyes rested on his handsome
face and fine figure with an odd wonder and wistfulness, and
she was very pale.
“good-bye lady sibyl!” he added gently—“all joy be
with you! to us who are left behind, your absence will
seem long,—but to you,—ah!—love gives wings to time,
and what would be to ordinary folks a month of mere dull
living, will be for you nothing but a moment’s rapture!
love is better than wealth,—you have found that out
already i know!—but i think—and hope—that you are
destined to make the knowledge more certain and complete!
think of me sometimes! au revoir!”
the horses started,—a handful of rice flung by the society
idiot who is always at weddings, rattled against the door and
on the roof of the brougham, and lucio stepped back, waving
his hand. to the last we saw him,—a tall stately figure on the
steps of lord elton’s mansion,—surrounded by an ultra-fashionable
throng, ... bridesmaids in bright attire and picture-hats,—young
girls all eager and excited-looking, each of them no
doubt longing fervently for the day to come when they might
severally manage to secure as rich a husband as myself, ...
match-making mothers and wicked old dowagers, exhibiting
priceless lace on their capacious bosoms, and ablaze with
diamonds, ... men with white button-hole bouquets in their
irreproachably fitting frock-coats,—servants in gay liveries,
and the usual street-crowd of idle sight-seers;—all this cluster
of faces, costumes and flowers, was piled against the grey background
of the stone portico,—and in the midst, the dark
beauty of lucio’s face and the luminance of his flashing eyes
made him the conspicuous object and chief centre of attraction,
[p ]
 ... then, ... the carriage turned a sharp corner,—the
faces vanished,—and sibyl and i realised that from henceforward
we were left alone,—alone to face the future and
ourselves,—and to learn the lesson of love ... or hate ... for
evermore together!
[p ]xxvi
i cannot now trace the slow or swift flitting by of
phantasmal events, ... wild ghosts of days or weeks
that drifted past, and brought me gradually and finally to a
time when i found myself wandering, numb and stricken and
sick at heart, by the shores of a lake in switzerland,—a small
lake, densely blue, with apparently a thought in its depths
such as is reflected in a child’s earnest eye. i gazed down at
the clear and glistening water almost unseeingly,—the snow-peaked
mountains surrounding it were too high for the lifting
of my aching sight,—loftiness, purity, and radiance were unbearable
to my mind, crushed as it was beneath a weight of
dismal wreckage and ruin. what a fool was i ever to have
believed that in this world there could be such a thing as
happiness! misery stared me in the face,—life-long misery,—and
no escape but death. misery!—it was the word which
like a hellish groan, had been uttered by the three dreadful
phantoms that had once, in an evil vision, disturbed my
rest. what had i done, i demanded indignantly of myself,
to deserve this wretchedness which no wealth could cure?—why
was fate so unjust? like all my kind, i was unable to
discern the small yet strong links of the chain i had myself
wrought, and which bound me to my own undoing,—i blamed
fate, or rather god,—and talked of injustice, merely because
i personally suffered, never realizing that what i considered
unjust was but the equitable measuring forth of that eternal
law which is carried out with as mathematical an exactitude
[p ]
 as the movement of the planets, notwithstanding man’s pigmy
efforts to impede its fulfilment. the light wind blowing
down from the snow peaks above me ruffled the placidity of
the little lake by which i aimlessly strolled,—i watched the
tiny ripples break over its surface like the lines of laughter on
a human face, and wondered morosely whether it was deep
enough to drown in! for what was the use of living on,—knowing
what i knew! knowing that she whom i had
loved, and whom i loved still in a way that was hateful to
myself, was a thing viler and more shameless in character
than the veriest poor drab of the street who sells herself for
current coin,—that the lovely body and angel-face were but
an attractive disguise for the soul of a harpy,—a vulture of
vice, ... my god!—an irrepressible cry escaped me as my
thoughts went on and on in the never-ending circle and problem
of incurable, unspeakable despair,—and i threw myself
down on a shelving bank of grass that sloped towards
the lake and covered my face in a paroxysm of tearless
agony.
still inexorable thought worked in my brain, and forced me
to consider my position. was she,—was sibyl—more to blame
than i myself for all the strange havoc wrought? i had married
her of my own free will and choice,—and she had told me
beforehand—“i am a contaminated creature, trained to perfection
in the lax morals and prurient literature of my day.” well,—and
so it had proved! my own blood burned with shame
as i reflected how ample and convincing were the proofs!—and,
starting up from my recumbent posture i paced up and
down again restlessly in a fever of self-contempt and disgust.
what could i do with a woman such as she to whom i was
now bound for life? reform her? she would laugh me to
scorn for the attempt. reform myself? she would sneer at
me for an effeminate milksop. besides, was not i as willing
to be degraded as she was to degrade me?—a very victim to
my brute passions? tortured and maddened by my feelings
i roamed about wildly, and started as if a pistol-shot had been
fired near me when the plash of oars sounded on the silence
[p ]
 and the keel of a small boat grated on the shore, the boatman
within it respectfully begging me in mellifluous french to
employ him for an hour. i assented, and in a minute or two
was out on the lake in the middle of the red glow of sunset
which turned the snow-summits to points of flame, and the
waters to the hue of ruby wine. i think the man who rowed
me saw that i was in no very pleasant humour, for he preserved
a discreet silence,—and i, pulling my hat partly over my eyes,
lay back in the stern, still busy with my wretched musings.
only a month married!—and yet,—a sickening satiety had
taken the place of the so-called ‘deathless’ lover’s passion.
there were moments even, when my wife’s matchless physical
beauty appeared hideous to me. i knew her as she was,—and
no exterior charm could ever again cover for me the
revolting nature within. and what puzzled me from dawn
to dusk was her polished, specious hypocrisy,—her amazing
aptitude for lies! to look at her,—to hear her speak,—one
would have deemed her a very saint of purity,—a delicate
creature whom a coarse word would startle and offend,—a
very incarnation of the sweetest and most gracious womanhood,—all
heart and feeling and sympathy. everyone thought
thus of her,—and never was there a greater error. heart she
had none; that fact was borne in upon me two days after our
marriage while we were in paris, for there a telegram reached
us announcing her mother’s death. the paralysed countess
of elton had, it appeared, expired suddenly on our wedding-day,
or rather our wedding night,—but the earl had deemed
it best to wait forty-eight hours before interrupting our
hymeneal happiness with the melancholy tidings. he
followed his telegram by a brief letter to his daughter, in which
the concluding lines were these—“as you are a bride and
are travelling abroad, i should advise you by no means to
go into mourning. under the circumstances it is really not
necessary.”
and sibyl had readily accepted his suggestion, keeping
generally however to white and pale mauve colourings in her
numerous and wonderful toilettes, in order not to outrage the
[p ]
 proprieties too openly in the opinions of persons known to
her, whom she might possibly meet casually in the foreign
towns we visited. no word of regret passed her lips, and no
tears were shed for her mother’s loss. she only said,
“what a good thing her sufferings are over!”
then, with a little sarcastic smile, she had added—
“i wonder when we shall receive the elton-chesney wedding
cards!”
i did not reply, for i was pained and grieved at her lack of
all gentle feeling in the matter, and i was also, to a certain
extent, superstitiously affected by the fact of the death occurring
on our marriage-day. however this was now a thing of
the past; a month had elapsed,—a month in which the tearing-down
of illusions had gone on daily and hourly,—till i was
left to contemplate the uncurtained bare prose of life and the
knowledge that i had wedded a beautiful feminine animal
with the soul of a shameless libertine. here i pause and ask
myself,—was not i also a libertine? yes,—i freely admit it,—but
the libertinage of a man, while it may run to excess in hot
youth, generally resolves itself, under the influence of a great
love, into a strong desire for undefiled sweetness and modesty
in the woman beloved. if a man has indulged in both folly
and sin, the time comes at last, when, if he has any good left
in him at all, he turns back upon himself and lashes his own
vices with the scorpion-whip of self-contempt till he smarts
with the rage and pain of it,—and then, aching in every pulse
with his deserved chastisement, he kneels in spirit at the feet
of some pure, true-hearted woman whose white soul, like an
angel, hovers compassionately above him, and there lays down
his life, saying “do what you will with it,—it is yours!” and
woe to her who plays lightly with such a gift, or works fresh
injury upon it! no man, even if he has in his day, indulged
in ‘rapid’ living, should choose a ‘rapid’ woman for his wife,—he
had far better put a loaded pistol to his head and make
an end of it!
the sunset-glory began to fade from the landscape as the
little boat glided on over the tranquil water, and a great shadow
[p ]
 was on my mind, like the shadow of that outer darkness which
would soon be night. again i asked myself—was there no
happiness possible in all the world? just then the angelus
chimed from a little chapel on the shore, and as it rang, a
memory stirred in my brain moving me well-nigh to tears.
mavis clare was happy!—mavis, with her frank fearless eyes,
sweet face and bright nature,—mavis, wearing her crown of
fame as simply as a child might wear a wreath of may-blossom,—she,
with a merely moderate share of fortune which even in its
slight proportion was only due to her own hard incessant work,—she
was happy. and i,—with my millions,—was wretched!
how was it? why was it? what had i done? i had lived as
my compeers lived,—i had followed the lead of all society,—i
had feasted my friends and effectually ‘snubbed’ my foes,—i
had comported myself exactly as others of my wealth comport
themselves,—and i had married a woman whom most men,
looking upon once, would have been proud to win. nevertheless
there seemed to be a curse upon me. what had i
missed out of life? i knew,—but was ashamed to own it,
because i had previously scorned what i called the dream-nothings
of mere sentiment. and now i had to acknowledge
the paramount importance of those ‘dream-nothings’ out of
which all true living must come. i had to realize that my
marriage was nothing but the mere mating of the male and
female animal,—a coarse bodily union, and no more;—that
all the finer and deeper emotions which make a holy thing of
human wedlock, were lacking,—the mutual respect, the trusting
sympathy,—the lovely confidence of mind with mind,—the
subtle inner spiritual bond which no science can analyse,
and which is so much closer and stronger than the material,
and knits immortal souls together when bodies decay—these
things had no existence, and never would exist between my
wife and me. thus, as far as i was concerned, there was a
strange blankness in the world,—i was thrust back upon
myself for comfort and found none. what should i do with
my life, i wondered drearily! win fame,—true fame,—after
all? with sibyl’s witch-eyes mocking my efforts?—never! if
[p ]
 i had ever had any gifts of creative thought within me, she
would have killed it!
the hour was over,—the boatman rowed me in to land,
and i paid and dismissed him. the sun had completely
sunk,—there were dense purple shadows darkening over the
mountains, and one or two small stars faintly discernible in
the east. i walked slowly back to the villa where we were
staying,—a ‘dépendance’ belonging to the large hotel of the
district, which we had rented for the sake of privacy and independence,
some of the hotel-servants being portioned off to
attend upon us, in addition to my own man morris, and my
wife’s maid. i found sibyl in the garden, reclining in a basket-chair,
her eyes fixed on the after-glow of the sunset, and in
her hands a book,—one of the loathliest of the prurient novels
that have been lately written by women to degrade and shame
their sex. with a sudden impulse of rage upon me which i
could not resist, i snatched the volume from her and flung it
into the lake below. she made no movement of either surprise
or offence,—she merely turned her eyes away from the
glowing heavens, and looked at me with a little smile.
“how violent you are to-day, geoffrey!” she said.
i gazed at her in sombre silence. from the light hat with
its pale mauve orchids that rested on her nut-brown hair, to
the point of her daintily embroidered shoe, her dress was perfect,—and
she was perfect. i knew that,—a matchless piece
of womanhood ... outwardly! my heart beat,—there was
a sense of suffocation in my throat,—i could have killed her
for the mingled loathing and longing which her beauty roused
in me.
“i am sorry!” i said hoarsely, avoiding her gaze—“but i
hate to see you with such a book as that!”
“you know its contents?” she queried, with the same
slight smile.
“i can guess.”
“such things have to be written, they say nowadays,”—she
went on—“and, certainly, to judge from the commendation
bestowed on these sort of books by the press, it is very
[p ]
 evident that the wave of opinion is setting in the direction
of letting girls know all about marriage before they enter
upon it, in order that they may do so with their eyes wide
open,—very wide open!” she laughed, and her laughter
hurt me like a physical wound. “what an old-fashioned idea
the bride of the poets and sixty-years-ago romancists seems
now!” she continued—“imagine her!—a shrinking tender
creature, shy of beholders, timid of speech, ... wearing
the emblematic veil, which in former days, you know, used
to cover the face entirely, as a symbol that the secrets of
marriage were as yet hidden from the maiden’s innocent
and ignorant eyes. now the veil is worn flung back from
the bride’s brows, and she stares unabashed at everybody,—oh
yes, indeed we know quite well what we are doing now
when we marry, thanks to the ‘new’ fiction!”
“the new fiction is detestable,”—i said hotly—“both in
style and morality. even as a question of literature i
wonder at your condescending to read any of it. the
woman whose dirty book i have just thrown away—and
i feel no compunction for having done it,—is destitute of
grammar as well as decency.”
“oh, but the critics don’t notice that,”—she interrupted,
with a delicate mockery vibrating in her voice—“it is apparently
not their business to assist in preserving the purity
of the english language. what they fall into raptures over
is the originality of the ‘sexual’ theme, though i should
have thought all such matters were as old as the hills. i
never read reviews as a rule, but i did happen to come
across one on the book you have just drowned,—and in it,
the reviewer stated he had cried over it!”
she laughed again.
“beast!” i said emphatically—“he probably found in it
some glozing-over of his own vices. but you, sibyl—why
do you read such stuff?—how can you read it?”
“curiosity moved me in the first place,”—she answered
listlessly—“i wanted to see what makes a reviewer cry!
then when i began to read, i found that the story was all
[p ]
 about the manner in which men amuse themselves with the
soiled doves of the highways and bye-ways,—and as i was
not very well instructed in that sort of thing, i thought i
might as well learn! you know these unpleasant morsels
of information on unsavoury subjects are like the reputed
suggestions of the devil,—if you listen to one, you are bound
to hear more. besides, literature is supposed to reflect the
time we live in,—and that kind of literature being more prevalent
than anything else, we are compelled to accept and
study it as the mirror of the age.”
with an expression on her face that was half mirth and half
scorn, she rose from her seat, and looked down into the lovely
lake below her.
“the fishes will eat that book,—” she observed—“i hope it
will not poison them! if they could read and understand
it, what singular ideas they would have of us human
beings!”
“why don’t you read mavis clare’s books?” i asked
suddenly—“you told me you admired her.”
“so i do,—immensely!” she answered,—“i admire her
and wonder at her, both together. how that woman can
keep her child’s heart and child’s faith in a world like this,
is more than i can understand. it is always a perfect
marvel to me,—a sort of supernatural surprise. you ask
me why don’t i read her books,—i do read them,—i’ve
read them all over and over again,—but she does not write
many, and one has to wait for her productions longer than
for those of most authors. when i want to feel like an
angel, i read mavis clare,—but i more often am inclined
to feel the other way, and then her books are merely so
many worries to me.”
“worries?” i echoed.
“yes. it is worrying to find somebody believing in a god
when you can’t believe in him,—to have beautiful faiths
offered to you which you can’t grasp,—and to know that
there is a creature alive, a woman like yourself in everything
except mind, who is holding fast a happiness which you
[p ]
 can never attain,—no, not though you held out praying
hands day and night and shouted wild appeals to the dull
heavens!”
at that moment she looked like a queen of tragedy,—her
violet eyes ablaze,—her lips apart,—her breast heaving;——i
approached her with a strange nervous hesitation and
touched her hand. she gave it to me passively,—i drew it
through my arm, and for a minute or two we paced silently
up and down the gravel walk. the lights from the monster
hotel which catered for us and our wants, were beginning to
twinkle from basement to roof,—and just above the châlet
we rented, a triad of stars sparkled in the shape of a
trefoil.
“poor geoffrey!” she said presently, with a quick upward
glance at me,—“i am sorry for you! with all my vagaries
of disposition i am not a fool, and at anyrate i have learned
how to analyse myself as well as others. i read you as
easily as i read a book,—i see what a strange tumult your
mind is in! you love me—and you loathe me!—and the
contrast of emotion makes a wreck of you and your ideals.
hush,—don’t speak; i know,—i know! but what would
you have me be? an angel? i cannot realize such a
being for more than a fleeting moment of imagination. a
saint? they were all martyred. a good woman? i never
met one. innocent?—ignorant? i told you before we
married that i was neither; there is nothing left for me to
discover as far as the relations between men and women
are concerned,—i have taken the measure of the inherent
love of vice in both sexes. there is not a pin to choose
between them,—men are no worse than women,—women
no worse than men. i have discovered everything—except
god!—and i conclude no god could ever have designed
such a crazy and mean business as human life.”
while she thus spoke, i could have fallen at her feet and
implored her to be silent. for she was, unknowingly, giving
utterance to some of the many thoughts in which i myself
had frequently indulged,—and yet, from her lips they sounded
[p ]
 cruel, unnatural, and callous to a degree that made me shrink
from her in fear and agony. we had reached a little grove of
pines,—and here in the silence and shadow i took her in my
arms and stared disconsolately upon the beauty of her face.
“sibyl!” i whispered—“sibyl, what is wrong with us
both? how is it that we do not seem to find the loveliest
side of love?—why is it that even in our kisses and embraces,
some impalpable darkness comes between us, so
that we anger or weary each other when we should be glad
and satisfied? what is it? can you tell? for you know
the darkness is there!”
a curious look came into her eyes,—a far-away strained
look of hungry yearning, mingled, as i thought, with compassion
for me.
“yes, it is there!” she answered slowly—“and it is of our
own mutual creation. i believe you have something nobler
in your nature, geoffrey, than i have in mine,—an indefinable
something that recoils from me and my theories despite
your wish and will. perhaps if you had given way to that
feeling in time, you would never have married me. you speak
of the loveliest side of love,—to me there is no lovely side,—it
is all coarse and horrible! you and i for instance,—cultured
man and woman,—we cannot, in marriage, get a flight
beyond the common emotions of hodge and his girl!” she
laughed violently, and shuddered in my arms. “what liars
the poets are, geoffrey! they ought to be sentenced to
life-long imprisonment for their perjuries! they help to
mould the credulous beliefs of a woman’s heart;—in her
early youth she reads their delicious assurances, and imagines
that love will be all they teach,—a thing divine and lasting
beyond earthly countings;—then comes the coarse finger of
prose on the butterfly-wing of poesy, and the bitterness and
hideousness of complete disillusion!”
i held her still in my arms with the fierce grasp of a man
clinging to a spar ere he drowns in mid-ocean.
“but i love you sibyl!——my wife, i love you!” i said,
with a passion that choked my utterance.
[p ]“you love me,—yes, i know, but how? in a way that is
abhorrent to yourself!” she replied—“it is not poetic love,—it
is man’s love, and man’s love is brute love. so it is,—so
it will be,—so it must be. moreover the brute-love soon
tires,—and when it dies out from satiety there is nothing
left. nothing, geoffrey,—absolutely nothing but a blank
and civil form of intercourse, which i do not doubt we shall
be able to keep up for the admiration and comment of
society!”
she disengaged herself from my embrace, and moved towards
the house.
“come!” she added, turning her exquisite head back over her
shoulder with a feline caressing grace that she alone possessed,
“you know there is a famous lady in london who advertises
her saleable charms to the outside public by means
of her monogram worked into the lace of all her window-blinds,
thinking it no doubt good for trade! i am not quite
so bad as that! you have paid dearly for me i know;—but
remember i as yet wear no jewels but yours, and crave
no gifts beyond those you are generous enough to bestow,—and
my dutiful desire is to give you as much full value as i
can for your money.”
“sibyl, you kill me!” i cried, tortured beyond endurance,
“do you think me so base——”
i broke off with almost a sob of despair.
“you cannot help being base,” she said, steadily regarding
me,—“because you are a man. i am base because i am a
woman. if we believed in a god, either of us, we might
discover some different way of life and love—who knows?—but
neither you nor i have any remnant of faith in a
being whose existence all the scientists of the day are ever
at work to disprove. we are persistently taught that we are
animals and nothing more,—let us therefore not be ashamed
of animalism. animalism and atheism are approved by the
scientists and applauded by the press,—and the clergy are
powerless to enforce the faith they preach. come geoffrey,
don’t stay mooning like a stricken parsifal under those
[p ]
 pines,—throw away that thing which troubles you, your conscience,—throw
it away as you have thrown the book i was
lately reading, and consider this,—that most men of your
type take pride and rejoice in being the prey of a bad
woman!—so you should really congratulate yourself on having
one for a wife!—one who is so broad-minded too, that she
will always let you have your own way in everything you
do, provided you let her have hers! it is the way all
marriages are arranged nowadays,—at any rate in our set,—otherwise
the tie would be impossible of endurance.
come!”
“we cannot live together on such an understanding, sibyl!”
i said hoarsely, as i walked slowly by her side towards the
villa.
“oh yes, we can!” she averred, a little malign smile playing
round her lips—“we can do as others do,—there is no
necessity for us to stand out from the rest like quixotic fools,
and pose as models to other married people,—we should
only be detested for our pains. it is surely better to be
popular than virtuous,—virtue never pays! see, there is
our interesting german waiter coming to inform us that
dinner is ready; please don’t look so utterly miserable, for
we have not quarrelled, and it would be foolish to let the
servants think we have.”
i made no answer. we entered the house, and dined,—sibyl
keeping up a perfect fire of conversation, to which i
replied in mere monosyllables,—and after dinner we went as
usual to sit in the illuminated gardens of the adjacent hotel,
and hear the band. sibyl was known, and universally admired
and flattered by many of the people staying there,——and,
as she moved about among her acquaintances, chatting first
with one group and then with another, i sat in moody silence,
watching her with increasing wonderment and horror. her
beauty seemed to me like the beauty of the poison-flower,
which, brilliant in colour and perfect in shape, exhales death
to those who pluck it from its stem. and that night, when i
held her in my arms, and felt her heart beating against my
[p ]
 own in the darkness, an awful dread arose in me,—a dread as
to whether i might not at some time or other be tempted to
strangle her as she lay on my breast——strangle her as one
would strangle a vampire that sucked one’s blood and strength
away!
[p ]xxvii
we concluded our wedding-tour rather sooner than
we had at first intended, and returned to england
and willowsmere court, about the middle of august. i had
a vague notion stirring in me that gave me a sort of dim
indefinable consolation, and it was this,—i meant to bring
my wife and mavis clare together, believing that the gentle
influence of the gracious and happy creature, who, like a
contented bird in its nest, dwelt serene in the little domain so
near my own, might have a softening and wholesome effect
upon sibyl’s pitiless love of analysis and scorn of all noble
ideals. the heat in warwickshire was at this time intense,—the
roses were out in their full beauty, and the thick foliage
of the branching oaks and elms in my grounds afforded
grateful shade and repose to the tired body, while the tranquil
loveliness of the woodland and meadow scenery, comforted
and soothed the equally tired mind. after all, there is no
country in the world so fair as england,—none so richly
endowed with verdant forests and fragrant flowers,—none that
can boast of sweeter nooks for seclusion and romance. in
italy, that land so over-praised by hysterical poseurs who
foolishly deem it admirable to glorify any country save their
own, the fields are arid and brown, and parched by the too
fervent sun,—there are no shady lanes such as england can
boast of in all her shires,—and the mania among italians for
ruthlessly cutting down their finest trees, has not only actually
injured the climate, but has so spoilt the landscape that it is
[p ]
 difficult to believe at all in its once renowned, and still
erroneously reported charm. such a bower of beauty as
lily cottage was in that sultry august, could never have
been discovered in all the length and breadth of italy. mavis
superintended the care of her gardens herself,—she had two
gardeners, who under her directions, kept the grass and trees
continually watered,—and nothing could be imagined more
lovely than the picturesque old-fashioned house, covered with
roses and tufts of jessamine that seemed to tie up the roof in
festal knots and garlands, while around the building spread
long reaches of deep emerald lawn, and bosky arbours of foliage
where all the most musical song-birds apparently found refuge
and delight, and where at evening a perfect colony of nightingales
kept up a bubbling fountain of delicious melody. i
remember well the afternoon, warm, languid and still, when i
took sibyl to see the woman-author she had so long admired.
the heat was so great that in our own grounds all the birds
were silent, but when we approached lily cottage the first
thing we heard was the piping of a thrush up somewhere
among the roses,—a mellow liquid warble expressing ‘sweet
content,’ and mingling with the subdued coo-cooings of the
dove ‘reviewers’ who were commenting on whatever pleased
or displeased them in the distance.
“what a pretty place it is!” said my wife, as she peeped
over the gate, and through the odorous tangles of honeysuckle
and jessamine—“i really think it is prettier than willowsmere.
it has been wonderfully improved.”
we were shown in,—and mavis, who had expected our
visit did not keep us waiting long. an she entered, clad in
some gossamer white stuff that clung softly about her pretty
figure and was belted in by a simple ribbon, an odd sickening
pang went through my heart. the fair untroubled face,—the
joyous yet dreamy student eyes,—the sensitive mouth, and
above all, the radiant look of happiness that made the whole
expression of her features so bright and fascinating, taught me
in one flash of conviction all that a woman might be, and all
that she too frequently is not. and i had hated mavis
[p ]
 clare!—i had even taken up my pen to deal her a wanton
blow through the medium of anonymous criticism, ... but
this was before i knew her,—before i realized that there could
be any difference between her and the female scarecrows who
so frequently pose as ‘novelists’ without being able to write
correct english, and who talk in public of their ‘copy’ with the
glibness gained from grub street and the journalists’ cheap
restaurant. yes—i had hated her,——and now——now,
almost i loved her! sibyl, tall, queenly and beautiful, gazed
upon her with eyes that expressed astonishment as well as
admiration.
“to think that you are the famous mavis clare!” she said,
smiling, as she held out her hand—“i always heard and knew
that you did not look at all literary, but i never quite realized
that you could be exactly what i see you are!”
“to look literary does not always imply that you are
literary!” returned mavis, laughing a little—“too often
i am afraid you will find that the women who take pains
to look literary are ignorant of literature! but how glad i
am to see you, lady sibyl! do you know i used to watch
you playing about on the lawns at willowsmere when i was
quite a little girl?”
“and i used to watch you,”—responded sibyl—“you
used to make daisy-chains and cowslip-balls in the fields
opposite on the other side of the avon. it is a great
pleasure to me to know we are neighbours. you must come
and see me often at willowsmere.”
mavis did not answer immediately,—she busied herself in
pouring out tea and dispensing it to both of us. sibyl, who
was always on the alert for glimpses of character, noticed that
she did not answer, and repeated her words coaxingly.
“you will come, will you not? as often as you like,—the
oftener the better. we must be friends, you know!”
mavis looked up then, a frank sweet smile in her
eyes.
“do you really mean it?” she asked.
“mean it!” echoed sibyl—“why, of course i do!”
[p ]“how can you doubt it!” i exclaimed.
“well, you must both forgive me for asking such a question”—said
mavis still smiling—“but you see you are now
among what are called the ‘county magnates,’ and county
magnates consider themselves infinitely above all authors!”
she laughed outright, and her blue eyes twinkled with fun.
“i think many of them estimate writers of books as some sort
of strange outgrowth of humanity that is barely decent. it
is deliciously funny and always amuses me,—nevertheless,
among my many faults, the biggest one is, i fancy, pride,
and a dreadfully obstinate spirit of independence. now, to
tell you the truth, i have been asked by many so-called
‘great’ people to their houses, and when i have gone, i
have generally been sorry for it afterwards.”
“why?” i asked—“they honour themselves by inviting
you.”
“oh, i don’t think they take it in that way at all!” she replied,
shaking her fair head demurely—“they fancy they
have performed a great act of condescension,—whereas it is
really i who condescend, for it is very good of me, you
know, to leave the society of the pallas athene in my study
for that of a flounced and frizzled lady of fashion!” her
bright smile again irradiated her face and she went on—“once
i was asked to luncheon with a certain baron and
baroness who invited a few guests “to meet me,” so they
said. i was not introduced to more than one or two of
these people,—the rest sat and stared at me as if i were a
new kind of fish or fowl. then the baron showed me his
house, and told me the prices of his pictures and his china,—he
was even good enough to explain which was dresden and
which was delft ware, though i believe, benighted author
as i am, i could have instructed him equally on these, and
other matters. however i managed to smile amicably
through the whole programme, and professed myself
charmed and delighted in the usual way;—but they never
asked me to visit them again,—and, (unless indeed they
wanted me to be impressed with their furniture-catalogue) i
[p ]
 can never make out what i did to be asked at all, and what i
have done never to be asked any more!”
“they must have been parvenus,”—said sibyl indignantly—“no
well-bred people would have priced their goods to you,
unless they happened to be jews.”
mavis laughed—a merry little laugh like a peal of bells,—then
she continued—
“well, i will not say who they were,—i must keep something
for my ‘literary reminiscences’ when i get old! then
all these people will be named, and go down to posterity as
dante’s enemies went down to dante’s hell! i have only
told you the incident just to show you why i asked you
if you meant it, when you invited me to visit you at willowsmere.
because the baron and baroness i have spoken of
‘gushed’ over me and my poor books to such an extent
that you would have fancied i was to be for evermore one
of their dearest friends,—and they didn’t mean it! other
people i know embrace me effusively and invite me to their
houses, and they don’t mean it! and when i find out these
shams, i like to make it very clear on my own side that
i do not seek to be embraced or invited, and that if certain
great folks deem it a ‘favour’ to ask me to their houses,
i do not so consider it, but rather think the ‘favour’ is
entirely on my part if i accept the invitation. and i do
not say this for my own self at all,—self has nothing to
do with it,—but i do say it and strongly assert it for the
sake of the dignity of literature as an art and profession.
if a few other authors would maintain this position, we
might raise the standard of letters by degrees to what it was
in the old days of scott and byron. i hope you do not
think me too proud?”
“on the contrary, i think you are quite right”—said sibyl
earnestly—“and i admire you for your courage and independence.
some of the aristocracy are, i know, such
utter snobs that often i feel ashamed to belong to them.
but as far as we are concerned, i can only assure you that
if you will honour us by becoming our friend as well as
[p ]
 neighbour, you shall not regret it. do try and like me if
you can!”
she bent forward with a witching smile on her fair face.
mavis looked at her seriously and admiringly.
“how beautiful you are!” she said frankly—“everybody
tells you this of course,—still, i cannot help joining in the
general chorus. to me, a lovely face is like a lovely flower,—i
must admire it. beauty is quite a divine thing, and
though i am often told that the plain people are always the
good people, i never can quite believe it. nature is surely
bound to give a beautiful face to a beautiful spirit.”
sibyl, who had smiled with pleasure at the first words of
the open compliment paid her by one of the most gifted of
her own sex, now flushed deeply.
“not always, miss clare,”—she said, veiling her brilliant
eyes beneath the droop of her long lashes—“one can imagine
a fair fiend as easily as a fair angel.”
“true!” and mavis looked at her musingly,—then
suddenly laughing in her blithe bright way, she added—“quite
true! really i cannot picture an ugly fiend,—for
the fiends are supposed to be immortal, and i am convinced
that immortal ugliness has no part in the universe. downright
hideousness belongs to humanity alone,—and an ugly
face is such a blot on creation that we can only console
ourselves by the reflection that it is fortunately perishable,
and that in course of time the soul behind it will be released
from its ill-formed husk, and will be allowed to wear a
fairer aspect. yes, lady sibyl, i will come to willowsmere;
i cannot refuse to look upon such loveliness as yours as
often as i may!”
“you are a charming flatterer!” said sibyl, rising and
putting an arm round her in that affectionate coaxing way
of hers which seemed so sincere, and which so frequently
meant nothing—“but i confess i prefer to be flattered by a
woman rather than by a man. men say the same things to
all women,—they have a very limited répertoire of compliments,—and
they will tell a fright she is beautiful, if it
[p ]
 happens to serve their immediate purpose. but women
themselves can so hardly be persuaded to admit that any
good qualities exist either inwardly or outwardly in one
another, that when they do say a kind or generous thing of
their own sex it is a wonder worth remembering. may i
your study?”
mavis willingly assented,—and we all three went into the
peaceful sanctum where the marble pallas presided, and where
the dogs tricksy and emperor were both ensconced,—emperor
sitting up on his haunches and surveying the
prospect from the window, and tricksy with a most absurd
air of importance, imitating the larger animal’s attitude
precisely, at a little distance off. both creatures were
friendly to my wife and to me, and while sibyl was stroking
the st bernard’s massive head, mavis said suddenly,
“where is the friend who came with you here first, prince
rimânez?”
“he is in st petersburg just now,”—i answered—“but we
expect him in two or three weeks to stay with us on a visit
for some time.”
“he is surely a very singular man,”—said mavis thoughtfully—“do
you remember how strangely my dogs behaved to
him? emperor was quite restless and troublesome for two
or three hours after he had gone.”
and in a few words, she told sibyl the incident of the st
bernard’s attack upon lucio.
“some people have a natural antipathy to dogs,”—said
sibyl, as she heard—“and the dogs always find it out, and
resent it. but i should not have thought prince rimânez
had an antipathy to any creatures except—women!”
and she laughed, a trifle bitterly.
“except women!” echoed mavis surprisedly—“does he
hate women? he must be a very good actor then,—for to
me he was wonderfully kind and gentle.”
sibyl looked at her intently, and was silent for a minute.
then she said—
“perhaps it is because he knows you are unlike the ordinary
[p ]
 run of women and have nothing in common with their usual
trumpery aims. of course he is always courteous to our
sex,—but i think it is easy to see that his courtesy is often
worn as a mere mask to cover a very different feeling.”
“you have perceived that, then, sibyl?” i said with a slight
smile.
“i should be blind if i had not perceived it”—she replied;
“i do not however blame him for his pet aversion,—i think
it makes him all the more attractive and interesting.”
“he is a great friend of yours?” inquired mavis, looking
at me as she put the question.
“the very greatest friend i have,”—i replied quickly—“i
owe him more than i can ever repay,—indeed i have to
thank him even for introducing me to my wife!”
i said the words unthinkingly and playfully, but as i uttered
them, a sudden shock affected my nerves,—a shock of painful
memory. yes, it was true!—i owed to him, to lucio, the
misery, fear, degradation and shame of having such a woman
as sibyl was, united to me till death should us part. i felt
myself turning sick and giddy,—and i sat down in one of the
quaint oak chairs that helped to furnish mavis clare’s study,
allowing the two women to pass out of the open french
window into the sunlit garden together, the dogs following at
their heels. i watched them as they went,—my wife, tall and
stately, attired in the newest and most fashionable mode,—mavis,
small and slight, with her soft white gown and floating
waist-ribbon,—the one sensual, the other spiritual,—the one
base and vicious in desire,—the other pure-souled and aspiring
to noblest ends,—the one, a physically magnificent animal,—the
other merely sweet-faced and ideally fair like a sylph of
the woodlands,—and looking, i clenched my hands as i
thought with bitterness of spirit what a mistaken choice i had
made. in the profound egotism which had always been part
of my nature i now actually allowed myself to believe that i
might, had i chosen, have wedded mavis clare,—never for
one moment imagining that all my wealth would have been
useless to me in such a quest, and that i might as well have
[p ]
 proposed to pluck a star from the sky as to win a woman who
was able to read my nature thoroughly, and who would never
have come down to my money-level from her intellectual
throne,—no, not though i had been a monarch of many
nations. i stared at the large tranquil features of the pallas
athene,—and the blank eyeballs of the marble goddess
appeared to regard me in turn with impassive scorn. i
glanced round the room, and at the walls adorned with the
wise sayings of poets and philosophers,—sayings that reminded
me of truths which i knew, yet never accepted as
practicable; and presently my eyes were attracted to a corner
near the writing-desk which i had not noticed before, where
there was a small dim lamp burning. above this lamp an
ivory crucifix gleamed white against draperies of dark purple
velvet,—below it, on a silver bracket, was an hour-glass through
which the sand was running in glistening grains, and round the
entire little shrine was written in letters of gold “now is
the acceptable time!”—the word ‘now’ being in larger
characters than the rest. ‘now’ was evidently mavis’s
motto,—to lose no moment, but to work, to pray, to love, to
hope, to thank god and be glad for life, all in the ‘now’—and
neither to regret the past nor forebode the future, but
simply do the best that could be done, and leave all else in
child-like confidence to the divine will. i got up restlessly,—the
sight of the crucifix curiously annoyed me;—and
i followed the path my wife and mavis had taken through
the garden. i found them looking in at the cage of the
‘athenæum’ owls,—the owl-in-chief being as usual puffed
out with his own importance, and swelling visibly with indignation
and excess of feather. sibyl turned as she saw me,—her
face was bright and smiling.
“miss clare has very strong opinions of her own, geoffrey,”
she said—“she is not as much captivated by prince rimânez
as most people are,—in fact, she has just confided to me
that she does not quite like him.”
mavis blushed, but her eyes met mine with fearless
candour.
[p ]“it is wrong to say what one thinks, i know,—” she murmured
in somewhat troubled accents—“and it is a dreadful
fault of mine. please forgive me mr tempest! you tell
me the prince is your greatest friend,—and i assure you i
was immensely impressed by his appearance when i first
saw him, ... but afterwards, ... after i had studied him
a little, the conviction was borne in upon me that he was not
altogether what he seemed.”
“that is exactly what he says of himself,”—i answered,
laughing a little—“he has a mystery i believe,—and he has
promised to clear it up for me some day. but i’m sorry
you don’t like him, miss clare,—for he likes you.”
“perhaps when i meet him again my ideas may be
different”—said mavis gently—“at present, ... well,—do
not let us talk of it any more,—indeed i feel i have been
very rude to express any opinion at all concerning one for
whom you and lady sibyl have so great a regard. but
somehow i seemed impelled, almost against my will, to say
what i did just now.”
her soft eyes looked pained and puzzled, and to relieve her
and change the subject, i asked if she was writing anything
new.
“oh yes,”—she replied—“it would never do for me to be
idle. the public are very kind to me,—and no sooner have
they read one thing of mine than they clamour for another,
so i am kept very busy.”
“and what of the critics?” i asked, with a good deal of
curiosity.
she laughed.
“i never pay the least attention to them,” she answered,
“except when they are hasty and misguided enough to write
lies about me,—then i very naturally take the liberty to contradict
those lies, either through my own statement or that of
my lawyers. apart from refusing to allow the public to be
led into a false notion of my work and aims, i have no
grudge whatever against the critics. they are generally very
poor hard-working men, and have a frightful struggle to
[p ]
 live. i have often, privately, done some of them a good
turn without their knowledge. a publisher of mine sent me
an ms. the other day by one of my deadliest enemies on
the press, and stated that my opinion would decide its rejection
or acceptance,—i read it through, and though it was
not very brilliant work, it was good enough, so i praised it
as warmly as i could, and urged its publication, with the
stipulation that the author should never be told i had had
the casting vote. it has just come out i see,—and i’m sure
i hope it will succeed.” here she paused to gather a few
deep damask roses, which she handed to sibyl. “yes,—critics
are very badly, even cruelly paid,”—she went on
musingly—“it is not to be expected that they should write
eulogies of the successful author, while they continue unsuccessful,—such
work could not be anything but gall and
wormwood to them. i know the poor little wife of one
of them,—and settled her dressmaker’s bill for her because
she was afraid to show it to her husband. the very week
afterwards he slashed away at my last book in the most
approved style in the paper on which he is employed, and
got, i suppose, about a guinea for his trouble. of course he
didn’t know about his little wife and her dunning dressmaker;
and he never will know, because i have bound her over to
secrecy.”
“but why do you do such things?” asked sibyl astonished;
“i would have let his wife get into the county court for
her bill, if i had been you!”
“would you?” and mavis smiled gravely—“well, i could
not. you know who it was that said ‘bless them that
curse you, and do good to them that hate you’? besides,
the poor little woman was frightened to death at her own
expenditure. it is pitiful, you know, to see the helpless
agonies of people who will live beyond their incomes,—they
suffer much more than the beggars in the street who make
frequently more than a pound a day by merely whining and
snivelling. the critics are much more in evil case than the
beggars—few of them make even a pound a day, and of
[p ]
 course they regard as their natural enemies the authors who
make thirty to fifty pounds a week. i assure you i am very
sorry for critics all round,—they are the least-regarded and
worst-rewarded of all the literary community. and i never
bother myself at all about what they say of me, except as i
before observed, when in their haste they tell lies,—then of
course it becomes necessary for me to state the truth in
simple self-defence as well as by way of duty to my public.
but as a rule i hand over all my press-notices to tricksy
there,”—indicating the minute yorkshire terrier who followed
closely at the edge of her white gown,—“and he
tears them to indistinguishable shreds in about three
minutes!”
she laughed merrily, and sibyl smiled, watching her with
the same wonder and admiration that had been expressed in
her looks more or less since the beginning of our interview
with this light-hearted possessor of literary fame. we were
now walking towards the gate, preparatory to taking our
departure.
“may i come and talk to you sometimes?” my wife said
suddenly, in her prettiest and most pleading voice—“it
would be such a privilege!”
“you can come whenever you like in the afternoons,”—replied
mavis readily—“the mornings belong to a goddess
more dominant even than beauty;—work!”
“you never work at night?” i asked.
“indeed no! i never turn the ordinances of nature upside
down, as i am sure i should get the worst of it if i
made such an attempt. the night is for sleep—and i use
it thankfully for that blessed purpose.”
“some authors can only write at night though,” i said.
“then you may be sure they only produce blurred pictures
and indistinct characterization,” said mavis—“some i
know there are, who invite inspiration through gin or
opium, as well as through the midnight influences, but i do
not believe in such methods. morning, and a freshly
rested brain are required for literary labour,—that is, if one
[p ]
 wants to write a book that will last for more than one
‘season.’”
she accompanied us to the gate and stood under the
porch, her big dog beside her, and the roses waving high
over her head.
“at any rate work agrees with you,”—said sibyl fixing
upon her a long, intent, almost envious gaze—“you look
perfectly happy.”
“i am perfectly happy,”—she answered, smiling—“i have
nothing in all the world to wish for, except that i may die
as peacefully as i have lived.”
“may that day be far distant!” i said earnestly.
she raised her soft meditative eyes to mine.
“thank you!” she responded gently—“but i do not
mind when it comes, so long as it finds me ready.”
she waved her hand to us as we left her and turned the
corner of the lane,—and for some minutes we walked on
slowly in absolute silence. then at last sibyl spoke—
“i quite understand the hatred there is in some quarters
for mavis clare,”—she said—“i am afraid i begin to hate
her myself!”
i stopped and stared at her, astonished and confounded.
“you begin to hate her——you?—and why?”
“are you so blind that you cannot perceive why?” she
retorted, the little malign smile i knew so well playing round
her lips—“because she is happy! because she has no
scandals in her life, and because she dares to be content!
one longs to make her miserable! but how to do it?
she believes in a god,—she thinks all he ordains is right
and good. with such a firm faith as that, she would be
happy in a garret earning but a few pence a day. i see
now perfectly how she has won her public,—it is by the
absolute conviction she has herself of the theories of life
she tries to instil. what can be done against her?
nothing! but i understand why the critics would like to
‘quash’ her,—if i were a critic, fond of whiskey-and-soda,
[p ]
 and music-hall women, i should like to quash her myself for
being so different to the rest of her sex!”
“what an incomprehensible woman you are, sibyl!” i
exclaimed with real irritation,—“you admire miss clare’s
books,—you have always admired them,—you have asked
her to become your friend,—and almost in the same
breath you aver you would like to ‘quash’ her or to
make her miserable! i confess i cannot understand
you!”
“of course you cannot!” she responded tranquilly, her
eyes resting upon me with a curious expression, as we paused
for an instant under the deep shade of a chestnut tree before
entering our own grounds—“i never supposed you could,
and unlike the ordinary femme incomprise, i have never
blamed you for your want of comprehension. it has taken
me some time to understand myself, and even now i am
not quite sure that i have gauged the depths or shallownesses
of my own nature correctly. but on this matter of
mavis clare, can you not imagine that badness may hate
goodness? that the confirmed drunkard may hate the
sober citizen? that the outcast may hate the innocent
maiden? and that it is possible that i,—reading life as i
do, and finding it loathsome in many of its aspects,—distrusting
men and women utterly,—and being destitute of
any faith in god,—may hate,—yes hate,”—and she clenched
her hand on a tuft of drooping leaves and scattered the green
fragments at her feet—“a woman who finds life beautiful,
and god existent,—who takes no part in our social shams
and slanders,—and who in place of my self-torturing spirit of
analysis, has secured an enviable fame and the honour of
thousands, allied to a serene content? why it would be
something worth living for, to make such a woman wretched
for once in her life!—but, as she is constituted, it is impossible
to do it.”
she turned from me and walked slowly onward,—i following
in a pained silence.
“if you do not mean to be her friend, you should tell her
[p ]
 so,”—i said presently—“you heard what she said about
pretended protestations of regard?”
“i heard,”—she replied morosely—“she is a clever woman,
geoffrey, and you may trust her to find me out without any
explanation!”
as she said this, i raised my eyes and looked full at
her,—her exceeding beauty was becoming almost an agony
to my sight, and in a sudden fool’s paroxysm of despair i
exclaimed—
“o sibyl, sibyl! why were you made as you are!”
“ah, why indeed!” she rejoined, with a faint mocking
smile—“and why, being made as i am, was i born an earl’s
daughter? if i had been a drab of the street, i should
have been in my proper place,—and novels would have
been written about me, and plays,—and i might have become
such a heroine as should cause all good men to weep
for joy because of my generosity in encouraging their vices!
but as an earl’s daughter, respectably married to a millionaire,
am a mistake of nature. yet nature does make
mistakes sometimes geoffrey, and when she does they are
generally irremediable!”
we had now reached our own grounds, and i walked, in
miserable mood, beside her across the lawn towards the
house.
“sibyl,”—i said at last—“i had hoped you and mavis
clare might be friends.”
she laughed.
“so we shall be friends i daresay,—for a little while”—she
replied—“but the dove does not willingly consort with the
raven, and mavis clare’s way of life and studious habits
would be to me insufferably dull. besides, as i said before,
she, as a clever woman and a thinker, is too clear-sighted
not to find me out in the course of time. but i will play
humbug as long as i can. if i perform the part of ‘county
lady’ or ‘patron,’ of course she won’t stand me for a moment.
i shall have to assume a much more difficult rôle,—that of
an honest woman!”
[p ]again she laughed,—a cruel little laugh that chilled my
blood, and paced slowly into the house through the open
windows of the drawing-room. and i, left alone in the
garden among the nodding roses and waving trees, felt that
the beautiful domain of willowsmere had suddenly grown
hideous and bereft of all its former charm, and was nothing
but a haunted house of desolation,—haunted by an
all-dominant and ever victorious spirit of evil.
[p ]xxviii
one of the strangest things in all the strange course
of our human life is the suddenness of certain unlooked-for
events, which, in a day or even an hour, may
work utter devastation where there has been more or less
peace, and hopeless ruin where there has been comparative
safety. like the shock of an earthquake, the clamorous
incidents thunder in on the regular routine of ordinary life,
crumbling down our hopes, breaking our hearts, and scattering
our pleasures into the dust and ashes of despair. and this
kind of destructive trouble generally happens in the midst of
apparent prosperity, without the least warning, and with all the
abrupt fierceness of a desert-storm. it is constantly made
manifest to us in the unexpected and almost instantaneous
downfall of certain members of society who have held their
heads proudly above their compeers and have presumed to
pose as examples of light and leading to the whole community;
we see it in the capricious fortunes of kings and
statesmen, who are in favour one day and disgraced the next,
and vast changes are wrought with such inexplicable quickness
that it is scarcely wonderful to hear of certain religious
sects who, when everything is prospering more than usually
well with them, make haste to put on garments of sackcloth,
and cast ashes on their heads, praying aloud “prepare us, o
lord, for the evil days which are at hand!” the moderation
of the stoics, who considered it impious either to rejoice
or grieve, and strove to maintain an equable middle course
[p ]
 between the opposing elements of sorrow and joy, without
allowing themselves to be led away by over-much delight or
over-much melancholy, was surely a wise habit of temperament.
i, who lived miserably as far as my inner and better
consciousness was concerned, was yet outwardly satisfied with
the material things of life and the luxuries surrounding me,—and
i began to take comfort in these things, and with them
endeavoured to quell and ignore my more subtle griefs, succeeding
so far in that i became more and more of a thorough
materialist every day, loving bodily ease, appetizing food,
costly wine, and personal indulgence to a degree that robbed
me gradually of even the desire for mental effort. i taught
myself moreover, almost insensibly, to accept and tolerate
what i knew of the wanton side of my wife’s character,—true,
i respected her less than the turk respects the
creature of his harem,—but like the turk, i took a certain
savage satisfaction in being the possessor of her beauty,
and with this feeling, and the brute passion it engendered,
i was fain to be content. so that for a short time at least,
the drowsy satisfaction of a well-fed, well-mated animal was
mine,—i imagined that nothing short of a stupendous financial
catastrophe to the country itself could exhaust my stock of
cash,—and that therefore there was no necessity for me to
exert myself in any particular branch of usefulness, but simply
to ‘eat drink and be merry’ as solomon advised. intellectual
activity was paralysed in me,—to take up my pen and write,
and make another and higher bid for fame, was an idea that
now never entered my mind; i spent my days in ordering
about my servants, and practising the petty pleasures of tyranny
on gardeners and grooms, and in generally giving myself airs
of importance, mingled with an assumption of toleration and
benevolence, for the benefit of all those in my employ. i
knew the proper thing to do, well enough!—i had not studied
the ways of the over-wealthy for nothing,—i was aware that
the rich man never feels so thoroughly virtuous as when he
has inquired after the health of his coachman’s wife, and has
sent her a couple of pounds for the outfit of her new-born
[p ]
 baby. the much prated-of ‘kindness of heart’ and ‘generosity’
possessed by millionaires, generally amounts to this
kind of thing,—and when, if idly strolling about my parklands,
i happened to meet the small child of my lodge-keeper,
and then and there bestowed sixpence upon it, i almost felt
as if i deserved a throne in heaven at the right hand of the
almighty, so great was my appreciation of my own good-nature.
sibyl, however, never affected this sort of county-magnate
beneficence. she did nothing at all among our poor
neighbours;—the clergyman of the district unfortunately
happened to let slip one day a few words to the effect that
“there was no great want of anything among his parishioners,
owing to the continual kindness and attention of miss
clare,”—and sibyl never from that moment proffered any
assistance. now and then she took her graceful person into
lily cottage and sat with its happy and studious occupant
for an hour,—and occasionally the fair author herself came
and dined with us, or had ‘afternoon tea’ under the branching
elms on the lawn,—but even i, intense egotist as i was, could
see that mavis was scarcely herself on these occasions. she
was always charming and bright of course,—indeed the only
times in which i was able to partially forget myself and the
absurdly increasing importance of my personality in my own
esteem, were when she, with her sweet voice and animated
manner, brought her wide knowledge of books, men, and
things, to bear on the conversation, thus raising it to a higher
level than was ever reached by my wife or me. yet i now
and then noticed a certain vague constraint about her,—and
her frank eyes had frequently a pained and questioning look
of trouble when they rested for any length of time on the
enchanting beauty of sibyl’s face and form. i, however, paid
little heed to these trifling matters, my whole care being to
lose myself more and more utterly in the enjoyment of purely
physical ease and comfort, without troubling myself as to what
such self-absorption might lead in the future. to be completely
without a conscience, without a heart and without
sentiment was, i perceived, the best way to keep one’s appetite,
[p ]
 and preserve one’s health;—to go about worrying over the
troubles of other people, or put one’s self out to do any good
in the world, would involve such an expenditure of time and
trouble as must inevitably spoil one’s digestion,—and i saw
that no millionaire or even moderately rich man cares to run
the risk of injuring his digestion for the sake of performing
a kindness to a poorer fellow-creature. profiting by the
examples presented to me everywhere in society, i took care
of my digestion, and was particular about the way in which
my meals were cooked and served,—particular too, as to the
fashion in which my wife dressed for those meals,—for it
suited my supreme humour to see her beauty bedecked as
suitably and richly as possible, that i might have the satisfaction
of considering her ‘points’ with the same epicurean
fastidiousness as i considered a dish of truffles or specially
prepared game. i never thought of the stern and absolute
law—“unto whom much is given, even from him should
much be required;”—i was scarcely aware of it in fact,—the
new testament was of all books in the world the most unfamiliar
to me. and while i wilfully deafened myself to the
voice of conscience,—that voice which ever and anon urged
me in vain to a nobler existence,—the clouds were gathering,
ready to burst above me with that terrific suddenness such as
always seems to us who refuse to study the causes of our
calamities, as astonishing and startling as death itself. for
we are always more or less startled at death notwithstanding
that it is the commonest occurrence known.
towards the middle of september my ‘royal and distinguished’
house-party arrived and stayed at willowsmere
court for a week. of course it is understood that whenever
the prince of wales honours any private residence with
a visit, he selects, if not all, at any rate the greater part of
those persons who are to be invited to meet him. he did
so in the present instance, and i was placed in the odd
position of having to entertain certain people whom i had
never met before, and who, with the questionable taste
frequently exhibited among the ‘upper ten,’ looked upon
[p ]
 me merely as “the man with the millions,” the caterer for
their provisions, and no more,—directing their chief attention
to sibyl, who was by virtue of her birth and associations one
of their ‘set,’ and pushing me, their host, more or less into
the background. however the glory of entertaining royalty
more than sufficed for my poor pride at that time, and with
less self-respect than an honest cur, i was content to be
snubbed and harassed and worried a hundred times a day
by one or the other of the ‘great’ personages who wandered
at will all over my house and grounds, and accepted my
lavish hospitality. many people imagine that it must be
an ‘honour’ to entertain a select party of aristocrats, but i,
on the contrary, consider that it is not only a degradation to
one’s manlier and more independent instincts, but also a
bore. these highly-bred, highly-connected individuals, are
for the most part unintelligent, and devoid of resources in
their own minds,—they are not gifted as conversationalists
or wits,—one gains no intellectual advantage from their
society,—they are simply dull folk, with an exaggerated sense
of their own importance, who expect wherever they go, to
be amused without trouble to themselves. out of all the
visitors at willowsmere the only one whom it was really a
pleasure to serve was the prince of wales himself,—and amid
the many personal irritations i had to suffer from others, i
found it a positive relief to render him any attention, however
slight, because his manner was always marked by that tact
and courtesy which are the best attributes of a true gentleman
whether he be prince or peasant. in his own affable way, he
went one afternoon to see mavis clare, and came back in
high good-humour, talking for some time of nothing but the
author of ‘differences,’ and of the success she had achieved
in literature. i had asked mavis to join our party before
the prince came, as i felt pretty sure he would not have
erased her name from the list of guests submitted to him,—but
she would not accept, and begged me very earnestly
not to press the point.
“i like the prince,”—she had said—“most people like him
[p ]
 who know him,—but i do not always like those who surround
him,—pardon me for my frankness! the prince of
wales is a social magnet,—he draws a number of persons
after him who by dint of wealth, if not intelligence, can
contrive to ‘push’ into his set. now i am not an advocate
of ‘push’—moreover i do not care to be seen with ‘everybody’;—this
is my sinful pride you will say, or as
our american cousins would put it, my ‘cussedness.’ but
i assure you, mr tempest, the best possession i have, and
one which i value a great deal more even than my literary
success, is my absolute independence, and i would not have
it thought, even erroneously, that i am anxious to mix with
the crowd of sycophants and time-servers who are only too
ready to take advantage of the prince’s good-nature.”
and, acting upon her determination, she had remained
more than ever secluded in her cottage-nest of foliage and
flowers during the progress of the week’s festivities,—the
result being, as i have stated, that the prince ‘dropped
in’ upon her quite casually one day, accompanied by his
equerry, and probably for all i knew, had the pleasure of
seeing the dove ‘reviewers’ fed, and squabbling over their
meal.
much as we had desired and expected the presence of
rimânez at our gathering, he did not appear. he telegraphed
his regrets from paris, and followed the telegram
by a characteristic letter, which ran thus:—
my dear tempest.
you are very kind to wish to include me, your old
friend, in the party you have invited to meet his royal highness,
and i only hope you will not think me churlish for
refusing to come. i am sick to death of royalties,—i have
known so many of them in the course of my existence that i
begin to find their society monotonous. their positions are
all so exactly alike too,—and moreover have always been alike
from the days of solomon in all his glory, down to the present
blessed era of victoria, queen and empress. one thirsts for
[p ]
 a change; at least i do. the only monarch that ever fascinated
my imagination particularly was richard cœur de lion;
there was something original and striking about that man, and
i presume he would have been well worth talking to. and
charlemagne was doubtless, as the slangy young man of the
day would observe, ‘not half bad.’ but for the rest,—un fico!
much talk is there made about her majesty elizabeth, who
was a shrew and a vixen and blood-thirsty withal,—the chief
glory of her reign was shakespeare, and he made kings and
queens the dancing puppets of his thought. in this, though
in nothing else, i resemble him. you will have enough to do
in the entertainment of your distinguished guests, for i suppose
there is no amusement they have not tried, and found more or
less unsatisfactory, and i am sorry i can suggest nothing particularly
new for you to do. her grace the duchess of
rapidryder is very fond of being tossed in a strong table-cloth
between four able-bodied gentlemen of good birth and discretion,
before going to bed o’ nights,—she cannot very well
appear on a music-hall stage you know, owing to her exalted
rank,—and this is a child-like, pretty and harmless method of
managing to show her legs, which she rightly considers, are
too shapely to be hidden. lady bouncer, whose name i see
in your list, always likes to cheat at cards,—i would aid and
abet her in her aim if i were you, as if she can only clear her
dressmaker’s bill by her winnings at willowsmere, she will
bear it in mind, and be a useful social friend to you. the
honourable miss fitz-gander who has a great reputation for
virtue, is anxious, for pressing and particular reasons, to marry
lord noodles,—if you can move on matters between them
into a definite engagement of marriage before her lady-mother
returns from her duty-visits in scotland, you will be doing her
a good turn, and saving society a scandal. to amuse the men
i suggest plenty of shooting, gambling, and unlimited smoking.
to entertain the prince, do little,—for he is clever enough
to entertain himself privately with the folly and humbug of
those he sees around him, without actually sharing in the
petty comedy. he is a keen observer,—and must derive
[p ]
 infinite gratification from his constant study of men and
manners, which is sufficiently deep and searching to fit him
for the occupation of even the throne of england. i say
‘even,’ for at present, till time’s great hour-glass turns, it is
the grandest throne in the world. the prince reads, understands,
and secretly laughs to scorn the table-cloth vagaries of
the duchess of rapidryder, the humours of my lady bouncer
and the nervous pruderies of the honourable miss fitz-gander.
and there is nothing he will appreciate so much in his reception
as a lack of toadyism, a sincere demeanour, an unostentatious
hospitality, a simplicity of speech, and a total absence of affectation.
remember this, and take my advice for what it is
worth. of all the royalties at present flourishing on this
paltry planet, i have the greatest respect for the prince of
wales, and it is by reason of this very respect that i do not
intend, on this occasion at any rate, to thrust myself upon his
notice. i shall arrive at willowsmere when your ‘royal’
festivities are over. my homage to your fair spouse, the lady
sibyl, and believe me,
yours as long as you desire it
lucio rimânez.
i laughed over this letter and showed it to my wife, who
did not laugh. she read it through with a closeness of attention
that somewhat surprised me, and when she laid it down
there was a strange look of pain in her eyes.
“how he despises us all!” she said slowly—“what scorn
underlies his words! do you not recognise it?”
“he was always a cynic,—” i replied indifferently—“i
never expect him to be anything else.”
“he seems to know some of the ways of the women who
are coming here—” she went on in the same musing accents;
“it is as if he read their thoughts, and perceived their intentions
at a distance.”
her brows knitted frowningly, and she seemed for some
time absorbed in gloomy meditation. but i did not pursue
[p ]
 the subject,—i was too intent on my own fussy preparations
for the prince’s arrival to care about anything else.
and, as i have said, royalty, in the person of one of the
most genial of men, came and went through the whole programme
devised for his entertainment, and then departed
again with his usual courteous acknowledgments for the
hospitality offered and accepted,—leaving us, as he generally
leaves everybody, charmed with his good-humour and
condescension, provided his temper has not been ruffled.
when, with his exit from the scene, the whole party
broke up, leaving my wife and me to our own two selves
once more, there came a strange silence and desolation
over the house that was like the stealthy sense of some
approaching calamity. sibyl seemed to feel it as much as
i did,—and though we said nothing to each other concerning
our mutual sensations, i could see that she was under the
same cloud of depression as myself. she went oftener to
lily cottage, and always from these visits to the fair-haired
student among the roses, came back, i hopefully fancied in
softer mood,—her very voice was gentler,—her eyes more
thoughtful and tender. one evening she said—
“i have been thinking, geoffrey, that perhaps there is some
good in life after all, if i could only find it out and live it.
but you are the last person to help me in such a matter.”
i was sitting in an arm-chair near the open window, smoking,
and i turned my eyes upon her with some astonishment
and a touch of indignation.
“what do you mean, sibyl?” i asked—“surely you know
that i have the greatest desire to see you always in your
best aspect,—many of your ideas have been most repugnant
to me....”
“stop there!” she said quickly, her eyes flashing as she
spoke—“my ideas have been repugnant to you, you say?
what have you done, you as my husband, to change those
ideas? have you not the same base passions as i?—and
do you not give way to them as basely? what have i seen
in you from day to day that i should take you as an
[p ]
 example? you are master here, and you rule with all the
arrogance wealth can give,—you eat, drink and sleep,—you
entertain your acquaintances simply that you may astonish
them by the excess of luxury in which you indulge,—you
read and smoke, shoot and ride, and there an end,—you are
an ordinary, not an exceptional man. do you trouble to
ask what is wrong with me?—do you try, with the patience
of a great love, to set before me nobler aims than those i
have consciously or unconsciously imbibed?—do you try to
lead me, an erring, passionate, misguided woman, into what
i dream of as the light,—the light of faith and hope which
alone gives peace?”
and suddenly, burying her head in the pillows of the
couch on which she leaned, she broke into a fit of smothered
weeping.
i drew my cigar from my mouth and stared at her helplessly.
it was about an hour after dinner, and a warm soft autumnal
evening,—i had eaten and drunk well, and i was drowsy and
heavy-brained.
“dear me!” i murmured—“you seem very unreasonable,
sibyl! i suppose you are hysterical....”
she sprang up from the couch,—her tears dried on her
cheeks as though by sheer heat of the crimson glow that
flushed them, and she laughed wildly.
“yes, that is it!” she exclaimed—“hysteria!—nothing
else! it is accountable for everything that moves a woman’s
nature. a woman has no right to have any emotions
that cannot be cured by smelling-salts! heart-ache?—pooh!—cut
her stay-lace! despair and a sense of sin
and misery?—nonsense!—bathe her temples with vinegar!
an uneasy conscience?—ah!—for an uneasy conscience
there is nothing better than sal volatile! woman is a toy,—a
breakable fool’s toy;—and when she is broken, throw
her aside and have done with her,—don’t try to piece together
the fragile rubbish!”
she ceased abruptly, panting for breath,—and before i
could collect my thoughts or find any words wherewith to
[p ]
 reply, a tall shadow suddenly darkened the embrasure of the
window, and a familiar voice enquired—
“may i, with the privilege of friendship, enter unannounced?”
i started up.
“rimânez!” i cried, seizing him by the hand.
“nay, geoffrey, my homage is due here first,”—he replied,
shaking off my grasp, and advancing to sibyl, who stood perfectly
still where she had risen up in her strange passion—“lady
sibyl, am i welcome?”
“can you ask it!” she said, with an enchanting smile, and
in a voice from which all harshness and excitement had fled;
“more than welcome!” here she gave him both her
hands which he respectfully kissed. “you cannot imagine
how much i have longed to see you again!”
“i must apologise for my sudden appearance, geoffrey,”—he
then observed, turning to me—“but as i walked here
from the station and came up your fine avenue of trees, i
was so struck with the loveliness of this place and the exquisite
peace of its surroundings, that, knowing my way
through the grounds, i thought i would just look about
and see if you were anywhere within sight before i presented
myself at the conventional door of entrance. and
i was not disappointed,—i found you, as i expected, enjoying
each other’s society!—the happiest and most fortunate
couple existent,—people whom, out of all the world i should
be disposed to envy, if i envied worldly happiness at all,
which i do not!”
i glanced at him quickly;—he met my gaze with a perfectly
unembarrassed air, and i concluded that he had not overheard
sibyl’s sudden melodramatic outburst.
“have you dined?” i asked, with my hand on the bell.
“thanks, yes. the town of leamington provided me
with quite a sumptuous repast of bread and cheese and ale.
i am tired of luxuries you know,—that is why i find plain
fare delicious. you are looking wonderfully well, geoffrey!—shall
i offend you if i say you are growing—yes—positively
[p ]
 stout?—with the stoutness befitting a true county
gentleman, who means to be as gouty in the future as his
respectable ancestors?”
i smiled, but not altogether with pleasure; it is never
agreeable to be called ‘stout’ in the presence of a beautiful
woman to whom one has only been wedded a matter of three
months.
“you have not put on any extra flesh;—” i said, by way of
feeble retort.
“no”—he admitted, as he disposed his slim elegant figure
in an arm-chair near my own—“the necessary quantity of
flesh is a bore to me always,—extra flesh would be a positive
infliction. i should like, as the irreverent though reverend
sidney smith said, on a hot day, ‘to sit in my bones,’ or
rather, to become a spirit of fine essence like shakespeare’s
ariel, if such things were possible and permissible. how
admirably married life agrees with you, lady sibyl!”
his fine eyes rested upon her with apparent admiration,—she
flushed under his gaze i saw, and seemed confused.
“when did you arrive in england?” she inquired.
“yesterday,”—he answered,—“i ran over channel from
honfleur in my yacht,—you did not know i had a yacht,
did you tempest?—oh, you must come for a trip in her
some day. she is a quick vessel, and the weather was fair.”
“is amiel with you?” i asked.
“no. i left him on board the yacht. i can, as the
common people say, ‘valet myself’ for a day or two.”
“a day or two?” echoed sibyl—“but you surely will not
leave us so soon? you promised to make a long visit here.”
“did i?” and he regarded her steadily, with the same
languorous admiration in his eyes—“but, my dear lady
sibyl, time alters our ideas, and i am not sure whether
you and your excellent husband are of the same opinion as
you were when you started on your wedding-tour. you
may not want me now!”
he said this with a significance to which i paid no heed
whatever.
[p ]“not want you!” i exclaimed—“i shall always want you
lucio,—you are the best friend i ever had, and the only
one i care to keep. believe me!—there’s my hand upon
it!”
he looked at me curiously for a minute,—then turned his
head towards my wife.
“and what does lady sibyl say?” he asked in a gentle,
almost caressing tone.
“lady sibyl says,” she answered with a smile, and the
colour coming and going in her cheeks—“that she will be
proud and glad if you will consider willowsmere your home
as long as you have leisure to make it so,—and that she
hopes,—though you are reputed to be a hater of women,—”
here she raised her beautiful eyes and fixed them full upon
him—“you will relent a little in favour of your present
châtelaine!”
with these words, and a playful salutation, she passed out
of the room into the garden, and stood on the lawn at a little
distance from us, her white robes shimmering in the mellow
autumnal twilight,—and lucio, springing up from his seat,
looked after her, clapping his hand down heavily on my
shoulder.
“by heaven!” he said softly, “a perfect woman! i
should be a churl to withstand her,—or you, my good
geoffrey,”—and he regarded me earnestly—“i have led a
very devil of a life since i saw you last,—it’s time i reformed,—upon
my soul it is! the peaceful contemplation of
virtuous marriage will do me good!—send for my luggage
to the station, geoffrey, and make the best of me,—i’ve
come to stay!”
[p ]xxix
a tranquil time now ensued; a time which, though
i knew it not, was just that singular pause so frequently
observed in nature before a storm, and in human
life before a crushing calamity. i put aside all troublesome
and harassing thoughts, and became oblivious of everything
save my own personal satisfaction in the renewal
of the comradeship between myself and lucio. we walked
together, rode together, and passed most of our days in each
other’s company,—nevertheless though i gave my friend much
of my closest confidence i never spoke to him of the moral
obliquities and perversions i had discovered in sibyl’s character,—not
out of any consideration for sibyl, but simply
because i knew by instinct what his reply would be. he
would have no sympathy with my feelings. his keen sense
of sarcasm would over-rule his friendship, and he would
retort upon me with the question—what business had i,
being imperfect myself, to expect perfection in my wife?
like many others of my sex i had the notion that i, as man,
could do all i pleased, when i pleased and how i pleased;
i could sink to a level lower than that of the beasts if i
chose,—but all the same i had the right to demand from my
wife the most flawless purity to mate with my defilement.
i was aware how lucio would treat this form of arrogant
egoism,—and with what mocking laughter he would receive
any expression of ideas from me on the subject of morality in
woman. so i was careful to let no hint of my actual position
[p ]
 escape me,—and i comported myself on all occasions to sibyl
with special tenderness and consideration, though she, i
thought, appeared rather to resent my playing the part of
lover-husband too openly. she was herself, in lucio’s presence,
strangely erratic of humour, by turns brilliant and
mournful,—sometimes merry and anon depressed: yet never
had she displayed a more captivating grace and charm of
manner. how foolish and blind i was all the while!—how
dead to any perception of the formation and sequence of
events! absorbed in gross material pleasures, i ignored all
the hidden forces that make the history of an individual life
no less than of a whole nation, and looked upon each day
that dawned almost as if it had been my own creation and
possession, to waste as i thought fit,—never considering that
days are but so many white leaflets from god’s chronicle of
human life, whereon we place our mark, good or bad, for the
just and exact summing-up of our thoughts and deeds here
after. had any one dared to say this truth to me then, i
should have bade him go and preach nonsense to children,—but
now,—when i recall those white leaves of days that were
unrolled before me fresh and blank with every sunrise, and
with which i did nothing save scrawl my own ego in a foul
smudge across each one, i tremble, and inwardly pray that i
may never be forced to send back my self-written record!
yet of what use is it to pray against eternal law? it is
eternal law that we shall ourselves count up our own misdeeds
at the final reckoning,—hence it is no wonder that
many are found who prefer not to believe in a future after
death. rightly do such esteem it better to die utterly, than
be forced to live again and look back upon the wilful evil they
have done!
october ripened slowly and almost imperceptibly towards
its end, and the trees put on their gorgeous autumnal tints of
burning crimson and gold. the weather remained fine and
warm, and what the french canadians poetically term the
‘summer of all saints’ gave us bright days and cloudless
moonlit evenings. the air was so mild that we were always
[p ]
 able to take our coffee after dinner on the terrace overlooking
the lawn in front of the drawing-room,—and it was on one
of these balmy nights that i was the interested spectator of a
strange scene between lucio and mavis clare,—a scene i
should have thought impossible of occurrence had i not myself
witnessed it. mavis had dined at willowsmere; she very
rarely so honoured us; and there were a few other guests
besides. we had lingered over the coffee longer than usual,
for mavis had given an extra charm to the conversation by her
eloquent vivacity and bright humour, and all present were
anxious to hear, see and know as much of the brilliant novelist
as possible. but when a full golden moon rose in mellow
splendour over the tree-tops, my wife suggested a stroll in the
grounds, and everyone agreeing to the proposal with delight,
we started,—more or less together,—some in couples, some in
groups of three or four. after a little desultory rambling however,
the party got separated in the rose-gardens and adjacent
shrubberies, and i found myself alone. i turned back to the
house to get my cigar-case which i had left on a table in the
library, and passing out again in another direction i strolled
slowly across the grass, smoking as i went, towards the river, the
silver gleam of which could clearly be discerned through the
fast-thinning foliage overhanging its banks. i had almost
reached the path that followed the course of the winding water,
when i was brought to a standstill by the sound of voices—one,
a man’s, low and persuasive,—the other a woman’s,
tender, grave and somewhat tremulous. neither voice could
be mistaken; i recognized lucio’s rich penetrating tones, and
the sweet vibrante accents of mavis clare. out of sheer
surprise i paused,—had lucio fallen in love, i wondered,
half-smiling?—was i about to discover that the supposed
‘woman-hater’ had been tamed and caught at last? by
mavis too!—little mavis, who was not beautiful according
to accepted standards, but who had something more than
beauty to enravish a proud and unbelieving soul,—here, as
my thoughts ran on, i was conscious of a foolish sense of
jealousy,—why should he choose mavis, i thought, out of all
[p ]
 women in the world? could he not leave her in peace with
her dreams, her books and her flowers?—safe under the pure,
wise, impassive gaze of pallas athene, whose cool brows were
never fevered by a touch of passion? something more than
curiosity now impelled me to listen, and i cautiously advanced
a step or two towards the shadow of a broad elm where i
could see without being seen. yes, there was rimânez,—standing
erect with folded arms, his dark, sad, inscrutable
eyes fixed on mavis, who stood opposite to him a few paces
off, looking at him in her turn with an expression of mingled
fascination and fear.
“i have asked you mavis clare,”—said lucio slowly—“to
let me serve you. you have genius—a rare quality in a
woman,—and i would advance your fortunes. i should
not be what i am if i did not try to persuade you to let me
help on your career. you are not rich,—i could show you
how to become so. you have a great fame—that i grant;
but you have many enemies and slanderers who are for ever
trying to pull you down from the throne you have won. i
could bring these to your feet, and make them your slaves.
with your intellectual power, your personal grace and gifts
of temperament, i could, if you would let me guide you,
give you such far-reaching influence as no woman has
possessed in this century. i am no boaster,—i can do what
i say and more; and i ask nothing from you in return except
that you should follow my advice implicitly. my advice,
let me tell you is not difficult to follow; most people find it
easy!”
his expression of face, i thought, was very singular as he
spoke,—it was so haggard, dreary and woe-begone that one
might have imagined he was making some proposal that was
particularly repugnant to him, instead of offering to perform
the benevolent action of helping a hard-working literary
woman to achieve greater wealth and distinction. i waited
expectantly for mavis to reply.
“you are very good, prince rimânez,” she said, after a
little pause—“to take any thought for me at all. i cannot
[p ]
 imagine why you should do so; for i am really nothing to
you. i have of course heard from mr tempest of your
great wealth and influence, and i have no doubt you mean
kindly. but i have never owed anything to any one,—no
one has ever helped me,—i have helped myself, and
still prefer to do so. and really i have nothing to wish for,—except—when
the time comes—a happy death. it is true
i am not rich,—but then i do not want to be rich. i would
not be the possessor of wealth for all the world! to be
surrounded with sycophants and flatterers,—never to be
able to distinguish false friends from true,—to be loved for
what you have and not for what you are!—oh no, it would
be misery to me. and i have never craved for power,—except
perhaps the power to win love. and that i have,—many
people love my books, and through my books love me,—i
feel their love, though i may never see or know them
personally. but i am so conscious of their sympathy that
i love them in return without the necessity of personal
acquaintance. they have hearts which respond to my heart,—that
is all the power i care about.”
“you forget your numerous enemies!” said lucio, still
morosely regarding her.
“no, i do not forget them,”—she returned,—“but—i
forgive them! they can do me no harm. as long as i
do not lower myself, no one else can lower me. if my own
conscience is clear, no reproaches can wound. my life is
open to all,—people can see how i live, and what i do. i
try to do well,—but if there are those who think i do ill,
i am sorry,—and if my faults can be amended i shall be
glad to amend them. one must have enemies in this
world,—that is, if one makes any sort of position,—people
without enemies are generally nonentities. all who succeed
in winning some little place of independence must expect
the grudging enmity of hundreds who cannot find even the
smallest foothold, and are therefore failures in the battle of
life,—i pity these sincerely, and when they say or write
cruel things of me, i know it is only spleen and disappointment
[p ]
 that moves both their tongues and pens, and freely
pardon them. they cannot hurt or hinder me,—in fact,
no one can hurt or hinder me but myself.”
i heard the trees rustle slightly,—a branch cracked,—and
peering through the leaves, i saw that lucio had advanced a
step closer to where mavis stood. a faint smile was on his
face, softening it wonderfully and giving an almost supernatural
light to his beautiful dark features.
“fair philosopher, you are almost a feminine marcus
aurelius in your estimate of men and things!”—he said;
“but—you are still a woman—and there is one thing lacking
to your life of sublime and calm contentment—a thing at
whose touch philosophy fails, and wisdom withers at its
root. love, mavis clare!—lover’s love,—devoted love,
blindly passionate,—this has not been yours as yet to win!
no heart beats against your own,—no tender arms caress
you,—you are alone. men are for the most part afraid of
you,—being brute fools themselves, they like their women
to be brute fools also,—and they grudge you your keen
intellect,—your serene independence. yet which is best?—the
adoration of a brute fool, or the loneliness pertaining
to a spirit aloft on some snowy mountain-peak, with no
companions but the stars? think of it!—the years will
pass, and you must needs grow old,—and with the years
will come that solitary neglect which makes age bitter.
now, you will doubtless wonder at my words—yet believe
me i speak the truth when i say that i can give you love,—not
my love, for i love none,—but i can bring to your
feet the proudest men in any country of the world as suitors
for your hand. you shall have your choice of them, and
your own time for choosing,—and whomsoever you love, him
you shall wed, ... why—what is wrong with you that you
shrink from me thus?”
for she had retreated, and was gazing at him in a kind of
horror.
“you terrify me!” she faltered,—and as the moonlight
[p ]
 fell upon her i could see that she was very pale—“such
promises are incredible—impossible! you speak as if you
were more than human! i do not understand you, prince
rimânez,—you are different to anyone i ever met, and ...
and ... something in me stronger than myself warns me
against you. what are you?—why do you talk to me so
strangely? pardon me if i seem ungrateful ..., oh, let us
go in—it is getting quite late i am sure, and i am
cold ...”
she trembled violently, and caught at the branch of a tree
to steady herself,—rimânez stood immovably still, regarding
her with a fixed and almost mournful gaze.
“you say my life is lonely,”—she went on reluctantly and
with a note of pathos in her sweet voice—“and you suggest
love and marriage as the only joys that can make a woman
happy. you may be right. i do not presume to assert
that you are wrong. i have many married women-friends—but
i would not change my lot with any one of them. i
have dreamed of love,—but because i have not realized my
dream i am not the less content. if it is god’s will that i
should be alone all my days, i shall not murmur, for my
solitude is not actual loneliness. work is a good comrade,—then
i have books, and flowers and birds—i am never
really lonely. and that i shall fully realize my dream of
love one day i am sure,—if not here, then hereafter. i
can wait!”
as she spoke, she looked up to the placid heavens where
one or two stars twinkled through the arching boughs,—her
face expressed angelic confidence and perfect peace,—and
rimânez advancing a step or two, fully confronted her with a
strange light of exultation in his eyes.
“true,—you can wait, mavis clare!” he said in deep clear
tones from which all sadness had fled—“you can afford to
wait! tell me,—think for a moment!—can you remember
me? is there a time on which you can look back, and
looking, see my face, not here but elsewhere? think!
[p ]
 did you ever see me long ago—in a far sphere of beauty
and light, when you were an angel, mavis,—and i was—not
what i am now! how you tremble! you need not
fear me,—i would not harm you for a thousand worlds! i
talk wildly at times i know;—i think of things that are
past,—long long past,—and i am filled with regrets that
burn my soul with fiercer heat than fire! and so neither
world’s wealth, world’s power, nor world’s love will tempt
you, mavis!—and you,—a woman! you are a living
miracle then,—as miraculous as the drop of undefiled dew
which reflects in its tiny circumference all the colours of the
sky, and sinks into the earth sweetly, carrying moisture and
refreshment where it falls. i can do nothing for you—you
will not have my aid—you reject my service? then as i
may not help you, you must help me!”—and dropping before
her, he reverently took her hand and kissed it—“i ask a very
little thing of you,—pray for me! i know you are accustomed
to pray, so it will be no trouble to you,—you believe
god hears you,—and when i look at you, i believe it too.
only a pure woman can make faith possible to man. pray
for me then, as one who has fallen from his higher and better
self,—who strives, but who may not attain,—who labours
under heavy punishment,—who would fain reach heaven,
but who by the cursëd will of man, and man alone, is kept
in hell! pray for me, mavis clare! promise it!—and so
shall you lift me a step nearer the glory i have lost!”
i listened, petrified with amazement. could this be lucio?—the
mocking, careless, cynical scoffer i knew, as i thought,
so well?—was it really he who knelt thus like a repentant
sinner, abasing his proud head before a woman? i saw mavis
release her hand from his, the while she stood looking down
upon him in alarm and bewilderment. presently she spoke
in sweet yet tremulous accents—
“since you desire it so earnestly, i promise,”—she said—“i
will pray that the strange and bitter sorrow which seems
to consume you may be removed from your life——”
[p ]“sorrow!” he echoed, interrupting her and springing to his
feet with an impassioned gesture—“woman,—genius,—angel,
whatever you are, do not speak of one sorrow for me! i
have a thousand thousand sorrows!—aye a million million,
that are as little flames about my heart, and as deeply seated
as the centres of the universe! the foul and filthy crimes
of men,—the base deceits and cruelties of women,—the
ruthless, murderous ingratitude of children,—the scorn of
good, the martyrdom of intellect, the selfishness, the avarice,
the sensuality of human life, the hideous blasphemy and sin
of the creature to the creator—these are my endless sorrows!—these
keep me wretched and in chains, when i would fain
be free. these create hell around me, and endless torture,—these
bind and crush me and pervert my being till i
become what i dare not name to myself, or to others. and
yet, ... as the eternal god is my witness, ... i do not think
i am as bad as the worst man living! i may tempt—but i
do not pursue,—i take the lead in many lives, yet i make
the way i go so plain that those who follow me do so by
their own choice and free will more than by my persuasion!”
he paused,—then continued in a softer tone—“you look
afraid of me,—but be assured you never had less cause for
terror. you have truth and purity—i honour both. you
will have none of my advice or assistance in the making of
your life’s history,—to-night therefore we part, to meet no
more on earth. never again, mavis clare!—no, not through
all your quiet days of sweet and contented existence will i
cross your path,—before heaven i swear it!”
“but why?” asked mavis gently, approaching him now as
she spoke, with a soft grace of movement, and laying her
hand on his arm—“why do you speak with such a passion
of self-reproach? what dark cloud is on your mind? surely
you have a noble nature,—and i feel that i have wronged
you in my thoughts, ... you must forgive me—i have mistrusted
you—”
“you do well to mistrust me!” he answered, and with these
[p ]
 words he caught both her hands and held them in his own,
looking at her full in the face with eyes that flashed like
jewels, “your instinct teaches you rightly. would there were
many more like you to doubt me and repel me! one word,—if,
when i am gone, you ever think of me, think that i
am more to be pitied than the veriest paralysed and starving
wretch that ever crawled on earth,—for he, perchance,
has hope—and i have none. and when you pray for me—for
i hold you to this promise,—pray for one who dares not
pray for himself! you know the words, ‘lead us not into
temptation but deliver us from evil’? to-night you have
been led into temptation, though you knew it not, but you
have delivered yourself from evil as only a true soul can.
and now farewell! in life i shall see you no more:—in
death,—well! i have attended many death-beds in response
to the invitations of the moribund,—but i shall not be present
at yours! perhaps, when your parting spirit is on the
verge between darkness and light, you may know who i was,
and am!—and you may thank god with your last breath that
we parted to-night—as we do now—forever!”
he loosened his grasp of her,—she fell back from him pale
and terrified,—for there was something now in the dark beauty
of his face that was unnatural and appalling. a sombre
shadow clouded his brows,—his eyes had gleams in them as
of fire,—and a smile was on his lips, half tender, half cruel.
his strange expression moved even me to a sense of fear, and
i shivered with sudden cold, though the air was warm and
balmy. slowly retreating, mavis moved away, looking round
at him now and then as she went, in wistful wonder and alarm,—till
in a minute or two her slight figure in its shimmering
silken white robe, had vanished among the trees. i lingered,
hesitating and uncertain what to do,—then finally determining
to get back to the house if possible without being noticed, i
made one step, when lucio’s voice, scarcely raised, addressed
me—
“well, eavesdropper! why did you not come out of the
[p ]
 shadow of that elm-tree and see the play to a better advantage?”
surprised and confused, i advanced, mumbling some unintelligible
excuse.
“you saw a pretty bit of acting here,” he went on, striking
a match and lighting a cigar the while he regarded me coolly,
his eyes twinkling with their usual mockery—“you know my
theory, that all men and all women are purchaseable for gold?
well, i wanted to try mavis clare. she rejected all my advantageous
offers, as you must have heard, and i could only
make matters smooth by asking her to pray for me. that
i did this very melodramatically i hope you will admit? a
woman of that dreamy idealistic temperament always likes
to imagine that there is a man who is grateful for her
prayers!”
“you seemed very much in earnest about it!” i said,
vexed with myself that he had caught me spying.
“why, of course!” he responded, thrusting his arm
familiarly through mine—“i had an audience! two
fastidious critics of dramatic art heard me rant my rantings,—i
had to do my best!”
“two critics?” i repeated perplexedly.
“yes. you on one side,—lady sibyl on the other. lady
sibyl rose, after the custom of fashionable beauties at the
opera, before the last scene, in order to get home in good
time for supper!”
he laughed wildly and discordantly, and i felt desperately
uncomfortable.
“you must be mistaken lucio—” i said—“that i listened
i admit,—and it was wrong of me to do so,—but my wife
would never condescend ...”
“ah, then it must have been a sylph of the woods that glided
out of the shadow with a silken train behind her and diamonds
in her hair!” he retorted gaily—“tut geoffrey!—don’t look
so crestfallen. i have done with mavis clare, and she with me.
i have not been making love to her,—i have simply, just to
[p ]
 amuse myself, tested her character,—and i find it stronger
than i thought. the combat is over. she will never go
my way,—nor, i fear, shall i ever go hers!”
“upon my word, lucio,” i said with some irritation—“your
disposition seems to grow more and more erratic and
singular every day!”
“does it not!” he answered with a droll affectation of
interested surprise in himself—“i am a curious creature
altogether! wealth is mine and i care not a jot for it,—power
is mine and i loathe its responsibility;—in fact i
would rather be anything but what i am! look at the
lights of your ‘home, sweet home’ geoffrey!” this he said
as we emerged from among the trees on to the moonlit lawn,
from whence could be seen the shining of the electric lamps
in the drawing-room—“lady sibyl is there,—an enchanting
and perfect woman, who lives but to welcome you to her
embracing arms! fortunate man!—who would not envy
you! love!—who would, who could exist without it—save
me! who, in europe at least, would forego the delights
of kissing,—(which the japanese by-the-by consider
a disgusting habit),—without embraces,—and all those
other endearments which are supposed to dignify the progress
of true love! one never tires of these things,—there
is no satiety! i wish i could love somebody!”
“so you can, if you like,”—i said, with a little uneasy
laugh.
“i cannot. it is not in me. you heard me tell mavis
clare as much. i have it in my power to make other
people fall in love, somewhat after the dexterous fashion
practised by match-making mothers,—but for myself, love
on this planet is too low a thing—too brief in duration.
last night, in a dream,—i have strange dreams at times,—i
saw one whom possibly i could love,—but she was a
spirit, with eyes more lustrous than the morning, and a
form as transparent as flame;—she could sing sweetly, and
i watched her soaring upward, and listened to her song. it
was a wild song, and to many mortal ears meaningless,—it
[p ]
 was something like this ...” and his rich baritone pealed
lusciously forth in melodious tune—
into the light,
into the heart of the fire!
to the innermost core of the deathless flame
i ascend,—i aspire!
under me rolls the whirling earth
with the noise of a myriad wheels that run
ever round and about the sun,—
over me circles the splendid heaven
strewn with the stars of morn and even,
and i a queen
of the air serene,
float with my flag-like wings unfurled,
alone—alone—’twixt god and the world!
here he broke off with a laugh. “she was a strange
spirit,”—he said—“because she could see nothing but
herself ‘’twixt god and the world.’ she was evidently
quite unaware of the numerous existing barriers put up by
mankind between themselves and their maker. i wonder
what unenlightened sphere she came from!”
i looked at him in mingled wonder and impatience.
“you talk wildly,”—i said—“and you sing wildly. of
things that mean nothing, and are nothing.”
he smiled, lifting his eyes to the moon, now shining her
fullest and brightest.
“true!” he replied—“things which have meaning and
are valuable, have all to do with money or appetite,
geoffrey! there is no wider outlook evidently! but we
were speaking of love, and i hold that love should be
eternal as hate. here you have the substance of my religious
creed if i have any,—that there are two spiritual
forces ruling the universe—love and hate,—and that their
incessant quarrel creates the general confusion of life.
both contend one against the other,—and only at judgment-day
will it be proved which is the strongest. i am
on the side of hate myself,—for at present hate has
[p ]
 scored all the victories worth winning, while love has been
so often martyred that there is only the poor ghost of it left
on earth.”
at that moment my wife’s figure appeared at the drawing-room
window, and lucio threw away his half-smoked cigar.
“your guardian-angel beckons!” he said, looking at me
an odd expression of something like pity mingled with
disdain,—“let us go in.”
[p ]xxx
the very next night but one after lucio’s strange interview
with mavis clare, the thunderbolt destined
to wreck my life and humiliate me to the dust, fell with
appalling suddenness. no warning given!—it came at a
moment when i had dared to deem myself happy. all that
day,—the last day i was ever to know of pride or self-gratulation,—i
had enjoyed life to the full; it was a day too in
which sibyl had seemed transformed to a sweeter, gentler
woman than i had hitherto known her,—when all her attractions
of beauty and manner were apparently put forth to
captivate and enthrall me as though she were yet to be wooed
and won. or,—did she mean to bewitch and subjugate
lucio? of this i never thought,—never dreamed:—i only
saw in my wife an enchantress of the most voluptuous and
delicate loveliness,—a woman whose very garments seemed to
cling to her tenderly as though proud of clothing so exquisite
a form,—a creature whose every glance was brilliant, whose
every smile was a ravishment,—and whose voice, attuned to
the softest and most caressing tones appeared in its every
utterance to assure me of a deeper and more lasting love than
i had yet enjoyed. the hours flew by on golden wings,—we
all three,—sibyl, myself and lucio,—had attained, as i imagined,
to a perfect unity of friendship and mutual understanding,—we
had passed that last day together in the outlying woods of
willowsmere, under a gorgeous canopy of autumn leaves,
through which the sun shed mellow beams of rose and gold,—we
[p ]
 had had an al fresco luncheon in the open air,—lucio had
sung for us wild old ballads and love-madrigals till the very
foliage had seemed to tremble with joy at the sound of such
entrancing melody,—and not a cloud had marred the perfect
peace and pleasure of the time. mavis clare was not with
us,—and i was glad. somehow i felt that of late she had
been more or less a discordant element whenever she had
joined our party. i admired her,—in a sort of fraternal half-patronizing
way i even loved her,—nevertheless i was conscious
that her ways were not as our ways,—her thoughts not
as our thoughts. i placed the fault on her of course; i concluded
that it was because she had what i elected to call
‘literary egoism,’ instead of by its rightful name, the spirit of
honourable independence. i never considered the inflated
quality of my own egoism,—the poor pride of a ‘cash and
county’ position, which is the pettiest sort of vain-glory anyone
can indulge in,—and after turning the matter over in my
mind, i decided that mavis was a very charming young woman
with great literary gifts, and an amazing pride, which made
it totally impossible for her to associate with many ‘great’
people, so-called,—as she would never descend to the necessary
level of flunkeyish servility which they expected, and
which i certainly demanded. i should almost have been
inclined to relegate her to ‘grub street,’ had not a faint sense
of justice as well as shame held me back from doing her that
indignity even in my thoughts. however i was too much
impressed with my own vast resources of unlimited wealth, to
realize the fact that anyone who, like mavis, earns independence
by intellectual work and worth alone, is entitled to feel
a far greater pride than those who by mere chance of birth or
heritage become the possessors of millions. then again,
mavis clare’s literary position was, though i liked her personally,
always a kind of reproach to me when i thought of my
own abortive efforts to win the laurels of fame. so that on
the whole i was glad she did not spend that day with us in
the woods;—of course, if i had paid any attention to the
“trifles which make up the sum of life” i should have remembered
[p ]
 that lucio had told her he would “meet her no more
on earth,”—but i judged this to be a mere trifle of hasty and
melodramatic speech, without any intentional meaning.
so my last twenty-four hours of happiness passed away in
halcyon serenity,—i felt a sense of deepening pleasure in
existence, and i began to believe that the future had brighter
things in store for me than i had lately ventured to expect.
sibyl’s new phase of gentleness and tenderness towards me,
combined with her rare beauty, seemed to augur that the
misunderstandings between us would be of short duration, and
that her nature, too early rendered harsh and cynical by a
‘society’ education would soften in time to that beautiful
womanliness which is, after all, woman’s best charm. thus
i thought, in blissful and contented reverie, reclining under
the branching autumnal foliage, with my fair wife beside me,
and listening to the rich tones of my friend lucio’s magnificent
voice pealing forth sonorous, wild melodies, as the sunset
deepened in the sky and the twilight shadows fell. then
came the night—the night which dropped only for a few hours
over the quiet landscape, but for ever over me!
we had dined late, and, pleasantly fatigued with our day in
the open air, had retired early. i had latterly grown a heavy
sleeper, and i suppose i must have slumbered some hours,
when i was awakened suddenly as though by an imperative
touch from some unseen hand. i started up in my bed,—the
night-lamp was burning dimly, and by its glimmer i saw that
sibyl was no longer at my side. my heart gave one bound
against my ribs and then almost stood still—a sense of something
unexpected and calamitous chilled my blood. i pushed
aside the embroidered silken hangings of the bed and peered
into the room,—it was empty. then i rose hastily, put on
my clothes and went to the door,—it was carefully shut, but
not locked as it had been when we retired for the night. i
opened it without the least noise, and looked out into the
long passage,—no one there! immediately opposite the bedroom
door there was a winding oak staircase leading down to
a broad corridor, which in former times had been used as a
[p ]
 music-room or picture-gallery,—an ancient organ, still sweet of
tone, occupied one end of it with dull golden pipes towering
up to the carved and embossed ceiling,—the other end was lit
by a large oriel window like that of a church, filled with rare
old stained glass, representing in various niches the lives of
the saints, the centre subject being the martyrdom of st
stephen. advancing with soft caution to the balustrade
overlooking this gallery, i gazed down into it, and for a
moment could see nothing on the polished floor but the
criss-cross patterns made by the moonlight falling through
the great window,—but presently, as i watched breathlessly,
wondering where sibyl could have gone to at this time of
night, i saw a dark tall shadow waver across the moonlit network
of lines, and i heard the smothered sound of voices.
with my pulses beating furiously, and a sensation of suffocation
in my throat,—full of strange thoughts and suspicions
which i dared not define, i crept slowly and stealthily down
the stair, till as my foot touched the last step i saw—what
nearly struck me to the ground with a shock of agony—and i
had to draw back and bite my lips hard to repress the cry that
nearly escaped them. there,—there before me in the full
moonlight, with the colours of the red and blue robes of the
painted saints on the window glowing blood-like and azure
about her, knelt my wife,—arrayed in a diaphanous garment
of filmy white which betrayed rather than concealed the outline
of her form,—her wealth of hair falling about her in wild
disorder,—her hands clasped in supplication,—her pale face
upturned; and above her towered the dark imposing figure
of lucio! i stared at the twain with dry burning eyes,—what
did this portend? was she—my wife—false? was he—my
friend—a traitor?
“patience——patience!——” i muttered to myself—“this
is a piece of acting doubtless——such as chanced the other
night with mavis clare!——patience!——let us hear this——this
comedy!” and, drawing myself close up against
the wall, i leaned there, scarcely drawing breath, waiting for
her voice,—for his;—when they spoke i should
 know,——yes,
[p ]
 i should know all! and i fastened my looks on them
as they stood there,—vaguely wondering even in my tense
anguish, at the fearful light on lucio’s face,—a light which
could scarcely be the reflection of the moon, as he backed the
window,—and at the scorn of his frowning brows. what
terrific humour swayed him?—why did he, even to my stupefied
thought appear more than human?—why did his very
beauty seem hideous at that moment, and his aspect fiendish?
hush—hush! she spoke,—my wife,—i heard her every word—heard
all and endured all, without falling dead at her feet in
the extremity of my dishonour and despair!
“i love you!” she wailed—“lucio, i love you, and my
love is killing me! be merciful!—have pity on my passion!—love
me for one hour, one little hour!—it is not much to
ask, and afterwards,—do with me what you will,—torture
me, brand me an outcast in the public sight, curse me before
heaven—i care nothing—i am yours body and soul—i love
you!”
her accents vibrated with mad idolatrous pleading,—i
listened infuriated, but dumb. “hush,—hush!” i told
myself “this is a comedy—not yet played out!” and i
waited, with every nerve strained, for lucio’s reply. it came,
accompanied by a laugh, low and sarcastic.
“you flatter me!” he said—“i regret i am unable to
return the compliment!”
my heart gave a throb of relief and fierce joy,—almost i
could have joined in his ironical laughter. she—sibyl—dragged
herself nearer to him.
“lucio—lucio!” she murmured—“have you a heart?
can you reject me when i pray to you thus?—when i offer
you all myself,—all that i am, or ever hope to be? am i so
repugnant to you? many men would give their lives if i
would say to them what i say to you,—but they are nothing
to me—you alone are my world,—the breath of my existence!—ah,
lucio, can you not believe, will you not realize
how deeply i love you!”
he turned towards her with a sudden fierce movement that
[p ]
 startled me,—and the cloud of scorn upon his brows grew
darker.
“i know you love me!” he said, and from where i stood i
saw the cold derisive smile flash from his lips to his eyes in
lightning-like mockery—“i have always known it! your
vampire soul leaped to mine at the first glance i ever gave
you,—you were a false foul thing from the first, and you
recognized your master! yes—your master!” for she had
uttered a faint cry as if in fear,—and he, stooping, snatched
her two hands and grasped them hard in his own—“listen to
the truth of yourself for once from one who is not afraid to
speak it!—you love me,—and truly your body and soul are
mine to claim, if i so choose! you married with a lie upon
your lips; you swore fidelity to your husband before god,
with infidelity already in your thoughts, and by your own
act made the mystical blessing a blasphemy and a curse!
wonder not then that the curse has fallen! i knew it all!—the
kiss i gave you on your wedding-day put fire in your
blood and sealed you mine!—why, you would have fled to
me that very night, had i demanded it,—had i loved you
as you love me,—that is, if you choose to call the disease
of vanity and desire that riots in your veins, by such a name
as love! but now hear me!” and as he held her two wrists
he looked down upon her with such black wrath depicted in
his face as seemed to create a darkness round him where
he stood,—“i hate you! yes—i hate you, and all such
women as you! for you corrupt the world,—you turn good
to evil,—you deepen folly into crime,—with the seduction
of your nude limbs and lying eyes, you make fools, cowards
and beasts of men! when you die, your bodies generate
foulness,—things of the mould and slime are formed out of
the flesh that was once fair for man’s delight,—you are no
use in life—you become poison in death,—i hate you all!
i read your soul—it is an open book to me—and it is
branded with a name given to those who are publicly vile,
but which should, of strict right and justice, be equally
bestowed on women of your position and type, who occupy
[p ]
 pride and place in this world’s standing, and who have not
the excuse of poverty for selling themselves to the devil!”
he ceased abruptly and with passion, making a movement
as though to fling her from him,—but she clung to his arm,—clung
with all the pertinacity of the loathly insect he had taken
from the bosom of the dead egyptian woman and made a toy
of to amuse his leisure! and i, looking on and listening,
honoured him for his plain speaking, for his courage in telling
this shameless creature what she was in the opinion of an
honest man, without glozing over her outrageous conduct for
the sake of civility or social observance. my friend,—my
more than friend! he was true,—he was loyal—he had
neither desire nor intent to betray or dishonour me. my heart
swelled with gratitude to him, and also with a curious sense
of feeble self-pity,—compassionating myself intensely, i could
have sobbed aloud in nervous fury and pain, had not my desire
to hear more, repressed my personal excitement and emotion.
i watched my wife wonderingly—what had become of her
pride that she still knelt before the man who had taunted her
with such words as should have been beyond all endurance?
“lucio! ... lucio!” she whispered, and her whisper
sounded through the long gallery like the hiss of a snake—“say
what you will—say all you will of me,—you can say
nothing that is not true. i am vile—i own it. but is it of
much avail to be virtuous? what pleasure comes from
goodness?—what gratification from self-denial? there is
no god to care! a few years, and we all die, and are forgotten
even by those who loved us,—why should we lose
such joys as we may have for the mere asking? surely it is
not difficult to love even me for an hour?—am i not fair to
look upon?—and is all this beauty of my face and form
worthless in your sight, and you no more than man? murder
me as you may with all the cruelty of cruel words, i care
nothing!—i love you—love you!”—and in a perfect passion
of self-abandonment she sprang to her feet, tossing back her
rich hair over her shoulders, and stood erect, a very bacchante
of wild loveliness—“look at me! you shall not,—you dare
not spurn such a love as mine!”
[p ]dead silence followed her outburst,—and i stared in fascinated
awe at lucio as he turned more fully round and confronted
her. the expression of his countenance struck me then as
quite unearthly,—his beautiful broad brows were knitted in a
darkling line of menace,—his eyes literally blazed with scorn,
and yet he laughed,—a low laugh, resonant with satire.
“shall not!—dare not!” he echoed disdainfully—“woman’s
words,—woman’s ranting!—the shriek of the outraged feminine
animal who fails to attract, as she thinks, her chosen
mate. such a love as yours!—what is it? degradation to
whosoever shall accept it,—shame to whosoever shall rely
upon it! you make a boast of your beauty; your mirror
shows you a pleasing image,—but your mirror lies!—as admirably
as you do! you see within it not the reflection of
yourself, for that would cause you to recoil in horror, ...
you merely look upon your fleshly covering, a garment of
tissues, shrinkable, perishable, and only fit to mingle with
the dust from which it sprang. your beauty! i see none
of it,—i see you! and to me you are hideous, and will
remain hideous for ever. i hate you!—i hate you with the
bitterness of an immeasurable and unforgiving hatred,—for
you have done me a wrong,—you have wrought an injury
upon me,—you have added another burden to the load of
punishment i carry!”
she made a forward movement with outstretched arms,—he
repulsed her by a fierce gesture.
“stand back!” he said—“be afraid of me, as of an unknown
terror! o pitiless heaven!—to think of it!—but
a night ago i was lifted a step nearer to my lost delight!—and
now this woman drags me back, and down!—and yet
again i hear the barring of the gates of paradise! o infinite
torture! o wicked souls of men and women!—is there no
touch of grace or thought of god left in you!—and will ye
make my sorrows eternal!”
he stood, lifting his face to the light where it streamed
through the oriel window, and the moonbeams colouring
themselves faintly roseate as they filtered through the painted
[p ]
 garments of st stephen, showed a great and terrible anguish
in his eyes. i heard him with amazement and awe,—i could
not imagine what he meant by his strange words,—and it was
evident by her expression, that my reckless and abandoned
wife was equally mystified.
“lucio,”—she murmured—“lucio, ... what is it ...
what have i done?—i who would not wound you for the
world?—i who but seek your love, lucio, to repay it in
full with such fond passion and tenderness as you have
never known! for this and this only, i married geoffrey,—i
chose your friend as husband because he was your friend!”
(o perfidious woman!) “and because i saw his foolish
egotism—his pride in himself and his riches,—his blind
confidence in me and in you;—i knew that i could, after
a time, follow the fashion of many another woman in my set
and choose my lover,—ah, my lover!—i had chosen him
already,—i have chosen you, lucio!—yes, though you hate
me you cannot hinder me from loving you,—i shall love
you till i die!”
he turned his gaze upon her steadily,—the gloom deepening
on his brows.
“and after you die?” he said—“will you love me
then?”
there was a stern derision in his tone which appeared to
vaguely terrify her.
“after death! ...” she stammered.
“yes,—after death!” he repeated sombrely—“there is
an after;—as your mother knows!” a faint exclamation
escaped her,—she fixed her eyes upon him affrightedly.
“fair lady,” he went on—“your mother was, like yourself,
a voluptuary. she, like you, made up her mind to ‘follow
the fashion’ as you put it, as soon as her husband’s ‘blind’
or willing confidence was gained. she chose, not one lover
but many. you know her end. in the written but miscomprehended
laws of nature, a diseased body is the
natural expression of a diseased mind,—her face in her
last days was the reflex of her soul. you shudder?—the
[p ]
 thought of her hideousness is repellent to your self-conscious
beauty? yet the evil that was in her is also in you,—it
festers in your blood slowly but surely, and as you have
no faith in god to cure the disease, it will have its way—even
at the final moment when death clutches at your
throat and stops your breathing. the smile upon your
frozen lips then will not be the smile of a saint, believe me,
but of a sinner! death is never deceived, though life may
be. and afterwards ... i ask again, will you love me, do
you think? ... when you know who i am?”
i was myself startled at his manner of putting this strange
question;—i saw her lift her hands beseechingly towards him,
and she seemed to tremble.
“when i know who you are!” she repeated wonderingly—“do
i not know? you are lucio,—lucio rimânez—my
love,—my love!—whose voice is my music,—whose beauty
i adore,—whose looks are my heaven”...
“and hell!” he interposed, with a low laugh—“come
here!”
she went towards him eagerly, yet falteringly. he pointed
to the ground,—i saw the rare blue diamond he always wore
on his right hand, flash like a flame in the moonrays.
“since you love me so well,”—he said—“kneel down and
worship me!”
she dropped on her knees—and clasped her hands,—i
strove to move,—to speak,—but some resistless force held
me dumb and motionless;—the light from the stained glass
window fell upon her face, and showed its fairness illumined
by a smile of perfect rapture.
“with every pulse of my being i worship you!” she murmured
passionately—“my king!—my god! the cruel things
you say but deepen my love for you,—you can kill, but you
can never change me! for one kiss of your lips i would
die,—for one embrace from you i would give my soul! ...”
“have you one to give?” he asked derisively—“is it not
already disposed of? you should make sure of that first!
stay where you are and let me look at you! so!—a woman,
[p ]
 wearing a husband’s name, holding a husband’s honour,
clothed in the very garments purchased with a husband’s
money, and newly risen from a husband’s side, steals
forth thus in the night, seeking to disgrace him and
pollute herself by the vulgarest unchastity! and this
is all that the culture and training of nineteenth-century
civilization can do for you? myself, i prefer the barbaric
fashion of old times, when rough savages fought for
their women as they fought for their cattle, treated them as
cattle, and kept them in their place, never dreaming of endowing
them with such strong virtues as truth and honour!
if women were pure and true, then the lost happiness of the
world might return to it,—but the majority of them are like
you, liars, ever pretending to be what they are not. i may
do what i choose with you, you say? torture you, kill you,
brand you with the name of outcast in the public sight, and
curse you before heaven—if i will only love you!—all this
is melodramatic speech, and i never cared for melodrama at
any time. i shall neither kill you, brand you, curse you, nor
love you;—i shall simply—call your husband!”
i stirred from my hiding-place,—then stopped. she sprang
to her feet in an insensate passion of anger and shame.
“you dare not!” she panted—“you dare not so ... disgrace
me!”
“disgrace you!” he echoed scornfully—“that remark
comes rather late, seeing you have disgraced yourself!”
but she was now fairly roused. all the savagery and
obstinacy of her nature was awakened, and she stood like
some beautiful wild animal at bay, trembling from head to
foot with the violence of her emotions.
“you repulse me,—you scorn me!” she muttered in
hurried fierce accents that scarcely rose above an angry
whisper—“you make a mockery of my heart’s anguish and
despair, but you shall suffer for it! i am your match,—nay
your equal! you shall not spurn me a second time! you
ask, will i love you when i know who you are,—it is your
pleasure to deal in mysteries, but i have no mysteries—i
am a woman who loves you with all the passion of a life,—and
[p ]
 i will murder myself and you, rather than live to know
that i have prayed you for your love in vain. do you think
i came unprepared?—no!” and she suddenly drew from
her bosom a short steel dagger with a jewelled hilt, a curio
i recognized as one of the gifts to her on her marriage;
“love me, i say!—or i will stab myself dead here at your
feet, and cry out to geoffrey that you have murdered me!”
she raised the weapon aloft,—i almost sprang forward—but
i drew back again quickly as i saw lucio seize the hand that
held the dagger and drag it firmly down,—while, wresting the
weapon from her clutch he snapped it asunder and flung the
pieces on the floor.
“your place was the stage, madam!” he said—“you
should have been the chief female mime at some ‘high-class’
theatre! you would have adorned the boards, drawn
the mob, had as many lovers, stagey and private as you
pleased, been invited to act at windsor, obtained a payment-jewel
from the queen, and written your name in her autograph
album. that should undoubtedly have been your
‘great’ career—you were born for it—made for it! you
would have been as brute-souled as you are now,—but
that would not have mattered,—mimes are exempt from
chastity!”
in the action of breaking the dagger, and in the intense
bitterness of his speech he had thrust her back a few paces
from him, and she stood breathless and white with rage, eyeing
him in mingled passion and terror. for a moment she
was silent,—then advancing slowly with the feline suppleness
of movement which had given her a reputation for grace exceeding
that of any woman in england, she said in deliberately
measured accents—
“lucio rimânez, i have borne your insults as i would bear
my death at your hands, because i love you. you loathe me,
you say—you repulse me,—i love you still! you cannot
cast me off—i am yours! you shall love me, or i will die,—one
of the two. take time for thought,—i leave you to-night,—i
give you all to-morrow to consider,—love me,—give
[p ]
 me yourself,—be my lover,—and i will play the comedy
of social life as well as any other woman,—so well that my
husband shall never know. but refuse me again as you
have refused me now, and i will make away with myself. i
am not ‘acting,’—i am speaking calmly and with conviction;
i mean what i say!”
“do you?” queried lucio coldly—“let me congratulate
you! few women attain to such coherence!”
“i will put an end to this life of mine;” she went on,
paying no sort of heed to his words—“i cannot endure existence
without your love, lucio!” and a dreary pathos vibrated
in her voice—“i hunger for the kisses of your lips,—the clasp
of your arms! do you know—do you ever think of your
own power?—the cruel, terrible power of your eyes, your
speech, your smile,—the beauty which makes you more like
an angel than a man,—and have you no pity? do you
think that ever a man was born like you?” he looked at her
as she said this, and a faint smile rested on his lips—“when
you speak, i hear music—when you sing, it seems to me
that i understand what the melodies of a poet’s heaven must
be;—surely, surely you know that your very looks are a
snare to the warm weak soul of a woman! lucio!—” and
emboldened by his silence, she stole nearer to him—“meet
me to-morrow in the lane near the cottage of mavis
clare....”
he started as if he had been stung—but not a word
escaped him.
“i heard all you said to her the other night;” she continued,
advancing yet a step closer to his side—“i followed
you,—and i listened. i was well-nigh mad with jealousy—i
thought—i feared—you loved her,—but i was wrong. i
never do thank god for anything,—but i thanked god that
night that i was wrong! she was not made for you—i am!
meet me outside her house, where the great white rose-tree
is in bloom—gather one,—one of those little autumnal roses
and give it to me—i shall understand it as a signal—a signal
that i may come to you to-morrow night and not be cursed
[p ]
 or repulsed, but loved,—loved!—ah lucio! promise me!—one
little rose!—the symbol of an hour’s love!—then let me
die; i shall have had all i ask of life!”
with a sudden swift movement, she flung herself upon his
breast, and circling her arms about his neck, lifted her face to
his. the moonbeams showed me her eyes alit with rapture,
her lips trembling with passion, her bosom heaving, ... the
blood surged up to my brain, and a red mist swam before my
sight, ... would lucio yield? not he!—he loosened her
desperate hands from about his throat, and forced her back,
holding her at arm’s length.
“woman, false and accurséd!” he said in tones that were
sonorous and terrific—“you know not what you seek! all
that you ask of life shall be yours in death!—this is the law,—therefore
beware what demands you make lest they be too
fully granted! a rose from the cottage of mavis clare?—a
rose from the garden of eden!—they are one and the
same to me! not for my gathering or yours! love and
joy? for the unfaithful there is no love,—for the impure
there is no joy. add no more to the measure of my hatred
and vengeance!—go while there is yet time,—go and front
the destiny you have made for yourself—for nothing can
alter it! and as for me, whom you love,—before whom
you have knelt in idolatrous worship—” and a low fierce
laugh escaped him—“why,—restrain your feverish desires,
fair fiend!—have patience!—we shall meet ere long!”
i could not bear the scene another moment, and springing
from my hiding-place, i dragged my wife away from him and
flung myself between them.
“let me defend you, lucio, from the pertinacities of this
wanton!” i cried with a wild burst of laughter—“an hour
ago i thought she was my wife,—i find her nothing but a
purchased chattel, who seeks a change of masters!”
[p ]xxxi
for one instant we all three stood facing each other,—i
breathless and mad with fury,—lucio calm and disdainful,—my
wife staggering back from me, half-swooning
with fear. in an access of black rage, i rushed upon her and
seized her in my arms.
“i have heard you!” i said—“i have seen you! i have
watched you kneel before my true friend, my loyal comrade
there, and try your best to make him as vile as yourself! i
am that poor fool, your husband,—that blind egoist whose
confidence you sought to win—and to betray! i am the
unhappy wretch whose surplus of world’s cash has bought
for him in marriage a shameless courtezan! you dare to
talk of love? you profane its very name! good god!—what
are such women as you made of? you throw yourselves
into our arms,—you demand our care—you exact our
respect—you tempt our senses—you win our hearts,—and
then you make fools of us all! fools, and worse than fools,—you
make us men without feeling, conscience, faith, or
pity! if we become criminals, what wonder! if we do
things that shame our sex, is it not because you set us the
example? god—god! i, who loved you,—yes, loved you
in spite of all that my marriage with you taught me,—i, who
would have died to save you from a shadow of suspicion,—i
am the one out of all the world you choose to murder by
your treachery!”
i loosened my grasp of her,—she recovered her self-possession
[p ]
 by an effort, and looked at me straightly with cold unfeeling
eyes.
“what did you marry me for?” she demanded—“for my
sake or your own?”
i was silent,—too choked with wrath and pain to speak.
all i could do was to hold out my hand to lucio, who grasped
it with a cordial and sympathetic pressure. yet ... i fancied
he smiled!
“was it because you desired to make me happy out of pure
love for me?” pursued sibyl—“or because you wished to
add dignity to your own position by wedding the daughter
of an earl? your motives were not unselfish,—you chose
me simply because i was the ‘beauty’ of the day whom
london men stared at and talked of,—and because it gave
you a certain ‘prestige’ to have me for your wife, in the same
way as it gave you a footing with royalty to be the owner
of the derby-winner. i told you honestly what i was before
our marriage,—it made no effect upon your vanity and
egoism. i never loved you,—i could not love you, and i
told you so. you have heard, so you say, all that has passed
between me and lucio,—therefore you know why i married
you. i state it boldly to your face,—it was that i might have
your intimate friend for my lover. that you should pretend
to be scandalized at this is absurd; it is a common position
of things in france, and is becoming equally common in
england. morality has always been declared unnecessary
for men,—it is becoming equally unnecessary for women!”
i stared at her, amazed at the glibness of her speech, and
the cool convincing manner in which she spoke, after her
recent access of passion and excitement.
“you have only to read the ‘new’ fiction,”—she went on,
a mocking smile lighting up her pale face, “and indeed all
‘new’ literature generally, to be assured that your ideas
of domestic virtue are quite out of date. both men and
women are, according to certain accepted writers of the day,
at equal liberty to love when they will, and where they may.
polygamous purity is the ‘new’ creed! such love, in fact,
[p ]
 so we are taught, constitutes the only ‘sacred’ union. if
you want to alter this ‘movement,’ and return to the old-fashioned
types of the modest maiden and the immaculate
matron, you must sentence all the ‘new’ writers of profitable
pruriency to penal servitude for life, and institute a
government censorship of the modern press. as matters
stand, your attitude of the outraged husband is not only
ridiculous,—it is unfashionable. i assure you i do not feel
the slightest prick of conscience in saying i love lucio,—any
woman might be proud of loving him;—he, however, will
not, or cannot love me,—we have had a ‘scene,’ and you
have completed the dramatic effect by witnessing it,—there
is no more to be said or done in the affair. i do not suppose
you can divorce me,—but if you can, you may—i shall
make no defence.”
she turned, as if to go;—i still stared dumbly at her, finding
no words to cope with her effrontery,—when lucio’s voice,
attuned to a grave and soothing suavity, interposed,—
“this is a very painful and distressing state of things,”—he
said, and the strange half-cynical, half contemptuous smile
still rested on his lips—“but i must positively protest against
the idea of divorce, not only for her ladyship’s sake, but my
own. i am entirely innocent in the matter!”
“innocent!” i exclaimed, grasping him again by the hand;
“you are nobility itself, lucio!—as loyal a friend as ever
man had! i thank you for your courage,—for the plain
and honest manner in which you have spoken. i heard all
you said! nothing was too strong,—nothing could be too
strong to awaken this misguided woman to a sense of her
outrageous conduct,—her unfaithfulness——”
“pardon me!” he interrupted delicately—“the lady
sibyl can scarcely be called unfaithful, geoffrey. she
suffers,——from——let us call it, a little exaltation of
nerves! in thought she may be guilty of infidelity, but
society does not know that,—and in act she is pure,—pure
as the newly-driven snow,—and as the newly-driven snow,
will society, itself immaculate, regard her!”
[p ]his eyes glittered,—i met his chill derisive glance.
“you think as i do, lucio!” i said hoarsely—“you feel
with me, that a wife’s unchaste thought is as vile as her
unchaste act. there is no excuse,—no palliative for such
cruel and abominable ingratitude. why,”—and my voice
rose unconsciously as i turned fiercely again towards sibyl—“did
i not free you and your family from the heavy pressure
of poverty and debt? have i grudged you anything? are
you not loaded with jewels?—have you not greater luxuries
and liberties than a queen? and do you not owe me at
least some duty?”
“i owe you nothing!” she responded boldly—“i gave
you what you paid for,—my beauty and my social position.
it was a fair bargain!”
“a dear and bitter one!” i cried.
“maybe so. but such as it was, you struck it,—not i.
you can end it when you please,—the law ...”
“the law will give you no freedom in such a case,”—interposed
lucio with a kind of satirical urbanity—“a judicial
separation on the ground of incompatibility of temper might
be possible certainly—but would not that be a pity? her
ladyship is unfortunate in her tastes,—that is all!—she
selected me as her cavaliere servente, and i refused the situation,—hence
there is nothing for it but to forget this
unpleasant incident, and try to live on a better understanding
for the future——”
“do you think”—said my wife, advancing with her proud
head uplifted in scorn, the while she pointed at me—“do
you think i will live with him after what he has seen and
heard to-night? what do you take me for?”
“for a very charming woman of hasty impulses and
unwise reasoning,”—replied lucio, with an air of sarcastic
gallantry—“lady sibyl, you are illogical,—most of your sex
are. you can do no good by prolonging this scene,—a
most unpleasant and trying one to us poor men. you
know how we hate ‘scenes’! let me beg of you to retire!
your duty is to your husband; pray heaven he may forget
[p ]
 this midnight delirium of yours, and set it down to some
strange illness rather than to any evil intention.”
for all answer she came towards him, stretching out her
arms in wild appeal.
“lucio!” she cried—“lucio, my love! good-night!—good-bye!”
i sprang between him and her advancing form.
“before my very face!” i exclaimed—“o infamous
woman! have you no shame?”
“none!” she said, with a wild smile—“i glory in my love
for such a king of worth and beauty! look at him!—and
then look at yourself in the nearest mirror that reflects so
poor and mean a picture of a man! how, even in your
egoism, could you deem it possible for a woman to love you
when he was near! stand out of the light!—you interpose
a shadow between my god and me!”
as she uttered these mad words, her aspect was so strange
and unearthly, that out of sheer stupefied wonder, i mechanically
did as she bade me, and stood aside. she regarded me
fixedly.
“i may as well say good-bye to you also,”—she observed—“for
i shall never live with you again.”
“nor i with you!” i said fiercely.
“nor i with you—nor i with you!” she repeated like a
child saying a lesson—“of course not!—if i do not live with
you, you cannot live with me!” she laughed discordantly;
then turned her beseeching gaze once more upon lucio—“good-bye!”
she said.
he looked at her with a curious fixity, but returned no
word in answer. his eyes flashed coldly in the moonlight
like sharp steel, and he smiled. she regarded him with such
passionate intentness that it seemed as though she sought to
draw his very soul into herself by the magnetism of her glance,—but
he stood unmoved, a very statue of fine disdain and
intellectual self-repression. my scarcely controlled fury broke
out again at the sight of her dumb yearning, and i gave vent
to a shout of scornful laughter.
[p ]“by heaven, a veritable new venus and reluctant adonis!”
i cried deliriously—“a poet should be here to immortalize so
touching a scene! go—go!”—and i motioned her away
with a furious gesture—“go, if you do not want me to
murder you! go, with the proud consciousness that you
have worked all the mischief and ruin that is most dear to
the heart of a woman,—you have spoilt a life and dishonoured
a name,—you can do no more,—your feminine
triumph is complete! go!—would to god i might never
see your face again!—would to god i had been spared the
misery of having married you!”
she paid no attention whatever to my words, but kept her
eyes fixed on lucio. retreating slowly, she seemed to feel
rather than see her way to the winding stair, and there, turning,
she began to ascend. half way up she paused—looked
back and fully confronted us once more,—with a wild wicked
rapture on her face she kissed her hands to lucio, smiling
like a spectral woman in a dream,—then she went onward
and upward step by step, till the last white fold of her robe
had vanished,—and we two,—my friend and i,—were alone.
facing one another we stood, silently,—i met his sombre eyes
and thought i read an infinite compassion in them!—then,—while
i yet looked upon him, something seemed to clutch my
throat and stop my breathing,—his dark and beautiful countenance
appeared to me to grow suddenly lurid as with fire,—a
coronal of flame seemed to tremble above his brows,—the
moonlight glistened blood-red!—a noise was in my ears of
mingled thunder and music as though the silent organ at the
end of the gallery were played by hands invisible;—struggling
against these delusive sensations, i involuntarily stretched out
my hands ...
“lucio! ...” i gasped—“lucio ... my friend! i think,
... i am, ... dying! my heart is broken!”
as i spoke, a great blackness closed over me,—and i fell
senseless.
[p ]xxxii
oh, the blessedness of absolute unconsciousness! it is
enough to make one wish that death were indeed
annihilation! utter oblivion,—complete destruction,—surely
this would be a greater mercy to the erring soul of man
than the terrible god’s-gift of immortality,—the dazzling
impress of that divine ‘image’ of the creator in which we are
all made, and which we can never obliterate from our beings.
i, who have realized to the full the unalterable truth of eternal
life,—eternal regeneration for each individual spirit in each
individual human creature,—look upon the endless futures
through which i am compelled to take my part with something
more like horror than gratitude. for i have wasted my
time and thrown away priceless opportunities,—and though
repentance may retrieve these, the work of retrieval is long
and bitter. it is easier to lose a glory than to win it; and if
i could have died the death that positivists hope for at the
very moment when i learned the full measure of my heart’s
desolation, surely it would have been well! but my temporary
swoon was only too brief,—and when i recovered i
found myself in lucio’s own apartment, one of the largest and
most sumptuously furnished of all the guest-chambers at willowsmere,—the
windows were wide open, and the floor was
flooded with moonlight. as i shuddered coldly back to life
and consciousness, i heard a tinkling sound of tune, and
opening my eyes wearily i saw lucio himself seated in the
full radiance of the moon with a mandoline on his knee from
[p ]
 which he was softly striking delicate impromptu melodies. i
was amazed at this,—astounded that while i personally was
overwhelmed with a weight of woe, he should still be capable
of amusing himself. it is a common idea with us all that
when we ourselves are put out, no one else should dare to be
merry,—in fact we expect nature itself to wear a miserable
face if our own beloved ego is disturbed by any trouble,—such
is the extent of our ridiculous self-consciousness. i
moved in my chair and half rose from it,—when lucio, still
thrumming the strings of his instrument piano pianissimo,
said—
“keep still, geoffrey! you’ll be all right in a few minutes.
don’t worry yourself.”
“worry myself!” i echoed bitterly—“why not say don’t
kill yourself!”
“because i see no necessity to offer you that advice at
present—” he responded coolly—“and if there were necessity,
i doubt if i should give it,—because i consider it better
to kill one’s self than worry one’s self. however opinions
differ. i want you to take this matter lightly.”
“lightly!—take my own dishonour and disgrace lightly!”
i exclaimed, almost leaping from my chair—“you ask too
much!”
“my good fellow, i ask no more than is asked and expected
of a hundred ‘society’ husbands to-day. consider!—your
wife has been led away from her soberer judgment and
reasoning by an exalted and hysterical passion for me on
account of my looks,—not for myself at all—because she
really does not know me,—she only sees me as i appear to
be. the love of handsome exterior personalities is a
common delusion of the fair sex—and passes in time like
other women’s diseases. no actual dishonour or disgrace
attaches to her or to you,—nothing has been seen, heard, or
done, in public. this being so, i can’t understand what you
are making a fuss about. the great object of social life,
you know, is to hide all savage passions and domestic differences
from the gaze of the vulgar crowd. you can be as
[p ]
 bad as you like in private—only god sees—and that does
not matter!”
his eyes had a mocking lustre in them,—twanging his
mandoline, he sang under his breath,
“if she be not fair for me
what care i how fair she be!”
“that is the true spirit, geoffrey,”—he went on—“it
sounds flippant to you no doubt in your present tragic
frame of mind,—but it is the only way to treat women, in
marriage or out of it. before the world and society, your
wife is like cæsar’s, above suspicion. only you and i (we
will leave god out) have been the witnesses of her attack of
hysteria ...”
“hysteria, you call it! she loves you!” i said hotly—“and
she has always loved you. she confessed it,—and you
admitted that you always knew it!”
“i always knew she was hysterical—yes—if that is what
you mean;”—he answered—“the majority of women have
no real feelings, no serious emotions—except one—vanity.
they do not know what a great love means,—their chief
desire is for conquest,—and failing in this, they run up the
gamut of baffled passion to the pitch of frenetic hysteria,
which with some becomes chronic. lady sibyl suffers in
this way. now listen to me. i will go off to paris or
moscow or berlin at once,—after what has happened, of
course i cannot stay here,—and i give you my word i will
not intrude myself into your domestic circle again. in a few
days you will tide over this rupture, and learn the wisdom of
supporting the differences that occur in matrimony, with
composure——”
“impossible! i will not part with you!” i said vehemently—“nor
will i live with her! better the companionship
of a true friend than that of a false wife!”
he raised his eyebrows with a puzzled half humorous
expression—then shrugged his shoulders, as one who gives up
a difficult argument. rising, he put aside his mandoline and
[p ]
 came over to me, his tall imposing figure casting a gigantic
shadow in the brilliant moonbeams.
“upon my word, you put me in a very awkward position
geoffrey,—what is to be done? you can get a judicial
separation if you like, but i think it would be an unwise
course of procedure after barely four months of marriage.
the world would be set talking at once. really it is better
to do anything than give the gossips a chance for floating
scandal. look here—don’t decide anything hastily,—come
up to town with me for a day, and leave your wife alone to
meditate upon her foolishness and its possible consequences,—then
you will be better able to judge as to your future
movements. go to your room, and sleep till morning.”
“sleep!” i repeated with a shudder—“in that room where
she——” i broke off with a cry and looked at him imploringly—“am
i going mad, i wonder! my brain seems on
fire! if i could forget! ... if i could forget! lucio—if
you, my loyal friend, had been false to me i should have
died,—your truth, your honour have saved me!”
he smiled—an odd, cynical little smile.
“tut——i make no boast of virtue”—he rejoined—“if
the lady’s beauty had been any temptation to me i might
have yielded to her charms,—in so doing i should have
been no more than man, as she herself suggested. but perhaps
i am more than man!—at anyrate bodily beauty in
woman makes no sort of effect on me, unless it is accompanied
by beauty of soul,—then it does make an effect, and
a very extraordinary one. it provokes me to try how deep
the beauty goes—whether it is impervious or vulnerable.
as i find it, so i leave it!”
i stared wearily at the moonlight patterns on the floor.
“what am i to do?” i asked—“what would you
advise?”
“come up to town with me,”—he replied—“you can
leave a note for your wife, explaining your absence,—and at
one of the clubs we will talk over the matter quietly, and
decide how best to avoid a social scandal. meanwhile, go
[p ]
 to bed. if you won’t go back to your own room, sleep in
the spare one next to mine.”
i rose mechanically and prepared to obey him. he watched
me furtively.
“will you take a composing draught if i mix it for you?”
he said—“it is harmless, and will give you a few hours’ sleep.”
“i would take poison from your hand!” i answered recklessly—“why
don’t you mix that for me?—and then, ...
then i should sleep indeed,—and forget this horrible night!”
“no,—unfortunately you would not forget!” he said, going
to his dressing-case and taking out a small white powder
which he dissolved gradually in a glass of water—“that is
the worst of what people call dying. i must instruct you in
a little science by-and-by, to distract your thoughts. the
scientific part of death,—the business that goes on behind
the scenes you know—will interest you very much—it is
highly instructive, particularly that section of it which i am
entitled to call the regeneration of atoms. the brain-cells
are atoms, and within these, are other atoms called
memories, curiously vital and marvellously prolific! drink
this,”—and he handed me the mixture he had prepared—“for
temporary purposes it is much better than death—because
it does numb and paralyse the conscious atoms for
a little while, whereas death only liberates them to a larger
and more obstinate vitality.”
i was too self-absorbed to heed or understand his words,
but i drank what he gave me submissively and returned the
glass,—he still watched me closely for about a minute. then
he opened the door of the apartment which adjoined his own.
“throw yourself on that bed and close your eyes,”—he
continued in somewhat peremptory accents—“till morning
breaks i give you a respite,—” and he smiled strangely—“both
from dreams and memories! plunge into oblivion,
my friend!—brief as it is and as it must ever be, it is sweet!—even
to a millionaire!”
the ironical tone of his voice vexed me,—i looked at him
half reproachfully, and saw his proud beautiful face, pale as
[p ]
 marble, clear-cut as a cameo, soften as i met his eyes,—i felt
he was sorry for me despite his love of satire,—and grasping
his hand i pressed it fervently without offering any other
reply. then, going into the next room as he bade me, i lay
down, and falling asleep almost instantly, i remembered no
more.
[p ]xxxiii
with the morning came full consciousness; i realized
bitterly all that had happened, but i was no longer
inclined to bemoan my fate. my senses were stricken,
as it seemed, too numb and rigid for any further outbreak
of passion. a hard callousness took the place of outraged
feeling; and though despair was in my heart, my mind was
made up to one stern resolve,—i would look upon sibyl
no more. never again should that fair face, the deceitful
mask of a false nature, tempt my sight and move me to
pity or forgiveness,—that i determined. leaving the room in
which i had passed the night, i went to my study and wrote
the following letter;—
sibyl.
after the degrading and disgraceful scene of last night
you must be aware that any further intercourse between
us is impossible. prince rimânez and i are leaving for
london; we shall not return. you can continue to reside
at willowsmere,—the house is yours,—and the half
of my fortune unconditionally settled upon you on our
marriage-day will enable you to keep up the fashions of
your ‘set,’ and live with that luxury and extravagance you
deem necessary to an ‘aristocratic’ position. i have decided
to travel,—and i intend to make such arrangements
as may prevent, if possible, our ever meeting again,—though
i shall of course do my best for my own sake, to avoid any
[p ]
 scandal. to reproach you for your conduct would be useless;
you are lost to all sense of shame. you have abased yourself
in the humiliation of a guilty passion before a man who despises
you,—who, in his own loyal and noble nature, hates you
for your infidelity and hypocrisy,—and i can find no pardon
for the wrong you have thus done to me, and the injury you
have brought upon my name. i leave you to the judgment
of your own conscience,—if you have one,—which is doubtful.
such women as you, are seldom troubled with remorse. it is
not likely you will ever see me or the man to whom you have
offered your undesired love again,—make of your life what
you can or will, i am indifferent to your movements, and for
my own part, shall endeavour as much as may be, to forget
that you exist.
your husband,
geoffrey tempest.
this letter, folded and sealed, i sent to my wife in her own
apartments by her maid,—the girl came back and said she
had delivered it, but that there was no answer. her ladyship
had a severe headache and meant to keep her room that morning.
i expressed just as much civil regret as a confidential
maid would naturally expect from the newly-wedded husband
of her mistress,—and then, giving instructions to my man
morris to pack my portmanteau, i partook of a hurried breakfast
with lucio in more or less silence and constraint, for the
servants were in attendance, and i did not wish them to suspect
that anything was wrong. for their benefit, i gave out
that my friend and i were called suddenly to town on urgent
business,—that we might be absent a couple of days, perhaps
longer,—and that any special message or telegram could be
sent on to me at arthur’s club. i was thankful when we at
last got away,—when the tall, picturesque red gables of willowsmere
vanished from my sight,—and when finally, seated in a
railway smoking-carriage reserved for our two selves, we were
able to watch the miles of distance gradually extending between
us and the beautiful autumnal woods of poet-haunted
[p ]
 warwickshire. for a long time we kept silence, turning over
and pretending to read the morning’s papers,—till presently
flinging down the dull and wearisome ‘times’ sheet, i sighed
heavily, and leaning back, closed my eyes.
“i am truly very much distressed about all this;” said
lucio then, with extreme gentleness and suavity—“it seems
to me that i am the adverse element in the affair. if lady
sibyl had never seen me,——”
“why, then i should never have seen her!” i responded
bitterly—“it was through you i met her first.”
“true!” and he eyed me thoughtfully—“i am very unfortunately
placed!—it is almost as if i were to blame,
though no-one could be more innocent or well-intentioned
than myself!” he smiled,—then went on very gravely—“i
really should avoid scandalous gossip if i were you,—i do
not speak of my own involuntary share in the disaster,—what
people say of me is quite immaterial; but for the lady’s
sake——”
“for my own sake i shall try to avoid it;” i said brusquely,
whereat his eyes glittered strangely—“it is myself i have to
consider most of all. i shall, as i hinted to you this morning,
travel for a few years.”
“yes,—go on a tiger-hunting expedition in india,”—he
suggested—“or kill elephants in africa. it is what a great
many men do when their wives forget themselves. several
well-known husbands are abroad just now!”
again the brilliant enigmatical smile flashed over his face,—but
i could not smile in answer. i stared moodily out of
the window at the bare autumnal fields, past which the train
flew,—bare of harvest,—stripped of foliage—like my own
miserable life.
“come and winter with me in egypt,”—he continued—“come
in my yacht ‘the flame,’—we will take her to
alexandria,—and then do the nile in a dahabeah, and
forget that such frivolous dolls as women exist except to
be played with by us ‘superior’ creatures and thrown
aside.”
[p ]“egypt——the nile!” i murmured,—somehow the idea
pleased me—“yes,——why not?”
“why not indeed!” he echoed—“the proposal is agreeable
to you i am sure. come and see the land of the old
gods,—the land where my princess used to live and torture
the souls of men!—perhaps we may discover the remains of
her last victim,——who knows!”
i avoided his gaze;—the recollection of the horrible winged
thing he persisted in imagining to be the transmigrated soul
of an evil woman, was repugnant to me. almost i felt as
if there were some subtle connection between that hateful
creature and my wife sibyl. i was glad when the train
reached london, and we, taking a hansom, were plunged
into the very vortex of human life. the perpetual noise of
traffic, the motley crowds of people, the shouting of news-boys
and omnibus-conductors,—all this hubbub was grateful to my
ears, and for a time at least, distracted my thoughts. we
lunched at the savoy, and amused ourselves with noting the
town noodles of fashion,—the inane young man in the stocks
of the stiff high collar, and wearing the manacles of equally
stiff and exaggerated cuffs, a veritable prisoner in the dock
of silly custom,—the frivolous fool of a woman, painted and
powdered, with false hair and dyed eyebrows, trying to look
as much like a paid courtezan as possible,—the elderly matron,
skipping forward on high heels, and attempting by the assumption
of juvenile airs and graces to cover up and conceal the
obtrusive facts of a too obvious paunch and overlapping
bosom,—the would-be dandy and ‘beau’ of seventy, strangely
possessed by youthful desires, and manifesting the same by
goat-like caperings at the heels of young married women;—these
and such-like contemptible units of a contemptible
social swarm, passed before us like puppets at a country
fair, and aroused us in turn to laughter or disdain. while
we yet lingered over our wine, a man came in alone, and sat
down at the table next to ours;—he had with him a book,
which, after giving his orders for luncheon, he at once opened
at a marked place and began to read with absorbed attention,—i
[p ]
 recognised the cover of the volume and knew it to be
mavis clare’s “differences.” a haze floated before my sight,—a
sensation of rising tears was in my throat,—i saw the fair
face, earnest eyes, and sweet smile of mavis,—that woman-wearer
of the laurel-crown,—that keeper of the lilies of purity
and peace. alas, those lilies!—they were for me
“des fleurs étranges,
avec leurs airs de sceptres d’anges;
de thyrses lumineux pour doigts de séraphins,—
leurs parfums sont trop forts, tout ensemble, et trop fins!”
i shaded my eyes with one hand,—yet under that shade i
felt that lucio watched me closely. presently he spoke softly,
just as if he had read my thoughts.
“considering the effect a perfectly innocent woman has on
the mind of even an evil man, it’s strange, isn’t it that there
are so few of them!”
i did not answer.
“in the present day,” he went on—“there are a number
of females clamouring like unnatural hens in a barn-yard
about their ‘rights’ and ‘wrongs.’ their greatest right, their
highest privilege, is to guide and guard the souls of men.
this, they for the most part, throw away as worthless.
aristocratic women, royal women even, hand over the care
of their children to hired attendants and inferiors, and then
are surprised and injured if those children turn out to be
either fools or blackguards. if i were controller of the
state, i would make it a law that every mother should be
bound to nurse and guard her children herself as nature
intended, unless prevented by ill-health, in which case she
would have to get a couple of doctor’s certificates to certify
the fact. otherwise, any woman refusing to comply with
the law should be sentenced to imprisonment with hard
labour. this would bring them to their senses. the idleness,
wickedness, extravagance and selfishness of women,
make men the boors and egotists they are.”
[p ]i looked up.
“the devil is in the whole business;”—i said bitterly—“if
women were good, men would have nothing to do with
them. look round you at what is called ‘society’! how
many men there are who deliberately choose tainted women
for their wives, and leave the innocent uncared for! take
mavis clare——”
“oh, you were thinking of mavis clare, were you?” he
rejoined, with a quick glance at me—“but she would be a
difficult prize for any man to win. she does not seek to be
married,—and she is not uncared for, since the whole world
cares for her.”
“that is a sort of impersonal love;”—i answered—“it
does not give her the protection such a woman needs, and
ought to obtain.”
“do you want to become her lover?” he asked with a
slight smile—“i’m afraid you’ve no chance!”
“i! her lover! good god!” i exclaimed, the blood
rushing hotly to my face at the mere suggestion—“what a
profane idea!”
“you are right,—it is profane;”—he agreed, still smiling—“it
is as though i should propose your stealing the sacramental
cup from a church, with just this difference,—you
might succeed in running off with the cup because it is only
the church’s property, but you would never succeed in winning
mavis clare, inasmuch as she belongs to god. you
know what milton says:
‘so dear to heaven is saintly chastity
that when a soul is found sincerely so,
a thousand liveried angels lacquey her,
driving far off each thing of sin and guilt,
and in clear dream and solemn vision
tell her of things which no gross ear can hear,
till oft converse with heavenly habitants
begin to cast a beam on th’outward shape
the unpolluted temple of the mind,
and turns it by degrees to the soul’s essence
till all be made immortal!’
[p ]he quoted the lines softly and with an exquisite gravity.
“that is what you see in mavis clare,”—he
 continued—“that
‘beam on the outward shape’ which ‘turns it by degrees
to the soul’s essence,’—and which makes her beautiful, without
what is called beauty by lustful men.”
i moved impatiently, and looked out from the window near
which we were seated, at the yellow width of the flowing
thames below.
“beauty, according to man’s ordinary standard,” pursued
lucio, “means simply good flesh,—nothing more. flesh,
arranged prettily and roundly on the always ugly skeleton
beneath,—flesh, daintily coloured and soft to the touch, without
scar or blemish. plenty of it too, disposed in the proper
places. it is the most perishable sort of commodity,—an
illness spoils it,—a trying climate ruins it,—age wrinkles it,—death
destroys it,—but it is all the majority of men look
for in their bargains with the fair sex. the most utter roué
of sixty that ever trotted jauntily down piccadilly pretending
to be thirty, expects like shylock his ‘pound’ or several
pounds of youthful flesh. the desire is neither refined nor
intellectual, but there it is,—and it is solely on this account
that the ‘ladies’ of the music-hall become the tainted members
and future mothers of the aristocracy.”
“it does not need the ladies of the music-hall to taint the
already tainted!” i said.
“true!” and he looked at me with kindly commiseration—“let
us put the whole mischief down to the ‘new’ fiction!”
we rose then, having finished luncheon, and leaving the
savoy we went on to arthur’s. here we sat down in a quiet
corner and began to talk of our future plans. it took me very
little time to make up my mind,—all quarters of the world
were the same to me, and i was really indifferent as to where
i went. yet there is always something suggestive and fascinating
about the idea of a first visit to egypt, and i willingly
agreed to accompany lucio thither, and remain the winter.
“we will avoid society”—he said—“the well-bred, well-educated
‘swagger’ people who throw champagne-bottles at
[p ]
 the sphinx, and think a donkey-race ‘ripping fun’ shall not
have the honour of our company. cairo is full of such
dancing dolls, so we will not stay there. old nile has many
attractions; and lazy luxury on a dahabeah will soothe your
overwrought nerves. i suggest our leaving england within
a week.”
i consented,—and while he went over to a table and wrote
some letters in preparation for our journey, i looked through
the day’s papers. there was nothing to read in them,—for
though all the world’s news palpitates into great britain on
obediently throbbing electric wires, each editor of each little
pennyworth, being jealous of every other editor of every other
pennyworth, only admits into his columns exactly what suits
his politics or personally pleases his taste, and the interests
of the public at large are scarcely considered. poor, bamboozled,
patient public!—no wonder it is beginning to think
that a halfpenny spent on a newspaper which is only purchased
to be thrown away, enough and more than enough. i was
still glancing up and down the tedious columns of the americanized
pall mall gazette, and lucio was still writing, when
a page-boy entered with a telegram.
“mr tempest?”
“yes.” and i snatched the yellow-covered missive and
tore it open,—and read the few words it contained almost
uncomprehendingly. they ran thus—
“return at once. something alarming has happened.
afraid to act without you. mavis clare.”
a curious chill came over me,—the telegram fell from my
hands on the table. lucio took it up and glanced at it.
then, regarding me stedfastly, he said—
“of course you must go. you can catch the four-forty
train if you take a hansom.”
“and you?” i muttered. my throat was dry and i could
scarcely speak.
“i’ll stay at the grand, and wait for news. don’t delay a
[p ]
 moment,—miss clare would not have taken it upon herself
to send this message, unless there had been serious cause.”
“what do you think—what do you suppose——” i began.
he stopped me by a slight imperative gesture.
“i think nothing—i suppose nothing. i only urge you to
start immediately. come!”
and almost before i realized it, he had taken me with him
out into the hall of the club, where he helped me on with my
coat, gave me my hat, and sent for a cab to take me to the
railway station. we scarcely exchanged farewells,—stupefied
with the suddenness of the unexpected summons back to the
home i had left in the morning, as i thought, for ever, i
hardly knew what i was doing or where i was going, till i
found myself alone in the train, returning to warwickshire as
fast as steam would bear me, with the gloom of the deepening
dusk around me, and such a fear and horror at my heart
as i dared not think of or define. what was the ‘something
alarming’ that had happened? how was it that mavis
clare had telegraphed to me? these, and endless other
questions tormented my brain,—and i was afraid to suggest
answers to any of them. when i arrived at the familiar
station, there was no one waiting to receive me, so i hired a
fly, and was driven up to my own house just as the short
evening deepened into night. a low autumnal wind was
sighing restlessly among the trees like a wandering soul in
torment; not a star shone in the black depths of the sky.
directly the carriage stopped, a slim figure in white came out
under the porch to meet me,—it was mavis, her angel’s face
grave and pale with emotion.
“it is you at last!” she said in a trembling voice——“thank
god you have come!”
 edmond rostand.
 ‘la princesse lointaine.’
 back
[p ]xxxiv
i grasped her hands hard.
“what is it?”—i began;—then, looking round i
saw that the hall was full of panic-stricken servants, some of
whom came forward, confusedly murmuring together about
being ‘afraid,’ and ‘not knowing what to do.’ i motioned
them back by a gesture and turned again to mavis clare.
“tell me,—quick—what is wrong?”
“we fear something has happened to lady sibyl,”—she replied
at once—“her rooms are locked, and we cannot make
her hear. her maid got alarmed, and ran over to my
house to ask me what was best to be done,—i came at
once, and knocked and called, but could get no response.
you know the windows are too high to reach from the
ground,—there is no ladder on the premises long enough
for the purpose,—and no one can climb up that side of the
building. i begged some of the servants to break open the
door by force,—but they would not,—they were all afraid;
and i did not like to act on my own responsibility, so i
telegraphed for you——”
i sprang away from her before she had finished speaking
and hurried upstairs at once,—outside the door of the ante-room
which led into my wife’s luxurious ‘suite’ of apartments,
i paused breathless.
“sibyl!” i cried.
there was not a sound. mavis had followed me, and stood
by my side, trembling a little. two or three of the servants
[p ]
 had also crept up the stairs, and were clinging to the banisters,
listening nervously.
“sibyl!” i called again. still absolute silence. i turned
round upon the waiting and anxious domestics with an
assumption of calmness.
“lady sibyl is probably not in her rooms at all;”—i said;
“she may have gone out unobserved. this door of the
ante-chamber has a spring-lock,—it can easily get fast shut
by the merest accident. bring a strong hammer,—or a
crowbar,—anything that will break it open,—if you had had
sense you would have obeyed miss clare, and done this a
couple of hours ago.”
and i waited with enforced composure, while my instructions
were carried out as rapidly as possible. two of the
men-servants appeared with the necessary tools, and very soon
the house resounded with clamour,—blow after blow was
dealt upon the solid oaken door for some time without
success,—the spring lock would not yield,—neither would
the strong hinges give way. presently however, after ten
minutes’ hard labour, one of the finely carved panels was
smashed in,—then another,—and, springing over the débris i
rushed through the ante-room into the boudoir,—then paused,
listening, and calling again, “sibyl!” no one followed me,—some
indefinable instinct, some nameless dread, held the
servants back, and mavis clare as well. i was alone, ...
and in complete darkness. groping about, with my heart
beating furiously, i sought for the ivory button in the wall
which would, at pressure, flood the rooms with electric light,
but somehow i could not find it. my hand came in contact
with various familiar things which i recognised by touch,—rare
bits of china, bronzes, vases, pictures,—costly trifles that
were heaped up as i knew, in this particular apartment with a
lavish luxury and disregard of cost befitting a wanton eastern
empress of old time,—cautiously feeling my way along, i
started with terror to see, as i thought, a tall figure outline
itself suddenly against the darkness,—white, spectral and
luminous,—a figure that, as i stared at it aghast, raised a
[p ]
 pallid hand and pointed me forward with a menacing air of
scorn! in my dazed horror at this apparition, or delusion, i
stumbled over the heavy trailing folds of a velvet portiére, and
knew by this that i had passed from the boudoir into the adjoining
bedroom. again i stopped,—calling “sibyl!” but
my voice had scarcely strength enough to raise itself above a
whisper. giddy and confused as i was, i remembered that
the electric light in this room was fixed at the side of the
toilet-table, and i stepped hurriedly in that direction, when
all at once in the thick gloom i touched something clammy
and cold like dead flesh, and brushed against a garment that
exhaled faint perfume, and rustled at my touch with a silken
sound. this alarmed me more thoroughly than the spectre
i fancied i had just seen,—i drew back shudderingly against
the wall,—and in so doing, my fingers involuntarily closed on
the polished ivory stud which, like a fairy talisman in modern
civilization, emits radiance at the owner’s will. i pressed it
nervously,—the light blazed forth through the rose-tinted
shells which shaded its dazzling clearness, and showed me
where i stood, ... within an arm’s length of a strange, stiff
white creature that sat staring at itself in the silver-framed
mirror with wide-open, fixed and glassy eyes!
“sibyl!” i gasped—“my wife ... ! ...” but the words
died chokingly in my throat. was it indeed my wife?—this
frozen statue of a woman, watching her own impassive image
thus intently? i looked upon her wonderingly,—doubtingly,—as
if she were some stranger;—it took me time to recognize
her features, and the bronze-gold darkness of her long hair
which fell loosely about her in a lavish wealth of rippling
waves, ... her left hand hung limply over the arm of
the chair in which, like some carven ivory goddess, she sat
enthroned,—and tremblingly, slowly, reluctantly, i advanced
and took that hand. cold as ice it lay in my palm much as
though it were a waxen model of itself;—it glittered with
jewels,—and i studied every ring upon it with a curious, dull
pertinacity, like one who seeks a clue to identity. that large
turquoise in a diamond setting was a marriage-gift from a
[p ]
 duchess,—that opal her father gave her,—the lustrous circle
of sapphires and brilliants surmounting her wedding-ring was
my gift,—that ruby i seemed to know,——well, well! what a
mass of sparkling value wasted on such fragile clay! i
peered into her face,—then at the reflection of that face in
the mirror,—and again i grew perplexed,—was it, could it be
sibyl after all? sibyl was beautiful,—this dead thing had a
devilish smile on its blue, parted lips, and frenzied horror in
its eyes! suddenly something tense in my brain seemed to
snap and give way,—dropping the chill fingers i held, i cried
aloud—
“mavis! mavis clare!”
in a moment she was with me,—in a glance she comprehended
all. falling on her knees by the dead woman she
broke into a passion of weeping.
“oh, poor girl!” she cried—“oh, poor, unhappy, misguided
girl!”
i stared at her gloomily. it seemed to me very strange
that she should weep for sorrows not her own. there was a
fire in my brain,—a confused trouble in my thoughts,—i
looked at my dead wife with her fixed gaze and evil smile,
sitting rigidly upright, and robed in the mocking sheen of her
rose-silk peignoir, showered with old lace, after the costliest
of paris fashions,—then at the living, tender-souled, earnest
creature, famed for her genius throughout the world, who
knelt on the ground, sobbing over the stiffening hand on
which so many rare gems glistened derisively,—and an
impulse rose in me stronger than myself, moving me to wild
and clamorous speech.
“get up, mavis!” i cried—“do not kneel there! go,—go
out of this room,—out of my sight! you do not know
what she was—this woman whom i married,—i deemed her
an angel, but she was a fiend,—yes, mavis, a fiend! look
at her, staring at her own image in the glass,—you cannot
call her beautiful—now! she smiles, you see,—just as she
smiled last night when, ... ah, you know nothing of
last night! i tell you, go!” and i stamped my foot almost
[p ]
 furiously,—“this air is contaminated,—it will poison you!
the perfume of paris and the effluvia of death intermingled
are sufficient to breed a pestilence! go quickly,—inform
the household their mistress is dead,—have the blinds
drawn down,—show all the exterior signs of decent and
fashionable woe!”—and i began laughing deliriously—“tell
the servants they may count upon expensive mourning,—for
all that money can do shall be done in homage to king
death! let everyone in the place eat and drink as much
as they can or will,—and sleep, or chatter as such menials
love to do, of hearses, graves and sudden disasters;—but
let me be left alone,—alone with her;—we have much to say
to one another!”
white and trembling, mavis rose up and stood gazing at
me in fear and pity.
“alone? ...” she faltered—“you are not fit to be alone!”
“no, i am not fit to be, but i must be,”—i rejoined
quickly and harshly—“this woman and i loved—after the
manner of brutes, and were wedded or rather mated in a
similar manner, though an archbishop blessed the pairing,
and called upon heaven to witness its sanctity! yet we
parted ill friends,—and dead though she is, i choose to
pass the night with her,—i shall learn much knowledge
from her silence! to-morrow the grave and the servants of
the grave may claim her, but to-night she is mine!”
the girl’s sweet eyes brimmed over with tears.
“oh you are too distracted to know what you are saying,”
she murmured—“you do not even try to discover how she
died!”
“that is easy enough to guess,”—i answered quickly, and
i took up a small dark-coloured bottle labelled ‘poison’ which
i had already perceived on the toilet-table—“this is uncorked
and empty. what it contained i do not know,—but
there must be an inquest of course,—people must be allowed
to make money for themselves out of her ladyship’s rash
act! and see there,—” here i pointed to some loose sheets
of note-paper covered with writing, and partially concealed
[p ]
 by a filmy lace handkerchief which had evidently been hastily
thrown across them, and a pen and inkstand close by—“there
is some admirable reading prepared for me doubtless!—the
last message from the beloved dead is sacred, mavis
clare; surely you, a writer of tender romances, can realize
this!—and realizing it, you will do as i ask you,—leave
me!”
she looked at me in deep compassion, and slowly turned
to go.
“god help you!” she said sobbingly—“god console
you!”
at this, some demon in me broke loose, and springing to
her side i caught her hands in mine.
“do not dare to talk of god!” i said in passionate accents;
“not in this room,—not in that presence! why should
you call curses down upon me? the help of god means
punishment,—the consolations of god are terrible! for
strength must acknowledge itself weak before he will help
it,—and a heart must be broken before he will console it!
but what do i say!—i believe in no god—! i believe in
an unknown force that encompasses me and hunts me down
to the grave, but nothing more. she thought as i do,—and
with reason,—for what has god done for her? she was
made evil from the first,—a born snare of satan....”
something caught my breath here,—i stopped, unable to
utter another word. mavis stared at me affrighted, and i
stared back again.
“what is it?” she whispered alarmedly. i struggled to
speak,—finally, with difficulty i answered her—
“nothing!”
and i motioned her away with a gesture of entreaty. the
expression of my face must have startled or intimidated her i
fancy, for she retreated hastily and i watched her disappearing
as if she were the phantom of a dream,—then, as she
passed out through the boudoir, i drew close the velvet portiére
behind her and locked the intermediate door. this done i
went slowly back to the side of my dead wife.
[p ]“now sibyl,”—i said aloud—“we are alone, you and i—alone
with our own reflected images,—you dead, and i
living! you have no terrors for me in your present condition,—your
beauty has gone. your smile, your eyes, your
touch cannot stir me to a throb of the passion you craved,
yet wearied of! what have you to say to me?—i have heard
that the dead can speak at times,—and you owe me reparation,—reparation
for the wrong you did me,—the lie on which
you based our marriage,—the guilt you cherished in your
heart! shall i read your petition for forgiveness here?”
and i gathered up the written sheets of note-paper in one
hand, feeling them rather than seeing them, for my eyes were
fixed on the pallid corpse in its rose-silk ‘negligée’ and jewels,
that gazed at itself so pertinaciously in the shining mirror. i
drew a chair close to it, and sat down, observing likewise the
reflection of my own haggard face in the glass beside that
of the self-murdered woman. turning presently, i began to
scrutinize my immovable companion more closely—and perceived
that she was very lightly clothed,—under the silk peignoir
there was only a flowing white garment of soft fine material
lavishly embroidered, through which the statuesque contour
of her rigid limbs could be distinctly seen. stooping, i felt
her heart,—i knew it was pulseless; yet i half imagined i
should feel its beat. as i withdrew my hand, something
scaly and glistening caught my eye, and looking i perceived
lucio’s marriage-gift circling her waist,—the flexible emerald
snake with its diamond crest and ruby eyes. it fascinated
me,——coiled round that dead body it seemed alive and
sentient,—if it had lifted its glittering head and hissed at
me i should scarcely have been surprised. i sat back for a
moment in my chair, almost as rigid as the corpse beside me,—i
stared again, as the corpse stared always, into the mirror
which pictured us both, we ‘twain in one,’ as the sentimentalists
aver of wedded folk, though in truth it often happens
that there are no two creatures in the world more widely
separated than husband and wife. i heard stealthy movements
and suppressed whisperings in the passage outside, and
[p ]
 guessed that some of the servants were there watching and
waiting,—but i cared nothing for that. i was absorbed in
the ghastly night interview i had planned for myself, and i
so entered into the spirit of the thing, that i turned on all the
electric lamps in the room, besides lighting two tall clusters
of shaded candles on either side of the toilet-table. when all
the surroundings were thus rendered as brilliant as possible,
so that the corpse looked more livid and ghastly by comparison,
i seated myself once more, and prepared to read the
last message of the dead.
“now sibyl,”—i muttered, leaning forward a little, and
noting with a morbid interest that the jaws of the corpse had
relaxed a little within the last few minutes, and that the smile
on the face was therefore more hideous—“confess your sins!—for
i am here to listen. such dumb, impressive eloquence
as yours deserves attention!”
a gust of wind fled round the house with a wailing cry,—the
windows shook, and the candles flickered. i waited till
every sound had died away, and then—with a glance at my
dead wife, under the sudden impression that she had heard
what i said, and knew what i was doing, i began to read.
[p ]xxxv
thus ran the ‘last document,’ commencing abruptly and
without prefix;—
“i have made up my mind to die. not out of passion
or petulance,—but from deliberate choice, and as i think,
necessity. my brain is tired of problems,—my body is tired
of life; it is best to make an end. the idea of death,—which
means annihilation,—is very sweet to me. i am glad
to feel that by my own will and act i can silence this uneasy
throbbing of my heart, this turmoil and heat of my blood,—this
tortured aching of my nerves. young as i am, i have
no delight now in existence,—i see nothing but my love’s
luminous eyes, his god-like features, his enthralling smile,—and
these are lost to me. for a brief while he has been my
world, life and time,—he has gone,—and without him there
is no universe. how could i endure the slow, wretched
passing of hours, days, weeks, months and years alone?—though
it is better to be alone than in the dull companionship
of the self-satisfied, complacent and arrogant fool who
is my husband. he has left me for ever, so he says in a
letter the maid brought to me an hour ago. it is quite
what i expected of him,—what man of his type could find
pardon for a blow to his own amour propre! if he had
studied my nature, entered into my emotions, or striven in the
least to guide and sustain me,—if he had shown me any sign
of a great, true love such as one sometimes dreams of and
[p ]
 seldom finds,—i think i should be sorry for him now,—i
should even ask his forgiveness for having married him. but
he has treated me precisely as he might treat a paid mistress,—that
is, he has fed me, clothed me, and provided me with
money and jewels in return for making me the toy of his
passions,—but he has not given me one touch of sympathy,—one
proof of self-denial or humane forbearance. therefore,
i owe him nothing. and now he, and my love who will not
be my lover, have gone away together; i am free to do as i
will with this small pulse within me called life, which is after
all, only a thread, easily broken. there is no one to say me
nay, or to hold my hand back from giving myself the final
quietus. it is well i have no friends; it is good for me that i
have probed the hypocrisy and social sham of the world, and
that i have mastered the following hard truths of life,—that
there is no love without lust,—no friendship without self-interest,—no
religion without avarice,—and no so-called virtue
without its accompanying stronger vice. who, knowing these
things, would care to take part in them! on the verge of
the grave i look back along the short vista of my years, and
i see myself a child in this very place, this wooded willowsmere;
i can note how that life began to which i am about to
put an end. pampered, petted and spoilt, told that i must
‘look pretty’ and take pleasure in my clothes, i was even at
the age of ten, capable of a certain amount of coquetry. old
roués, smelling of wine and tobacco, were eager to take me on
their knees and pinch my soft flesh;—they would press my
innocent lips with their withered ones,—withered and contaminated
by the kisses of cocottes and ‘soiled doves’ of the
town!—i have often wondered how it is these men can dare
to touch a young child’s mouth, knowing in themselves what
beasts they are! i see my nurse,—a trained liar and time-server,
giving herself more airs than a queen, and forbidding
me to speak to this child or that child, because they were
‘beneath’ me;—then came my governess, full of a prurient
prudery, as bad a woman in morals as ever lived, yet ‘highly
recommended’ and with excellent references, and wearing an
[p ]
 assumption of the strictest virtue, like many equally hypocritical
clergymen’s wives i have known. i soon found her out,—for
even as a child i was painfully observant,—and the stories she
and my mother’s french maid used to tell, in lowered voices
now and then broken by coarse laughter, were sufficient to
enlighten me as to her true character. yet, beyond having
a supreme contempt for the woman who practised religious
austerity outwardly, and was at heart a rake, i gave small consideration
to the difficult problem such a nature suggested.
i lived,—how strange it seems that i should be writing now
of myself, as past and done with!—yes, i lived in a dreamy,
more or less idyllic state of mind, thinking without being conscious
of thought, full of fancies concerning the flowers, trees
and birds,—wishing for things of which i knew nothing,—imagining
myself a queen at times, and again, a peasant. i
was an omnivorous reader,—and i was specially fond of
poetry. i used to pore over the mystic verse of shelley, and
judged him then as a sort of demi-god;—and never, even
when i knew all about his life, could i realize him as a man
with a thin, shrieking falsetto voice and ‘loose’ notions concerning
women. but i am quite sure it was good for his
fame that he was drowned in early youth with so many
melancholy and dramatic surroundings,—it saved him, i
consider, from a possibly vicious and repulsive old age. i
adored keats till i knew he had wasted his passion on a
fanny brawn,—and then the glamour of him vanished. i
can offer no reason for this,—i merely set down the fact. i
made a hero of lord byron,—in fact he has always formed
for me the only heroical type of poet. strong in himself and
pitiless in his love for women, he treated them for the most
part as they merited, considering the singular and unworthy
specimens of the sex it was his misfortune to encounter. i
used to wonder, when reading these men’s amorous lines,
whether love would ever come my way, and what beatific state
of emotion i should then enjoy. then came the rough
awakening from all my dreams,—childhood melted into
womanhood,—and at sixteen i was taken up to town with
[p ]
 my parents to “know something of the ways and manners of
society,” before finally ‘coming out.’ oh, those ways and
manners! i learnt them to perfection! astonished at first,
then bewildered, and allowed no time to form any judgment
on what i saw, i was hurried through a general vague ‘impression’
of things such as i had never imagined or dreamed
of. while i was yet lost in wonderment, and kept constantly
in companionship with young girls of my own rank and age,
who nevertheless seemed much more advanced in knowledge
of the world than i, my father suddenly informed me that
willowsmere was lost to us,—that he could not afford to keep
it up,—and that we should return there no more. ah, what
tears i shed!—what a fury of grief consumed me!—i did not
then comprehend the difficult entanglements of either wealth or
poverty;—all i could realize was that the doors of my dear
old home were closed upon me for ever. after that, i think
i grew cold and hard in disposition; i had never loved my
mother very dearly,—in fact i had seen very little of her, as
she was always away visiting, if not entertaining visitors, and
she seldom had me with her,—so that when she was suddenly
struck down by a first shock of paralysis, it affected me but
little. she had her doctors and nurses,—i had my governess
still with me; and my mother’s sister, aunt charlotte, came to
keep house for us,—so i began to analyse society for myself,
without giving any expression of my opinions on what i observed.
i was not yet ‘out,’ but i went everywhere where
girls of my age were invited, and perceived things without
showing that i had any faculty of perception. i cultivated a
passionless and cold exterior,—a listless, uninterested and
frigid demeanor,—for i discovered that this was accepted by
many people as dullness or stupidity, and that by assuming
such a character, certain otherwise crafty persons would talk
more readily before me, and betray themselves and their vices
unawares. thus my ‘social education’ began in grim earnest;—women
of title and renown would ask me to their ‘quiet
teas,’ because i was what they were pleased to call a ‘harmless
girl—’ ‘rather pretty, but dull,’—and allow me to assist
[p ]
 them in entertaining the lovers who called upon them while
their husbands were out. i remember that on one occasion,
a great lady famous for two things, her diamonds and her
intimacy with the queen, kissed her ‘cavaliere servente,’ a
noted sporting earl, with considerable abandon in my presence.
he muttered something about me,—i heard it;—but his
amorous mistress merely answered in a whisper—“oh, it’s
only sibyl elton,—she understands nothing.” afterwards
however, when he had gone, she turned to me with a grin
and remarked—“you saw me kiss bertie, didn’t you? i
often do; he’s quite like my brother!” i made no reply,—i
only smiled vaguely; and the next day she sent me a
valuable diamond ring, which i at once returned to her with
a prim little note, stating that i was much obliged, but that
my father considered me too young as yet to wear diamonds.
why do i think of these trifles now i wonder!—now when i
am about to take my leave of life and all its lies! ... there
is a little bird singing outside my bedroom window,—such a
pretty creature! i suppose it is happy?—it should be, as it is
not human... the tears are in my eyes as i listen to its
sweet warbling, and think that it will be living and singing
still to-day at sunset when i am dead!
that last sentence was mere sentiment, for i am not sorry
to die. if i felt the least regret about it i should not carry
out my intention. i must resume my narrative,—for it is an
analysis i am trying to make of myself, to find out if i can
whether there are no excuses to be found for my particular
disposition,—whether it is not after all, the education and
training i have had that have made me what i am, or whether
indeed i was born evil from the first. the circumstances
that surrounded me, did not, at any rate, tend to soften or
improve my character. i had just passed my seventeenth
birthday, when one morning my father called me into his
library and told me the true position of his affairs. i learned
that he was crippled on all sides with debt,—that he lived on
advances made to him by jew usurers,—and that these
[p ]
 advances were trusted to him solely on the speculation that i,
his only daughter, would make a sufficiently rich marriage to
enable him to repay all loans with heavy interest. he went on
to say that he hoped i would act sensibly,—and that when
any men showed indications of becoming suitors for my hand,
i would, before encouraging them, inform him, in order that
he might make strict enquiries as to their actual extent of fortune.
i then understood, for the first time, that i was for
sale. i listened in silence till he had finished,—then i asked
him—‘love, i suppose, is not to be considered in the matter?’
he laughed, and assured me it was much easier to love a rich
man than a poor one, as i would find out after a little experience.
he added, with some hesitation, that to help make
both ends meet, as the expenses of town life were considerable,
he had arranged to take a young american lady under
his charge, a miss diana chesney, who wished to be introduced
into english society, and who would pay two thousand
guineas a year to him for that privilege, and for aunt charlotte’s
services as chaperône. i do not remember now what
i said to him when i heard this,—i know that my long
suppressed feelings broke out in a storm of fury, and that for
the moment he was completely taken aback by the force of my
indignation. an american boarder in our house!—it seemed
to me as outrageous and undignified as the conduct of a person
i once heard of, who, favoured by the queen’s patronage
with ‘free’ apartments in kensington palace, took from time
to time on the sly, an american or colonial ‘paying-guest,’
who adopted forthwith the address of her majesty’s birthplace
as her own, thus lowering the whole prestige of that historic
habitation. my wrath however was useless;—the bargain
was arranged,—my father, regardless of his proud lineage and
the social dignity of his position, had degraded himself, in my
opinion, to the level of a sort of superior lodging-house
keeper,—and from that time i lost all my former respect for
him. of course it can be argued that i was wrong,—that i
ought to have honoured him for turning his name to monetary
account by loaning it out as a protective shield and panoply
[p ]
 for an american woman without anything but the dollars of a
vulgar ‘railway-king’ to back her up in society,—but i could
not see it in that light. i retreated into myself more than
ever,—and became more than pleasantly known for my coldness,
reserve and hauteur. miss chesney came, and strove
hard to be my friend,—but she soon found that impossible.
she is a good-hearted creature i believe,—but she is badly
bred and badly trained as all her compatriots are, more or less,
despite their smattering of an european education; i disliked
her from the first, and have spared no pains to show it.
yet i know she will be countess of elton as soon as it is
decently possible,—say, after the year’s ceremonious mourning
for my mother has expired, and perhaps three months’ hypocritical
wearing of black for me,—my father believes himself
to be still young and passably good-looking, and he is quite
incapable of resisting the fortune she will bring him. when
she took up her fixed abode in our house and aunt charlotte
became her paid chaperône, i seldom went out to any social
gatherings, for i could not endure the idea of being seen in
her companionship. i kept to my own room a great deal,
and thus secluded, read many books. all the fashionable
fiction of the day passed through my hands, much to my
gradual enlightenment, if not to my edification. one day,—a
day that is stamped on my memory as a kind of turning-point
in my life,—i read a novel by a woman which i did not
at first entirely understand,—but on going over some of its
passages a second time, all at once its horrible lasciviousness
flashed upon me, and filled me with such genuine disgust that
i flung it on the ground in a fit of loathing and contempt.
yet i had seen it praised in all the leading journals of the day;
its obscenities were hinted at as ‘daring,’—its vulgarities were
quoted as ‘brilliant wit,’—in fact so many laudatory columns
were written about it in the press that i resolved to read it
again. encouraged by the ‘literary censors’ of the time, i
did so, and little by little the insidious abomination of it
filtered into my mind and stayed there. i began to think
about it,—and by-and-by found pleasure in thinking about it.
[p ]
 i sent for other books by the same tainted hand, and my
appetite for that kind of prurient romance grew keener. at
this particular juncture as chance or fate would have it, an
acquaintance of mine, the daughter of a marchioness, a girl
with large black eyes, and those full protruding lips which
remind one unconsciously of a swine’s snout, brought me two
or three odd volumes of the poems of swinburne. always
devoted to poetry, and considering it to be the highest of
the arts, and up to that period having been ignorant of this
writer’s work, i turned over the books with eagerness, expecting
to enjoy the usual sublime emotions which it is the privilege
and glory of the poet to inspire in mortals less divinely
endowed than himself, and who turn to him
“for help to climb
beyond the highest peaks of time.”
now i should like, if i could do so, to explain clearly the
effect of this satyr-songster upon my mind,—for i believe
there are many women to whom his works have been deadlier
than the deadliest poison, and far more soul-corrupting than
any book of zola’s or the most pernicious of modern french
writers. at first i read the poems quickly, with a certain
pleasure in the musical swing and jangle of rhythm, and
without paying much attention to the subject-matter of the
verse,—but presently, as though a lurid blaze of lightning
had stripped a fair tree of its adorning leaves, my senses
suddenly perceived the cruelty and sensuality concealed
under the ornate language and persuasive rhymes,—and for a
moment i paused in my reading, and closed my eyes, shuddering
and sick at heart. was human nature as base and
abandoned as this man declared it to be? was there no
god but lust? were men and women lower and more
depraved in their passions and appetites than the very beasts?
i mused and dreamed,—i pored over the ‘laus veneris’—‘faustine’
and ‘anactoria,’ till i felt myself being dragged
down to the level of the mind that conceived such outrages
to decency,—i drank in the poet’s own fiendish
[p ]
 contempt of god, and i read over and over again his verses
‘before a crucifix’ till i knew them by heart;—till they rang
in my brain as persistently as any nursery jingle, and drove
my thoughts into as haughty a scorn of christ and his teachings,
as any unbelieving jew. it is nothing to me now,—now,
when without hope, or faith or love, i am about to take
the final plunge into eternal darkness and silence,—but for
the sake of those who have the comfort of a religion i ask,
why, in a so-called christian country, is such a hideous blasphemy
as ‘before a crucifix’ allowed to circulate among the
people without so much as one reproof from those who elect
themselves judges of literature? i have seen many noble
writers condemned unheard,—many have been accused of
blasphemy, whose works tend quite the other way,—but these
lines are permitted to work their cruel mischief unchecked,
and the writer of them is glorified as though he were a benefactor
to mankind. i quote them here, from bitter memory,
that i may not be deemed as exaggerating their nature—
“so when our souls look back to thee,
they sicken, seeing against thy side,
too foul to speak of or to see,
the leprous likeness of a bride,
whose kissing lips through his lips grown
leave their god rotten to the bone.
when we would see thee man, and know
what heart thou had’st towards man indeed,
lo, thy blood-blackened altars; lo,
the lips of priests that pray and feed,
while their own hell’s worm curls and licks
the poison of the crucifix.
thou bad’st the children come to thee,—
what children now but curses come,
what manhood in that god can be
who sees their worship and is dumb?—
no soul that lived, loved, wrought, and died
is this, their carrion crucified!
[p ]
 nay, if their god and thou be one
if thou and this thing be the same,
thou should’st not look upon the sun,
the sun grows haggard at thy name!
come down, be done with, cease, give o’er,
hide thyself, strive not, be no more!”
from the time of reading this, i used to think of christ as
‘carrion crucified’;—if i ever thought at all. i found out
that no one had ever reproached swinburne for this term,—that
it did not interfere with his chances for the laureateship,—and
that not even a priest of the church had been bold-spoken
or zealous enough in his master’s cause to publicly
resent the shameless outrage. so i concluded that swinburne
must, after all, be right in his opinions, and i followed the lazy
and unthinking course of social movement, spending my days
with such literature as stored my brain with a complete knowledge
of things evil and pernicious. whatever soul i had in
me was killed; the freshness of my mind was gone,—swinburne,
among others, had helped me to live mentally, if not
physically, through such a phase of vice as had poisoned my
thoughts for ever. i understand there is some vague law in
existence about placing an interdiction on certain books considered
injurious to public morals,—if there is such a rule, it
has been curiously lax concerning the author of ‘anactoria’—who,
by virtue of being a poet, passes unquestioned into many
a home, carrying impure suggestion into minds that were once
cleanly and simple. as for me, after i had studied his verse to
my heart’s content, nothing remained sacred,—i judged men as
beasts and women as little better,—i had no belief in honour,
virtue or truth,—and i was absolutely indifferent to all things
save one, and that was my resolve to have my own way as far
as love was concerned. i might be forced to marry without
love for purely money-considerations,—but all the same, love i
would have, or what i called love;—not an ‘ideal’ passion by
any means, but precisely what mr swinburne and a few of the
most-praised novelists of the day had taught me to consider
as love. i began to wonder when and how i should meet my
[p ]
 lover,—such thoughts as i had at this time indeed would have
made moralists stare and uplift their hands in horror,—but to
the exterior world i was the very pink and pattern of maidenly
decorum, reserve and pride. men desired, but feared me;
for i never gave them any encouragement, seeing as yet none
among them whom i deemed worthy of such love as i could
give. the majority resembled carefully trained baboons,—respectably
clothed and artistically shaven,—but nevertheless
all with the spasmodic grin, the leering eye and the uncouth
gestures of the hairy woodland monster. when i was just
eighteen i ‘came out’ in earnest—that is, i was presented at
court with all the foolish and farcical pomp practised on such
occasions. i was told before going that it was a great and
necessary thing to be ‘presented,’—that it was a guarantee of
position, and above all of reputation,—the queen received none
whose conduct was not rigidly correct and virtuous. what
humbug it all was!—i laughed then, and i can smile now to
think of it,—why, the very woman who presented me had two
illegitimate sons, unknown to her lawful husband, and she
was not the only playful sinner in the court comedy! some
women were there that day whom since even i would not
receive—so openly infamous are their lives and characters,
yet they make their demure curtseys before the throne at
stated times, and assume to be the very patterns of virtue and
austerity. now and then, it chances in the case of an exceedingly
beautiful woman, of whom all the others are jealous, that
for her little slips she is selected as an ‘example’ and excluded
from court, while her plainer sisters, though sinning seventy
times seven against all the laws of decency and morality,
are still received,—but otherwise, there is very little real care
exercised as to the character and prestige of the women whom
the queen receives. if any one of them is refused, it is
certain she adds to her social enormities, the greater crime of
being beautiful, otherwise there would be no one to whisper
away her reputation! i was what is called a ‘success’ on
my presentation day. that is, i was stared at, and openly
flattered by certain members of my sex who were too old and
[p ]
 ugly to be jealous, and treated with insolent contempt by
those who were young enough to be my rivals. there was
a great crush to get into the throne-room; and some of
the ladies used rather strong language. one duchess, just in
front of me, said to her companion—‘do as i do,—kick
out! bruise their shins for them—as hard as you can,—we
shall get on faster then!’ this choice remark was accompanied
by the grin of a fishwife and the stare of a drab.
yet it was a ‘great’ lady who spoke,—not a transatlantic
importation, but a woman of distinguished lineage and connection.
her observation however was only one out of many
similar speeches which i heard on all sides of me during the
‘distinguished’ mélée,—a thoroughly ill-mannered ‘crush,’
which struck me as supremely vulgar and totally unfitting
the dignity of our sovereign’s court. when i curtsied before
the throne at last, and saw the majesty of the empire represented
by a kindly faced old lady, looking very tired and
bored, whose hand was as cold as ice when i kissed it, i was
conscious of an intense feeling of pity for her in her high
estate. who would be a monarch, to be doomed to the
perpetual receiving of a company of fools! i got through
my duties quickly, and returned home more or less wearied
out and disgusted with the whole ceremony,—and next day i
found that my ‘debût’ had given me the position of a ‘leading
beauty’; or in other words that i was now formally put up
for sale. that is really what is meant by being ‘presented’
and ‘coming out,’—these are the fancy terms of one’s parental
auctioneer. my life was now passed in dressing, having my
photograph taken, giving ‘sittings’ to aspiring fashionable
painters, and being ‘inspected’ by men with a view to matrimony.
it was distinctly understood in society that i was not
to be sold under a certain figure per annum,—and the price
was too high for most would-be purchasers. how sick i grew
of my constant exhibition in the marriage-market! what contempt
and hatred was fostered in me for the mean and pitiable
hypocrisies of my set! i was not long in discovering that
money was the chief-motive power of all social success,—that
[p ]
 the proudest and highest personages in the world could be
easily gathered together under the roof of any vulgar plebeian
who happened to have enough cash to feed and entertain
them. as an example of this, i remember a woman, ugly,
passée and squint-eyed, who during her father’s life was only
allowed about half-a-crown a week as pocket-money up to her
fortieth year,—and who, when that father died, leaving her in
possession of half his fortune, (the other half going to illegitimate
children of whom she had never heard, he having always
posed as a pattern of immaculate virtue) suddenly blossomed
out as a ‘leader’ of fashion, and succeeded, through cautious
scheming and ungrudging toadyism, in assembling some of
the highest people in the land under her roof. ugly and
passée though she was, and verging towards fifty, with neither
grace, wit, nor intelligence, through the power of her cash
alone she invited royal dukes and ‘titles’ generally to her
dinners and dances,—and it is to their shame that they
actually accepted her invitations. such voluntary degradations
on the part of really well-connected people i have never
been able to understand,—it is not as if they were actually in
want of food or amusement, for they have a surfeit of both
every season,—and it seems to me that they ought to show a
better example than to flock in crowds to the entertainments
of a mere uninteresting and ugly nobody just because she
happens to have money. i never entered her house myself
though she had the audacity to invite me,—i learned moreover,
that she had promised a friend of mine a hundred
guineas if she could persuade me to make one appearance
in her rooms. for my renown as a ‘beauty’ combined with
my pride and exclusiveness, would have given her parties a
prestige greater than even royalty could bestow,—she knew
that and i knew that,—and knowing it, never condescended
to so much as notice her by a bow. but though i took a
certain satisfaction in thus revenging myself on the atrocious
vulgarity of parvenus and social interlopers, i grew intensely
weary of the monotony and emptiness of what fashionable
folks call ‘amusement,’ and presently falling ill of a nervous
[p ]
 fever, i was sent down to the seaside for a few weeks’ change
of air with a young cousin of mine, a girl i rather liked
because she was so different to myself. her name was eva
maitland—she was but sixteen and extremely delicate—poor
little soul! she died two months before my marriage.
she and i, and a maid to attend us, went down to cromer,—and
one day, sitting on the cliffs together, she asked me
timidly if i knew an author named mavis clare? i told her
no,—whereupon she handed me a book called ‘the wings of
psyche.’
“do read it!” she said earnestly—“it will make you feel
so happy!”
i laughed. the idea of a modern author writing anything
to make one feel happy, seemed to me quite ludicrous, the
aim of most of them being to awaken a disgust of life, and a
hatred of one’s fellow-creatures. however, to please eva, i
read the ‘wings of psyche,’—and if it did not make me actually
happy, it moved me to a great wonder and deep reverence
for the woman-writer of such a book. i found out all about
her,—that she was young, good-looking, of a noble character
and unblemished reputation, and that her only enemies were the
press-critics. this last point was so much in her favour with
me that i at once bought everything she had ever written, and
her works became, as it were, my haven of rest. her theories
of life are strange, poetic, ideal and beautiful;—though i have
not been able to accept them or work them out in my own
case, i have always felt soothed and comforted for a while in
the very act of wishing they were true. and the woman is
like her books,—strange, poetic, ideal and beautiful,—how
odd it is to think that she is within ten minutes walk of me
now!—i could send for her if i liked, and tell her all,—but
she would prevent me carrying out my resolve. she would
cling to me woman-like and kiss me, and hold my hands and
say ‘no, sibyl, no! you are not yourself,—you must come
to me and rest!’ an odd fancy has seized me, ... i will
open my window and call her very gently,—she might be in
the garden coming here to see me,—and if she hears and
[p ]
 answers, who knows!—why, perhaps my ideas may change,
and fate itself may take a different course!
well, i have called her. i have sent her name ‘mavis!’
softly out on the sunshine and still air three times, and only a
little brown namesake of hers, a thrush, swinging on a branch
of fir, answered me with his low autumnal piping. mavis!
she will not come,—to-day god will not make her his
messenger. she cannot guess—she does not know this
tragedy of my heart, greater and more poignant than all
the tragedies of fiction. if she did know me as i am, i
wonder what she would think of me!
let me go back to the time when love came to me,—love,
ardent, passionate, and eternal! ah, what wild joy thrilled
through me! what mad ecstasy fired my blood!—what delirious
dreams possessed my brain!—i saw lucio,—and it
seemed as if the splendid eyes of some great angel had flashed
a glory in my soul! with him came his friend, the foil to
his beauty,—the arrogant, self-satisfied fool of a millionaire,
geoffrey tempest,—he who bought me, and who by virtue
of his purchase, is entitled by law to call himself my
husband ...”
here i paused in my reading and looked up. the dead
woman’s eyes appeared now to regard me as steadily as herself
in the opposite mirror,—the head was a little more
dropped forward on the breast, and the whole face very
nearly resembled that of the late countess of elton when
the last shock of paralysis had rendered her hideous disfigurement
complete.
“to think i loved that!” i said aloud, pointing at the
corpse’s ghastly reflection—“fool that i was indeed!—as
great a fool as all men are who barter their lives for the
possession of a woman’s mere body! why if there were any
life after death,—if such a creature had a soul that at all resembled
this poisoned clay, the very devils might turn away
aghast from such a loathly comrade!”
[p ]the candles flickered and the dead face seemed to
smile,—a clock chimed in the adjoining room, but i did
not count the hour,—i merely arranged the manuscript
pages i held more methodically, and read on with renewed
attention.
[p ]xxxvi
“from the moment i saw lucio rimânez”—went on
sibyl’s ‘dying speech’—“i abandoned myself to
love and the desire of love. i had heard of him before from
my father who had (as i learned to my shame) been indebted
to him for monetary assistance. on the very night we met,
my father told me quite plainly that now was my chance to
get ‘settled’ in life. ‘marry rimânez or tempest, whichever
you can most easily catch,’ he said—‘the prince is
fabulously wealthy—but he keeps up a mystery about himself
and no one knows where he actually comes from,—besides
which he dislikes women;—now tempest has five
millions and seems an easy-going fool,—i should say you had
better go for tempest.’ i made no answer and gave no
promise either way. i soon found out however that lucio
did not intend to marry,—and i concluded that he preferred
to be the lover of many women, instead of the husband of
one. i did not love him any the less for this,—i only
resolved that i would at least be one of those who were
happy enough to share his passion. i married the man
tempest, feeling that like many women i knew, i should
when safely wedded, have greater liberty of action,—i was
aware that most modern men prefer an amour with a married
woman to any other kind of liaison,—and i thought lucio
would have readily yielded to the plan i had pre-conceived.
but i was mistaken,—and out of this mistake comes all my
perplexity, pain and bewilderment i cannot understand
[p ]
 why my love,—beloved beyond all word or thought,—should
scorn me and repulse me with such bitter loathing! it is
such a common thing now-a-days for a married woman to
have her own lover, apart from her husband de convenance!
the writers of books advise it,—i have seen the custom not
only excused but advocated over and over again in long and
scientific articles that are openly published in leading magazines.
why then should i be blamed or my desires considered
criminal? as long as no public scandal is made, what harm
is done? i cannot see it,—it is not as if there were a god to
care,—the scientists say there is no god!
i was very startled just now. i thought i heard lucio’s
voice calling me. i have walked through the rooms looking
everywhere, and i opened my door to listen, but there is no
one. i am alone. i have told the servant not to disturb me
till i ring; ... i shall never ring! now i come to think
of it, it is singular that i have never known who lucio really
is. a prince, he says—and that i can well believe,—though
truly princes now-a-days are so plebeian and common in look
and bearing that he seems too great to belong to so shabby
a fraternity. from what kingdom does he come?—to what
nation does he belong? these are questions which he never
answers save equivocally.
i pause here, and look at myself in the
mirror. how beautiful i am! i note with admiration the
deep and dewy lustre of my eyes and their dark silky fringes,—i
see the delicate colouring of my cheeks and lips,—the
dear rounded chin with its pretty dimple,—the pure lines of
my slim throat and snowy neck,—the glistening wealth of my
long hair. all this was given to me for the attraction and
luring of men, but my love, whom i love with all this living,
breathing, exquisite being of mine, can see no beauty in me, and
rejects me with such scorn as pierces my very soul. i have knelt
to him,—i have prayed to him,—i have worshipped him,—in
vain! hence it comes that i must die. only one thing he said
[p ]
 that had the sound of hope, though the utterance was fierce,
and his looks were cruel,—‘patience!’ he whispered—‘we
shall meet ere long!’ what did he mean?—what possible
meeting can there be now, when death must close the gate of
life, and even love would come too late!
i have unlocked my jewel-case and taken from it the deadly
thing secreted there,—a poison that was entrusted to me by
one of the physicians who lately attended my mother. ‘keep
this under lock and key,’ he said, ‘and be sure that it is used
only for external purposes. there is sufficient in this flask to
kill ten men, if swallowed by mistake.’ i look at it wonderingly.
it is colourless,—and there is not enough to fill a
teaspoon, ... yet ... it will bring down upon me an
eternal darkness, and close up for ever the marvellous scenes
of the universe! so little!—to do so much! i have fastened
lucio’s wedding-gift round my waist,—the beautiful snake of
jewels that clings to me as though it were charged with an
embrace from him,—ah! would i could cheat myself into so
pleasing a fancy! ... i am trembling, but not with cold
or fear,—it is simply an excitation of the nerves,——an instinctive
recoil of flesh and blood at the near prospect of
death.... how brilliantly the sun shines through my
window!—its callous golden stare has watched so many
tortured creatures die without so much as a cloud to dim its
radiance by way of the suggestion of pity! if there were a
god i fancy he would be like the sun,—glorious, changeless,
unapproachable, beautiful, but pitiless!
out of all the various types of human beings i think i
hate the class called poets most. i used to love them and
believe in them; but i know them now to be mere weavers
of lies,—builders of cloud castles in which no throbbing life
can breathe, no weary heart find rest. love is their chief
motive,—they either idealize or degrade it,—and of the love
we women long for most, they have no conception. they
can only sing of brute passion or ethical impossibilities,—of
[p ]
 the mutual great sympathy, the ungrudging patient tenderness
that should make love lovely, they have no sweet things to
say. between their strained æstheticism and unbridled sensualism,
my spirit has been stretched on the rack and broken
on the wheel, ... i should think many a wretched woman
wrecked among love’s disillusions must curse them as
i do!
i am ready now, i think. there is nothing more to say. i
offer no excuses for myself. i am as i was made,—a proud
and rebellious woman, self-willed and sensual, seeing no fault
in free love, and no crime in conjugal infidelity,—and if i am
vicious, i can honestly declare that my vices have been encouraged
and fostered in me by most of the literary teachers
of my time. i married, as most women of my set marry,
merely for money,—i loved, as most women of my set love,
for mere bodily attraction,—i die, as most women of my set
will die, either naturally or self-slain, in utter atheism, rejoicing
that there is no god and no hereafter!
i had the poison
in my hand a moment ago, ready to take, when i suddenly felt
someone approaching me stealthily from behind, and glancing
up quickly at the mirror i saw ... my mother! her face,
hideous and ghastly as it had been in her last illness, was reflected
in the glass, peering over my shoulder! i sprang up
and confronted her,——she was gone! and now i am shivering
with cold, and i feel a chill dampness on my forehead,—mechanically
i have soaked a handkerchief with perfume from
one of the silver bottles on the dressing table, and have passed
it across my temples to help me recover from this sick swooning
sensation. to recover!—how foolish of me, seeing i am
about to die. i do not believe in ghosts,—yet i could have
sworn my mother was actually present just now,—of course it
was an optical delusion of my own feverish brain. the strong
scent on my handkerchief reminds me of paris—i can see the
shop where i bought this particular perfume, and the well-dressed
[p ]
 doll of a man who served me, with his little waxed
moustache, and his indefinable french manner of conveying a
speechless personal compliment while making out a bill....
laughing at this recollection, i see my face radiate in the
glass,—my eyes flash into vivid lustre, and the dimples near
my lips come and go, giving my expression an enchanting
sweetness. yet in a few hours this loveliness will be destroyed,—and
in a few days, the worms will twine where the smile is
now!
an idea has come upon me that perhaps
i ought to say a prayer. it would be hypocritical,—but
conventional. to die fashionably, one ought to concede a
few words to the church. and yet ... to kneel down with
clasped hands and tell an inactive, unsympathetic, selfish, paid
community called the church, that i am going to kill myself
for the sake of love and love’s despair, and that therefore i
humbly implore its forgiveness for the act seems absurd,—as
absurd as to tell the same thing to a non-existent deity. i
suppose the scientists do not think what a strange predicament
their advanced theories put the human mind in at the hour of
death. they forget that on the brink of the grave, thoughts
come that will not be gainsaid, and that cannot be appeased
by a learned thesis.... however i will not pray,—it would
seem to myself cowardly that i who have never said my prayers
since i was a child, should run over them now in a foolish
babbling attempt to satisfy the powers invisible,—i could not,
out of sheer association, appeal to mr swinburne’s ‘crucified
carrion’! besides i do not believe in the powers invisible at
all,—i feel that once outside this life, ‘the rest’ as hamlet
said ‘is silence.’
i have been staring dreamily and in a sort of stupefaction at
the little poison-flask in my hand. it is quite empty now. i
have swallowed every drop of the liquid it contained,—i took
it quickly and determinately as one takes nauseous medicine,
without allowing myself another moment of time for thought
[p ]
 or hesitation. it tasted acrid and burning on my tongue,—but
at present i am not conscious of any strange or painful
result. i shall watch my face in the mirror and trace the
oncoming of death,—this will be at any rate a new sensation
not without interest!
my mother is here,—here with me in this room! she is
moving about restlessly, making wild gestures with her hands
and trying to speak. she looks as she did when she was
dying,—only more alive, more sentient. i have followed her
up and down, but am unable to touch her,—she eludes my
grasp. i have called her ‘mother! mother!’ but no sound
issues from her white lips. her face is so appalling that i
was seized with a convulsion of terror a moment ago and fell
on my knees before her imploring her to leave me,—and then
she paused in her gliding to and fro and—smiled! what a
hideous smile it was! i think i lost consciousness, ... for
i found myself lying on the ground. a sharp and terrible
pain running through me made me spring to my feet, ...
and i bit my lips till they bled, lest i should scream aloud
with the agony i suffered and so alarm the house. when the
paroxysm passed i saw my mother standing quite near to me,
dumbly watching me with a strange expression of wonder and
remorse. i tottered past her and back to this chair where i
now sit,——i am calmer now, and i am able to realize
that she is only the phantom of my own brain—that i fancy
she is here while knowing she is dead.
torture indescribable has made of me a writhing, moaning,
helpless creature for the past few minutes. truly that drug
was deadly;—the pain is horrible ... horrible! ... it has
left me quivering in every limb and palpitating in every nerve.
looking at my face in the glass i see that it has already
altered. it is drawn and livid,—all the fresh rose-tint of my lips
has gone,—my eyes protrude unnaturally, ... there are dull
blue marks at the corners of my mouth and in the hollows of
my temples, and i observe a curious quick pulsation in the
[p ]
 veins of my throat. be my torment what it will, now there is
no remedy,—and i am resolved to sit here and study my own
features to the end. ‘the reaper whose name is death’ must
surely be near, ready to gather my long hair in his skeleton
hand like a sheaf of ripe corn, ... my poor beautiful
hair!—how i have loved its glistening ripples, and brushed
it, and twined it round my fingers, ... and how soon it will
lie like a dank weed in the mould!
a devouring fire is in my brain and body,—i am burning
with heat and parched with thirst,—i have drunk deep
draughts of cold water, but this has not relieved me. the
sun glares in upon me like an open furnace,—i have tried to
rise and close the blind against it, but find i have no force
to stand upright. the strong radiance blinds me:—the silver
toilet boxes on my table glitter like so many points of swords.
it is by a powerful effort of will that i am able to continue
writing,—my head is swimming round,—and there is a choking
sensation in my throat.
a moment since i thought i
was dying. torn asunder as it were by the most torturing
pangs, i could have screamed for help,—and would have done
so, had voice been left me. but i cannot speak above a
whisper,—i mutter my own name to myself ‘sibyl! sibyl!’
and can scarcely hear it. my mother stands beside me,—apparently
waiting;—a little while ago i thought i heard her
say ‘come, sibyl! come to your chosen lover!’ now i am
conscious of a great silence everywhere,—a numbness has
fallen upon me, and a delicious respite from pain,—but i see
my face in the glass and know it is the face of the dead. it
will soon be all over,—a few more uneasy breathings,—and i
shall be at rest. i am glad,—for the world and i were never
good friends;—i am sure that if we could know, before we
were born, what life really is, we should never take the trouble
to live!
a horrible fear has suddenly
[p ]
 beset me. what if death were not what the scientists deem
it,—suppose it were another form of life? can it be that i
am losing reason and courage together? ... or what is this
terrible misgiving that is taking possession of me? ... i
begin to falter ... a strange sense of horror is creeping over
me ... i have no more physical pain, but something worse
than pain oppresses me ... a feeling that i cannot define.
i am dying ... dying!—i repeat this to myself for comfort,
... in a little while i shall be deaf and blind and unconscious,
... why then is the silence around me now broken
through by sound? i listen,—and i hear distinctly the clamour
of wild voices mingled with a sullen jar and roll as of distant
thunder! ... my mother stands closer to me, ... she is
stretching out her hand to touch mine!
oh god! ... let me write—write—while i can! let me
yet hold fast the thread which fastens me to earth,—give me
time—time before i drift out, lost in yonder blackness and
flame! let me write for others the awful truth, as i see it,—there
is no death! none—none!—i cannot die. i am
passing out of my body,—i am being wrenched away from
it inch by inch in inexplicable mystic torture,—but i am not
dying,—i am being carried forward into a new life, vague and
vast! ... i see a new world full of dark forms, half shaped
yet shapeless!—they float towards me, beckoning me on. i
am actively conscious—i hear, i think, i know! death is a
mere human dream,—a comforting fancy; it has no real
existence,—there is nothing in the universe but life! o
hideous misery!—i cannot die! in my mortal body i can
scarcely breathe,—the pen i try to hold writes of itself rather
than through my shaking hand,—but these pangs are the throes
of birth—not death! ... i hold back,—with all the force of my
soul i strive not to plunge into that black abyss i see before
me—but—my mother drags me with her,—i cannot shake
her off! i hear her voice now;—she speaks distinctly, and
laughs as though she wept; ‘come sibyl! soul of the
[p ]
 child i bore, come and meet your lover! come and see upon
whom you fixed your faith! soul of the woman i trained,
return to that from whence you came!’ still i hold
 back,—nude
and trembling i stare into a dark void—and now there
are wings about me,—wings of fiery scarlet!—they fill the
space,—they enfold me,—they propel me,—they rush past
and whirl around me, stinging me as with flying arrows and
showers of hail!
let me write on,—write on, with this dead fleshly hand, ...
one moment more time, dread god! ... one moment more
to write the truth,—the terrible truth of death whose darkest
secret, life, is unknown to men! i live!—a new, strong,
impetuous vitality possesses me, though my mortal body is
nearly dead. faint gasps and weak shudderings affect it still,—and
i, outside it and no longer of it, propel its perishing
hand to write these final words—i live! to my despair and
horror,—to my remorse and agony, i live!—oh the unspeakable
misery of this new life! and worst of all,—god whom
i doubted, god whom i was taught to deny, this wronged,
blasphemed, and outraged god exists! and i could have
found him had i chosen,—this knowledge is forced upon me
as i am torn from hence,—it is shouted at me by a thousand
wailing voices! ... too late!—too late!—the scarlet wings
beat me downward,—these strange half-shapeless forms close
round and drive me onward ... to a further darkness, ...
amid wind and fire!
serve me, dead hand, once more ere i
depart, ... my tortured spirit must seize and compel you to
write down this thing unnameable, that earthly eyes may read,
and earthly souls take timely warning! ... i know at last
whom i have loved!—whom i have chosen, whom i have
worshipped! ... oh god, have mercy! ... i know who
claims my worship now, and drags me into yonder rolling
world of flame!... his name is”
here the manuscript ended,—incomplete and broken off
[p ]
 abruptly,—and there was a blot on the last sentence as though
the pen had been violently wrenched from the dying fingers
and hastily flung down.
the clock in the west room again chimed the hour. i rose
stiffly from my chair, trembling,—my self-possession was giving
way, and i began to feel at last unnerved. i looked askance
at my dead wife,—she, who with a superhuman dying effort
had declared herself to be yet alive,—who, in some imaginable
strange way had seemingly written after death, in a frantic
desire to make some appalling declaration which nevertheless
remained undeclared. the rigid figure of the corpse had
now real terrors for me,—i dared not touch it,—i scarcely
dared look at it, ... in some dim inscrutable
fashion i felt as if “scarlet wings” environed it, beating me
down, yet pressing me on,—me too, in my turn! with the
manuscript gathered close in my hand, i bent nervously forward
to blow out the wax lights on the toilet table, ... i
saw on the floor the handkerchief odorous with the french
perfume the dead woman had written of,—i picked it up and
placed it near her where she sat, grinning hideously at her
own mirrored ghastliness. the flash of the jewelled serpent
round her waist caught my eyes anew as i did this, and i
stared for a moment at its green glitter, dumbly fascinated,—then,
moving stealthily, with the cold sweat pouring down my
back and every pulse in me rendered feeble by sheer horror,
i turned to leave the room. as i reached the portiére and
lifted it, some instinct made me look back at the dread picture
of the leading “society” beauty sitting stark and livid
pale before her own stark and livid-pale image in the glass,—what
a “fashion-plate” she would make now, i thought, for a
frivolous and hypocritical “ladies’ paper!”
“you say you are not dead, sibyl!” i muttered aloud—“not
dead, but living! then, if you are alive, where are you,
sibyl?——where are you?”
the heavy silence seemed fraught with fearful meaning,—the
light of the electric lamps on the corpse and on the shimmering
silk garment wrapped round it appeared unearthly,—and
[p ]
 the perfume in the room had a grave-like earthy smell.
a panic seized me, and dragging frantically at the portiére
till all its velvet folds were drawn thickly together, i made
haste to shut out from my sight the horrible figure of the
woman whose bodily fairness i had loved in the customary
way of sensual men,—and left her without so much as a pardoning
or pitying kiss of farewell on the cold brow. for,
... after all i had myself to think of, ... and she was
dead!
[p ]xxxvii
i pass over all the details of polite “shock,” affected
sorrow, and feigned sympathy of society at my wife’s
sudden death. no one was really grieved about it,—men raised
their eyebrows, shrugged their shoulders, lit extra cigarettes
and dismissed the subject as too unpleasant and depressing
to dwell upon,—women were glad of the removal of a too
beautiful and too much admired rival, and the majority of
fashionable folk delighted in having something “thrilling” to
talk about in the tragic circumstances of her end. as a rule,
people are seldom or never unselfish enough to be honestly
sorry for the evanishment of some leading or brilliant figure
from their midst,—the vacancy leaves room for the pushing in
of smaller fry. be sure that if you are unhappily celebrated
for either beauty, wit, intellect, or all three together, half
society wishes you dead already, and the other half tries to
make you as wretched as possible while you are alive. to
be missed at all when you die, some one must love you very
deeply and unselfishly; and deep unselfish love is rarer to
find among mortals than a pearl in a dust-bin.
thanks to my abundance of cash, everything concerning
sibyl’s suicide was admirably managed. in consideration of
her social position as an earl’s daughter, two doctors certified
(on my paying them very handsome fees) that hers was a
‘death by misadventure,’—namely, through taking an accidental
overdose of a powerful sleeping draught. it was the
best report to make,—and the most respectable. it gave the
[p ]
 penny press an opportunity of moralizing on the dangers that
lurked in sleeping draughts generally,—and tom, dick, and
harry all wrote letters to their favorite periodicals (signing
their names in full) giving their opinions as to the nature of
sleeping draughts, so that for a week at least the ordinary
dullness of the newspapers was quite enlivened by ungrammatical
gratis ‘copy.’ the conventionalities of law, decency
and order were throughout scrupulously observed and complied
with,—everybody was paid (which was the chief thing),
and everybody was, i believe, satisfied with what they managed
to make out of the death-payment. the funeral gave
joy to the souls of all undertakers,—it was so expensive and
impressive. the florist’s trade gained something of an impetus
by the innumerable orders received for wreaths and
crosses made of the costliest flowers. when the coffin was
carried to the grave, it could not be seen for the load of blossoms
that covered it. and amid all the cards and ‘loving
tokens’ and ‘farewell dearests’ and ‘not-lost-but-gone-befores’—that
ticketed the white masses of lilies, gardenias and roses
which were supposed to symbolize the innocence and sweetness
of the poisoned corpse they were sent to adorn, there was not
one honest regret,—not one unfeigned expression of true sorrow.
lord elton made a sufficiently striking figure of dignified
parental woe, but on the whole i think he was not sorry for
his daughter’s death, since the only opposing obstacle to his
marriage with diana chesney was now removed. i fancy
diana herself was sorry, so far as such a frivolous little
american could be sorry for anything,—perhaps, however it
would be more correct to say that she was frightened. sibyl’s
sudden end startled and troubled her,—but i am not sure that
it grieved her. there is such a difference between unselfish
grief, and the mere sense of nervous personal shock! miss
charlotte fitzroy took the news of her niece’s death with that
admirable fortitude which frequently characterizes religious
spinsters of a certain age. she put by her knitting,—said
‘god’s will be done!’ and sent for her favorite clergyman.
he came, stayed with her some hours drinking strong tea,—and
[p ]
 the next morning at church administered to her communion.
this done, miss fitzroy went on the blameless and
even tenor of her way, wearing the same virtuously distressed
expression as usual, and showed no further sign of feeling. i,
as the afflicted millionaire-husband, was no doubt the most
interesting figure on the scene; i was, i know very well got
up, thanks to my tailor, and to the affectionate care of the
chief undertaker who handed me my black gloves on the day
of the funeral with servile solicitude, but in my heart i felt
myself to be a far better actor than henry irving, and if only
for my admirable mimicry of heart-break, more fully worthy of
the accolade.
 lucio did not attend the obsequies,—he wrote
me a brief note of sympathy from town, and hinted that he
was sure i could understand his reasons for not being present.
i did understand, of course,—and appreciated his respect, as i
thought, for me and my feelings,—yet strange and incongruous
as it may seem, i never longed so much for his company
as i did then! however,—we had a glorious burial of my
fair and false lady,—prancing horses drew coroneted carriages
in a long defile down the pretty warwickshire lanes to the
grey old church, picturesque and peaceful, where the clergyman
and his assistants in newly-washed surplices, met the
flower-laden coffin, and with the usual conventional mumblings,
consigned it to the dust. there were even press-reporters
present, who not only described the scene as it did not
happen, but who also sent fancy sketches, to their respective
journals, of the church as it did not exist. i mention this
simply to show how thoroughly all “proper forms” were carried
out and conceded to. after the ceremony all we “mourners”
went back to willowsmere to luncheon, and i well remember
that lord elton told me a new and risqué joke over a glass of
port before the meal was finished. the undertakers had a
sort of festive banquet in the servants’ hall,—and taking everything
into due consideration, my wife’s death gave a great
deal of pleasure to many people, and put useful money into
several ready pockets. she had left no blank in society that
could not be easily filled up,—she was merely one butterfly
[p ]
 out of thousands, more daintily coloured perhaps and more
restless in flight,—but never judged as more than up to the
butterfly standard. i said no one gave her an honest
regret, but i was wrong. mavis clare was genuinely, almost
passionately grieved. she sent no flowers for the coffin, but
she came to the funeral by herself, and stood a little apart
waiting silently till the grave was covered in,—and then, just
as the “fashionable” train of mourners were leaving the
churchyard, she advanced and placed a white cross of her
own garden-lilies upon the newly-turned brown mould. i
noticed her action, and determined that before i left willowsmere
for the east with lucio (for my journey had only been
postponed a week or two on account of sibyl’s death) she
should know all.
the day came when i carried out this resolve. it was a
rainy and chill afternoon, and i found mavis in her study,
sitting beside a bright log fire with her small terrier in her lap
and her faithful st bernard stretched at her feet. she was
absorbed in a book,—and over her watched the marble pallas
inflexible and austere. as i entered she rose, and putting
down the volume and her pet dog together, she advanced to
meet me with an intense sympathy in her clear eyes, and a
wordless pity in the tremulous lines of her sweet mouth. it
was charming to see how sorry she felt for me,—and it was
odd that i could not feel sorry for myself. after a few words
of embarrassed greeting i sat down and watched her silently,
while she arranged the logs in the fire to make them burn
brighter, and for the moment avoided my gaze.
“i suppose you know,”—i began with harsh abruptness—“that
the sleeping-draught story is a polite fiction? you
know that my wife poisoned herself intentionally?”
mavis looked at me with a troubled and compassionate
expression.
“i feared it was so—” ... she began nervously.
“oh there is nothing either to fear or to hope”—i said
with some violence—“she did it. and can you guess why
she did it? because she was mad with her own wickedness
[p ]
 and sensuality,—because she loved with a guilty love, my
friend lucio rimânez.”
mavis gave a little cry as of pain, and sat down white and
trembling.
“you can read quickly, i am sure,”—i went on. “part of
the profession of literature is the ability to skim books and
manuscripts rapidly, and grasp the whole gist of them in a
few minutes;—read this—” and i handed her the rolled-up
pages of sibyl’s dying declaration—“let me stay here, while
you learn from that what sort of a woman she was, and judge
whether, despite her beauty, she is worth a regret!”
“pardon me,—” said mavis gently—“i would rather not
read what was not meant for my eyes.”
“but it is meant for your eyes,”—i retorted impatiently—“it
is meant for everybody’s eyes apparently,—it is addressed
to nobody in particular. there is a mention of you in it. i
beg—nay i command you to read it!—i want your opinion
on it,—your advice; you may possibly suggest, after perusal,
the proper sort of epitaph i ought to inscribe on the
monument i am going to build to her sacred and dear
memory!”
i covered my face with one hand to hide the bitter smile
which i knew betrayed my thoughts, and pushed the manuscript
towards her. very reluctantly she took it,—and slowly
unrolling it, began to read. for several minutes there was a
silence, broken only by the crackling of the logs on the fire,
and the regular breathing of the dogs who now both lay
stretched comfortably in front of the wood blaze. i looked
covertly at the woman whose fame i had envied,—at the
slight figure, the coronal of soft hair,—the delicate, drooping
sensitive face,—the small white classic hand that held the
written sheets of paper so firmly, yet so tenderly,—the very
hand of the greek marble psyche;—and i thought what
short-sighted asses some literary men are who suppose they
can succeed in shutting out women like mavis clare from
winning everything that fame or fortune can offer. such a
head as hers, albeit covered with locks fair and caressable,
[p ]
 was not meant, in its fine shape and compactness, for submission
to inferior intelligences whether masculine or feminine,—that
determined little chin which the firelight delicately outlined,
was a visible declaration of the strength of will and the
indomitably high ambition of its owner,—and yet, ... the
soft eyes,—the tender mouth,—did not these suggest the
sweetest love, the purest passion that ever found place in a
woman’s heart? i lost myself in dreamy musing,—i thought
of many things that had little to do with either my own past
or present. i realized that now and then at rare intervals
god makes a woman of genius with a thinker’s brain and an
angel’s soul,—and that such an one is bound to be a destiny
to all mortals less divinely endowed, and a glory to the world
in which she dwells. so considering, i studied mavis clare’s
face and form,—i saw her eyes fill with tears as she read on;—why
should she weep, i wondered, over that ‘last document’
which had left me unmoved and callous? i was
startled almost as if from sleep when her voice, thrilling
with pain, disturbed the stillness,—she sprang up, gazing at
me as if she saw some horrible vision.
“oh, are you so blind,” she cried, “as not to see what this
means? can you not understand? do you not know your
worst enemy?”
“my worst enemy?” i echoed amazed—“you surprise me,
mavis,—what have i, or my enemies or friends to do with
my wife’s last confession? she raved,—between poison and
passion, she could not tell, as you see by her final words,
whether she was dead or alive,—and her writing at all under
such stress of circumstances was a phenomenal effort,—but it
has nothing to do with me personally.”
“for god’s sake do not be so hard-hearted!”—said mavis
passionately—“to me these last words of sibyl’s,—poor,
tortured, miserable girl!—are beyond all expression horrible
and appalling. do you mean to tell me you have no belief in
a future life?”
“none.” i answered with conviction.
“then this is nothing to you?—this solemn assurance of
[p ]
 hers that she is not dead, but living again,—living too, in indescribable
misery!—you do not believe it?”
“does anyone believe the ravings of the dying!” i
answered—“she was, as i have said, suffering the torments
of poison and passion,—and in those torments wrote as one
tormented....”
“is it impossible to convince you of the truth?” asked
mavis solemnly,—“are you so diseased in your spiritual perceptions
as not to know, beyond a doubt, that this world is
but the shadow of the other worlds awaiting us? i assure
you, as i live, you will have that terrible knowledge forced
upon you some day! i am aware of your theories,—your wife
had the same beliefs or rather non-beliefs as yourself,—yet she
has been convinced at last! i shall not attempt to argue with
you. if this last letter of the unhappy girl you wedded
cannot open your eyes to the eternal facts you choose to
ignore, nothing will ever help you. you are in the power of
your enemy!”
“of whom are you speaking, mavis?” i asked astonished,
observing that she stood like one suddenly appalled in a dream,
her eyes fixed musingly on vacancy, and her lips trembling apart.
“your enemy—your enemy!” she repeated with energy—“it
seems to me as if his shadow stood near you now!
listen to this voice from the dead—sibyl’s voice!——what
does she say?——‘oh god, have mercy!——i know who
claims my worship now and drags me into yonder rolling world
of flame ... his name is—’” ...
“well!” i interrupted eagerly——“she breaks off there;
his name is——”
“lucio rimânez!” said mavis in a thrilling tone—“i do
not know from whence he came,—but i take god to witness
my belief that he is a worker of evil,—a fiend in beautiful
human shape,—a destroyer and a corrupter! the curse of
him fell on sibyl the moment she met him,—the same curse
rests on you! leave him if you are wise,—take your chance
of escape while it remains to you,—and never let him see
your face again!”
[p ]she spoke with a kind of breathless haste as though impelled
by a force not her own,—i stared at her amazed, and
in a manner irritated.
“such a course of action would be impossible to me,
mavis,”—i said somewhat coldly—“the prince rimânez is
my best friend—no man ever had a better;—and his loyalty
to me has been put to a severe test under which most men
would have failed. i have not told you all.”
and i related in a few words the scene i had witnessed between
my wife and lucio in the music-gallery at willowsmere.
she listened,—but with an evident effort,—and pushing back
her clustering hair from her brows she sighed heavily.
“i am sorry,—but it does not alter my conviction!”—she
said—“i look upon your best friend as your worst foe. and
i feel you do not realize the awful calamity of your wife’s
death in its true aspect. will you forgive me if i ask you to
leave me now?——lady sibyl’s letter has affected me terribly—i
feel i cannot speak about it any more.... i wish i had
not read it....”
she broke off with a little half-suppressed sob,—i saw she
was unnerved, and taking the manuscript from her hand, i
said half-banteringly—
“you cannot then suggest an epitaph for my wife’s monument?”
she turned upon me with a grand gesture of reproach.
“yes i can!”—she replied in a low indignant voice—“inscribe
it as—‘from a pitiless hand to a broken heart!’ that
will suit the dead girl,—and you, the living man!”
her rustling gown swept across my feet,—she passed me
and was gone. stupefied by her sudden anger, and equally
sudden departure, i stood inert,—the st bernard rose from the
hearth-rug and glowered at me suspiciously, evidently wishing
me to take my leave,—pallas athene stared, as usual, through
me and beyond me in a boundless scorn,—all the various
objects in this quiet study seemed silently to eject me as an
undesired occupant. i looked round it once longingly as a
[p ]
 tired outcast may look on a peaceful garden and wish in vain
to enter.
“how like her sex she is after all!” i said half aloud—“she
blames me for being pitiless,—and forgets that sibyl was
the sinner,—not i! no matter how guilty a woman may be,
she generally manages to secure a certain amount of sympathy,—a
man is always left out in the cold.”
a shuddering sense of loneliness oppressed me as my eyes
wandered round the restful room. the odour of lilies was in
the air, exhaled, so i fancied, from the delicate and dainty
personality of mavis herself.
“if i had only known her first,—and loved her!” i murmured,
as i turned away at last and left the house.
but then i remembered i had hated her before i ever met
her,—and not only had i hated her, but i had vilified and
misrepresented her work with a scurrilous pen under the shield
of anonymity, and out of sheer malice,—thus giving her in the
public sight, the greatest proof of her own genius a gifted
woman can ever win,—man’s envy!
[p ]xxxviii
two weeks later i stood on the deck of lucio’s yacht
‘the flame,’—a vessel whose complete magnificence
filled me, as well as all other beholders, with bewildered
wonderment and admiration. she was a miracle of speed,
her motive power being electricity; and the electric engines
with which she was fitted were so complex and remarkable
as to baffle all would-be inquirers into the secret of their
mechanism and potency. a large crowd of spectators
gathered to see her as she lay off southampton, attracted by
the beauty of her shape and appearance,—some bolder spirits
even came out in tugs and row-boats, hoping to be allowed to
make a visit of inspection on board, but the sailors, powerfully-built
men of a foreign and somewhat unpleasing type,
soon intimated that the company of such inquisitive persons
was undesirable and unwelcome. with white sails spread, and
a crimson flag flying from her mast, she weighed anchor at
sunset on the afternoon of the day her owner and i joined
her, and moving through the waters with delicious noiselessness
and incredible rapidity, soon left far behind her the
english shore, looking like a white line in the mist, or the
pale vision of a land that might once have been. i had done
a few quixotic things before departing from my native country,—for
example, i had made a free gift of his former home
willowsmere, to lord elton, taking a sort of sullen pleasure
in thinking that he, the spendthrift nobleman, owed the restoration
of his property to me,—to me who had never been
[p ]
 either a successful linen-draper or furniture-man, but simply
an author, one of ‘those sort of people’ whom my lord and
my lady imagine they can ‘patronize’ and neglect again at
pleasure without danger to themselves. the arrogant fools
invariably forget what lasting vengeance can be taken for
an unmerited slight by the owner of a brilliant pen! i
was glad too, in a way, to realize that the daughter of the
american railway-king would be brought to the grand old
house to air her ‘countess-ship,’ and look at her prettily pert
little physiognomy in the very mirror where sibyl had watched
herself die. i do not know why this idea pleased me, for i
bore no grudge against diana chesney,—she was vulgar but
harmless, and would probably make a much more popular
châtelaine at willowsmere court than my wife had ever been.
among other things, i dismissed my man morris, and made
him miserable,—with the gift of a thousand pounds, to marry
and start a business on. he was miserable because he could
not make up his mind what business to adopt, his anxiety
being to choose the calling that would ‘pay’ best,—and also,
because though he ‘had his eye’ upon several young women,
he could not tell which among them would be likely to be
least extravagant, and the most serviceable as a cook and
housekeeper. the love of money and the pains of taking
care of it, embittered his days as it embitters the days of most
men, and my unexpected munificence towards him burdened
him with such a weight of trouble as robbed him of natural
sleep and appetite. i cared nothing for his perplexities however,
and gave him no advice, good or bad. my other servants
i dismissed, each with a considerable gift of money, not that
i particularly wished to benefit them, but simply because i
desired them to speak well of me. and in this world it is
very evident that the only way to get a good opinion is to pay
for it! i gave orders to a famous italian sculptor for sibyl’s
monument, english sculptors having no conception of sculpture,—it
was to be of exquisite design, wrought in purest
white marble, the chief adornment being the centre-figure of
an angel ready for flight, with the face of sibyl faithfully
[p ]
 copied from her picture. because, however devilish a woman
may be in her life-time, one is bound by all the laws of social
hypocrisy to make an angel of her as soon as she is dead!
just before i left london i heard that my old college-friend
‘boffles,’ john carrington, had met with a sudden end. busy
at the ‘retorting’ of his gold, he had been choked by the
mercurial fumes and had died in hideous torment. at one
time this news would have deeply affected me, but now, i
was scarcely sorry. i had heard nothing of him since i had
come into my fortune,—he had never even written to congratulate
me. always full of my own self-importance, i
judged this as great neglect on his part, and now that he was
dead i felt no more than any of us feel now-a-days at the loss
of friends. and that is very little,—we have really no time
to be sorry,—so many people are always dying!—and we are
in such a desperate hurry to rush on to death ourselves!
nothing seemed to touch me that did not closely concern my
own personal interest,—and i had no affections left, unless i
may call the vague tenderness i had for mavis clare an
affection. yet, to be honest, this very emotion was after all
nothing but a desire to be consoled, pitied and loved by her,—to
be able to turn upon the world and say “this woman
whom you have lifted on your shield of honour and crowned
with laurels,—she loves me—she is not yours, but mine!”
purely interested and purely selfish was the longing,—and it
deserved no other name than selfishness.
my feelings for rimânez too began at this time to undergo
a curious change. the fascination i had for him, the power
he exercised over me remained as great as ever, but i found
myself often absorbed in a close study of him, strangely against
my own will. sometimes his every look seemed fraught with
meaning,—his every gesture suggestive of an almost terrific
authority. he was always to me the most attractive of beings,—nevertheless
there was an uneasy sensation of doubt and
fear growing up in my mind regarding him,—a painful anxiety
to know more about him than he had ever told me,—and on
rare occasions i experienced a sudden shock of inexplicable
[p ]
 repulsion against him which like a tremendous wave threw me
back with violence upon myself and left me half-stunned with
a dread of i knew not what. alone with him, as it were, on
the wide sea, cut off for a time from all other intercourse than
that which we shared together, these sensations were very
strong upon me. i began to note many things which i had
been too blind or too absorbed in my own pursuits to observe
before; the offensive presence of amiel, who acted as chief
steward on board the yacht, filled me now not only with dislike,
but nervous apprehension,—the dark and more or less
repulsive visages of the crew haunted me in my dreams;—and
one day, leaning over the vessel’s edge and gazing blankly
down into the fathomless water below, i fell to thinking of
strange sorceries of the east, and stories of magicians who by
the exercise of unlawful science did so make victims of men
and delude them that their wills were entirely perverted and
no longer their own. i do not know why this passing thought
should have suddenly overwhelmed me with deep depression,—but
when i looked up, to me the sky had grown dark, and
the face of one of the sailors who was near me polishing the
brass hand-rail, seemed singularly threatening and sinister. i
moved to go to the other side of the deck, when a hand was
gently laid on my shoulder from behind, and turning, i met
the sad and splendid eyes of lucio.
“are you growing weary of the voyage geoffrey?” he
asked—“weary of those two suggestions of eternity—the interminable
sky, the interminable sea? i am afraid you are!—man
easily gets fatigued with his own littleness and powerlessness
when he is set afloat on a plank between air and ocean.
yet we are travelling as swiftly as electricity will bear us,—and,
as worked in this vessel, it is carrying us at a far greater
speed than you perhaps realize or imagine.”
i made no immediate answer, but taking his arm strolled
slowly up and down. i felt he was looking at me, but i
avoided meeting his gaze.
“you have been thinking of your wife?” he queried softly
and, as i thought, sympathetically—“i have shunned,—for
[p ]
 reasons you know of,—all allusion to the tragic end of so
beautiful a creature. beauty is, alas!—so often subject to
hysteria! yet—if you had any faith, you would believe she is
an angel now!”
i stopped short at this, and looked straight at him. there
was a fine smile on his delicate mouth.
“an angel!” i repeated slowly—“or a devil? which
would you say she is?—you, who sometimes declare that you
believe in heaven,—and hell?”
he was silent, but the dreamy smile remained still on his lips.
“come, speak!” i said roughly—“you can be frank with
me, you know,—angel or devil—which?”
“my dear geoffrey!” he remonstrated gently and with
gravity—“a woman is always an angel,—both here and
hereafter!”
i laughed bitterly. “if that is part of your faith i am
sorry for you!”
“i have not spoken of my faith,”—he rejoined in colder
accents, lifting his brilliant eyes to the darkening heaven—“i
am not a salvationist, that i should bray forth a creed to the
sound of trump and drum.”
“all the same, you have a creed;”—i persisted—“and i
fancy it must be a strange one! if you remember, you
promised to explain it to me——”
“are you ready to receive such an explanation?” he asked
in a somewhat ironical tone—“no, my dear friend!—permit
me to say you are not ready—not yet! my beliefs are too
positive to be brought even into contact with your contradictions,—too
frightfully real to submit to your doubts for a
moment. you would at once begin to revert to the puny,
used-up old arguments of voltaire, schopenhauer and huxley,—little
atomic theories like grains of dust in the whirlwind of
my knowledge! i can tell you i believe in god as a very
actual and positive being,—and that is presumably the first
of the church articles.”
“you believe in god!” i echoed his words, staring at
him stupidly. he seemed in earnest. in fact he had always
[p ]
 seemed in earnest on the subject of deity. vaguely i thought
of a woman in society whom i slightly knew,—an ugly woman,
unattractive and mean-minded, who passed her time in entertaining
semi-royalties and pushing herself amongst them,—she
had said to me one day— “i hate people who believe
in god, don’t you? the idea of a god makes me sick!”
“you believe in god!” i repeated again dubiously.
“look!” he said, raising his hand towards the sky—“there
a few drifting clouds cover millions of worlds, impenetrable,
mysterious, yet actual;—down there—” and he
pointed to the sea, “lurk a thousand things of which, though
the ocean is a part of earth, human beings have not yet
learned the nature. between these upper and lower spaces
of the incomprehensible yet absolute, you, a finite atom of
limited capabilities stand, uncertain how long the frail thread
of your life shall last, yet arrogantly balancing the question
with your own poor brain, as to whether you,—you in your
utter littleness and incompetency shall condescend to accept a
god or not! i confess, that of all astonishing things in the
universe, this particular attitude of modern mankind is the
most astonishing to me!”
“your own attitude is?——”
“the reluctant acceptance of such terrific knowledge as is
forced upon me,—” he replied with a dark smile—“i do not
say i have been an apt or a willing pupil,—i have had to
suffer in learning what i know!”
“do you believe in hell?” i asked him suddenly—“and
in satan, the arch-enemy of mankind?”
he was silent for so long that i was surprised, the more so
as he grew pale to the lips, and a curious, almost deathlike
rigidity of feature gave his expression something of the ghastly
and terrible. after a pause he turned his eyes upon me,—an
intense burning misery was reflected in them, though he smiled.
“most assuredly i believe in hell! how can i do otherwise
if i believe in heaven? if there is an up there must be
[p ]
 a down; if there is light, there must also be darkness!
and, ... concerning the arch-enemy of mankind,—if half
the stories reported of him be true, he must be the most
piteous and pitiable figure in the universe! what would be
the sorrows of a thousand million worlds, compared to the
sorrows of satan!”
“sorrows!” i echoed—“he is supposed to rejoice in the
working of evil!”
“neither angel nor devil can do that,”—he said slowly—“to
rejoice in the working of evil is a temporary mania
which affects man only. for actual joy to come out of evil,
chaos must come again, and god must extinguish himself.”
he stared across the dark sea,—the sun had sunk, and one
faint star twinkled through the clouds. “and so i again say—the
sorrows of satan! sorrows immeasurable as eternity
itself,—imagine them! to be shut out of heaven!—to hear
all through the unending æons, the far-off voices of angels
whom once he knew and loved!—to be a wanderer among
deserts of darkness, and to pine for the light celestial that
was formerly as air and food to his being,—and to know that
man’s folly, man’s utter selfishness, man’s cruelty, keep him
thus exiled, an outcast from pardon and peace! man’s
nobleness may lift the lost spirit almost within reach of his
lost joys,—but man’s vileness drags him down again,—easy
was the torture of sisyphus compared with the torture of
satan! no wonder that he loathes mankind!—small blame
to him if he seeks to destroy the puny tribe eternally,—little
marvel that he grudges them their share of immortality!
think of it as a legend merely,”—and he turned upon me
with a movement that was almost fierce—“christ redeemed
man,—and by his teaching, showed how it was possible for
man to redeem the devil!”
“i do not understand you—” i said feebly, awed by the
strange pain and passion of his tone.
“do you not? yet my meaning is scarcely obscure!
if men were true to their immortal instincts and to the
god that made them,—if they were generous, honest,
[p ]
 fearless, faithful, reverent, unselfish, ... if women were
pure, brave, tender and loving,—can you not imagine that
in the strong force and fairness of such a world, ‘lucifer,
son of the morning’ would be moved to love instead of
hate?—that the closed doors of paradise would be unbarred—and
that he, lifted towards his creator on the prayers of
pure lives, would wear again his angel’s crown? can you
not realize this, even by way of a legendary story?”
“why yes, as a legendary story the idea is beautiful,”—i
admitted—“and to me, as i told you once before, quite new.
still, as men are never likely to be honest or women pure,
i’m afraid the poor devil stands a bad chance of ever getting
redeemed!”
“i fear so too!” and he eyed me with a curious derision—“i
very much fear so! and his chances being so slight, i
rather respect him for being the arch-enemy of such a worthless
race!” he paused a moment, then added—“i wonder
how we have managed to get on such an absurd subject of
conversation? it is dull and uninteresting as all ‘spiritual’
themes invariably are. my object in bringing you out on this
voyage is not to indulge in psychological argument, but to
make you forget your troubles as much as possible, and enjoy
the present while it lasts.”
there was a vibration of compassionate kindness in his
voice which at once moved me to an acute sense of self-pity,
the worst enervator of moral force that exists. i sighed heavily.
“truly i have suffered”—i said—“more than most men!”
“more even than most millionaires deserve to suffer!”
declared lucio, with that inevitable touch of sarcasm which
distinguished some of his friendliest remarks—“money is
supposed to make amends to a man for everything,—and even
the wealthy wife of a certain irish ‘patriot’ has not found it
incompatible with affection to hold her moneybags close to
herself while her husband has been declared a bankrupt.
how she has ‘idolized’ him, let others say! now, considering
your cash-abundance, it must be owned the fates have
treated you somewhat unkindly!”
[p ]the smile that was half-cruel and half-sweet radiated in his
eyes as he spoke,—and again a singular revulsion of feeling
against him moved me to dislike and fear. and yet,—how
fascinating was his company! i could not but admit that the
voyage with him to alexandria on board ‘the flame’ was
one of positive enchantment and luxury all the way. there
was nothing in a material sense left to wish for,—all that could
appeal to the intelligence or the imagination had been thought
of on board this wonderful yacht which sped like a fairy ship
over the sea. some of the sailors were skilled musicians, and
on tranquil nights or at sunset, would bring stringed instruments
and discourse to our ears the most dulcet and ravishing
melodies. lucio himself too would often sing,—his luscious
voice resounding, as it seemed, over all the visible sea and
sky, with such passion as might have drawn an angel down
to listen. gradually my mind became impregnated with
these snatches of mournful, fierce, or weird minor tunes,—and
i began to suffer in silence from an inexplicable depression
and foreboding sense of misery, as well as from
another terrible feeling to which i could scarcely give a name,—a
dreadful uncertainty of myself, as of one lost in a wilderness
and about to die. i endured these fits of mental agony
alone,—and in such dreary burning moments, believed i was
going mad. i grew more and more sullen and taciturn, and
when we at last arrived at alexandria i was not moved to any
particular pleasure. the place was new to me, but i was not
conscious of novelty,—everything seemed flat, dull, and totally
uninteresting. a heavy almost lethargic stupor chained my
wits, and when we left the yacht in harbour and went on to
cairo, i was not sensible of any personal enjoyment in the
journey, or interest in what i saw. i was only partially roused
when we took possession of a luxurious dahabeah, which, with
a retinue of attendants, had been specially chartered for us,
and commenced our lotus-like voyage up the nile. the
reed-edged, sluggish yellow river fascinated me,—i used to
spend long hours reclining at full length in a deck-chair,
gazing at the flat shores, the blown sand-heaps, the broken
[p ]
 columns and mutilated temples of the dead kingdoms of the
past. one evening, thus musing, while the great golden moon
climbed languidly up into the sky to stare at the wrecks of
earthly ages i said—
“if one could only see these ancient cities as they once
existed, what strange revelations might be made! our
modern marvels of civilization and progress might seem
small trifles after all,—for i believe in our days we are
only re-discovering what the peoples of old time knew.”
lucio drew his cigar from his mouth and looked at it
meditatively. then he glanced up at me with a half-smile—
“would you like to see a city resuscitated?” he inquired—“here,
in this very spot, some six thousand years ago, a king
reigned, with a woman not his queen but his favourite, (quite a
lawful arrangement in those days) who was as famous for her
beauty and virtue, as this river is for its fructifying tide.
here civilization had progressed enormously,—with the one
exception that it had not outgrown faith. modern france
and england have beaten the ancients in their scorn of god
and creed, their contempt for divine things, their unnameable
lasciviousness and blasphemy. this city”——and he waved
his hand towards a dreary stretch of shore where a cluster of
tall reeds waved above the monster fragment of a fallen
column,—“was governed by the strong pure faith of its people
more than anything,—and the ruler of social things in it was
a woman. the king’s favourite was something like mavis clare
in that she possessed genius,—she had also the qualities of
justice, intelligence, love, truth and a most noble unselfishness,—she
made this place happy. it was a paradise on earth
while she lived,—when she died, its glory ended. so much
can a woman do if she chooses,—so much does she not do,
in her usual cow-like way of living!”
“how do you know all this you tell me of?” i asked him.
“by study of past records”—he replied—“i read what
modern men declare they have no time to read. you are
right in the idea that all ‘new’ things are only old things
re-invented or re-discovered,—if you had gone a step further
[p ]
 and said that some of men’s present lives are only the continuation
of their past, you would not have been wrong.
now, if you like, i can by my science, show you the city
that stood here long ago,—the ‘city beautiful’ as its name
is, translated from the ancient tongue.”
i roused myself from my lounging attitude and looked at
him amazedly. he met my gaze unmoved.
“you can show it to me!” i exclaimed—“how can you
do such an impossible thing?”
“permit me to hypnotize you,”—he answered smiling,—“my
system of hypnotism is, very fortunately, not yet
discovered by meddlesome inquirers into occult matters,—but
it never fails of its effect,—and i promise you, you shall,
under my influence, see not only the place, but the people.”
my curiosity was strongly excited, and i became more
eager to try the suggested experiment than i cared to openly
show. i laughed however, with affected indifference.
“i am perfectly willing!” i said—“all the same, i don’t
think you can hypnotize me,—i have much too strong a will
of my own——” at which remark i saw a smile, dark and
saturnine, hover on his lips—“but you can make the
attempt.”
he rose at once, and signed to one of our egyptian
servants.
