 canon, were loaded with precious gems; his sandals were of the finest
 leather which was imported from spain; his beard trimmed to as small
 dimensions as his order would possibly permit, and his shaven crown
 concealed by a scarlet cap richly embroidered.
 the appearance of the knight templar was also changed; and, though less
 studiously bedecked with ornament, his dress was as rich, and his
 appearance far more commanding, than that of his companion. he had
 exchanged his shirt of mail for an under tunic of dark purple silk,
 garnished with furs, over which flowed his long robe of spotless white, in
 ample folds. the eight-pointed cross of his order was cut on the shoulder
 of his mantle in black velvet. the high cap no longer invested his brows,
 which were only shaded by short and thick curled hair of a raven
 blackness, corresponding to his unusually swart complexion. nothing could
 be more gracefully majestic than his step and manner, had they not been
 marked by a predominant air of haughtiness, easily acquired by the
 exercise of unresisted authority.
 these two dignified persons were followed by their respective attendants,
 and at a more humble distance by their guide, whose figure had nothing
 more remarkable than it derived from the usual weeds of a pilgrim. a cloak
 or mantle of coarse black serge, enveloped his whole body. it was in shape
 something like the cloak of a modern hussar, having similar flaps for
 covering the arms, and was called a “sclaveyn”, or “sclavonian”. coarse
 sandals, bound with thongs, on his bare feet; a broad and shadowy hat,
 with cockle-shells stitched on its brim, and a long staff shod with iron,
 to the upper end of which was attached a branch of palm, completed the
 palmer's attire. he followed modestly the last of the train which entered
 the hall, and, observing that the lower table scarce afforded room
 sufficient for the domestics of cedric and the retinue of his guests, he
 withdrew to a settle placed beside and almost under one of the large
 chimneys, and seemed to employ himself in drying his garments, until the
 retreat of some one should make room at the board, or the hospitality of
 the steward should supply him with refreshments in the place he had chosen
 apart.
 cedric rose to receive his guests with an air of dignified hospitality,
 and, descending from the dais, or elevated part of his hall, made three
 steps towards them, and then awaited their approach.
 “i grieve,” he said, “reverend prior, that my vow binds me to advance no
 farther upon this floor of my fathers, even to receive such guests as you,
 and this valiant knight of the holy temple. but my steward has expounded
 to you the cause of my seeming discourtesy. let me also pray, that you
 will excuse my speaking to you in my native language, and that you will
 reply in the same if your knowledge of it permits; if not, i sufficiently
 understand norman to follow your meaning.”
 “vows,” said the abbot, “must be unloosed, worthy franklin, or permit me
 rather to say, worthy thane, though the title is antiquated. vows are the
 knots which tie us to heaven—they are the cords which bind the
 sacrifice to the horns of the altar,—and are therefore,—as i
 said before,—to be unloosened and discharged, unless our holy mother
 church shall pronounce the contrary. and respecting language, i willingly
 hold communication in that spoken by my respected grandmother, hilda of
 middleham, who died in odour of sanctity, little short, if we may presume
 to say so, of her glorious namesake, the blessed saint hilda of whitby,
 god be gracious to her soul!”
 when the prior had ceased what he meant as a conciliatory harangue, his
 companion said briefly and emphatically, “i speak ever french, the
 language of king richard and his nobles; but i understand english
 sufficiently to communicate with the natives of the country.”
 cedric darted at the speaker one of those hasty and impatient glances,
 which comparisons between the two rival nations seldom failed to call
 forth; but, recollecting the duties of hospitality, he suppressed further
 show of resentment, and, motioning with his hand, caused his guests to
 assume two seats a little lower than his own, but placed close beside him,
 and gave a signal that the evening meal should be placed upon the board.
 while the attendants hastened to obey cedric's commands, his eye
 distinguished gurth the swineherd, who, with his companion wamba, had just
 entered the hall. “send these loitering knaves up hither,” said the saxon,
 impatiently. and when the culprits came before the dais,—“how comes
 it, villains! that you have loitered abroad so late as this? hast thou
 brought home thy charge, sirrah gurth, or hast thou left them to robbers
 and marauders?”
 “the herd is safe, so please ye,” said gurth.
 “but it does not please me, thou knave,” said cedric, “that i should be
 made to suppose otherwise for two hours, and sit here devising vengeance
 against my neighbours for wrongs they have not done me. i tell thee,
 shackles and the prison-house shall punish the next offence of this kind.”
 gurth, knowing his master's irritable temper, attempted no exculpation;
 but the jester, who could presume upon cedric's tolerance, by virtue of
 his privileges as a fool, replied for them both; “in troth, uncle cedric,
 you are neither wise nor reasonable to-night.”
 “'how, sir?” said his master; “you shall to the porter's lodge, and taste
 of the discipline there, if you give your foolery such license.”
 “first let your wisdom tell me,” said wamba, “is it just and reasonable to
 punish one person for the fault of another?”
 “certainly not, fool,” answered cedric.
 “then why should you shackle poor gurth, uncle, for the fault of his dog
 fangs? for i dare be sworn we lost not a minute by the way, when we had
 got our herd together, which fangs did not manage until we heard the
 vesper-bell.”
 “then hang up fangs,” said cedric, turning hastily towards the swineherd,
 “if the fault is his, and get thee another dog.”
 “under favour, uncle,” said the jester, “that were still somewhat on the
 bow-hand of fair justice; for it was no fault of fangs that he was lame
 and could not gather the herd, but the fault of those that struck off two
 of his fore-claws, an operation for which, if the poor fellow had been
 consulted, he would scarce have given his voice.”
 “and who dared to lame an animal which belonged to my bondsman?” said the
 saxon, kindling in wrath.
 “marry, that did old hubert,” said wamba, “sir philip de malvoisin's
 keeper of the chase. he caught fangs strolling in the forest, and said he
 chased the deer contrary to his master's right, as warden of the walk.”
 “the foul fiend take malvoisin,” answered the saxon, “and his keeper both!
 i will teach them that the wood was disforested in terms of the great
 forest charter. but enough of this. go to, knave, go to thy place—and
 thou, gurth, get thee another dog, and should the keeper dare to touch it,
 i will mar his archery; the curse of a coward on my head, if i strike not
 off the forefinger of his right hand!—he shall draw bowstring no
 more.—i crave your pardon, my worthy guests. i am beset here with
 neighbours that match your infidels, sir knight, in holy land. but your
 homely fare is before you; feed, and let welcome make amends for hard
 fare.”
 the feast, however, which was spread upon the board, needed no apologies
 from the lord of the mansion. swine's flesh, dressed in several modes,
 appeared on the lower part of the board, as also that of fowls, deer,
 goats, and hares, and various kinds of fish, together with huge loaves and
 cakes of bread, and sundry confections made of fruits and honey. the
 smaller sorts of wild-fowl, of which there was abundance, were not served
 up in platters, but brought in upon small wooden spits or broaches, and
 offered by the pages and domestics who bore them, to each guest in
 succession, who cut from them such a portion as he pleased. beside each
 person of rank was placed a goblet of silver; the lower board was
 accommodated with large drinking horns.
 when the repast was about to commence, the major-domo, or steward,
 suddenly raising his wand, said aloud,—“forbear!—place for the
 lady rowena.”
 a side-door at the upper end of the hall now opened behind the banquet
 table, and rowena, followed by four female attendants, entered the
 apartment. cedric, though surprised, and perhaps not altogether agreeably
 so, at his ward appearing in public on this occasion, hastened to meet
 her, and to conduct her, with respectful ceremony, to the elevated seat at
 his own right hand, appropriated to the lady of the mansion. all stood up
 to receive her; and, replying to their courtesy by a mute gesture of
 salutation, she moved gracefully forward to assume her place at the board.
 ere she had time to do so, the templar whispered to the prior, “i shall
 wear no collar of gold of yours at the tournament. the chian wine is your
 own.”
 “said i not so?” answered the prior; “but check your raptures, the
 franklin observes you.”
 unheeding this remonstrance, and accustomed only to act upon the immediate
 impulse of his own wishes, brian de bois-guilbert kept his eyes riveted on
 the saxon beauty, more striking perhaps to his imagination, because
 differing widely from those of the eastern sultanas.
 formed in the best proportions of her sex, rowena was tall in stature, yet
 not so much so as to attract observation on account of superior height.
 her complexion was exquisitely fair, but the noble cast of her head and
 features prevented the insipidity which sometimes attaches to fair
 beauties. her clear blue eye, which sat enshrined beneath a graceful
 eyebrow of brown sufficiently marked to give expression to the forehead,
 seemed capable to kindle as well as melt, to command as well as to
 beseech. if mildness were the more natural expression of such a
 combination of features, it was plain, that in the present instance, the
 exercise of habitual superiority, and the reception of general homage, had
 given to the saxon lady a loftier character, which mingled with and
 qualified that bestowed by nature. her profuse hair, of a colour betwixt
 brown and flaxen, was arranged in a fanciful and graceful manner in
 numerous ringlets, to form which art had probably aided nature. these
 locks were braided with gems, and, being worn at full length, intimated
 the noble birth and free-born condition of the maiden. a golden chain, to
 which was attached a small reliquary of the same metal, hung round her
 neck. she wore bracelets on her arms, which were bare. her dress was an
 under-gown and kirtle of pale sea-green silk, over which hung a long loose
 robe, which reached to the ground, having very wide sleeves, which came
 down, however, very little below the elbow. this robe was crimson, and
 manufactured out of the very finest wool. a veil of silk, interwoven with
 gold, was attached to the upper part of it, which could be, at the
 wearer's pleasure, either drawn over the face and bosom after the spanish
 fashion, or disposed as a sort of drapery round the shoulders.
 when rowena perceived the knight templar's eyes bent on her with an
 ardour, that, compared with the dark caverns under which they moved, gave
 them the effect of lighted charcoal, she drew with dignity the veil around
 her face, as an intimation that the determined freedom of his glance was
 disagreeable. cedric saw the motion and its cause. “sir templar,” said he,
 “the cheeks of our saxon maidens have seen too little of the sun to enable
 them to bear the fixed glance of a crusader.”
 “if i have offended,” replied sir brian, “i crave your pardon,—that
 is, i crave the lady rowena's pardon,—for my humility will carry me
 no lower.”
 “the lady rowena,” said the prior, “has punished us all, in chastising the
 boldness of my friend. let me hope she will be less cruel to the splendid
 train which are to meet at the tournament.”
 “our going thither,” said cedric, “is uncertain. i love not these
 vanities, which were unknown to my fathers when england was free.”
 “let us hope, nevertheless,” said the prior, “our company may determine
 you to travel thitherward; when the roads are so unsafe, the escort of sir
 brian de bois-guilbert is not to be despised.”
 “sir prior,” answered the saxon, “wheresoever i have travelled in this
 land, i have hitherto found myself, with the assistance of my good sword
 and faithful followers, in no respect needful of other aid. at present, if
 we indeed journey to ashby-de-la-zouche, we do so with my noble neighbour
 and countryman athelstane of coningsburgh, and with such a train as would
 set outlaws and feudal enemies at defiance.—i drink to you, sir
 prior, in this cup of wine, which i trust your taste will approve, and i
 thank you for your courtesy. should you be so rigid in adhering to
 monastic rule,” he added, “as to prefer your acid preparation of milk, i
 hope you will not strain courtesy to do me reason.”
 “nay,” said the priest, laughing, “it is only in our abbey that we confine
 ourselves to the 'lac dulce' or the 'lac acidum' either. conversing with,
 the world, we use the world's fashions, and therefore i answer your pledge
 in this honest wine, and leave the weaker liquor to my lay-brother.”
 “and i,” said the templar, filling his goblet, “drink wassail to the fair
 rowena; for since her namesake introduced the word into england, has never
 been one more worthy of such a tribute. by my faith, i could pardon the
 unhappy vortigern, had he half the cause that we now witness, for making
 shipwreck of his honour and his kingdom.”
 “i will spare your courtesy, sir knight,” said rowena with dignity, and
 without unveiling herself; “or rather i will tax it so far as to require
 of you the latest news from palestine, a theme more agreeable to our
 english ears than the compliments which your french breeding teaches.”
 “i have little of importance to say, lady,” answered sir brian de
 bois-guilbert, “excepting the confirmed tidings of a truce with saladin.”
 he was interrupted by wamba, who had taken his appropriated seat upon a
 chair, the back of which was decorated with two ass's ears, and which was
 placed about two steps behind that of his master, who, from time to time,
 supplied him with victuals from his own trencher; a favour, however, which
 the jester shared with the favourite dogs, of whom, as we have already
 noticed, there were several in attendance. here sat wamba, with a small
 table before him, his heels tucked up against the bar of the chair, his
 cheeks sucked up so as to make his jaws resemble a pair of nut-crackers,
 and his eyes half-shut, yet watching with alertness every opportunity to
 exercise his licensed foolery.
 “these truces with the infidels,” he exclaimed, without caring how
 suddenly he interrupted the stately templar, “make an old man of me!”
 “go to, knave, how so?” said cedric, his features prepared to receive
 favourably the expected jest.
 “because,” answered wamba, “i remember three of them in my day, each of
 which was to endure for the course of fifty years; so that, by
 computation, i must be at least a hundred and fifty years old.”
 “i will warrant you against dying of old age, however,” said the templar,
 who now recognised his friend of the forest; “i will assure you from all
 deaths but a violent one, if you give such directions to wayfarers, as you
 did this night to the prior and me.”
 “how, sirrah!” said cedric, “misdirect travellers? we must have you whipt;
 you are at least as much rogue as fool.”
 “i pray thee, uncle,” answered the jester, “let my folly, for once,
 protect my roguery. i did but make a mistake between my right hand and my
 left; and he might have pardoned a greater, who took a fool for his
 counsellor and guide.”
 conversation was here interrupted by the entrance of the porter's page,
 who announced that there was a stranger at the gate, imploring admittance
 and hospitality.
 “admit him,” said cedric, “be he who or what he may;—a night like
 that which roars without, compels even wild animals to herd with tame, and
 to seek the protection of man, their mortal foe, rather than perish by the
 elements. let his wants be ministered to with all care—look to it,
 oswald.”
 and the steward left the banqueting hall to see the commands of his patron
 obeyed.
 hath not a jew eyes? hath not a jew hands, organs, dimensions,
 senses, affections, passions? fed with the same food, hurt with
 the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the
 same means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer, as
 a christian is?
 —merchant of venice
 oswald, returning, whispered into the ear of his master, “it is a jew, who
 calls himself isaac of york; is it fit i should marshall him into the
 hall?”
 “let gurth do thine office, oswald,” said wamba with his usual effrontery;
 “the swineherd will be a fit usher to the jew.”
 “st mary,” said the abbot, crossing himself, “an unbelieving jew, and
 admitted into this presence!”
 “a dog jew,” echoed the templar, “to approach a defender of the holy
 sepulchre?”
 “by my faith,” said wamba, “it would seem the templars love the jews'
 inheritance better than they do their company.”
 “peace, my worthy guests,” said cedric; “my hospitality must not be
 bounded by your dislikes. if heaven bore with the whole nation of
 stiff-necked unbelievers for more years than a layman can number, we may
 endure the presence of one jew for a few hours. but i constrain no man to
 converse or to feed with him.—let him have a board and a morsel
 apart,—unless,” he said smiling, “these turban'd strangers will
 admit his society.”
 “sir franklin,” answered the templar, “my saracen slaves are true moslems,
 and scorn as much as any christian to hold intercourse with a jew.”
 “now, in faith,” said wamba, “i cannot see that the worshippers of mahound
 and termagaunt have so greatly the advantage over the people once chosen
 of heaven.”
 “he shall sit with thee, wamba,” said cedric; “the fool and the knave will
 be well met.”
 “the fool,” answered wamba, raising the relics of a gammon of bacon, “will
 take care to erect a bulwark against the knave.”
 “hush,” said cedric, “for here he comes.”
 introduced with little ceremony, and advancing with fear and hesitation,
 and many a bow of deep humility, a tall thin old man, who, however, had
 lost by the habit of stooping much of his actual height, approached the
 lower end of the board. his features, keen and regular, with an aquiline
 nose, and piercing black eyes; his high and wrinkled forehead, and long
 grey hair and beard, would have been considered as handsome, had they not
 been the marks of a physiognomy peculiar to a race, which, during those
 dark ages, was alike detested by the credulous and prejudiced vulgar, and
 persecuted by the greedy and rapacious nobility, and who, perhaps, owing
 to that very hatred and persecution, had adopted a national character, in
 which there was much, to say the least, mean and unamiable.
 the jew's dress, which appeared to have suffered considerably from the
 storm, was a plain russet cloak of many folds, covering a dark purple
 tunic. he had large boots lined with fur, and a belt around his waist,
 which sustained a small knife, together with a case for writing materials,
 but no weapon. he wore a high square yellow cap of a peculiar fashion,
 assigned to his nation to distinguish them from christians, and which he
 doffed with great humility at the door of the hall.
 the reception of this person in the hall of cedric the saxon, was such as
 might have satisfied the most prejudiced enemy of the tribes of israel.
 cedric himself coldly nodded in answer to the jew's repeated salutations,
 and signed to him to take place at the lower end of the table, where,
 however, no one offered to make room for him. on the contrary, as he
 passed along the file, casting a timid supplicating glance, and turning
 towards each of those who occupied the lower end of the board, the saxon
 domestics squared their shoulders, and continued to devour their supper
 with great perseverance, paying not the least attention to the wants of
 the new guest. the attendants of the abbot crossed themselves, with looks
 of pious horror, and the very heathen saracens, as isaac drew near them,
 curled up their whiskers with indignation, and laid their hands on their
 poniards, as if ready to rid themselves by the most desperate means from
 the apprehended contamination of his nearer approach.
 probably the same motives which induced cedric to open his hall to this
 son of a rejected people, would have made him insist on his attendants
 receiving isaac with more courtesy. but the abbot had, at this moment,
 engaged him in a most interesting discussion on the breed and character of
 his favourite hounds, which he would not have interrupted for matters of
 much greater importance than that of a jew going to bed supperless. while
 isaac thus stood an outcast in the present society, like his people among
 the nations, looking in vain for welcome or resting place, the pilgrim who
 sat by the chimney took compassion upon him, and resigned his seat, saying
 briefly, “old man, my garments are dried, my hunger is appeased, thou art
 both wet and fasting.” so saying, he gathered together, and brought to a
 flame, the decaying brands which lay scattered on the ample hearth; took
 from the larger board a mess of pottage and seethed kid, placed it upon
 the small table at which he had himself supped, and, without waiting the
 jew's thanks, went to the other side of the hall;—whether from
 unwillingness to hold more close communication with the object of his
 benevolence, or from a wish to draw near to the upper end of the table,
 seemed uncertain.
 had there been painters in those days capable to execute such a subject,
 the jew, as he bent his withered form, and expanded his chilled and
 trembling hands over the fire, would have formed no bad emblematical
 personification of the winter season. having dispelled the cold, he turned
 eagerly to the smoking mess which was placed before him, and ate with a
 haste and an apparent relish, that seemed to betoken long abstinence from
 food.
 meanwhile the abbot and cedric continued their discourse upon hunting; the
 lady rowena seemed engaged in conversation with one of her attendant
 females; and the haughty templar, whose eye wandered from the jew to the
 saxon beauty, revolved in his mind thoughts which appeared deeply to
 interest him.
 “i marvel, worthy cedric,” said the abbot, as their discourse proceeded,
 “that, great as your predilection is for your own manly language, you do
 not receive the norman-french into your favour, so far at least as the
 mystery of wood-craft and hunting is concerned. surely no tongue is so
 rich in the various phrases which the field-sports demand, or furnishes
 means to the experienced woodman so well to express his jovial art.”
 “good father aymer,” said the saxon, “be it known to you, i care not for
 those over-sea refinements, without which i can well enough take my
 pleasure in the woods. i can wind my horn, though i call not the blast
 either a 'recheate' or a 'morte'—i can cheer my dogs on the prey,
 and i can flay and quarter the animal when it is brought down, without
 using the newfangled jargon of 'curee, arbor, nombles', and all the babble
 of the fabulous sir tristrem.” 
 “the french,” said the templar, raising his voice with the presumptuous
 and authoritative tone which he used upon all occasions, “is not only the
 natural language of the chase, but that of love and of war, in which
 ladies should be won and enemies defied.”
 “pledge me in a cup of wine, sir templar,” said cedric, “and fill another
 to the abbot, while i look back some thirty years to tell you another
 tale. as cedric the saxon then was, his plain english tale needed no
 garnish from french troubadours, when it was told in the ear of beauty;
 and the field of northallerton, upon the day of the holy standard, could
 tell whether the saxon war-cry was not heard as far within the ranks of
 the scottish host as the 'cri de guerre' of the boldest norman baron. to
 the memory of the brave who fought there!—pledge me, my guests.” he
 drank deep, and went on with increasing warmth. “ay, that was a day of
 cleaving of shields, when a hundred banners were bent forwards over the
 heads of the valiant, and blood flowed round like water, and death was
 held better than flight. a saxon bard had called it a feast of the swords—a
 gathering of the eagles to the prey—the clashing of bills upon
 shield and helmet, the shouting of battle more joyful than the clamour of
 a bridal. but our bards are no more,” he said; “our deeds are lost in
 those of another race—our language—our very name—is
 hastening to decay, and none mourns for it save one solitary old man—cupbearer!
 knave, fill the goblets—to the strong in arms, sir templar, be their
 race or language what it will, who now bear them best in palestine among
 the champions of the cross!”
 “it becomes not one wearing this badge to answer,” said sir brian de
 bois-guilbert; “yet to whom, besides the sworn champions of the holy
 sepulchre, can the palm be assigned among the champions of the cross?”
 “to the knights hospitallers,” said the abbot; “i have a brother of their
 order.”
 “i impeach not their fame,” said the templar; “nevertheless—-”
 “i think, friend cedric,” said wamba, interfering, “that had richard of
 the lion's heart been wise enough to have taken a fool's advice, he might
 have staid at home with his merry englishmen, and left the recovery of
 jerusalem to those same knights who had most to do with the loss of it.”
 “were there, then, none in the english army,” said the lady rowena, “whose
 names are worthy to be mentioned with the knights of the temple, and of st
 john?”
 “forgive me, lady,” replied de bois-guilbert; “the english monarch did,
 indeed, bring to palestine a host of gallant warriors, second only to
 those whose breasts have been the unceasing bulwark of that blessed land.”
 “second to none,” said the pilgrim, who had stood near enough to hear, and
 had listened to this conversation with marked impatience. all turned
 toward the spot from whence this unexpected asseveration was heard.
original
 “i say,” repeated the pilgrim in a firm and strong voice, “that the
 english chivalry were second to none who ever drew sword in defence of the
 holy land. i say besides, for i saw it, that king richard himself, and
 five of his knights, held a tournament after the taking of st
 john-de-acre, as challengers against all comers. i say that, on that day,
 each knight ran three courses, and cast to the ground three antagonists. i
 add, that seven of these assailants were knights of the temple—and
 sir brian de bois-guilbert well knows the truth of what i tell you.”
 it is impossible for language to describe the bitter scowl of rage which
 rendered yet darker the swarthy countenance of the templar. in the
 extremity of his resentment and confusion, his quivering fingers griped
 towards the handle of his sword, and perhaps only withdrew, from the
 consciousness that no act of violence could be safely executed in that
 place and presence. cedric, whose feelings were all of a right onward and
 simple kind, and were seldom occupied by more than one object at once,
 omitted, in the joyous glee with which he heard of the glory of his
 countrymen, to remark the angry confusion of his guest; “i would give thee
 this golden bracelet, pilgrim,” he said, “couldst thou tell me the names
 of those knights who upheld so gallantly the renown of merry england.”
 “that will i do blithely,” replied the pilgrim, “and without guerdon; my
 oath, for a time, prohibits me from touching gold.”
 “i will wear the bracelet for you, if you will, friend palmer,” said
 wamba.
 “the first in honour as in arms, in renown as in place,” said the pilgrim,
 “was the brave richard, king of england.”
 “i forgive him,” said cedric; “i forgive him his descent from the tyrant
 duke william.”
 “the earl of leicester was the second,” continued the pilgrim; “sir thomas
 multon of gilsland was the third.”
 “of saxon descent, he at least,” said cedric, with exultation.
 “sir foulk doilly the fourth,” proceeded the pilgrim.
 “saxon also, at least by the mother's side,” continued cedric, who
 listened with the utmost eagerness, and forgot, in part at least, his
 hatred to the normans, in the common triumph of the king of england and
 his islanders. “and who was the fifth?” he demanded.
 “the fifth was sir edwin turneham.”
 “genuine saxon, by the soul of hengist!” shouted cedric—“and the
 sixth?” he continued with eagerness—“how name you the sixth?”
 “the sixth,” said the palmer, after a pause, in which he seemed to
 recollect himself, “was a young knight of lesser renown and lower rank,
 assumed into that honourable company, less to aid their enterprise than to
 make up their number—his name dwells not in my memory.”
 “sir palmer,” said sir brian de bois-guilbert scornfully, “this assumed
 forgetfulness, after so much has been remembered, comes too late to serve
 your purpose. i will myself tell the name of the knight before whose lance
 fortune and my horse's fault occasioned my falling—it was the knight
 of ivanhoe; nor was there one of the six that, for his years, had more
 renown in arms.—yet this will i say, and loudly—that were he
 in england, and durst repeat, in this week's tournament, the challenge of
 st john-de-acre, i, mounted and armed as i now am, would give him every
 advantage of weapons, and abide the result.”
 “your challenge would soon be answered,” replied the palmer, “were your
 antagonist near you. as the matter is, disturb not the peaceful hall with
 vaunts of the issue of the conflict, which you well know cannot take
 place. if ivanhoe ever returns from palestine, i will be his surety that
 he meets you.”
 “a goodly security!” said the knight templar; “and what do you proffer as
 a pledge?”
 “this reliquary,” said the palmer, taking a small ivory box from his
 bosom, and crossing himself, “containing a portion of the true cross,
 brought from the monastery of mount carmel.”
 the prior of jorvaulx crossed himself and repeated a pater noster, in
 which all devoutly joined, excepting the jew, the mahomedans, and the
 templar; the latter of whom, without vailing his bonnet, or testifying any
 reverence for the alleged sanctity of the relic, took from his neck a gold
 chain, which he flung on the board, saying—“let prior aymer hold my
 pledge and that of this nameless vagrant, in token that when the knight of
 ivanhoe comes within the four seas of britain, he underlies the challenge
 of brian de bois-guilbert, which, if he answer not, i will proclaim him as
 a coward on the walls of every temple court in europe.”
 “it will not need,” said the lady rowena, breaking silence; “my voice
 shall be heard, if no other in this hall is raised in behalf of the absent
 ivanhoe. i affirm he will meet fairly every honourable challenge. could my
 weak warrant add security to the inestimable pledge of this holy pilgrim,
 i would pledge name and fame that ivanhoe gives this proud knight the
 meeting he desires.”
 a crowd of conflicting emotions seemed to have occupied cedric, and kept
 him silent during this discussion. gratified pride, resentment,
 embarrassment, chased each other over his broad and open brow, like the
 shadow of clouds drifting over a harvest-field; while his attendants, on
 whom the name of the sixth knight seemed to produce an effect almost
 electrical, hung in suspense upon their master's looks. but when rowena
 spoke, the sound of her voice seemed to startle him from his silence.
 “lady,” said cedric, “this beseems not; were further pledge necessary, i
 myself, offended, and justly offended, as i am, would yet gage my honour
 for the honour of ivanhoe. but the wager of battle is complete, even
 according to the fantastic fashions of norman chivalry—is it not,
 father aymer?”
 “it is,” replied the prior; “and the blessed relic and rich chain will i
 bestow safely in the treasury of our convent, until the decision of this
 warlike challenge.”
 having thus spoken, he crossed himself again and again, and after many
 genuflections and muttered prayers, he delivered the reliquary to brother
 ambrose, his attendant monk, while he himself swept up with less ceremony,
 but perhaps with no less internal satisfaction, the golden chain, and
 bestowed it in a pouch lined with perfumed leather, which opened under his
 arm. “and now, sir cedric,” he said, “my ears are chiming vespers with the
 strength of your good wine—permit us another pledge to the welfare
 of the lady rowena, and indulge us with liberty to pass to our repose.”
 “by the rood of bromholme,” said the saxon, “you do but small credit to
 your fame, sir prior! report speaks you a bonny monk, that would hear the
 matin chime ere he quitted his bowl; and, old as i am, i feared to have
 shame in encountering you. but, by my faith, a saxon boy of twelve, in my
 time, would not so soon have relinquished his goblet.”
 the prior had his own reasons, however, for persevering in the course of
 temperance which he had adopted. he was not only a professional
 peacemaker, but from practice a hater of all feuds and brawls. it was not
 altogether from a love to his neighbour, or to himself, or from a mixture
 of both. on the present occasion, he had an instinctive apprehension of
 the fiery temper of the saxon, and saw the danger that the reckless and
 presumptuous spirit, of which his companion had already given so many
 proofs, might at length produce some disagreeable explosion. he therefore
 gently insinuated the incapacity of the native of any other country to
 engage in the genial conflict of the bowl with the hardy and strong-headed
 saxons; something he mentioned, but slightly, about his own holy
 character, and ended by pressing his proposal to depart to repose.
 the grace-cup was accordingly served round, and the guests, after making
 deep obeisance to their landlord and to the lady rowena, arose and mingled
 in the hall, while the heads of the family, by separate doors, retired
 with their attendants.
 “unbelieving dog,” said the templar to isaac the jew, as he passed him in
 the throng, “dost thou bend thy course to the tournament?”
 “i do so propose,” replied isaac, bowing in all humility, “if it please
 your reverend valour.”
 “ay,” said the knight, “to gnaw the bowels of our nobles with usury, and
 to gull women and boys with gauds and toys—i warrant thee store of
 shekels in thy jewish scrip.”
 “not a shekel, not a silver penny, not a halfling—so help me the god
 of abraham!” said the jew, clasping his hands; “i go but to seek the
 assistance of some brethren of my tribe to aid me to pay the fine which
 the exchequer of the jews have imposed upon me—father jacob be my
 speed! i am an impoverished wretch—the very gaberdine i wear is
 borrowed from reuben of tadcaster.” 
 the templar smiled sourly as he replied, “beshrew thee for a false-hearted
 liar!” and passing onward, as if disdaining farther conference, he
 communed with his moslem slaves in a language unknown to the bystanders.
 the poor israelite seemed so staggered by the address of the military
 monk, that the templar had passed on to the extremity of the hall ere he
 raised his head from the humble posture which he had assumed, so far as to
 be sensible of his departure. and when he did look around, it was with the
 astonished air of one at whose feet a thunderbolt has just burst, and who
 hears still the astounding report ringing in his ears.
 the templar and prior were shortly after marshalled to their sleeping
 apartments by the steward and the cupbearer, each attended by two
 torchbearers and two servants carrying refreshments, while servants of
 inferior condition indicated to their retinue and to the other guests
 their respective places of repose.
 to buy his favour i extend this friendship:
 if he will take it, so; if not, adieu;
 and, for my love, i pray you wrong me not.
 —merchant of venice
 as the palmer, lighted by a domestic with a torch, passed through the
 intricate combination of apartments of this large and irregular mansion,
 the cupbearer coming behind him whispered in his ear, that if he had no
 objection to a cup of good mead in his apartment, there were many
 domestics in that family who would gladly hear the news he had brought
 from the holy land, and particularly that which concerned the knight of
 ivanhoe. wamba presently appeared to urge the same request, observing that
 a cup after midnight was worth three after curfew. without disputing a
 maxim urged by such grave authority, the palmer thanked them for their
 courtesy, but observed that he had included in his religious vow, an
 obligation never to speak in the kitchen on matters which were prohibited
 in the hall. “that vow,” said wamba to the cupbearer, “would scarce suit a
 serving-man.”
 the cupbearer shrugged up his shoulders in displeasure. “i thought to have
 lodged him in the solere chamber,” said he; “but since he is so unsocial
 to christians, e'en let him take the next stall to isaac the jew's.—anwold,”
 said he to the torchbearer, “carry the pilgrim to the southern cell.—i
 give you good-night,” he added, “sir palmer, with small thanks for short
 courtesy.”
 “good-night, and our lady's benison,” said the palmer, with composure; and
 his guide moved forward.
 in a small antechamber, into which several doors opened, and which was
 lighted by a small iron lamp, they met a second interruption from the
 waiting-maid of rowena, who, saying in a tone of authority, that her
 mistress desired to speak with the palmer, took the torch from the hand of
 anwold, and, bidding him await her return, made a sign to the palmer to
 follow. apparently he did not think it proper to decline this invitation
 as he had done the former; for, though his gesture indicated some surprise
 at the summons, he obeyed it without answer or remonstrance.
 a short passage, and an ascent of seven steps, each of which was composed
 of a solid beam of oak, led him to the apartment of the lady rowena, the
 rude magnificence of which corresponded to the respect which was paid to
 her by the lord of the mansion. the walls were covered with embroidered
 hangings, on which different-coloured silks, interwoven with gold and
 silver threads, had been employed with all the art of which the age was
 capable, to represent the sports of hunting and hawking. the bed was
 adorned with the same rich tapestry, and surrounded with curtains dyed
 with purple. the seats had also their stained coverings, and one, which
 was higher than the rest, was accommodated with a footstool of ivory,
 curiously carved.
 no fewer than four silver candelabras, holding great waxen torches, served
 to illuminate this apartment. yet let not modern beauty envy the
 magnificence of a saxon princess. the walls of the apartment were so ill
 finished and so full of crevices, that the rich hangings shook in the
 night blast, and, in despite of a sort of screen intended to protect them
 from the wind, the flame of the torches streamed sideways into the air,
 like the unfurled pennon of a chieftain. magnificence there was, with some
 rude attempt at taste; but of comfort there was little, and, being
 unknown, it was unmissed.
 the lady rowena, with three of her attendants standing at her back, and
 arranging her hair ere she lay down to rest, was seated in the sort of
 throne already mentioned, and looked as if born to exact general homage.
 the pilgrim acknowledged her claim to it by a low genuflection.
 “rise, palmer,” said she graciously. “the defender of the absent has a
 right to favourable reception from all who value truth, and honour
 manhood.” she then said to her train, “retire, excepting only elgitha; i
 would speak with this holy pilgrim.”
 the maidens, without leaving the apartment, retired to its further
 extremity, and sat down on a small bench against the wall, where they
 remained mute as statues, though at such a distance that their whispers
 could not have interrupted the conversation of their mistress.
 “pilgrim,” said the lady, after a moment's pause, during which she seemed
 uncertain how to address him, “you this night mentioned a name—i
 mean,” she said, with a degree of effort, “the name of ivanhoe, in the
 halls where by nature and kindred it should have sounded most acceptably;
 and yet, such is the perverse course of fate, that of many whose hearts
 must have throbbed at the sound, i, only, dare ask you where, and in what
 condition, you left him of whom you spoke?—we heard, that, having
 remained in palestine, on account of his impaired health, after the
 departure of the english army, he had experienced the persecution of the
 french faction, to whom the templars are known to be attached.”
 “i know little of the knight of ivanhoe,” answered the palmer, with a
 troubled voice. “i would i knew him better, since you, lady, are
 interested in his fate. he hath, i believe, surmounted the persecution of
 his enemies in palestine, and is on the eve of returning to england, where
 you, lady, must know better than i, what is his chance of happiness.”
 the lady rowena sighed deeply, and asked more particularly when the knight
 of ivanhoe might be expected in his native country, and whether he would
 not be exposed to great dangers by the road. on the first point, the
 palmer professed ignorance; on the second, he said that the voyage might
 be safely made by the way of venice and genoa, and from thence through
 france to england. “ivanhoe,” he said, “was so well acquainted with the
 language and manners of the french, that there was no fear of his
 incurring any hazard during that part of his travels.”
 “would to god,” said the lady rowena, “he were here safely arrived, and
 able to bear arms in the approaching tourney, in which the chivalry of
 this land are expected to display their address and valour. should
 athelstane of coningsburgh obtain the prize, ivanhoe is like to hear evil
 tidings when he reaches england.—how looked he, stranger, when you
 last saw him? had disease laid her hand heavy upon his strength and
 comeliness?”
 “he was darker,” said the palmer, “and thinner, than when he came from
 cyprus in the train of coeur-de-lion, and care seemed to sit heavy on his
 brow; but i approached not his presence, because he is unknown to me.”
 “he will,” said the lady, “i fear, find little in his native land to clear
 those clouds from his countenance. thanks, good pilgrim, for your
 information concerning the companion of my childhood.—maidens,” she
 said, “draw near—offer the sleeping cup to this holy man, whom i
 will no longer detain from repose.”
 one of the maidens presented a silver cup, containing a rich mixture of
 wine and spice, which rowena barely put to her lips. it was then offered
 to the palmer, who, after a low obeisance, tasted a few drops.
 “accept this alms, friend,” continued the lady, offering a piece of gold,
 “in acknowledgment of thy painful travail, and of the shrines thou hast
 visited.”
 the palmer received the boon with another low reverence, and followed
 edwina out of the apartment.
 in the anteroom he found his attendant anwold, who, taking the torch from
 the hand of the waiting-maid, conducted him with more haste than ceremony
 to an exterior and ignoble part of the building, where a number of small
 apartments, or rather cells, served for sleeping places to the lower order
 of domestics, and to strangers of mean degree.
 “in which of these sleeps the jew?” said the pilgrim.
 “the unbelieving dog,” answered anwold, “kennels in the cell next your
 holiness.—st dunstan, how it must be scraped and cleansed ere it be
 again fit for a christian!”
 “and where sleeps gurth the swineherd?” said the stranger.
 “gurth,” replied the bondsman, “sleeps in the cell on your right, as the
 jew on that to your left; you serve to keep the child of circumcision
 separate from the abomination of his tribe. you might have occupied a more
 honourable place had you accepted of oswald's invitation.”
 “it is as well as it is,” said the palmer; “the company, even of a jew,
 can hardly spread contamination through an oaken partition.”
 so saying, he entered the cabin allotted to him, and taking the torch from
 the domestic's hand, thanked him, and wished him good-night. having shut
 the door of his cell, he placed the torch in a candlestick made of wood,
 and looked around his sleeping apartment, the furniture of which was of
 the most simple kind. it consisted of a rude wooden stool, and still ruder
 hutch or bed-frame, stuffed with clean straw, and accommodated with two or
 three sheepskins by way of bed-clothes.
 the palmer, having extinguished his torch, threw himself, without taking
 off any part of his clothes, on this rude couch, and slept, or at least
 retained his recumbent posture, till the earliest sunbeams found their way
 through the little grated window, which served at once to admit both air
 and light to his uncomfortable cell. he then started up, and after
 repeating his matins, and adjusting his dress, he left it, and entered
 that of isaac the jew, lifting the latch as gently as he could.
 the inmate was lying in troubled slumber upon a couch similar to that on
 which the palmer himself had passed the night. such parts of his dress as
 the jew had laid aside on the preceding evening, were disposed carefully
 around his person, as if to prevent the hazard of their being carried off
 during his slumbers. there was a trouble on his brow amounting almost to
 agony. his hands and arms moved convulsively, as if struggling with the
 nightmare; and besides several ejaculations in hebrew, the following were
 distinctly heard in the norman-english, or mixed language of the country:
 “for the sake of the god of abraham, spare an unhappy old man! i am poor,
 i am penniless—should your irons wrench my limbs asunder, i could
 not gratify you!”
 the palmer awaited not the end of the jew's vision, but stirred him with
 his pilgrim's staff. the touch probably associated, as is usual, with some
 of the apprehensions excited by his dream; for the old man started up, his
 grey hair standing almost erect upon his head, and huddling some part of
 his garments about him, while he held the detached pieces with the
 tenacious grasp of a falcon, he fixed upon the palmer his keen black eyes,
 expressive of wild surprise and of bodily apprehension.
 “fear nothing from me, isaac,” said the palmer, “i come as your friend.”
 “the god of israel requite you,” said the jew, greatly relieved; “i
 dreamed—but father abraham be praised, it was but a dream.” then,
 collecting himself, he added in his usual tone, “and what may it be your
 pleasure to want at so early an hour with the poor jew?”
 “it is to tell you,” said the palmer, “that if you leave not this mansion
 instantly, and travel not with some haste, your journey may prove a
 dangerous one.”
 “holy father!” said the jew, “whom could it interest to endanger so poor a
 wretch as i am?”
 “the purpose you can best guess,” said the pilgrim; “but rely on this,
 that when the templar crossed the hall yesternight, he spoke to his
 mussulman slaves in the saracen language, which i well understand, and
 charged them this morning to watch the journey of the jew, to seize upon
 him when at a convenient distance from the mansion, and to conduct him to
 the castle of philip de malvoisin, or to that of reginald front-de-boeuf.”
 it is impossible to describe the extremity of terror which seized upon the
 jew at this information, and seemed at once to overpower his whole
 faculties. his arms fell down to his sides, and his head drooped on his
 breast, his knees bent under his weight, every nerve and muscle of his
 frame seemed to collapse and lose its energy, and he sunk at the foot of
 the palmer, not in the fashion of one who intentionally stoops, kneels, or
 prostrates himself to excite compassion, but like a man borne down on all
 sides by the pressure of some invisible force, which crushes him to the
 earth without the power of resistance.
 “holy god of abraham!” was his first exclamation, folding and elevating
 his wrinkled hands, but without raising his grey head from the pavement;
 “oh, holy moses! o, blessed aaron! the dream is not dreamed for nought,
 and the vision cometh not in vain! i feel their irons already tear my
 sinews! i feel the rack pass over my body like the saws, and harrows, and
 axes of iron over the men of rabbah, and of the cities of the children of
 ammon!”
 “stand up, isaac, and hearken to me,” said the palmer, who viewed the
 extremity of his distress with a compassion in which contempt was largely
 mingled; “you have cause for your terror, considering how your brethren
 have been used, in order to extort from them their hoards, both by princes
 and nobles; but stand up, i say, and i will point out to you the means of
 escape. leave this mansion instantly, while its inmates sleep sound after
 the last night's revel. i will guide you by the secret paths of the
 forest, known as well to me as to any forester that ranges it, and i will
 not leave you till you are under safe conduct of some chief or baron going
 to the tournament, whose good-will you have probably the means of
 securing.”
 as the ears of isaac received the hopes of escape which this speech
 intimated, he began gradually, and inch by inch, as it were, to raise
 himself up from the ground, until he fairly rested upon his knees,
 throwing back his long grey hair and beard, and fixing his keen black eyes
 upon the palmer's face, with a look expressive at once of hope and fear,
 not unmingled with suspicion. but when he heard the concluding part of the
 sentence, his original terror appeared to revive in full force, and he
 dropt once more on his face, exclaiming, “'i' possess the means of
 securing good-will! alas! there is but one road to the favour of a
 christian, and how can the poor jew find it, whom extortions have already
 reduced to the misery of lazarus?” then, as if suspicion had overpowered
 his other feelings, he suddenly exclaimed, “for the love of god, young
 man, betray me not—for the sake of the great father who made us all,
 jew as well as gentile, israelite and ishmaelite—do me no treason! i
 have not means to secure the good-will of a christian beggar, were he
 rating it at a single penny.” as he spoke these last words, he raised
 himself, and grasped the palmer's mantle with a look of the most earnest
 entreaty. the pilgrim extricated himself, as if there were contamination
 in the touch.
 “wert thou loaded with all the wealth of thy tribe,” he said, “what
 interest have i to injure thee?—in this dress i am vowed to poverty,
 nor do i change it for aught save a horse and a coat of mail. yet think
 not that i care for thy company, or propose myself advantage by it; remain
 here if thou wilt—cedric the saxon may protect thee.”
 “alas!” said the jew, “he will not let me travel in his train—saxon
 or norman will be equally ashamed of the poor israelite; and to travel by
 myself through the domains of philip de malvoisin and reginald
 front-de-boeuf—good youth, i will go with you!—let us haste—let
 us gird up our loins—let us flee!—here is thy staff, why wilt
 thou tarry?”
 “i tarry not,” said the pilgrim, giving way to the urgency of his
 companion; “but i must secure the means of leaving this place—follow
 me.”
 he led the way to the adjoining cell, which, as the reader is apprised,
 was occupied by gurth the swineherd.—“arise, gurth,” said the
 pilgrim, “arise quickly. undo the postern gate, and let out the jew and
 me.”
 gurth, whose occupation, though now held so mean, gave him as much
 consequence in saxon england as that of eumaeus in ithaca, was offended at
 the familiar and commanding tone assumed by the palmer. “the jew leaving
 rotherwood,” said he, raising himself on his elbow, and looking
 superciliously at him without quitting his pallet, “and travelling in
 company with the palmer to boot—”
 “i should as soon have dreamt,” said wamba, who entered the apartment at
 the instant, “of his stealing away with a gammon of bacon.”
 “nevertheless,” said gurth, again laying down his head on the wooden log
 which served him for a pillow, “both jew and gentile must be content to
 abide the opening of the great gate—we suffer no visitors to depart
 by stealth at these unseasonable hours.”
 “nevertheless,” said the pilgrim, in a commanding tone, “you will not, i
 think, refuse me that favour.”
 so saying, he stooped over the bed of the recumbent swineherd, and
 whispered something in his ear in saxon. gurth started up as if
 electrified. the pilgrim, raising his finger in an attitude as if to
 express caution, added, “gurth, beware—thou are wont to be prudent.
 i say, undo the postern—thou shalt know more anon.”
 with hasty alacrity gurth obeyed him, while wamba and the jew followed,
 both wondering at the sudden change in the swineherd's demeanour. “my
 mule, my mule!” said the jew, as soon as they stood without the postern.
 “fetch him his mule,” said the pilgrim; “and, hearest thou,—let me
 have another, that i may bear him company till he is beyond these parts—i
 will return it safely to some of cedric's train at ashby. and do thou”—he
 whispered the rest in gurth's ear.
 “willingly, most willingly shall it be done,” said gurth, and instantly
 departed to execute the commission.
 “i wish i knew,” said wamba, when his comrade's back was turned, “what you
 palmers learn in the holy land.”
 “to say our orisons, fool,” answered the pilgrim, “to repent our sins, and
 to mortify ourselves with fastings, vigils, and long prayers.”
 “something more potent than that,” answered the jester; “for when would
 repentance or prayer make gurth do a courtesy, or fasting or vigil
 persuade him to lend you a mule?—i trow you might as well have told
 his favourite black boar of thy vigils and penance, and wouldst have
 gotten as civil an answer.”
 “go to,” said the pilgrim, “thou art but a saxon fool.”
 “thou sayst well,” said the jester; “had i been born a norman, as i think
 thou art, i would have had luck on my side, and been next door to a wise
 man.”
 at this moment gurth appeared on the opposite side of the moat with the
 mules. the travellers crossed the ditch upon a drawbridge of only two
 planks breadth, the narrowness of which was matched with the straitness of
 the postern, and with a little wicket in the exterior palisade, which gave
 access to the forest. no sooner had they reached the mules, than the jew,
 with hasty and trembling hands, secured behind the saddle a small bag of
 blue buckram, which he took from under his cloak, containing, as he
 muttered, “a change of raiment—only a change of raiment.” then
 getting upon the animal with more alacrity and haste than could have been
 anticipated from his years, he lost no time in so disposing of the skirts
 of his gabardine as to conceal completely from observation the burden
 which he had thus deposited “en croupe”.
 the pilgrim mounted with more deliberation, reaching, as he departed, his
 hand to gurth, who kissed it with the utmost possible veneration. the
 swineherd stood gazing after the travellers until they were lost under the
 boughs of the forest path, when he was disturbed from his reverie by the
 voice of wamba.
 “knowest thou,” said the jester, “my good friend gurth, that thou art
 strangely courteous and most unwontedly pious on this summer morning? i
 would i were a black prior or a barefoot palmer, to avail myself of thy
 unwonted zeal and courtesy—certes, i would make more out of it than
 a kiss of the hand.”
 “thou art no fool thus far, wamba,” answered gurth, “though thou arguest
 from appearances, and the wisest of us can do no more—but it is time
 to look after my charge.”
 so saying, he turned back to the mansion, attended by the jester.
 meanwhile the travellers continued to press on their journey with a
 dispatch which argued the extremity of the jew's fears, since persons at
 his age are seldom fond of rapid motion. the palmer, to whom every path
 and outlet in the wood appeared to be familiar, led the way through the
 most devious paths, and more than once excited anew the suspicion of the
 israelite, that he intended to betray him into some ambuscade of his
 enemies.
 his doubts might have been indeed pardoned; for, except perhaps the flying
 fish, there was no race existing on the earth, in the air, or the waters,
 who were the object of such an unintermitting, general, and relentless
 persecution as the jews of this period. upon the slightest and most
 unreasonable pretences, as well as upon accusations the most absurd and
 groundless, their persons and property were exposed to every turn of
 popular fury; for norman, saxon, dane, and briton, however adverse these
 races were to each other, contended which should look with greatest
 detestation upon a people, whom it was accounted a point of religion to
 hate, to revile, to despise, to plunder, and to persecute. the kings of
 the norman race, and the independent nobles, who followed their example in
 all acts of tyranny, maintained against this devoted people a persecution
 of a more regular, calculated, and self-interested kind. it is a
 well-known story of king john, that he confined a wealthy jew in one of
 the royal castles, and daily caused one of his teeth to be torn out,
 until, when the jaw of the unhappy israelite was half disfurnished, he
 consented to pay a large sum, which it was the tyrant's object to extort
 from him. the little ready money which was in the country was chiefly in
 possession of this persecuted people, and the nobility hesitated not to
 follow the example of their sovereign, in wringing it from them by every
 species of oppression, and even personal torture. yet the passive courage
 inspired by the love of gain, induced the jews to dare the various evils
 to which they were subjected, in consideration of the immense profits
 which they were enabled to realize in a country naturally so wealthy as
 england. in spite of every kind of discouragement, and even of the special
 court of taxations already mentioned, called the jews' exchequer, erected
 for the very purpose of despoiling and distressing them, the jews
 increased, multiplied, and accumulated huge sums, which they transferred
 from one hand to another by means of bills of exchange—an invention
 for which commerce is said to be indebted to them, and which enabled them
 to transfer their wealth from land to land, that when threatened with
 oppression in one country, their treasure might be secured in another.
 the obstinacy and avarice of the jews being thus in a measure placed in
 opposition to the fanaticism that tyranny of those under whom they lived,
 seemed to increase in proportion to the persecution with which they were
 visited; and the immense wealth they usually acquired in commerce, while
 it frequently placed them in danger, was at other times used to extend
 their influence, and to secure to them a certain degree of protection. on
 these terms they lived; and their character, influenced accordingly, was
 watchful, suspicious, and timid—yet obstinate, uncomplying, and
 skilful in evading the dangers to which they were exposed.
 when the travellers had pushed on at a rapid rate through many devious
 paths, the palmer at length broke silence.
 “that large decayed oak,” he said, “marks the boundaries over which
 front-de-boeuf claims authority—we are long since far from those of
 malvoisin. there is now no fear of pursuit.”
 “may the wheels of their chariots be taken off,” said the jew, “like those
 of the host of pharaoh, that they may drive heavily!—but leave me
 not, good pilgrim—think but of that fierce and savage templar, with
 his saracen slaves—they will regard neither territory, nor manor,
 nor lordship.”
 “our road,” said the palmer, “should here separate; for it beseems not men
 of my character and thine to travel together longer than needs must be.
 besides, what succour couldst thou have from me, a peaceful pilgrim,
 against two armed heathens?”
 “o good youth,” answered the jew, “thou canst defend me, and i know thou
 wouldst. poor as i am, i will requite it—not with money, for money,
 so help me my father abraham, i have none—but—-”
 “money and recompense,” said the palmer, interrupting him, “i have already
 said i require not of thee. guide thee i can; and, it may be, even in some
 sort defend thee; since to protect a jew against a saracen, can scarce be
 accounted unworthy of a christian. therefore, jew, i will see thee safe
 under some fitting escort. we are now not far from the town of sheffield,
 where thou mayest easily find many of thy tribe with whom to take refuge.”
 “the blessing of jacob be upon thee, good youth!” said the jew; “in
 sheffield i can harbour with my kinsman zareth, and find some means of
 travelling forth with safety.”
 “be it so,” said the palmer; “at sheffield then we part, and
 half-an-hour's riding will bring us in sight of that town.”
 the half hour was spent in perfect silence on both parts; the pilgrim
 perhaps disdaining to address the jew, except in case of absolute
 necessity, and the jew not presuming to force a conversation with a person
 whose journey to the holy sepulchre gave a sort of sanctity to his
 character. they paused on the top of a gently rising bank, and the
 pilgrim, pointing to the town of sheffield, which lay beneath them,
 repeated the words, “here, then, we part.”
 “not till you have had the poor jew's thanks,” said isaac; “for i presume
 not to ask you to go with me to my kinsman zareth's, who might aid me with
 some means of repaying your good offices.”
 “i have already said,” answered the pilgrim, “that i desire no recompense.
 if among the huge list of thy debtors, thou wilt, for my sake, spare the
 gyves and the dungeon to some unhappy christian who stands in thy danger,
 i shall hold this morning's service to thee well bestowed.”
 “stay, stay,” said the jew, laying hold of his garment; “something would i
 do more than this, something for thyself.—god knows the jew is poor—yes,
 isaac is the beggar of his tribe—but forgive me should i guess what
 thou most lackest at this moment.”
 “if thou wert to guess truly,” said the palmer, “it is what thou canst not
 supply, wert thou as wealthy as thou sayst thou art poor.”
 “as i say?” echoed the jew; “o! believe it, i say but the truth; i am a
 plundered, indebted, distressed man. hard hands have wrung from me my
 goods, my money, my ships, and all that i possessed—yet i can tell
 thee what thou lackest, and, it may be, supply it too. thy wish even now
 is for a horse and armour.”
 the palmer started, and turned suddenly towards the jew:—“what fiend
 prompted that guess?” said he, hastily.
 “no matter,” said the jew, smiling, “so that it be a true one—and,
 as i can guess thy want, so i can supply it.”
 “but consider,” said the palmer, “my character, my dress, my vow.”
 “i know you christians,” replied the jew, “and that the noblest of you
 will take the staff and sandal in superstitious penance, and walk afoot to
 visit the graves of dead men.”
 “blaspheme not, jew,” said the pilgrim, sternly.
 “forgive me,” said the jew; “i spoke rashly. but there dropt words from
 you last night and this morning, that, like sparks from flint, showed the
 metal within; and in the bosom of that palmer's gown, is hidden a knight's
 chain and spurs of gold. they glanced as you stooped over my bed in the
 morning.”
 the pilgrim could not forbear smiling. “were thy garments searched by as
 curious an eye, isaac,” said he, “what discoveries might not be made?”
 “no more of that,” said the jew, changing colour; and drawing forth his
 writing materials in haste, as if to stop the conversation, he began to
 write upon a piece of paper which he supported on the top of his yellow
 cap, without dismounting from his mule. when he had finished, he delivered
 the scroll, which was in the hebrew character, to the pilgrim, saying, “in
 the town of leicester all men know the rich jew, kirjath jairam of
 lombardy; give him this scroll—he hath on sale six milan harnesses,
 the worst would suit a crowned head—ten goodly steeds, the worst
 might mount a king, were he to do battle for his throne. of these he will
 give thee thy choice, with every thing else that can furnish thee forth
 for the tournament: when it is over, thou wilt return them safely—unless
 thou shouldst have wherewith to pay their value to the owner.”
 “but, isaac,” said the pilgrim, smiling, “dost thou know that in these
 sports, the arms and steed of the knight who is unhorsed are forfeit to
 his victor? now i may be unfortunate, and so lose what i cannot replace or
 repay.”
 the jew looked somewhat astounded at this possibility; but collecting his
 courage, he replied hastily. “no—no—no—it is impossible—i
 will not think so. the blessing of our father will be upon thee. thy lance
 will be powerful as the rod of moses.”
 so saying, he was turning his mule's head away, when the palmer, in his
 turn, took hold of his gaberdine. “nay, but isaac, thou knowest not all
 the risk. the steed may be slain, the armour injured—for i will
 spare neither horse nor man. besides, those of thy tribe give nothing for
 nothing; something there must be paid for their use.”
 the jew twisted himself in the saddle, like a man in a fit of the colic;
 but his better feelings predominated over those which were most familiar
 to him. “i care not,” he said, “i care not—let me go. if there is
 damage, it will cost you nothing—if there is usage money, kirjath
 jairam will forgive it for the sake of his kinsman isaac. fare thee well!—yet
 hark thee, good youth,” said he, turning about, “thrust thyself not too
 forward into this vain hurly-burly—i speak not for endangering the
 steed, and coat of armour, but for the sake of thine own life and limbs.”
 “gramercy for thy caution,” said the palmer, again smiling; “i will use
 thy courtesy frankly, and it will go hard with me but i will requite it.”
 they parted, and took different roads for the town of sheffield.
 knights, with a long retinue of their squires,
 in gaudy liveries march and quaint attires;
 one laced the helm, another held the lance,
 a third the shining buckler did advance.
 the courser paw'd the ground with restless feet,
 and snorting foam'd and champ'd the golden bit.
 the smiths and armourers on palfreys ride,
 files in their hands, and hammers at their side;
 and nails for loosen'd spears, and thongs for shields provide.
 the yeomen guard the streets in seemly bands;
 and clowns come crowding on, with cudgels in their hands.
 —palamon and arcite
 the condition of the english nation was at this time sufficiently
 miserable. king richard was absent a prisoner, and in the power of the
 perfidious and cruel duke of austria. even the very place of his captivity
 was uncertain, and his fate but very imperfectly known to the generality
 of his subjects, who were, in the meantime, a prey to every species of
 subaltern oppression.
 prince john, in league with philip of france, coeur-de-lion's mortal
 enemy, was using every species of influence with the duke of austria, to
 prolong the captivity of his brother richard, to whom he stood indebted
 for so many favours. in the meantime, he was strengthening his own faction
 in the kingdom, of which he proposed to dispute the succession, in case of
 the king's death, with the legitimate heir, arthur duke of brittany, son
 of geoffrey plantagenet, the elder brother of john. this usurpation, it is
 well known, he afterwards effected. his own character being light,
 profligate, and perfidious, john easily attached to his person and
 faction, not only all who had reason to dread the resentment of richard
 for criminal proceedings during his absence, but also the numerous class
 of “lawless resolutes,” whom the crusades had turned back on their
 country, accomplished in the vices of the east, impoverished in substance,
 and hardened in character, and who placed their hopes of harvest in civil
 commotion. to these causes of public distress and apprehension, must be
 added, the multitude of outlaws, who, driven to despair by the oppression
 of the feudal nobility, and the severe exercise of the forest laws, banded
 together in large gangs, and, keeping possession of the forests and the
 wastes, set at defiance the justice and magistracy of the country. the
 nobles themselves, each fortified within his own castle, and playing the
 petty sovereign over his own dominions, were the leaders of bands scarce
 less lawless and oppressive than those of the avowed depredators. to
 maintain these retainers, and to support the extravagance and magnificence
 which their pride induced them to affect, the nobility borrowed sums of
 money from the jews at the most usurious interest, which gnawed into their
 estates like consuming cankers, scarce to be cured unless when
 circumstances gave them an opportunity of getting free, by exercising upon
 their creditors some act of unprincipled violence.
 under the various burdens imposed by this unhappy state of affairs, the
 people of england suffered deeply for the present, and had yet more
 dreadful cause to fear for the future. to augment their misery, a
 contagious disorder of a dangerous nature spread through the land; and,
 rendered more virulent by the uncleanness, the indifferent food, and the
 wretched lodging of the lower classes, swept off many whose fate the
 survivors were tempted to envy, as exempting them from the evils which
 were to come.
 yet amid these accumulated distresses, the poor as well as the rich, the
 vulgar as well as the noble, in the event of a tournament, which was the
 grand spectacle of that age, felt as much interested as the half-starved
 citizen of madrid, who has not a real left to buy provisions for his
 family, feels in the issue of a bull-feast. neither duty nor infirmity
 could keep youth or age from such exhibitions. the passage of arms, as it
 was called, which was to take place at ashby, in the county of leicester,
 as champions of the first renown were to take the field in the presence of
 prince john himself, who was expected to grace the lists, had attracted
 universal attention, and an immense confluence of persons of all ranks
 hastened upon the appointed morning to the place of combat.
 the scene was singularly romantic. on the verge of a wood, which
 approached to within a mile of the town of ashby, was an extensive meadow,
 of the finest and most beautiful green turf, surrounded on one side by the
 forest, and fringed on the other by straggling oak-trees, some of which
 had grown to an immense size. the ground, as if fashioned on purpose for
 the martial display which was intended, sloped gradually down on all sides
 to a level bottom, which was enclosed for the lists with strong palisades,
 forming a space of a quarter of a mile in length, and about half as broad.
 the form of the enclosure was an oblong square, save that the corners were
 considerably rounded off, in order to afford more convenience for the
 spectators. the openings for the entry of the combatants were at the
 northern and southern extremities of the lists, accessible by strong
 wooden gates, each wide enough to admit two horsemen riding abreast. at
 each of these portals were stationed two heralds, attended by six
 trumpets, as many pursuivants, and a strong body of men-at-arms for
 maintaining order, and ascertaining the quality of the knights who
 proposed to engage in this martial game.
 on a platform beyond the southern entrance, formed by a natural elevation
 of the ground, were pitched five magnificent pavilions, adorned with
 pennons of russet and black, the chosen colours of the five knights
 challengers. the cords of the tents were of the same colour. before each
 pavilion was suspended the shield of the knight by whom it was occupied,
 and beside it stood his squire, quaintly disguised as a salvage or silvan
 man, or in some other fantastic dress, according to the taste of his
 master, and the character he was pleased to assume during the game. 
 the central pavilion, as the place of honour, had been assigned to brian
 be bois-guilbert, whose renown in all games of chivalry, no less than his
 connexions with the knights who had undertaken this passage of arms, had
 occasioned him to be eagerly received into the company of the challengers,
 and even adopted as their chief and leader, though he had so recently
 joined them. on one side of his tent were pitched those of reginald
 front-de-boeuf and richard de malvoisin, and on the other was the pavilion
 of hugh de grantmesnil, a noble baron in the vicinity, whose ancestor had
 been lord high steward of england in the time of the conqueror, and his
 son william rufus. ralph de vipont, a knight of st john of jerusalem, who
 had some ancient possessions at a place called heather, near
 ashby-de-la-zouche, occupied the fifth pavilion. from the entrance into
 the lists, a gently sloping passage, ten yards in breadth, led up to the
 platform on which the tents were pitched. it was strongly secured by a
 palisade on each side, as was the esplanade in front of the pavilions, and
 the whole was guarded by men-at-arms.
 the northern access to the lists terminated in a similar entrance of
 thirty feet in breadth, at the extremity of which was a large enclosed
 space for such knights as might be disposed to enter the lists with the
 challengers, behind which were placed tents containing refreshments of
 every kind for their accommodation, with armourers, tarriers, and other
 attendants, in readiness to give their services wherever they might be
 necessary.
 the exterior of the lists was in part occupied by temporary galleries,
 spread with tapestry and carpets, and accommodated with cushions for the
 convenience of those ladies and nobles who were expected to attend the
 tournament. a narrow space, betwixt these galleries and the lists, gave
 accommodation for yeomanry and spectators of a better degree than the mere
 vulgar, and might be compared to the pit of a theatre. the promiscuous
 multitude arranged themselves upon large banks of turf prepared for the
 purpose, which, aided by the natural elevation of the ground, enabled them
 to overlook the galleries, and obtain a fair view into the lists. besides
 the accommodation which these stations afforded, many hundreds had perched
 themselves on the branches of the trees which surrounded the meadow; and
 even the steeple of a country church, at some distance, was crowded with
 spectators.
 it only remains to notice respecting the general arrangement, that one
 gallery in the very centre of the eastern side of the lists, and
 consequently exactly opposite to the spot where the shock of the combat
 was to take place, was raised higher than the others, more richly
 decorated, and graced by a sort of throne and canopy, on which the royal
 arms were emblazoned. squires, pages, and yeomen in rich liveries, waited
 around this place of honour, which was designed for prince john and his
 attendants. opposite to this royal gallery was another, elevated to the
 same height, on the western side of the lists; and more gaily, if less
 sumptuously decorated, than that destined for the prince himself. a train
 of pages and of young maidens, the most beautiful who could be selected,
 gaily dressed in fancy habits of green and pink, surrounded a throne
 decorated in the same colours. among pennons and flags bearing wounded
 hearts, burning hearts, bleeding hearts, bows and quivers, and all the
 commonplace emblems of the triumphs of cupid, a blazoned inscription
 informed the spectators, that this seat of honour was designed for “la
 royne de las beaulte et des amours”. but who was to represent the queen of
 beauty and of love on the present occasion no one was prepared to guess.
 meanwhile, spectators of every description thronged forward to occupy
 their respective stations, and not without many quarrels concerning those
 which they were entitled to hold. some of these were settled by the
 men-at-arms with brief ceremony; the shafts of their battle-axes, and
 pummels of their swords, being readily employed as arguments to convince
 the more refractory. others, which involved the rival claims of more
 elevated persons, were determined by the heralds, or by the two marshals
 of the field, william de wyvil, and stephen de martival, who, armed at all
 points, rode up and down the lists to enforce and preserve good order
 among the spectators.
 gradually the galleries became filled with knights and nobles, in their
 robes of peace, whose long and rich-tinted mantles were contrasted with
 the gayer and more splendid habits of the ladies, who, in a greater
 proportion than even the men themselves, thronged to witness a sport,
 which one would have thought too bloody and dangerous to afford their sex
 much pleasure. the lower and interior space was soon filled by substantial
 yeomen and burghers, and such of the lesser gentry, as, from modesty,
 poverty, or dubious title, durst not assume any higher place. it was of
 course amongst these that the most frequent disputes for precedence
 occurred.
 “dog of an unbeliever,” said an old man, whose threadbare tunic bore
 witness to his poverty, as his sword, and dagger, and golden chain
 intimated his pretensions to rank,—“whelp of a she-wolf! darest thou
 press upon a christian, and a norman gentleman of the blood of
 montdidier?”
 this rough expostulation was addressed to no other than our acquaintance
 isaac, who, richly and even magnificently dressed in a gaberdine
 ornamented with lace and lined with fur, was endeavouring to make place in
 the foremost row beneath the gallery for his daughter, the beautiful
 rebecca, who had joined him at ashby, and who was now hanging on her
 father's arm, not a little terrified by the popular displeasure which
 seemed generally excited by her parent's presumption. but isaac, though we
 have seen him sufficiently timid on other occasions, knew well that at
 present he had nothing to fear. it was not in places of general resort, or
 where their equals were assembled, that any avaricious or malevolent noble
 durst offer him injury. at such meetings the jews were under the
 protection of the general law; and if that proved a weak assurance, it
 usually happened that there were among the persons assembled some barons,
 who, for their own interested motives, were ready to act as their
 protectors. on the present occasion, isaac felt more than usually
 confident, being aware that prince john was even then in the very act of
 negotiating a large loan from the jews of york, to be secured upon certain
 jewels and lands. isaac's own share in this transaction was considerable,
 and he well knew that the prince's eager desire to bring it to a
 conclusion would ensure him his protection in the dilemma in which he
 stood.
 emboldened by these considerations, the jew pursued his point, and jostled
 the norman christian, without respect either to his descent, quality, or
 religion. the complaints of the old man, however, excited the indignation
 of the bystanders. one of these, a stout well-set yeoman, arrayed in
 lincoln green, having twelve arrows stuck in his belt, with a baldric and
 badge of silver, and a bow of six feet length in his hand, turned short
 round, and while his countenance, which his constant exposure to weather
 had rendered brown as a hazel nut, grew darker with anger, he advised the
 jew to remember that all the wealth he had acquired by sucking the blood
 of his miserable victims had but swelled him like a bloated spider, which
 might be overlooked while he kept in a corner, but would be crushed if it
 ventured into the light. this intimation, delivered in norman-english with
 a firm voice and a stern aspect, made the jew shrink back; and he would
 have probably withdrawn himself altogether from a vicinity so dangerous,
 had not the attention of every one been called to the sudden entrance of
 prince john, who at that moment entered the lists, attended by a numerous
 and gay train, consisting partly of laymen, partly of churchmen, as light
 in their dress, and as gay in their demeanour, as their companions. among
 the latter was the prior of jorvaulx, in the most gallant trim which a
 dignitary of the church could venture to exhibit. fur and gold were not
 spared in his garments; and the points of his boots, out-heroding the
 preposterous fashion of the time, turned up so very far, as to be
 attached, not to his knees merely, but to his very girdle, and effectually
 prevented him from putting his foot into the stirrup. this, however, was a
 slight inconvenience to the gallant abbot, who, perhaps, even rejoicing in
 the opportunity to display his accomplished horsemanship before so many
 spectators, especially of the fair sex, dispensed with the use of these
 supports to a timid rider. the rest of prince john's retinue consisted of
 the favourite leaders of his mercenary troops, some marauding barons and
 profligate attendants upon the court, with several knights templars and
 knights of st john.
 it may be here remarked, that the knights of these two orders were
 accounted hostile to king richard, having adopted the side of philip of
 france in the long train of disputes which took place in palestine betwixt
 that monarch and the lion-hearted king of england. it was the well-known
 consequence of this discord that richard's repeated victories had been
 rendered fruitless, his romantic attempts to besiege jerusalem
 disappointed, and the fruit of all the glory which he had acquired had
 dwindled into an uncertain truce with the sultan saladin. with the same
 policy which had dictated the conduct of their brethren in the holy land,
 the templars and hospitallers in england and normandy attached themselves
 to the faction of prince john, having little reason to desire the return
 of richard to england, or the succession of arthur, his legitimate heir.
 for the opposite reason, prince john hated and contemned the few saxon
 families of consequence which subsisted in england, and omitted no
 opportunity of mortifying and affronting them; being conscious that his
 person and pretensions were disliked by them, as well as by the greater
 part of the english commons, who feared farther innovation upon their
 rights and liberties, from a sovereign of john's licentious and tyrannical
 disposition.
 attended by this gallant equipage, himself well mounted, and splendidly
 dressed in crimson and in gold, bearing upon his hand a falcon, and having
 his head covered by a rich fur bonnet, adorned with a circle of precious
 stones, from which his long curled hair escaped and overspread his
 shoulders, prince john, upon a grey and high-mettled palfrey, caracoled
 within the lists at the head of his jovial party, laughing loud with his
 train, and eyeing with all the boldness of royal criticism the beauties
 who adorned the lofty galleries.
 those who remarked in the physiognomy of the prince a dissolute audacity,
 mingled with extreme haughtiness and indifference to the feelings of
 others could not yet deny to his countenance that sort of comeliness which
 belongs to an open set of features, well formed by nature, modelled by art
 to the usual rules of courtesy, yet so far frank and honest, that they
 seemed as if they disclaimed to conceal the natural workings of the soul.
 such an expression is often mistaken for manly frankness, when in truth it
 arises from the reckless indifference of a libertine disposition,
 conscious of superiority of birth, of wealth, or of some other
 adventitious advantage, totally unconnected with personal merit. to those
 who did not think so deeply, and they were the greater number by a hundred
 to one, the splendour of prince john's “rheno”, (i.e. fur tippet,) the
 richness of his cloak, lined with the most costly sables, his maroquin
 boots and golden spurs, together with the grace with which he managed his
 palfrey, were sufficient to merit clamorous applause.
 in his joyous caracole round the lists, the attention of the prince was
 called by the commotion, not yet subsided, which had attended the
 ambitious movement of isaac towards the higher places of the assembly. the
 quick eye of prince john instantly recognised the jew, but was much more
 agreeably attracted by the beautiful daughter of zion, who, terrified by
 the tumult, clung close to the arm of her aged father.
 the figure of rebecca might indeed have compared with the proudest
 beauties of england, even though it had been judged by as shrewd a
 connoisseur as prince john. her form was exquisitely symmetrical, and was
 shown to advantage by a sort of eastern dress, which she wore according to
 the fashion of the females of her nation. her turban of yellow silk suited
 well with the darkness of her complexion. the brilliancy of her eyes, the
 superb arch of her eyebrows, her well-formed aquiline nose, her teeth as
 white as pearl, and the profusion of her sable tresses, which, each
 arranged in its own little spiral of twisted curls, fell down upon as much
 of a lovely neck and bosom as a simarre of the richest persian silk,
 exhibiting flowers in their natural colours embossed upon a purple ground,
 permitted to be visible—all these constituted a combination of
 loveliness, which yielded not to the most beautiful of the maidens who
 surrounded her. it is true, that of the golden and pearl-studded clasps,
 which closed her vest from the throat to the waist, the three uppermost
 were left unfastened on account of the heat, which somewhat enlarged the
 prospect to which we allude. a diamond necklace, with pendants of
 inestimable value, were by this means also made more conspicuous. the
 feather of an ostrich, fastened in her turban by an agraffe set with
 brilliants, was another distinction of the beautiful jewess, scoffed and
 sneered at by the proud dames who sat above her, but secretly envied by
 those who affected to deride them.
 “by the bald scalp of abraham,” said prince john, “yonder jewess must be
 the very model of that perfection, whose charms drove frantic the wisest
 king that ever lived! what sayest thou, prior aymer?—by the temple
 of that wise king, which our wiser brother richard proved unable to
 recover, she is the very bride of the canticles!”
 “the rose of sharon and the lily of the valley,”—answered the prior,
 in a sort of snuffling tone; “but your grace must remember she is still
 but a jewess.”
 “ay!” added prince john, without heeding him, “and there is my mammon of
 unrighteousness too—the marquis of marks, the baron of byzants,
 contesting for place with penniless dogs, whose threadbare cloaks have not
 a single cross in their pouches to keep the devil from dancing there. by
 the body of st mark, my prince of supplies, with his lovely jewess, shall
 have a place in the gallery!—what is she, isaac? thy wife or thy
 daughter, that eastern houri that thou lockest under thy arm as thou
 wouldst thy treasure-casket?”
 “my daughter rebecca, so please your grace,” answered isaac, with a low
 congee, nothing embarrassed by the prince's salutation, in which, however,
 there was at least as much mockery as courtesy.
 “the wiser man thou,” said john, with a peal of laughter, in which his gay
 followers obsequiously joined. “but, daughter or wife, she should be
 preferred according to her beauty and thy merits.—who sits above
 there?” he continued, bending his eye on the gallery. “saxon churls,
 lolling at their lazy length!—out upon them!—let them sit
 close, and make room for my prince of usurers and his lovely daughter.
 i'll make the hinds know they must share the high places of the synagogue
 with those whom the synagogue properly belongs to.”
 those who occupied the gallery to whom this injurious and unpolite speech
 was addressed, were the family of cedric the saxon, with that of his ally
 and kinsman, athelstane of coningsburgh, a personage, who, on account of
 his descent from the last saxon monarchs of england, was held in the
 highest respect by all the saxon natives of the north of england. but with
 the blood of this ancient royal race, many of their infirmities had
 descended to athelstane. he was comely in countenance, bulky and strong in
 person, and in the flower of his age—yet inanimate in expression,
 dull-eyed, heavy-browed, inactive and sluggish in all his motions, and so
 slow in resolution, that the soubriquet of one of his ancestors was
 conferred upon him, and he was very generally called athelstane the
 unready. his friends, and he had many, who, as well as cedric, were
 passionately attached to him, contended that this sluggish temper arose
 not from want of courage, but from mere want of decision; others alleged
 that his hereditary vice of drunkenness had obscured his faculties, never
 of a very acute order, and that the passive courage and meek good-nature
 which remained behind, were merely the dregs of a character that might
 have been deserving of praise, but of which all the valuable parts had
 flown off in the progress of a long course of brutal debauchery.
 it was to this person, such as we have described him, that the prince
 addressed his imperious command to make place for isaac and rebecca.
 athelstane, utterly confounded at an order which the manners and feelings
 of the times rendered so injuriously insulting, unwilling to obey, yet
 undetermined how to resist, opposed only the “vis inertiae” to the will of
 john; and, without stirring or making any motion whatever of obedience,
 opened his large grey eyes, and stared at the prince with an astonishment
 which had in it something extremely ludicrous. but the impatient john
 regarded it in no such light.
 “the saxon porker,” he said, “is either asleep or minds me not—prick
 him with your lance, de bracy,” speaking to a knight who rode near him,
 the leader of a band of free companions, or condottieri; that is, of
 mercenaries belonging to no particular nation, but attached for the time
 to any prince by whom they were paid. there was a murmur even among the
 attendants of prince john; but de bracy, whose profession freed him from
 all scruples, extended his long lance over the space which separated the
 gallery from the lists, and would have executed the commands of the prince
 before athelstane the unready had recovered presence of mind sufficient
 even to draw back his person from the weapon, had not cedric, as prompt as
 his companion was tardy, unsheathed, with the speed of lightning, the
 short sword which he wore, and at a single blow severed the point of the
 lance from the handle. the blood rushed into the countenance of prince
 john. he swore one of his deepest oaths, and was about to utter some
 threat corresponding in violence, when he was diverted from his purpose,
 partly by his own attendants, who gathered around him conjuring him to be
 patient, partly by a general exclamation of the crowd, uttered in loud
 applause of the spirited conduct of cedric. the prince rolled his eyes in
 indignation, as if to collect some safe and easy victim; and chancing to
 encounter the firm glance of the same archer whom we have already noticed,
 and who seemed to persist in his gesture of applause, in spite of the
 frowning aspect which the prince bent upon him, he demanded his reason for
 clamouring thus.
 “i always add my hollo,” said the yeoman, “when i see a good shot, or a
 gallant blow.”
 “sayst thou?” answered the prince; “then thou canst hit the white thyself,
 i'll warrant.”
 “a woodsman's mark, and at woodsman's distance, i can hit,” answered the
 yeoman.
 “and wat tyrrel's mark, at a hundred yards,” said a voice from behind, but
 by whom uttered could not be discerned.
 this allusion to the fate of william rufus, his relative, at once incensed
 and alarmed prince john. he satisfied himself, however, with commanding
 the men-at-arms, who surrounded the lists, to keep an eye on the braggart,
 pointing to the yeoman.
 “by st grizzel,” he added, “we will try his own skill, who is so ready to
 give his voice to the feats of others!”
 “i shall not fly the trial,” said the yeoman, with the composure which
 marked his whole deportment.
 “meanwhile, stand up, ye saxon churls,” said the fiery prince; “for, by
 the light of heaven, since i have said it, the jew shall have his seat
 amongst ye!”
 “by no means, an it please your grace!—it is not fit for such as we
 to sit with the rulers of the land,” said the jew; whose ambition for
 precedence though it had led him to dispute place with the extenuated and
 impoverished descendant of the line of montdidier, by no means stimulated
 him to an intrusion upon the privileges of the wealthy saxons.
 “up, infidel dog when i command you,” said prince john, “or i will have
 thy swarthy hide stript off, and tanned for horse-furniture.”
 thus urged, the jew began to ascend the steep and narrow steps which led
 up to the gallery.
 “let me see,” said the prince, “who dare stop him,” fixing his eye on
 cedric, whose attitude intimated his intention to hurl the jew down
 headlong.
 the catastrophe was prevented by the clown wamba, who, springing betwixt
 his master and isaac, and exclaiming, in answer to the prince's defiance,
 “marry, that will i!” opposed to the beard of the jew a shield of brawn,
 which he plucked from beneath his cloak, and with which, doubtless, he had
 furnished himself, lest the tournament should have proved longer than his
 appetite could endure abstinence. finding the abomination of his tribe
 opposed to his very nose, while the jester, at the same time, flourished
 his wooden sword above his head, the jew recoiled, missed his footing, and
 rolled down the steps,—an excellent jest to the spectators, who set
 up a loud laughter, in which prince john and his attendants heartily
 joined.
 “deal me the prize, cousin prince,” said wamba; “i have vanquished my foe
 in fair fight with sword and shield,” he added, brandishing the brawn in
 one hand and the wooden sword in the other.
 “who, and what art thou, noble champion?” said prince john, still
 laughing.
 “a fool by right of descent,” answered the jester; “i am wamba, the son of
 witless, who was the son of weatherbrain, who was the son of an alderman.”
 “make room for the jew in front of the lower ring,” said prince john, not
 unwilling perhaps to, seize an apology to desist from his original
 purpose; “to place the vanquished beside the victor were false heraldry.”
 “knave upon fool were worse,” answered the jester, “and jew upon bacon
 worst of all.”
 “gramercy! good fellow,” cried prince john, “thou pleasest me—here,
 isaac, lend me a handful of byzants.”
 as the jew, stunned by the request, afraid to refuse, and unwilling to
 comply, fumbled in the furred bag which hung by his girdle, and was
 perhaps endeavouring to ascertain how few coins might pass for a handful,
 the prince stooped from his jennet and settled isaac's doubts by snatching
 the pouch itself from his side; and flinging to wamba a couple of the gold
 pieces which it contained, he pursued his career round the lists, leaving
 the jew to the derision of those around him, and himself receiving as much
 applause from the spectators as if he had done some honest and honourable
 action.
 at this the challenger with fierce defy
 his trumpet sounds; the challenged makes reply:
 with clangour rings the field, resounds the vaulted sky.
 their visors closed, their lances in the rest,
 or at the helmet pointed or the crest,
 they vanish from the barrier, speed the race,
 and spurring see decrease the middle space.
 palamon and arcite
 in the midst of prince john's cavalcade, he suddenly stopt, and appealing
 to the prior of jorvaulx, declared the principal business of the day had
 been forgotten.
 “by my halidom,” said he, “we have forgotten, sir prior, to name the fair
 sovereign of love and of beauty, by whose white hand the palm is to be
 distributed. for my part, i am liberal in my ideas, and i care not if i
 give my vote for the black-eyed rebecca.”
 “holy virgin,” answered the prior, turning up his eyes in horror, “a
 jewess!—we should deserve to be stoned out of the lists; and i am
 not yet old enough to be a martyr. besides, i swear by my patron saint,
 that she is far inferior to the lovely saxon, rowena.”
 “saxon or jew,” answered the prince, “saxon or jew, dog or hog, what
 matters it? i say, name rebecca, were it only to mortify the saxon
 churls.”
 a murmur arose even among his own immediate attendants.
 “this passes a jest, my lord,” said de bracy; “no knight here will lay
 lance in rest if such an insult is attempted.”
 “it is the mere wantonness of insult,” said one of the oldest and most
 important of prince john's followers, waldemar fitzurse, “and if your
 grace attempt it, cannot but prove ruinous to your projects.”
 “i entertained you, sir,” said john, reining up his palfrey haughtily,
 “for my follower, but not for my counsellor.”
 “those who follow your grace in the paths which you tread,” said waldemar,
 but speaking in a low voice, “acquire the right of counsellors; for your
 interest and safety are not more deeply gaged than their own.”
 from the tone in which this was spoken, john saw the necessity of
 acquiescence “i did but jest,” he said; “and you turn upon me like so many
 adders! name whom you will, in the fiend's name, and please yourselves.”
 “nay, nay,” said de bracy, “let the fair sovereign's throne remain
 unoccupied, until the conqueror shall be named, and then let him choose
 the lady by whom it shall be filled. it will add another grace to his
 triumph, and teach fair ladies to prize the love of valiant knights, who
 can exalt them to such distinction.”
 “if brian de bois-guilbert gain the prize,” said the prior, “i will gage
 my rosary that i name the sovereign of love and beauty.”
 “bois-guilbert,” answered de bracy, “is a good lance; but there are others
 around these lists, sir prior, who will not fear to encounter him.”
 “silence, sirs,” said waldemar, “and let the prince assume his seat. the
 knights and spectators are alike impatient, the time advances, and highly
 fit it is that the sports should commence.”
 prince john, though not yet a monarch, had in waldemar fitzurse all the
 inconveniences of a favourite minister, who, in serving his sovereign,
 must always do so in his own way. the prince acquiesced, however, although
 his disposition was precisely of that kind which is apt to be obstinate
 upon trifles, and, assuming his throne, and being surrounded by his
 followers, gave signal to the heralds to proclaim the laws of the
 tournament, which were briefly as follows:
 first, the five challengers were to undertake all comers.
 secondly, any knight proposing to combat, might, if he pleased, select a
 special antagonist from among the challengers, by touching his shield. if
 he did so with the reverse of his lance, the trial of skill was made with
 what were called the arms of courtesy, that is, with lances at whose
 extremity a piece of round flat board was fixed, so that no danger was
 encountered, save from the shock of the horses and riders. but if the
 shield was touched with the sharp end of the lance, the combat was
 understood to be at “outrance”, that is, the knights were to fight with
 sharp weapons, as in actual battle.
 thirdly, when the knights present had accomplished their vow, by each of
 them breaking five lances, the prince was to declare the victor in the
 first day's tourney, who should receive as prize a warhorse of exquisite
 beauty and matchless strength; and in addition to this reward of valour,
 it was now declared, he should have the peculiar honour of naming the
 queen of love and beauty, by whom the prize should be given on the ensuing
 day.
 fourthly, it was announced, that, on the second day, there should be a
 general tournament, in which all the knights present, who were desirous to
 win praise, might take part; and being divided into two bands of equal
 numbers, might fight it out manfully, until the signal was given by prince
 john to cease the combat. the elected queen of love and beauty was then to
 crown the knight whom the prince should adjudge to have borne himself best
 in this second day, with a coronet composed of thin gold plate, cut into
 the shape of a laurel crown. on this second day the knightly games ceased.
 but on that which was to follow, feats of archery, of bull-baiting, and
 other popular amusements, were to be practised, for the more immediate
 amusement of the populace. in this manner did prince john endeavour to lay
 the foundation of a popularity, which he was perpetually throwing down by
 some inconsiderate act of wanton aggression upon the feelings and
 prejudices of the people.
 the lists now presented a most splendid spectacle. the sloping galleries
 were crowded with all that was noble, great, wealthy, and beautiful in the
 northern and midland parts of england; and the contrast of the various
 dresses of these dignified spectators, rendered the view as gay as it was
 rich, while the interior and lower space, filled with the substantial
 burgesses and yeomen of merry england, formed, in their more plain attire,
 a dark fringe, or border, around this circle of brilliant embroidery,
 relieving, and, at the same time, setting off its splendour.
 the heralds finished their proclamation with their usual cry of “largesse,
 largesse, gallant knights!” and gold and silver pieces were showered on
 them from the galleries, it being a high point of chivalry to exhibit
 liberality towards those whom the age accounted at once the secretaries
 and the historians of honour. the bounty of the spectators was
 acknowledged by the customary shouts of “love of ladies—death of
 champions—honour to the generous—glory to the brave!” to which
 the more humble spectators added their acclamations, and a numerous band
 of trumpeters the flourish of their martial instruments. when these sounds
 had ceased, the heralds withdrew from the lists in gay and glittering
 procession, and none remained within them save the marshals of the field,
 who, armed cap-a-pie, sat on horseback, motionless as statues, at the
 opposite ends of the lists. meantime, the enclosed space at the northern
 extremity of the lists, large as it was, was now completely crowded with
 knights desirous to prove their skill against the challengers, and, when
 viewed from the galleries, presented the appearance of a sea of waving
 plumage, intermixed with glistening helmets, and tall lances, to the
 extremities of which were, in many cases, attached small pennons of about
 a span's breadth, which, fluttering in the air as the breeze caught them,
 joined with the restless motion of the feathers to add liveliness to the
 scene.
 at length the barriers were opened, and five knights, chosen by lot,
 advanced slowly into the area; a single champion riding in front, and the
 other four following in pairs. all were splendidly armed, and my saxon
 authority (in the wardour manuscript) records at great length their
 devices, their colours, and the embroidery of their horse trappings. it is
 unnecessary to be particular on these subjects. to borrow lines from a
 contemporary poet, who has written but too little:
 “the knights are dust,
 and their good swords are rust,
 their souls are with the saints, we trust.” 
 their escutcheons have long mouldered from the walls of their castles.
 their castles themselves are but green mounds and shattered ruins—the
 place that once knew them, knows them no more—nay, many a race since
 theirs has died out and been forgotten in the very land which they
 occupied, with all the authority of feudal proprietors and feudal lords.
 what, then, would it avail the reader to know their names, or the
 evanescent symbols of their martial rank!
 now, however, no whit anticipating the oblivion which awaited their names
 and feats, the champions advanced through the lists, restraining their
 fiery steeds, and compelling them to move slowly, while, at the same time,
 they exhibited their paces, together with the grace and dexterity of the
 riders. as the procession entered the lists, the sound of a wild barbaric
 music was heard from behind the tents of the challengers, where the
 performers were concealed. it was of eastern origin, having been brought
 from the holy land; and the mixture of the cymbals and bells seemed to bid
 welcome at once, and defiance, to the knights as they advanced. with the
 eyes of an immense concourse of spectators fixed upon them, the five
 knights advanced up the platform upon which the tents of the challengers
 stood, and there separating themselves, each touched slightly, and with
 the reverse of his lance, the shield of the antagonist to whom he wished
 to oppose himself. the lower orders of spectators in general—nay,
 many of the higher class, and it is even said several of the ladies, were
 rather disappointed at the champions choosing the arms of courtesy. for
 the same sort of persons, who, in the present day, applaud most highly the
 deepest tragedies, were then interested in a tournament exactly in
 proportion to the danger incurred by the champions engaged.
 having intimated their more pacific purpose, the champions retreated to
 the extremity of the lists, where they remained drawn up in a line; while
 the challengers, sallying each from his pavilion, mounted their horses,
 and, headed by brian de bois-guilbert, descended from the platform, and
 opposed themselves individually to the knights who had touched their
 respective shields.
 at the flourish of clarions and trumpets, they started out against each
 other at full gallop; and such was the superior dexterity or good fortune
 of the challengers, that those opposed to bois-guilbert, malvoisin, and
 front-de-boeuf, rolled on the ground. the antagonist of grantmesnil,
 instead of bearing his lance-point fair against the crest or the shield of
 his enemy, swerved so much from the direct line as to break the weapon
 athwart the person of his opponent—a circumstance which was
 accounted more disgraceful than that of being actually unhorsed; because
 the latter might happen from accident, whereas the former evinced
 awkwardness and want of management of the weapon and of the horse. the
 fifth knight alone maintained the honour of his party, and parted fairly
 with the knight of st john, both splintering their lances without
 advantage on either side.
 the shouts of the multitude, together with the acclamations of the
 heralds, and the clangour of the trumpets, announced the triumph of the
 victors and the defeat of the vanquished. the former retreated to their
 pavilions, and the latter, gathering themselves up as they could, withdrew
 from the lists in disgrace and dejection, to agree with their victors
 concerning the redemption of their arms and their horses, which, according
 to the laws of the tournament, they had forfeited. the fifth of their
 number alone tarried in the lists long enough to be greeted by the
 applauses of the spectators, amongst whom he retreated, to the
 aggravation, doubtless, of his companions' mortification.
 a second and a third party of knights took the field; and although they
 had various success, yet, upon the whole, the advantage decidedly remained
 with the challengers, not one of whom lost his seat or swerved from his
 charge—misfortunes which befell one or two of their antagonists in
 each encounter. the spirits, therefore, of those opposed to them, seemed
 to be considerably damped by their continued success. three knights only
 appeared on the fourth entry, who, avoiding the shields of bois-guilbert
 and front-de-boeuf, contented themselves with touching those of the three
 other knights, who had not altogether manifested the same strength and
 dexterity. this politic selection did not alter the fortune of the field,
 the challengers were still successful: one of their antagonists was
 overthrown, and both the others failed in the “attaint”, 
 that is, in striking the helmet and shield of their antagonist firmly and
 strongly, with the lance held in a direct line, so that the weapon might
 break unless the champion was overthrown.
 after this fourth encounter, there was a considerable pause; nor did it
 appear that any one was very desirous of renewing the contest. the
 spectators murmured among themselves; for, among the challengers,
 malvoisin and front-de-boeuf were unpopular from their characters, and the
 others, except grantmesnil, were disliked as strangers and foreigners.
 but none shared the general feeling of dissatisfaction so keenly as cedric
 the saxon, who saw, in each advantage gained by the norman challengers, a
 repeated triumph over the honour of england. his own education had taught
 him no skill in the games of chivalry, although, with the arms of his
 saxon ancestors, he had manifested himself, on many occasions, a brave and
 determined soldier. he looked anxiously to athelstane, who had learned the
 accomplishments of the age, as if desiring that he should make some
 personal effort to recover the victory which was passing into the hands of
 the templar and his associates. but, though both stout of heart, and
 strong of person, athelstane had a disposition too inert and unambitious
 to make the exertions which cedric seemed to expect from him.
 “the day is against england, my lord,” said cedric, in a marked tone; “are
 you not tempted to take the lance?”
 “i shall tilt to-morrow” answered athelstane, “in the 'melee'; it is not
 worth while for me to arm myself to-day.”
 two things displeased cedric in this speech. it contained the norman word
 “melee”, (to express the general conflict,) and it evinced some
 indifference to the honour of the country; but it was spoken by
 athelstane, whom he held in such profound respect, that he would not trust
 himself to canvass his motives or his foibles. moreover, he had no time to
 make any remark, for wamba thrust in his word, observing, “it was better,
 though scarce easier, to be the best man among a hundred, than the best
 man of two.”
 athelstane took the observation as a serious compliment; but cedric, who
 better understood the jester's meaning, darted at him a severe and
 menacing look; and lucky it was for wamba, perhaps, that the time and
 place prevented his receiving, notwithstanding his place and service, more
 sensible marks of his master's resentment.
 the pause in the tournament was still uninterrupted, excepting by the
 voices of the heralds exclaiming—“love of ladies, splintering of
 lances! stand forth gallant knights, fair eyes look upon your deeds!”
 the music also of the challengers breathed from time to time wild bursts
 expressive of triumph or defiance, while the clowns grudged a holiday
 which seemed to pass away in inactivity; and old knights and nobles
 lamented in whispers the decay of martial spirit, spoke of the triumphs of
 their younger days, but agreed that the land did not now supply dames of
 such transcendent beauty as had animated the jousts of former times.
 prince john began to talk to his attendants about making ready the
 banquet, and the necessity of adjudging the prize to brian de
 bois-guilbert, who had, with a single spear, overthrown two knights, and
 foiled a third.
 at length, as the saracenic music of the challengers concluded one of
 those long and high flourishes with which they had broken the silence of
 the lists, it was answered by a solitary trumpet, which breathed a note of
 defiance from the northern extremity. all eyes were turned to see the new
 champion which these sounds announced, and no sooner were the barriers
 opened than he paced into the lists. as far as could be judged of a man
 sheathed in armour, the new adventurer did not greatly exceed the middle
 size, and seemed to be rather slender than strongly made. his suit of
 armour was formed of steel, richly inlaid with gold, and the device on his
 shield was a young oak-tree pulled up by the roots, with the spanish word
 desdichado, signifying disinherited. he was mounted on a gallant black
 horse, and as he passed through the lists he gracefully saluted the prince
 and the ladies by lowering his lance. the dexterity with which he managed
 his steed, and something of youthful grace which he displayed in his
 manner, won him the favour of the multitude, which some of the lower
 classes expressed by calling out, “touch ralph de vipont's shield—touch
 the hospitallers shield; he has the least sure seat, he is your cheapest
 bargain.”
 the champion, moving onward amid these well-meant hints, ascended the
 platform by the sloping alley which led to it from the lists, and, to the
 astonishment of all present, riding straight up to the central pavilion,
 struck with the sharp end of his spear the shield of brian de
 bois-guilbert until it rung again. all stood astonished at his
 presumption, but none more than the redoubted knight whom he had thus
 defied to mortal combat, and who, little expecting so rude a challenge,
 was standing carelessly at the door of the pavilion.
 “have you confessed yourself, brother,” said the templar, “and have you
 heard mass this morning, that you peril your life so frankly?”
 “i am fitter to meet death than thou art” answered the disinherited
 knight; for by this name the stranger had recorded himself in the books of
 the tourney.
 “then take your place in the lists,” said bois-guilbert, “and look your
 last upon the sun; for this night thou shalt sleep in paradise.”
 “gramercy for thy courtesy,” replied the disinherited knight, “and to
 requite it, i advise thee to take a fresh horse and a new lance, for by my
 honour you will need both.”
 having expressed himself thus confidently, he reined his horse backward
 down the slope which he had ascended, and compelled him in the same manner
 to move backward through the lists, till he reached the northern
 extremity, where he remained stationary, in expectation of his antagonist.
 this feat of horsemanship again attracted the applause of the multitude.
 however incensed at his adversary for the precautions which he
 recommended, brian de bois-guilbert did not neglect his advice; for his
 honour was too nearly concerned, to permit his neglecting any means which
 might ensure victory over his presumptuous opponent. he changed his horse
 for a proved and fresh one of great strength and spirit. he chose a new
 and a tough spear, lest the wood of the former might have been strained in
 the previous encounters he had sustained. lastly, he laid aside his
 shield, which had received some little damage, and received another from
 his squires. his first had only borne the general device of his rider,
 representing two knights riding upon one horse, an emblem expressive of
 the original humility and poverty of the templars, qualities which they
 had since exchanged for the arrogance and wealth that finally occasioned
 their suppression. bois-guilbert's new shield bore a raven in full flight,
 holding in its claws a skull, and bearing the motto, “gare le corbeau”.
 when the two champions stood opposed to each other at the two extremities
 of the lists, the public expectation was strained to the highest pitch.
 few augured the possibility that the encounter could terminate well for
 the disinherited knight, yet his courage and gallantry secured the general
 good wishes of the spectators.
 the trumpets had no sooner given the signal, than the champions vanished
 from their posts with the speed of lightning, and closed in the centre of
 the lists with the shock of a thunderbolt. the lances burst into shivers
 up to the very grasp, and it seemed at the moment that both knights had
 fallen, for the shock had made each horse recoil backwards upon its
 haunches. the address of the riders recovered their steeds by use of the
 bridle and spur; and having glared on each other for an instant with eyes
 which seemed to flash fire through the bars of their visors, each made a
 demi-volte, and, retiring to the extremity of the lists, received a fresh
 lance from the attendants.
 a loud shout from the spectators, waving of scarfs and handkerchiefs, and
 general acclamations, attested the interest taken by the spectators in
 this encounter; the most equal, as well as the best performed, which had
 graced the day. but no sooner had the knights resumed their station, than
 the clamour of applause was hushed into a silence, so deep and so dead,
 that it seemed the multitude were afraid even to breathe.
 a few minutes pause having been allowed, that the combatants and their
 horses might recover breath, prince john with his truncheon signed to the
 trumpets to sound the onset. the champions a second time sprung from their
 stations, and closed in the centre of the lists, with the same speed, the
 same dexterity, the same violence, but not the same equal fortune as
 before.
 in this second encounter, the templar aimed at the centre of his
 antagonist's shield, and struck it so fair and forcibly, that his spear
 went to shivers, and the disinherited knight reeled in his saddle. on the
 other hand, that champion had, in the beginning of his career, directed
 the point of his lance towards bois-guilbert's shield, but, changing his
 aim almost in the moment of encounter, he addressed it to the helmet, a
 mark more difficult to hit, but which, if attained, rendered the shock
 more irresistible. fair and true he hit the norman on the visor, where his
 lance's point kept hold of the bars. yet, even at this disadvantage, the
 templar sustained his high reputation; and had not the girths of his
 saddle burst, he might not have been unhorsed. as it chanced, however,
 saddle, horse, and man, rolled on the ground under a cloud of dust.
original
 to extricate himself from the stirrups and fallen steed, was to the
 templar scarce the work of a moment; and, stung with madness, both at his
 disgrace and at the acclamations with which it was hailed by the
 spectators, he drew his sword and waved it in defiance of his conqueror.
 the disinherited knight sprung from his steed, and also unsheathed his
 sword. the marshals of the field, however, spurred their horses between
 them, and reminded them, that the laws of the tournament did not, on the
 present occasion, permit this species of encounter.
 “we shall meet again, i trust,” said the templar, casting a resentful
 glance at his antagonist; “and where there are none to separate us.”
 “if we do not,” said the disinherited knight, “the fault shall not be
 mine. on foot or horseback, with spear, with axe, or with sword, i am
 alike ready to encounter thee.”
 more and angrier words would have been exchanged, but the marshals,
 crossing their lances betwixt them, compelled them to separate. the
 disinherited knight returned to his first station, and bois-guilbert to
 his tent, where he remained for the rest of the day in an agony of
 despair.
 without alighting from his horse, the conqueror called for a bowl of wine,
 and opening the beaver, or lower part of his helmet, announced that he
 quaffed it, “to all true english hearts, and to the confusion of foreign
 tyrants.” he then commanded his trumpet to sound a defiance to the
 challengers, and desired a herald to announce to them, that he should make
 no election, but was willing to encounter them in the order in which they
 pleased to advance against him.
 the gigantic front-de-boeuf, armed in sable armour, was the first who took
 the field. he bore on a white shield a black bull's head, half defaced by
 the numerous encounters which he had undergone, and bearing the arrogant
 motto, “cave, adsum”. over this champion the disinherited knight obtained
 a slight but decisive advantage. both knights broke their lances fairly,
 but front-de-boeuf, who lost a stirrup in the encounter, was adjudged to
 have the disadvantage.
 in the stranger's third encounter with sir philip malvoisin, he was
 equally successful; striking that baron so forcibly on the casque, that
 the laces of the helmet broke, and malvoisin, only saved from falling by
 being unhelmeted, was declared vanquished like his companions.
 in his fourth combat with de grantmesnil, the disinherited knight showed
 as much courtesy as he had hitherto evinced courage and dexterity. de
 grantmesnil's horse, which was young and violent, reared and plunged in
 the course of the career so as to disturb the rider's aim, and the
 stranger, declining to take the advantage which this accident afforded
 him, raised his lance, and passing his antagonist without touching him,
 wheeled his horse and rode back again to his own end of the lists,
 offering his antagonist, by a herald, the chance of a second encounter.
 this de grantmesnil declined, avowing himself vanquished as much by the
 courtesy as by the address of his opponent.
 ralph de vipont summed up the list of the stranger's triumphs, being
 hurled to the ground with such force, that the blood gushed from his nose
 and his mouth, and he was borne senseless from the lists.
 the acclamations of thousands applauded the unanimous award of the prince
 and marshals, announcing that day's honours to the disinherited knight.
 ——in the midst was seen
 a lady of a more majestic mien,
 by stature and by beauty mark'd their sovereign queen.
 and as in beauty she surpass'd the choir,
 so nobler than the rest was her attire;
 a crown of ruddy gold enclosed her brow,
 plain without pomp, and rich without a show;
 a branch of agnus castus in her hand,
 she bore aloft her symbol of command.
 the flower and the leaf
 william de wyvil and stephen de martival, the marshals of the field, were
 the first to offer their congratulations to the victor, praying him, at
 the same time, to suffer his helmet to be unlaced, or, at least, that he
 would raise his visor ere they conducted him to receive the prize of the
 day's tourney from the hands of prince john. the disinherited knight, with
 all knightly courtesy, declined their request, alleging, that he could not
 at this time suffer his face to be seen, for reasons which he had assigned
 to the heralds when he entered the lists. the marshals were perfectly
 satisfied by this reply; for amidst the frequent and capricious vows by
 which knights were accustomed to bind themselves in the days of chivalry,
 there were none more common than those by which they engaged to remain
 incognito for a certain space, or until some particular adventure was
 achieved. the marshals, therefore, pressed no farther into the mystery of
 the disinherited knight, but, announcing to prince john the conqueror's
 desire to remain unknown, they requested permission to bring him before
 his grace, in order that he might receive the reward of his valour.
 john's curiosity was excited by the mystery observed by the stranger; and,
 being already displeased with the issue of the tournament, in which the
 challengers whom he favoured had been successively defeated by one knight,
 he answered haughtily to the marshals, “by the light of our lady's brow,
 this same knight hath been disinherited as well of his courtesy as of his
 lands, since he desires to appear before us without uncovering his face.—wot
 ye, my lords,” he said, turning round to his train, “who this gallant can
 be, that bears himself thus proudly?”
 “i cannot guess,” answered de bracy, “nor did i think there had been
 within the four seas that girth britain a champion that could bear down
 these five knights in one day's jousting. by my faith, i shall never
 forget the force with which he shocked de vipont. the poor hospitaller was
 hurled from his saddle like a stone from a sling.”
 “boast not of that,” said a knight of st john, who was present; “your
 temple champion had no better luck. i saw your brave lance, bois-guilbert,
 roll thrice over, grasping his hands full of sand at every turn.”
 de bracy, being attached to the templars, would have replied, but was
 prevented by prince john. “silence, sirs!” he said; “what unprofitable
 debate have we here?”
 “the victor,” said de wyvil, “still waits the pleasure of your highness.”
 “it is our pleasure,” answered john, “that he do so wait until we learn
 whether there is not some one who can at least guess at his name and
 quality. should he remain there till night-fall, he has had work enough to
 keep him warm.”
 “your grace,” said waldemar fitzurse, “will do less than due honour to the
 victor, if you compel him to wait till we tell your highness that which we
 cannot know; at least i can form no guess—unless he be one of the
 good lances who accompanied king richard to palestine, and who are now
 straggling homeward from the holy land.”
 “it may be the earl of salisbury,” said de bracy; “he is about the same
 pitch.”
 “sir thomas de multon, the knight of gilsland, rather,” said fitzurse;
 “salisbury is bigger in the bones.” a whisper arose among the train, but
 by whom first suggested could not be ascertained. “it might be the king—it
 might be richard coeur-de-lion himself!”
 “over god's forbode!” said prince john, involuntarily turning at the same
 time as pale as death, and shrinking as if blighted by a flash of
 lightning; “waldemar!—de bracy! brave knights and gentlemen,
 remember your promises, and stand truly by me!”
 “here is no danger impending,” said waldemar fitzurse; “are you so little
 acquainted with the gigantic limbs of your father's son, as to think they
 can be held within the circumference of yonder suit of armour?—de
 wyvil and martival, you will best serve the prince by bringing forward the
 victor to the throne, and ending an error that has conjured all the blood
 from his cheeks.—look at him more closely,” he continued, “your
 highness will see that he wants three inches of king richard's height, and
 twice as much of his shoulder-breadth. the very horse he backs, could not
 have carried the ponderous weight of king richard through a single
 course.”
 while he was yet speaking, the marshals brought forward the disinherited
 knight to the foot of a wooden flight of steps, which formed the ascent
 from the lists to prince john's throne. still discomposed with the idea
 that his brother, so much injured, and to whom he was so much indebted,
 had suddenly arrived in his native kingdom, even the distinctions pointed
 out by fitzurse did not altogether remove the prince's apprehensions; and
 while, with a short and embarrassed eulogy upon his valour, he caused to
 be delivered to him the war-horse assigned as the prize, he trembled lest
 from the barred visor of the mailed form before him, an answer might be
 returned, in the deep and awful accents of richard the lion-hearted.
 but the disinherited knight spoke not a word in reply to the compliment of
 the prince, which he only acknowledged with a profound obeisance.
 the horse was led into the lists by two grooms richly dressed, the animal
 itself being fully accoutred with the richest war-furniture; which,
 however, scarcely added to the value of the noble creature in the eyes of
 those who were judges. laying one hand upon the pommel of the saddle, the
 disinherited knight vaulted at once upon the back of the steed without
 making use of the stirrup, and, brandishing aloft his lance, rode twice
 around the lists, exhibiting the points and paces of the horse with the
 skill of a perfect horseman.
 the appearance of vanity, which might otherwise have been attributed to
 this display, was removed by the propriety shown in exhibiting to the best
 advantage the princely reward with which he had been just honoured, and
 the knight was again greeted by the acclamations of all present.
 in the meanwhile, the bustling prior of jorvaulx had reminded prince john,
 in a whisper, that the victor must now display his good judgment, instead
 of his valour, by selecting from among the beauties who graced the
 galleries a lady, who should fill the throne of the queen of beauty and of
 love, and deliver the prize of the tourney upon the ensuing day. the
 prince accordingly made a sign with his truncheon, as the knight passed
 him in his second career around the lists. the knight turned towards the
 throne, and, sinking his lance, until the point was within a foot of the
 ground, remained motionless, as if expecting john's commands; while all
 admired the sudden dexterity with which he instantly reduced his fiery
 steed from a state of violent emotion and high excitation to the stillness
 of an equestrian statue.
 “sir disinherited knight,” said prince john, “since that is the only title
 by which we can address you, it is now your duty, as well as privilege, to
 name the fair lady, who, as queen of honour and of love, is to preside
 over next day's festival. if, as a stranger in our land, you should
 require the aid of other judgment to guide your own, we can only say that
 alicia, the daughter of our gallant knight waldemar fitzurse, has at our
 court been long held the first in beauty as in place. nevertheless, it is
 your undoubted prerogative to confer on whom you please this crown, by the
 delivery of which to the lady of your choice, the election of to-morrow's
 queen will be formal and complete.—raise your lance.”
 the knight obeyed; and prince john placed upon its point a coronet of
 green satin, having around its edge a circlet of gold, the upper edge of
 which was relieved by arrow-points and hearts placed interchangeably, like
 the strawberry leaves and balls upon a ducal crown.
 in the broad hint which he dropped respecting the daughter of waldemar
 fitzurse, john had more than one motive, each the offspring of a mind,
 which was a strange mixture of carelessness and presumption with low
 artifice and cunning. he wished to banish from the minds of the chivalry
 around him his own indecent and unacceptable jest respecting the jewess
 rebecca; he was desirous of conciliating alicia's father waldemar, of whom
 he stood in awe, and who had more than once shown himself dissatisfied
 during the course of the day's proceedings. he had also a wish to
 establish himself in the good graces of the lady; for john was at least as
 licentious in his pleasures as profligate in his ambition. but besides all
 these reasons, he was desirous to raise up against the disinherited knight
 (towards whom he already entertained a strong dislike) a powerful enemy in
 the person of waldemar fitzurse, who was likely, he thought, highly to
 resent the injury done to his daughter, in case, as was not unlikely, the
 victor should make another choice.
 and so indeed it proved. for the disinherited knight passed the gallery
 close to that of the prince, in which the lady alicia was seated in the
 full pride of triumphant beauty, and, pacing forwards as slowly as he had
 hitherto rode swiftly around the lists, he seemed to exercise his right of
 examining the numerous fair faces which adorned that splendid circle.
 it was worth while to see the different conduct of the beauties who
 underwent this examination, during the time it was proceeding. some
 blushed, some assumed an air of pride and dignity, some looked straight
 forward, and essayed to seem utterly unconscious of what was going on,
 some drew back in alarm, which was perhaps affected, some endeavoured to
 forbear smiling, and there were two or three who laughed outright. there
 were also some who dropped their veils over their charms; but, as the
 wardour manuscript says these were fair ones of ten years standing, it may
 be supposed that, having had their full share of such vanities, they were
 willing to withdraw their claim, in order to give a fair chance to the
 rising beauties of the age.
 at length the champion paused beneath the balcony in which the lady rowena
 was placed, and the expectation of the spectators was excited to the
 utmost.
 it must be owned, that if an interest displayed in his success could have
 bribed the disinherited knight, the part of the lists before which he
 paused had merited his predilection. cedric the saxon, overjoyed at the
 discomfiture of the templar, and still more so at the miscarriage of his
 two malevolent neighbours, front-de-boeuf and malvoisin, had, with his
 body half stretched over the balcony, accompanied the victor in each
 course, not with his eyes only, but with his whole heart and soul. the
 lady rowena had watched the progress of the day with equal attention,
 though without openly betraying the same intense interest. even the
 unmoved athelstane had shown symptoms of shaking off his apathy, when,
 calling for a huge goblet of muscadine, he quaffed it to the health of the
 disinherited knight. another group, stationed under the gallery occupied
 by the saxons, had shown no less interest in the fate of the day.
 “father abraham!” said isaac of york, when the first course was run
 betwixt the templar and the disinherited knight, “how fiercely that
 gentile rides! ah, the good horse that was brought all the long way from
 barbary, he takes no more care of him than if he were a wild ass's colt—and
 the noble armour, that was worth so many zecchins to joseph pareira, the
 armourer of milan, besides seventy in the hundred of profits, he cares for
 it as little as if he had found it in the highways!”
 “if he risks his own person and limbs, father,” said rebecca, “in doing
 such a dreadful battle, he can scarce be expected to spare his horse and
 armour.”
 “child!” replied isaac, somewhat heated, “thou knowest not what thou
 speakest—his neck and limbs are his own, but his horse and armour
 belong to—holy jacob! what was i about to say!—nevertheless,
 it is a good youth—see, rebecca! see, he is again about to go up to
 battle against the philistine—pray, child—pray for the safety
 of the good youth,—and of the speedy horse, and the rich armour.—god
 of my fathers!” he again exclaimed, “he hath conquered, and the
 uncircumcised philistine hath fallen before his lance,—even as og
 the king of bashan, and sihon, king of the amorites, fell before the sword
 of our fathers!—surely he shall take their gold and their silver,
 and their war-horses, and their armour of brass and of steel, for a prey
 and for a spoil.”
 the same anxiety did the worthy jew display during every course that was
 run, seldom failing to hazard a hasty calculation concerning the value of
 the horse and armour which was forfeited to the champion upon each new
 success. there had been therefore no small interest taken in the success
 of the disinherited knight, by those who occupied the part of the lists
 before which he now paused.
 whether from indecision, or some other motive of hesitation, the champion
 of the day remained stationary for more than a minute, while the eyes of
 the silent audience were riveted upon his motions; and then, gradually and
 gracefully sinking the point of his lance, he deposited the coronet which
 it supported at the feet of the fair rowena. the trumpets instantly
 sounded, while the heralds proclaimed the lady rowena the queen of beauty
 and of love for the ensuing day, menacing with suitable penalties those
 who should be disobedient to her authority. they then repeated their cry
 of largesse, to which cedric, in the height of his joy, replied by an
 ample donative, and to which athelstane, though less promptly, added one
 equally large.
 there was some murmuring among the damsels of norman descent, who were as
 much unused to see the preference given to a saxon beauty, as the norman
 nobles were to sustain defeat in the games of chivalry which they
 themselves had introduced. but these sounds of disaffection were drowned
 by the popular shout of “long live the lady rowena, the chosen and lawful
 queen of love and of beauty!” to which many in the lower area added, “long
 live the saxon princess! long live the race of the immortal alfred!”
 however unacceptable these sounds might be to prince john, and to those
 around him, he saw himself nevertheless obliged to confirm the nomination
 of the victor, and accordingly calling to horse, he left his throne; and
 mounting his jennet, accompanied by his train, he again entered the lists.
 the prince paused a moment beneath the gallery of the lady alicia, to whom
 he paid his compliments, observing, at the same time, to those around him—“by
 my halidome, sirs! if the knight's feats in arms have shown that he hath
 limbs and sinews, his choice hath no less proved that his eyes are none of
 the clearest.”
 it was on this occasion, as during his whole life, john's misfortune, not
 perfectly to understand the characters of those whom he wished to
 conciliate. waldemar fitzurse was rather offended than pleased at the
 prince stating thus broadly an opinion, that his daughter had been
 slighted.
 “i know no right of chivalry,” he said, “more precious or inalienable than
 that of each free knight to choose his lady-love by his own judgment. my
 daughter courts distinction from no one; and in her own character, and in
 her own sphere, will never fail to receive the full proportion of that
 which is her due.”
 prince john replied not; but, spurring his horse, as if to give vent to
 his vexation, he made the animal bound forward to the gallery where rowena
 was seated, with the crown still at her feet.
 “assume,” he said, “fair lady, the mark of your sovereignty, to which none
 vows homage more sincerely than ourself, john of anjou; and if it please
 you to-day, with your noble sire and friends, to grace our banquet in the
 castle of ashby, we shall learn to know the empress to whose service we
 devote to-morrow.”
 rowena remained silent, and cedric answered for her in his native saxon.
 “the lady rowena,” he said, “possesses not the language in which to reply
 to your courtesy, or to sustain her part in your festival. i also, and the
 noble athelstane of coningsburgh, speak only the language, and practise
 only the manners, of our fathers. we therefore decline with thanks your
 highness's courteous invitation to the banquet. to-morrow, the lady rowena
 will take upon her the state to which she has been called by the free
 election of the victor knight, confirmed by the acclamations of the
 people.”
 so saying, he lifted the coronet, and placed it upon rowena's head, in
 token of her acceptance of the temporary authority assigned to her.
 “what says he?” said prince john, affecting not to understand the saxon
 language, in which, however, he was well skilled. the purport of cedric's
 speech was repeated to him in french. “it is well,” he said; “to-morrow we
 will ourself conduct this mute sovereign to her seat of dignity.—you,
 at least, sir knight,” he added, turning to the victor, who had remained
 near the gallery, “will this day share our banquet?”
 the knight, speaking for the first time, in a low and hurried voice,
 excused himself by pleading fatigue, and the necessity of preparing for
 to-morrow's encounter.
 “it is well,” said prince john, haughtily; “although unused to such
 refusals, we will endeavour to digest our banquet as we may, though
 ungraced by the most successful in arms, and his elected queen of beauty.”
 so saying, he prepared to leave the lists with his glittering train, and
 his turning his steed for that purpose, was the signal for the breaking up
 and dispersion of the spectators.
 yet, with the vindictive memory proper to offended pride, especially when
 combined with conscious want of desert, john had hardly proceeded three
 paces, ere again, turning around, he fixed an eye of stern resentment upon
 the yeoman who had displeased him in the early part of the day, and issued
 his commands to the men-at-arms who stood near—“on your life, suffer
 not that fellow to escape.”
 the yeoman stood the angry glance of the prince with the same unvaried
 steadiness which had marked his former deportment, saying, with a smile,
 “i have no intention to leave ashby until the day after to-morrow—i
 must see how staffordshire and leicestershire can draw their bows—the
 forests of needwood and charnwood must rear good archers.”
 “i,” said prince john to his attendants, but not in direct reply,—“i
 will see how he can draw his own; and woe betide him unless his skill
 should prove some apology for his insolence!”
 “it is full time,” said de bracy, “that the 'outrecuidance' 
 of these peasants should be restrained by some striking example.”
 waldemar fitzurse, who probably thought his patron was not taking the
 readiest road to popularity, shrugged up his shoulders and was silent.
 prince john resumed his retreat from the lists, and the dispersion of the
 multitude became general.
 in various routes, according to the different quarters from which they
 came, and in groups of various numbers, the spectators were seen retiring
 over the plain. by far the most numerous part streamed towards the town of
 ashby, where many of the distinguished persons were lodged in the castle,
 and where others found accommodation in the town itself. among these were
 most of the knights who had already appeared in the tournament, or who
 proposed to fight there the ensuing day, and who, as they rode slowly
 along, talking over the events of the day, were greeted with loud shouts
 by the populace. the same acclamations were bestowed upon prince john,
 although he was indebted for them rather to the splendour of his
 appearance and train, than to the popularity of his character.
 a more sincere and more general, as well as a better-merited acclamation,
 attended the victor of the day, until, anxious to withdraw himself from
 popular notice, he accepted the accommodation of one of those pavilions
 pitched at the extremities of the lists, the use of which was courteously
 tendered him by the marshals of the field. on his retiring to his tent,
 many who had lingered in the lists, to look upon and form conjectures
 concerning him, also dispersed.
 the signs and sounds of a tumultuous concourse of men lately crowded
 together in one place, and agitated by the same passing events, were now
 exchanged for the distant hum of voices of different groups retreating in
 all directions, and these speedily died away in silence. no other sounds
 were heard save the voices of the menials who stripped the galleries of
 their cushions and tapestry, in order to put them in safety for the night,
 and wrangled among themselves for the half-used bottles of wine and relics
 of the refreshment which had been served round to the spectators.
 beyond the precincts of the lists more than one forge was erected; and
 these now began to glimmer through the twilight, announcing the toil of
 the armourers, which was to continue through the whole night, in order to
 repair or alter the suits of armour to be used again on the morrow.
 a strong guard of men-at-arms, renewed at intervals, from two hours to two
 hours, surrounded the lists, and kept watch during the night.
 thus, like the sad presaging raven, that tolls
 the sick man's passport in her hollow beak,
 and in the shadow of the silent night
 doth shake contagion from her sable wings;
 vex'd and tormented, runs poor barrabas,
 with fatal curses towards these christians.
 —jew of malta
 the disinherited knight had no sooner reached his pavilion, than squires
 and pages in abundance tendered their services to disarm him, to bring
 fresh attire, and to offer him the refreshment of the bath. their zeal on
 this occasion was perhaps sharpened by curiosity, since every one desired
 to know who the knight was that had gained so many laurels, yet had
 refused, even at the command of prince john, to lift his visor or to name
 his name. but their officious inquisitiveness was not gratified. the
 disinherited knight refused all other assistance save that of his own
 squire, or rather yeoman—a clownish-looking man, who, wrapt in a
 cloak of dark-coloured felt, and having his head and face half-buried in a
 norman bonnet made of black fur, seemed to affect the incognito as much as
 his master. all others being excluded from the tent, this attendant
 relieved his master from the more burdensome parts of his armour, and
 placed food and wine before him, which the exertions of the day rendered
 very acceptable.
 the knight had scarcely finished a hasty meal, ere his menial announced to
 him that five men, each leading a barbed steed, desired to speak with him.
 the disinherited knight had exchanged his armour for the long robe usually
 worn by those of his condition, which, being furnished with a hood,
 concealed the features, when such was the pleasure of the wearer, almost
 as completely as the visor of the helmet itself, but the twilight, which
 was now fast darkening, would of itself have rendered a disguise
 unnecessary, unless to persons to whom the face of an individual chanced
 to be particularly well known.
 the disinherited knight, therefore, stept boldly forth to the front of his
 tent, and found in attendance the squires of the challengers, whom he
 easily knew by their russet and black dresses, each of whom led his
 master's charger, loaded with the armour in which he had that day fought.
 “according to the laws of chivalry,” said the foremost of these men, “i,
 baldwin de oyley, squire to the redoubted knight brian de bois-guilbert,
 make offer to you, styling yourself, for the present, the disinherited
 knight, of the horse and armour used by the said brian de bois-guilbert in
 this day's passage of arms, leaving it with your nobleness to retain or to
 ransom the same, according to your pleasure; for such is the law of arms.”
 the other squires repeated nearly the same formula, and then stood to
 await the decision of the disinherited knight.
 “to you four, sirs,” replied the knight, addressing those who had last
 spoken, “and to your honourable and valiant masters, i have one common
 reply. commend me to the noble knights, your masters, and say, i should do
 ill to deprive them of steeds and arms which can never be used by braver
 cavaliers.—i would i could here end my message to these gallant
 knights; but being, as i term myself, in truth and earnest, the
 disinherited, i must be thus far bound to your masters, that they will, of
 their courtesy, be pleased to ransom their steeds and armour, since that
 which i wear i can hardly term mine own.”
 “we stand commissioned, each of us,” answered the squire of reginald
 front-de-boeuf, “to offer a hundred zecchins in ransom of these horses and
 suits of armour.”
 “it is sufficient,” said the disinherited knight. “half the sum my present
 necessities compel me to accept; of the remaining half, distribute one
 moiety among yourselves, sir squires, and divide the other half betwixt
 the heralds and the pursuivants, and minstrels, and attendants.”
 the squires, with cap in hand, and low reverences, expressed their deep
 sense of a courtesy and generosity not often practised, at least upon a
 scale so extensive. the disinherited knight then addressed his discourse
 to baldwin, the squire of brian de bois-guilbert. “from your master,” said
 he, “i will accept neither arms nor ransom. say to him in my name, that
 our strife is not ended—no, not till we have fought as well with
 swords as with lances—as well on foot as on horseback. to this
 mortal quarrel he has himself defied me, and i shall not forget the
 challenge.—meantime, let him be assured, that i hold him not as one
 of his companions, with whom i can with pleasure exchange courtesies; but
 rather as one with whom i stand upon terms of mortal defiance.”
 “my master,” answered baldwin, “knows how to requite scorn with scorn, and
 blows with blows, as well as courtesy with courtesy. since you disdain to
 accept from him any share of the ransom at which you have rated the arms
 of the other knights, i must leave his armour and his horse here, being
 well assured that he will never deign to mount the one nor wear the
 other.”
 “you have spoken well, good squire,” said the disinherited knight, “well
 and boldly, as it beseemeth him to speak who answers for an absent master.
 leave not, however, the horse and armour here. restore them to thy master;
 or, if he scorns to accept them, retain them, good friend, for thine own
 use. so far as they are mine, i bestow them upon you freely.”
 baldwin made a deep obeisance, and retired with his companions; and the
 disinherited knight entered the pavilion.
 “thus far, gurth,” said he, addressing his attendant, “the reputation of
 english chivalry hath not suffered in my hands.”
 “and i,” said gurth, “for a saxon swineherd, have not ill played the
 personage of a norman squire-at-arms.”
 “yea, but,” answered the disinherited knight, “thou hast ever kept me in
 anxiety lest thy clownish bearing should discover thee.”
 “tush!” said gurth, “i fear discovery from none, saving my playfellow,
 wamba the jester, of whom i could never discover whether he were most
 knave or fool. yet i could scarce choose but laugh, when my old master
 passed so near to me, dreaming all the while that gurth was keeping his
 porkers many a mile off, in the thickets and swamps of rotherwood. if i am
 discovered—-”
 “enough,” said the disinherited knight, “thou knowest my promise.”
 “nay, for that matter,” said gurth, “i will never fail my friend for fear
 of my skin-cutting. i have a tough hide, that will bear knife or scourge
 as well as any boar's hide in my herd.”
 “trust me, i will requite the risk you run for my love, gurth,” said the
 knight. “meanwhile, i pray you to accept these ten pieces of gold.”
 “i am richer,” said gurth, putting them into his pouch, “than ever was
 swineherd or bondsman.”
 “take this bag of gold to ashby,” continued his master, “and find out
 isaac the jew of york, and let him pay himself for the horse and arms with
 which his credit supplied me.”
 “nay, by st dunstan,” replied gurth, “that i will not do.”
 “how, knave,” replied his master, “wilt thou not obey my commands?”
 “so they be honest, reasonable, and christian commands,” replied gurth;
 “but this is none of these. to suffer the jew to pay himself would be
 dishonest, for it would be cheating my master; and unreasonable, for it
 were the part of a fool; and unchristian, since it would be plundering a
 believer to enrich an infidel.”
 “see him contented, however, thou stubborn varlet,” said the disinherited
 knight.
 “i will do so,” said gurth, taking the bag under his cloak, and leaving
 the apartment; “and it will go hard,” he muttered, “but i content him with
 one-half of his own asking.” so saying, he departed, and left the
 disinherited knight to his own perplexed ruminations; which, upon more
 accounts than it is now possible to communicate to the reader, were of a
 nature peculiarly agitating and painful.
 we must now change the scene to the village of ashby, or rather to a
 country house in its vicinity belonging to a wealthy israelite, with whom
 isaac, his daughter, and retinue, had taken up their quarters; the jews,
 it is well known, being as liberal in exercising the duties of hospitality
 and charity among their own people, as they were alleged to be reluctant
 and churlish in extending them to those whom they termed gentiles, and
 whose treatment of them certainly merited little hospitality at their
 hand.
 in an apartment, small indeed, but richly furnished with decorations of an
 oriental taste, rebecca was seated on a heap of embroidered cushions,
 which, piled along a low platform that surrounded the chamber, served,
 like the estrada of the spaniards, instead of chairs and stools. she was
 watching the motions of her father with a look of anxious and filial
 affection, while he paced the apartment with a dejected mien and
 disordered step; sometimes clasping his hands together—sometimes
 casting his eyes to the roof of the apartment, as one who laboured under
 great mental tribulation. “o, jacob!” he exclaimed—“o, all ye twelve
 holy fathers of our tribe! what a losing venture is this for one who hath
 duly kept every jot and tittle of the law of moses—fifty zecchins
 wrenched from me at one clutch, and by the talons of a tyrant!”
 “but, father,” said rebecca, “you seemed to give the gold to prince john
 willingly.”
 “willingly? the blotch of egypt upon him!—willingly, saidst thou?—ay,
 as willingly as when, in the gulf of lyons, i flung over my merchandise to
 lighten the ship, while she laboured in the tempest—robed the
 seething billows in my choice silks—perfumed their briny foam with
 myrrh and aloes—enriched their caverns with gold and silver work!
 and was not that an hour of unutterable misery, though my own hands made
 the sacrifice?”
 “but it was a sacrifice which heaven exacted to save our lives,” answered
 rebecca, “and the god of our fathers has since blessed your store and your
 gettings.”
 “ay,” answered isaac, “but if the tyrant lays hold on them as he did
 to-day, and compels me to smile while he is robbing me?—o, daughter,
 disinherited and wandering as we are, the worst evil which befalls our
 race is, that when we are wronged and plundered, all the world laughs
 around, and we are compelled to suppress our sense of injury, and to smile
 tamely, when we would revenge bravely.”
 “think not thus of it, my father,” said rebecca; “we also have advantages.
 these gentiles, cruel and oppressive as they are, are in some sort
 dependent on the dispersed children of zion, whom they despise and
 persecute. without the aid of our wealth, they could neither furnish forth
 their hosts in war, nor their triumphs in peace, and the gold which we
 lend them returns with increase to our coffers. we are like the herb which
 flourisheth most when it is most trampled on. even this day's pageant had
 not proceeded without the consent of the despised jew, who furnished the
 means.”
 “daughter,” said isaac, “thou hast harped upon another string of sorrow.
 the goodly steed and the rich armour, equal to the full profit of my
 adventure with our kirjath jairam of leicester—there is a dead loss
 too—ay, a loss which swallows up the gains of a week; ay, of the
 space between two sabbaths—and yet it may end better than i now
 think, for 'tis a good youth.”
 “assuredly,” said rebecca, “you shall not repent you of requiting the good
 deed received of the stranger knight.”
 “i trust so, daughter,” said isaac, “and i trust too in the rebuilding of
 zion; but as well do i hope with my own bodily eyes to see the walls and
 battlements of the new temple, as to see a christian, yea, the very best
 of christians, repay a debt to a jew, unless under the awe of the judge
 and jailor.”
 so saying, he resumed his discontented walk through the apartment; and
 rebecca, perceiving that her attempts at consolation only served to awaken
 new subjects of complaint, wisely desisted from her unavailing efforts—a
 prudential line of conduct, and we recommend to all who set up for
 comforters and advisers, to follow it in the like circumstances.
 the evening was now becoming dark, when a jewish servant entered the
 apartment, and placed upon the table two silver lamps, fed with perfumed
 oil; the richest wines, and the most delicate refreshments, were at the
 same time displayed by another israelitish domestic on a small ebony
 table, inlaid with silver; for, in the interior of their houses, the jews
 refused themselves no expensive indulgences. at the same time the servant
 informed isaac, that a nazarene (so they termed christians, while
 conversing among themselves) desired to speak with him. he that would live
 by traffic, must hold himself at the disposal of every one claiming
 business with him. isaac at once replaced on the table the untasted glass
 of greek wine which he had just raised to his lips, and saying hastily to
 his daughter, “rebecca, veil thyself,” commanded the stranger to be
 admitted.
 just as rebecca had dropped over her fine features a screen of silver
 gauze which reached to her feet, the door opened, and gurth entered, wrapt
 in the ample folds of his norman mantle. his appearance was rather
 suspicious than prepossessing, especially as, instead of doffing his
 bonnet, he pulled it still deeper over his rugged brow.
 “art thou isaac the jew of york?” said gurth, in saxon.
 “i am,” replied isaac, in the same language, (for his traffic had rendered
 every tongue spoken in britain familiar to him)—“and who art thou?”
 “that is not to the purpose,” answered gurth.
 “as much as my name is to thee,” replied isaac; “for without knowing
 thine, how can i hold intercourse with thee?”
 “easily,” answered gurth; “i, being to pay money, must know that i deliver
 it to the right person; thou, who are to receive it, will not, i think,
 care very greatly by whose hands it is delivered.”
 “o,” said the jew, “you are come to pay moneys?—holy father abraham!
 that altereth our relation to each other. and from whom dost thou bring
 it?”
 “from the disinherited knight,” said gurth, “victor in this day's
 tournament. it is the price of the armour supplied to him by kirjath
 jairam of leicester, on thy recommendation. the steed is restored to thy
 stable. i desire to know the amount of the sum which i am to pay for the
 armour.”
 “i said he was a good youth!” exclaimed isaac with joyful exultation. “a
 cup of wine will do thee no harm,” he added, filling and handing to the
 swineherd a richer drought than gurth had ever before tasted. “and how
 much money,” continued isaac, “has thou brought with thee?”
 “holy virgin!” said gurth, setting down the cup, “what nectar these
 unbelieving dogs drink, while true christians are fain to quaff ale as
 muddy and thick as the draff we give to hogs!—what money have i
 brought with me?” continued the saxon, when he had finished this uncivil
 ejaculation, “even but a small sum; something in hand the whilst. what,
 isaac! thou must bear a conscience, though it be a jewish one.”
 “nay, but,” said isaac, “thy master has won goodly steeds and rich armours
 with the strength of his lance, and of his right hand—but 'tis a
 good youth—the jew will take these in present payment, and render
 him back the surplus.”
 “my master has disposed of them already,” said gurth.
 “ah! that was wrong,” said the jew, “that was the part of a fool. no
 christians here could buy so many horses and armour—no jew except
 myself would give him half the values. but thou hast a hundred zecchins
 with thee in that bag,” said isaac, prying under gurth's cloak, “it is a
 heavy one.”
 “i have heads for cross-bow bolts in it,” said gurth, readily.
 “well, then”—said isaac, panting and hesitating between habitual
 love of gain and a new-born desire to be liberal in the present instance,
 “if i should say that i would take eighty zecchins for the good steed and
 the rich armour, which leaves me not a guilder's profit, have you money to
 pay me?”
 “barely,” said gurth, though the sum demanded was more reasonable than he
 expected, “and it will leave my master nigh penniless. nevertheless, if
 such be your least offer, i must be content.”
 “fill thyself another goblet of wine,” said the jew. “ah! eighty zecchins
 is too little. it leaveth no profit for the usages of the moneys; and,
 besides, the good horse may have suffered wrong in this day's encounter.
 o, it was a hard and a dangerous meeting! man and steed rushing on each
 other like wild bulls of bashan! the horse cannot but have had wrong.”
 “and i say,” replied gurth, “he is sound, wind and limb; and you may see
 him now, in your stable. and i say, over and above, that seventy zecchins
 is enough for the armour, and i hope a christian's word is as good as a
 jew's. if you will not take seventy, i will carry this bag” (and he shook
 it till the contents jingled) “back to my master.”
 “nay, nay!” said isaac; “lay down the talents—the shekels—the
 eighty zecchins, and thou shalt see i will consider thee liberally.”
 gurth at length complied; and telling out eighty zecchins upon the table,
 the jew delivered out to him an acquittance for the horse and suit of
 armour. the jew's hand trembled for joy as he wrapped up the first seventy
 pieces of gold. the last ten he told over with much deliberation, pausing,
 and saying something as he took each piece from the table, and dropt it
 into his purse. it seemed as if his avarice were struggling with his
 better nature, and compelling him to pouch zecchin after zecchin while his
 generosity urged him to restore some part at least to his benefactor, or
 as a donation to his agent. his whole speech ran nearly thus:
 “seventy-one—seventy-two; thy master is a good youth—seventy-three,
 an excellent youth—seventy-four—that piece hath been clipt
 within the ring—seventy-five—and that looketh light of weight—seventy-six—when
 thy master wants money, let him come to isaac of york—seventy-seven—that
 is, with reasonable security.” here he made a considerable pause, and
 gurth had good hope that the last three pieces might escape the fate of
 their comrades; but the enumeration proceeded.—“seventy-eight—thou
 art a good fellow—seventy-nine—and deservest something for
 thyself—-”
 here the jew paused again, and looked at the last zecchin, intending,
 doubtless, to bestow it upon gurth. he weighed it upon the tip of his
 finger, and made it ring by dropping it upon the table. had it rung too
 flat, or had it felt a hair's breadth too light, generosity had carried
 the day; but, unhappily for gurth, the chime was full and true, the
 zecchin plump, newly coined, and a grain above weight. isaac could not
 find in his heart to part with it, so dropt it into his purse as if in
 absence of mind, with the words, “eighty completes the tale, and i trust
 thy master will reward thee handsomely.—surely,” he added, looking
 earnestly at the bag, “thou hast more coins in that pouch?”
 gurth grinned, which was his nearest approach to a laugh, as he replied,
 “about the same quantity which thou hast just told over so carefully.” he
 then folded the quittance, and put it under his cap, adding,—“peril
 of thy beard, jew, see that this be full and ample!” he filled himself
 unbidden, a third goblet of wine, and left the apartment without ceremony.
 “rebecca,” said the jew, “that ishmaelite hath gone somewhat beyond me.
 nevertheless his master is a good youth—ay, and i am well pleased
 that he hath gained shekels of gold and shekels of silver, even by the
 speed of his horse and by the strength of his lance, which, like that of
 goliath the philistine, might vie with a weaver's beam.”
 as he turned to receive rebecca's answer, he observed, that during his
 chattering with gurth, she had left the apartment unperceived.
 in the meanwhile, gurth had descended the stair, and, having reached the
 dark antechamber or hall, was puzzling about to discover the entrance,
 when a figure in white, shown by a small silver lamp which she held in her
 hand, beckoned him into a side apartment. gurth had some reluctance to
 obey the summons. rough and impetuous as a wild boar, where only earthly
 force was to be apprehended, he had all the characteristic terrors of a
 saxon respecting fawns, forest-fiends, white women, and the whole of the
 superstitions which his ancestors had brought with them from the wilds of
 germany. he remembered, moreover, that he was in the house of a jew, a
 people who, besides the other unamiable qualities which popular report
 ascribed to them, were supposed to be profound necromancers and cabalists.
 nevertheless, after a moment's pause, he obeyed the beckoning summons of
 the apparition, and followed her into the apartment which she indicated,
 where he found to his joyful surprise that his fair guide was the
 beautiful jewess whom he had seen at the tournament, and a short time in
 her father's apartment.
 she asked him the particulars of his transaction with isaac, which he
 detailed accurately.
 “my father did but jest with thee, good fellow,” said rebecca; “he owes
 thy master deeper kindness than these arms and steed could pay, were their
 value tenfold. what sum didst thou pay my father even now?”
 “eighty zecchins,” said gurth, surprised at the question.
 “in this purse,” said rebecca, “thou wilt find a hundred. restore to thy
 master that which is his due, and enrich thyself with the remainder. haste—begone—stay
 not to render thanks! and beware how you pass through this crowded town,
 where thou mayst easily lose both thy burden and thy life.—reuben,”
 she added, clapping her hands together, “light forth this stranger, and
 fail not to draw lock and bar behind him.” reuben, a dark-brow'd and
 black-bearded israelite, obeyed her summons, with a torch in his hand;
 undid the outward door of the house, and conducting gurth across a paved
 court, let him out through a wicket in the entrance-gate, which he closed
 behind him with such bolts and chains as would well have become that of a
 prison.
 “by st dunstan,” said gurth, as he stumbled up the dark avenue, “this is
 no jewess, but an angel from heaven! ten zecchins from my brave young
 master—twenty from this pearl of zion—oh, happy day!—such
 another, gurth, will redeem thy bondage, and make thee a brother as free
 of thy guild as the best. and then do i lay down my swineherd's horn and
 staff, and take the freeman's sword and buckler, and follow my young
 master to the death, without hiding either my face or my name.”
 st outlaw: stand, sir, and throw us that you have about you;
 if not, we'll make you sit, and rifle you.
 speed: sir, we are undone! these are the villains
 that all the travellers do fear so much.
 val: my friends,—
 st out: that's not so, sir, we are your enemies.
 d out: peace! we'll hear him.
 d out: ay, by my beard, will we;
 for he's a proper man.
 —two gentlemen of verona
 the nocturnal adventures of gurth were not yet concluded; indeed he
 himself became partly of that mind, when, after passing one or two
 straggling houses which stood in the outskirts of the village, he found
 himself in a deep lane, running between two banks overgrown with hazel and
 holly, while here and there a dwarf oak flung its arms altogether across
 the path. the lane was moreover much rutted and broken up by the carriages
 which had recently transported articles of various kinds to the
 tournament; and it was dark, for the banks and bushes intercepted the
 light of the harvest moon.
 from the village were heard the distant sounds of revelry, mixed
 occasionally with loud laughter, sometimes broken by screams, and
 sometimes by wild strains of distant music. all these sounds, intimating
 the disorderly state of the town, crowded with military nobles and their
 dissolute attendants, gave gurth some uneasiness. “the jewess was right,”
 he said to himself. “by heaven and st dunstan, i would i were safe at my
 journey's end with all this treasure! here are such numbers, i will not
 say of arrant thieves, but of errant knights and errant squires, errant
 monks and errant minstrels, errant jugglers and errant jesters, that a man
 with a single merk would be in danger, much more a poor swineherd with a
 whole bagful of zecchins. would i were out of the shade of these infernal
 bushes, that i might at least see any of st nicholas's clerks before they
 spring on my shoulders.”
 gurth accordingly hastened his pace, in order to gain the open common to
 which the lane led, but was not so fortunate as to accomplish his object.
 just as he had attained the upper end of the lane, where the underwood was
 thickest, four men sprung upon him, even as his fears anticipated, two
 from each side of the road, and seized him so fast, that resistance, if at
 first practicable, would have been now too late.—“surrender your
 charge,” said one of them; “we are the deliverers of the commonwealth, who
 ease every man of his burden.”
 “you should not ease me of mine so lightly,” muttered gurth, whose surly
 honesty could not be tamed even by the pressure of immediate violence,—“had
 i it but in my power to give three strokes in its defence.”
 “we shall see that presently,” said the robber; and, speaking to his
 companions, he added, “bring along the knave. i see he would have his head
 broken, as well as his purse cut, and so be let blood in two veins at
 once.”
 gurth was hurried along agreeably to this mandate, and having been dragged
 somewhat roughly over the bank, on the left-hand side of the lane, found
 himself in a straggling thicket, which lay betwixt it and the open common.
 he was compelled to follow his rough conductors into the very depth of
 this cover, where they stopt unexpectedly in an irregular open space, free
 in a great measure from trees, and on which, therefore, the beams of the
 moon fell without much interruption from boughs and leaves. here his
 captors were joined by two other persons, apparently belonging to the
 gang. they had short swords by their sides, and quarter-staves in their
 hands, and gurth could now observe that all six wore visors, which
 rendered their occupation a matter of no question, even had their former
 proceedings left it in doubt.
 “what money hast thou, churl?” said one of the thieves.
 “thirty zecchins of my own property,” answered gurth, doggedly.
 “a forfeit—a forfeit,” shouted the robbers; “a saxon hath thirty
 zecchins, and returns sober from a village! an undeniable and unredeemable
 forfeit of all he hath about him.”
 “i hoarded it to purchase my freedom,” said gurth.
 “thou art an ass,” replied one of the thieves “three quarts of double ale
 had rendered thee as free as thy master, ay, and freer too, if he be a
 saxon like thyself.”
 “a sad truth,” replied gurth; “but if these same thirty zecchins will buy
 my freedom from you, unloose my hands, and i will pay them to you.”
 “hold,” said one who seemed to exercise some authority over the others;
 “this bag which thou bearest, as i can feel through thy cloak, contains
 more coin than thou hast told us of.”
 “it is the good knight my master's,” answered gurth, “of which, assuredly,
 i would not have spoken a word, had you been satisfied with working your
 will upon mine own property.”
 “thou art an honest fellow,” replied the robber, “i warrant thee; and we
 worship not st nicholas so devoutly but what thy thirty zecchins may yet
 escape, if thou deal uprightly with us. meantime render up thy trust for a
 time.” so saying, he took from gurth's breast the large leathern pouch, in
 which the purse given him by rebecca was enclosed, as well as the rest of
 the zecchins, and then continued his interrogation.—“who is thy
 master?”
 “the disinherited knight,” said gurth.
 “whose good lance,” replied the robber, “won the prize in to-day's
 tourney? what is his name and lineage?”
 “it is his pleasure,” answered gurth, “that they be concealed; and from
 me, assuredly, you will learn nought of them.”
 “what is thine own name and lineage?”
 “to tell that,” said gurth, “might reveal my master's.”
 “thou art a saucy groom,” said the robber, “but of that anon. how comes
 thy master by this gold? is it of his inheritance, or by what means hath
 it accrued to him?”
 “by his good lance,” answered gurth.—“these bags contain the ransom
 of four good horses, and four good suits of armour.”
 “how much is there?” demanded the robber.
 “two hundred zecchins.”
 “only two hundred zecchins!” said the bandit; “your master hath dealt
 liberally by the vanquished, and put them to a cheap ransom. name those
 who paid the gold.”
 gurth did so.
 “the armour and horse of the templar brian de bois-guilbert, at what
 ransom were they held?—thou seest thou canst not deceive me.”
 “my master,” replied gurth, “will take nought from the templar save his
 life's-blood. they are on terms of mortal defiance, and cannot hold
 courteous intercourse together.”
 “indeed!”—repeated the robber, and paused after he had said the
 word. “and what wert thou now doing at ashby with such a charge in thy
 custody?”
 “i went thither to render to isaac the jew of york,” replied gurth, “the
 price of a suit of armour with which he fitted my master for this
 tournament.”
 “and how much didst thou pay to isaac?—methinks, to judge by weight,
 there is still two hundred zecchins in this pouch.”
 “i paid to isaac,” said the saxon, “eighty zecchins, and he restored me a
 hundred in lieu thereof.”
 “how! what!” exclaimed all the robbers at once; “darest thou trifle with
 us, that thou tellest such improbable lies?”
 “what i tell you,” said gurth, “is as true as the moon is in heaven. you
 will find the just sum in a silken purse within the leathern pouch, and
 separate from the rest of the gold.”
 “bethink thee, man,” said the captain, “thou speakest of a jew—of an
 israelite,—as unapt to restore gold, as the dry sand of his deserts
 to return the cup of water which the pilgrim spills upon them.”
 “there is no more mercy in them,” said another of the banditti, “than in
 an unbribed sheriffs officer.”
 “it is, however, as i say,” said gurth.
 “strike a light instantly,” said the captain; “i will examine this said
 purse; and if it be as this fellow says, the jew's bounty is little less
 miraculous than the stream which relieved his fathers in the wilderness.”
 a light was procured accordingly, and the robber proceeded to examine the
 purse. the others crowded around him, and even two who had hold of gurth
 relaxed their grasp while they stretched their necks to see the issue of
 the search. availing himself of their negligence, by a sudden exertion of
 strength and activity, gurth shook himself free of their hold, and might
 have escaped, could he have resolved to leave his master's property behind
 him. but such was no part of his intention. he wrenched a quarter-staff
 from one of the fellows, struck down the captain, who was altogether
 unaware of his purpose, and had well-nigh repossessed himself of the pouch
 and treasure. the thieves, however, were too nimble for him, and again
 secured both the bag and the trusty gurth.
 “knave!” said the captain, getting up, “thou hast broken my head; and with
 other men of our sort thou wouldst fare the worse for thy insolence. but
 thou shalt know thy fate instantly. first let us speak of thy master; the
 knight's matters must go before the squire's, according to the due order
 of chivalry. stand thou fast in the meantime—if thou stir again,
 thou shalt have that will make thee quiet for thy life—comrades!” he
 then said, addressing his gang, “this purse is embroidered with hebrew
 characters, and i well believe the yeoman's tale is true. the errant
 knight, his master, must needs pass us toll-free. he is too like ourselves
 for us to make booty of him, since dogs should not worry dogs where wolves
 and foxes are to be found in abundance.”
 “like us?” answered one of the gang; “i should like to hear how that is
 made good.”
 “why, thou fool,” answered the captain, “is he not poor and disinherited
 as we are?—doth he not win his substance at the sword's point as we
 do?—hath he not beaten front-de-boeuf and malvoisin, even as we
 would beat them if we could? is he not the enemy to life and death of
 brian de bois-guilbert, whom we have so much reason to fear? and were all
 this otherwise, wouldst thou have us show a worse conscience than an
 unbeliever, a hebrew jew?”
 “nay, that were a shame,” muttered the other fellow; “and yet, when i
 served in the band of stout old gandelyn, we had no such scruples of
 conscience. and this insolent peasant,—he too, i warrant me, is to
 be dismissed scatheless?”
 “not if thou canst scathe him,” replied the captain.—“here, fellow,”
 continued he, addressing gurth, “canst thou use the staff, that thou
 starts to it so readily?”
 “i think,” said gurth, “thou shouldst be best able to reply to that
 question.”
 “nay, by my troth, thou gavest me a round knock,” replied the captain; “do
 as much for this fellow, and thou shalt pass scot-free; and if thou dost
 not—why, by my faith, as thou art such a sturdy knave, i think i
 must pay thy ransom myself.—take thy staff, miller,” he added, “and
 keep thy head; and do you others let the fellow go, and give him a staff—there
 is light enough to lay on load by.”
 the two champions being alike armed with quarter-staves, stepped forward
 into the centre of the open space, in order to have the full benefit of
 the moonlight; the thieves in the meantime laughing, and crying to their
 comrade, “miller! beware thy toll-dish.” the miller, on the other hand,
 holding his quarter-staff by the middle, and making it flourish round his
 head after the fashion which the french call “faire le moulinet”,
 exclaimed boastfully, “come on, churl, an thou darest: thou shalt feel the
 strength of a miller's thumb!”
original
 “if thou be'st a miller,” answered gurth, undauntedly, making his weapon
 play around his head with equal dexterity, “thou art doubly a thief, and
 i, as a true man, bid thee defiance.”
 so saying, the two champions closed together, and for a few minutes they
 displayed great equality in strength, courage, and skill, intercepting and
 returning the blows of their adversary with the most rapid dexterity,
 while, from the continued clatter of their weapons, a person at a distance
 might have supposed that there were at least six persons engaged on each
 side. less obstinate, and even less dangerous combats, have been described
 in good heroic verse; but that of gurth and the miller must remain unsung,
 for want of a sacred poet to do justice to its eventful progress. yet,
 though quarter-staff play be out of date, what we can in prose we will do
 for these bold champions.
 long they fought equally, until the miller began to lose temper at finding
 himself so stoutly opposed, and at hearing the laughter of his companions,
 who, as usual in such cases, enjoyed his vexation. this was not a state of
 mind favourable to the noble game of quarter-staff, in which, as in
 ordinary cudgel-playing, the utmost coolness is requisite; and it gave
 gurth, whose temper was steady, though surly, the opportunity of acquiring
 a decided advantage, in availing himself of which he displayed great
 mastery.
 the miller pressed furiously forward, dealing blows with either end of his
 weapon alternately, and striving to come to half-staff distance, while
 gurth defended himself against the attack, keeping his hands about a yard
 asunder, and covering himself by shifting his weapon with great celerity,
 so as to protect his head and body. thus did he maintain the defensive,
 making his eye, foot, and hand keep true time, until, observing his
 antagonist to lose wind, he darted the staff at his face with his left
 hand; and, as the miller endeavoured to parry the thrust, he slid his
 right hand down to his left, and with the full swing of the weapon struck
 his opponent on the left side of the head, who instantly measured his
 length upon the green sward.
 “well and yeomanly done!” shouted the robbers; “fair play and old england
 for ever! the saxon hath saved both his purse and his hide, and the miller
 has met his match.”
 “thou mayst go thy ways, my friend,” said the captain, addressing gurth,
 in special confirmation of the general voice, “and i will cause two of my
 comrades to guide thee by the best way to thy master's pavilion, and to
 guard thee from night-walkers that might have less tender consciences than
 ours; for there is many one of them upon the amble in such a night as
 this. take heed, however,” he added sternly; “remember thou hast refused
 to tell thy name—ask not after ours, nor endeavour to discover who
 or what we are; for, if thou makest such an attempt, thou wilt come by
 worse fortune than has yet befallen thee.”
 gurth thanked the captain for his courtesy, and promised to attend to his
 recommendation. two of the outlaws, taking up their quarter-staves, and
 desiring gurth to follow close in the rear, walked roundly forward along a
 by-path, which traversed the thicket and the broken ground adjacent to it.
 on the very verge of the thicket two men spoke to his conductors, and
 receiving an answer in a whisper, withdrew into the wood, and suffered
 them to pass unmolested. this circumstance induced gurth to believe both
 that the gang was strong in numbers, and that they kept regular guards
 around their place of rendezvous.
 when they arrived on the open heath, where gurth might have had some
 trouble in finding his road, the thieves guided him straight forward to
 the top of a little eminence, whence he could see, spread beneath him in
 the moonlight, the palisades of the lists, the glimmering pavilions
 pitched at either end, with the pennons which adorned them fluttering in
 the moonbeams, and from which could be heard the hum of the song with
 which the sentinels were beguiling their night-watch.
 here the thieves stopt.
 “we go with you no farther,” said they; “it were not safe that we should
 do so.—remember the warning you have received—keep secret what
 has this night befallen you, and you will have no room to repent it—neglect
 what is now told you, and the tower of london shall not protect you
 against our revenge.”
 “good night to you, kind sirs,” said gurth; “i shall remember your orders,
 and trust that there is no offence in wishing you a safer and an honester
 trade.”
 thus they parted, the outlaws returning in the direction from whence they
 had come, and gurth proceeding to the tent of his master, to whom,
 notwithstanding the injunction he had received, he communicated the whole
 adventures of the evening.
 the disinherited knight was filled with astonishment, no less at the
 generosity of rebecca, by which, however, he resolved he would not profit,
 than that of the robbers, to whose profession such a quality seemed
 totally foreign. his course of reflections upon these singular
 circumstances was, however, interrupted by the necessity for taking
 repose, which the fatigue of the preceding day, and the propriety of
 refreshing himself for the morrow's encounter, rendered alike
 indispensable.
 the knight, therefore, stretched himself for repose upon a rich couch with
 which the tent was provided; and the faithful gurth, extending his hardy
 limbs upon a bear-skin which formed a sort of carpet to the pavilion, laid
 himself across the opening of the tent, so that no one could enter without
 awakening him.
 the heralds left their pricking up and down,
 now ringen trumpets loud and clarion.
 there is no more to say, but east and west,
 in go the speares sadly in the rest,
 in goth the sharp spur into the side,
 there see men who can just and who can ride;
 there shiver shaftes upon shieldes thick,
 he feeleth through the heart-spone the prick;
 up springen speares, twenty feet in height,
 out go the swordes to the silver bright;
 the helms they to-hewn and to-shred;
 out burst the blood with stern streames red.
 chaucer.
 morning arose in unclouded splendour, and ere the sun was much above the
 horizon, the idlest or the most eager of the spectators appeared on the
 common, moving to the lists as to a general centre, in order to secure a
 favourable situation for viewing the continuation of the expected games.
 the marshals and their attendants appeared next on the field, together
 with the heralds, for the purpose of receiving the names of the knights
 who intended to joust, with the side which each chose to espouse. this was
 a necessary precaution, in order to secure equality betwixt the two bodies
 who should be opposed to each other.
 according to due formality, the disinherited knight was to be considered
 as leader of the one body, while brian de bois-guilbert, who had been
 rated as having done second-best in the preceding day, was named first
 champion of the other band. those who had concurred in the challenge
 adhered to his party of course, excepting only ralph de vipont, whom his
 fall had rendered unfit so soon to put on his armour. there was no want of
 distinguished and noble candidates to fill up the ranks on either side.
 in fact, although the general tournament, in which all knights fought at
 once, was more dangerous than single encounters, they were, nevertheless,
 more frequented and practised by the chivalry of the age. many knights,
 who had not sufficient confidence in their own skill to defy a single
 adversary of high reputation, were, nevertheless, desirous of displaying
 their valour in the general combat, where they might meet others with whom
 they were more upon an equality. on the present occasion, about fifty
 knights were inscribed as desirous of combating upon each side, when the
 marshals declared that no more could be admitted, to the disappointment of
 several who were too late in preferring their claim to be included.
 about the hour of ten o'clock, the whole plain was crowded with horsemen,
 horsewomen, and foot-passengers, hastening to the tournament; and shortly
 after, a grand flourish of trumpets announced prince john and his retinue,
 attended by many of those knights who meant to take share in the game, as
 well as others who had no such intention.
 about the same time arrived cedric the saxon, with the lady rowena,
 unattended, however, by athelstane. this saxon lord had arrayed his tall
 and strong person in armour, in order to take his place among the
 combatants; and, considerably to the surprise of cedric, had chosen to
 enlist himself on the part of the knight templar. the saxon, indeed, had
 remonstrated strongly with his friend upon the injudicious choice he had
 made of his party; but he had only received that sort of answer usually
 given by those who are more obstinate in following their own course, than
 strong in justifying it.
 his best, if not his only reason, for adhering to the party of brian de
 bois-guilbert, athelstane had the prudence to keep to himself. though his
 apathy of disposition prevented his taking any means to recommend himself
 to the lady rowena, he was, nevertheless, by no means insensible to her
 charms, and considered his union with her as a matter already fixed beyond
 doubt, by the assent of cedric and her other friends. it had therefore
 been with smothered displeasure that the proud though indolent lord of
 coningsburgh beheld the victor of the preceding day select rowena as the
 object of that honour which it became his privilege to confer. in order to
 punish him for a preference which seemed to interfere with his own suit,
 athelstane, confident of his strength, and to whom his flatterers, at
 least, ascribed great skill in arms, had determined not only to deprive
 the disinherited knight of his powerful succour, but, if an opportunity
 should occur, to make him feel the weight of his battle-axe.
 de bracy, and other knights attached to prince john, in obedience to a
 hint from him, had joined the party of the challengers, john being
 desirous to secure, if possible, the victory to that side. on the other
 hand, many other knights, both english and norman, natives and strangers,
 took part against the challengers, the more readily that the opposite band
 was to be led by so distinguished a champion as the disinherited knight
 had approved himself.
 as soon as prince john observed that the destined queen of the day had
 arrived upon the field, assuming that air of courtesy which sat well upon
 him when he was pleased to exhibit it, he rode forward to meet her, doffed
 his bonnet, and, alighting from his horse, assisted the lady rowena from
 her saddle, while his followers uncovered at the same time, and one of the
 most distinguished dismounted to hold her palfrey.
 “it is thus,” said prince john, “that we set the dutiful example of
 loyalty to the queen of love and beauty, and are ourselves her guide to
 the throne which she must this day occupy.—ladies,” he said, “attend
 your queen, as you wish in your turn to be distinguished by like honours.”
 so saying, the prince marshalled rowena to the seat of honour opposite his
 own, while the fairest and most distinguished ladies present crowded after
 her to obtain places as near as possible to their temporary sovereign.
 no sooner was rowena seated, than a burst of music, half-drowned by the
 shouts of the multitude, greeted her new dignity. meantime, the sun shone
 fierce and bright upon the polished arms of the knights of either side,
 who crowded the opposite extremities of the lists, and held eager
 conference together concerning the best mode of arranging their line of
 battle, and supporting the conflict.
 the heralds then proclaimed silence until the laws of the tourney should
 be rehearsed. these were calculated in some degree to abate the dangers of
 the day; a precaution the more necessary, as the conflict was to be
 maintained with sharp swords and pointed lances.
 the champions were therefore prohibited to thrust with the sword, and were
 confined to striking. a knight, it was announced, might use a mace or
 battle-axe at pleasure, but the dagger was a prohibited weapon. a knight
 unhorsed might renew the fight on foot with any other on the opposite side
 in the same predicament; but mounted horsemen were in that case forbidden
 to assail him. when any knight could force his antagonist to the extremity
 of the lists, so as to touch the palisade with his person or arms, such
 opponent was obliged to yield himself vanquished, and his armour and horse
 were placed at the disposal of the conqueror. a knight thus overcome was
 not permitted to take farther share in the combat. if any combatant was
 struck down, and unable to recover his feet, his squire or page might
 enter the lists, and drag his master out of the press; but in that case
 the knight was adjudged vanquished, and his arms and horse declared
 forfeited. the combat was to cease as soon as prince john should throw
 down his leading staff, or truncheon; another precaution usually taken to
 prevent the unnecessary effusion of blood by the too long endurance of a
 sport so desperate. any knight breaking the rules of the tournament, or
 otherwise transgressing the rules of honourable chivalry, was liable to be
 stript of his arms, and, having his shield reversed to be placed in that
 posture astride upon the bars of the palisade, and exposed to public
 derision, in punishment of his unknightly conduct. having announced these
 precautions, the heralds concluded with an exhortation to each good knight
 to do his duty, and to merit favour from the queen of beauty and of love.
 this proclamation having been made, the heralds withdrew to their
 stations. the knights, entering at either end of the lists in long
 procession, arranged themselves in a double file, precisely opposite to
 each other, the leader of each party being in the centre of the foremost
 rank, a post which he did not occupy until each had carefully marshalled
 the ranks of his party, and stationed every one in his place.
 it was a goodly, and at the same time an anxious, sight, to behold so many
 gallant champions, mounted bravely, and armed richly, stand ready prepared
 for an encounter so formidable, seated on their war-saddles like so many
 pillars of iron, and awaiting the signal of encounter with the same ardour
 as their generous steeds, which, by neighing and pawing the ground, gave
 signal of their impatience.
 as yet the knights held their long lances upright, their bright points
 glancing to the sun, and the streamers with which they were decorated
 fluttering over the plumage of the helmets. thus they remained while the
 marshals of the field surveyed their ranks with the utmost exactness, lest
 either party had more or fewer than the appointed number. the tale was
 found exactly complete. the marshals then withdrew from the lists, and
 william de wyvil, with a voice of thunder, pronounced the signal words—“laissez
 aller!” the trumpets sounded as he spoke—the spears of the champions
 were at once lowered and placed in the rests—the spurs were dashed
 into the flanks of the horses, and the two foremost ranks of either party
 rushed upon each other in full gallop, and met in the middle of the lists
 with a shock, the sound of which was heard at a mile's distance. the rear
 rank of each party advanced at a slower pace to sustain the defeated, and
 follow up the success of the victors of their party.
 the consequences of the encounter were not instantly seen, for the dust
 raised by the trampling of so many steeds darkened the air, and it was a
 minute ere the anxious spectator could see the fate of the encounter. when
 the fight became visible, half the knights on each side were dismounted,
 some by the dexterity of their adversary's lance,—some by the
 superior weight and strength of opponents, which had borne down both horse
 and man,—some lay stretched on earth as if never more to rise,—some
 had already gained their feet, and were closing hand to hand with those of
 their antagonists who were in the same predicament,—and several on
 both sides, who had received wounds by which they were disabled, were
 stopping their blood by their scarfs, and endeavouring to extricate
 themselves from the tumult. the mounted knights, whose lances had been
 almost all broken by the fury of the encounter, were now closely engaged
 with their swords, shouting their war-cries, and exchanging buffets, as if
 honour and life depended on the issue of the combat.
 the tumult was presently increased by the advance of the second rank on
 either side, which, acting as a reserve, now rushed on to aid their
 companions. the followers of brian de bois-guilbert shouted—“ha!
 beau-seant! beau-seant! 
 “—for the temple—for the temple!” the opposite party shouted
 in answer—“desdichado! desdichado!”—which watch-word they took
 from the motto upon their leader's shield.
 the champions thus encountering each other with the utmost fury, and with
 alternate success, the tide of battle seemed to flow now toward the
 southern, now toward the northern extremity of the lists, as the one or
 the other party prevailed. meantime the clang of the blows, and the shouts
 of the combatants, mixed fearfully with the sound of the trumpets, and
 drowned the groans of those who fell, and lay rolling defenceless beneath
 the feet of the horses. the splendid armour of the combatants was now
 defaced with dust and blood, and gave way at every stroke of the sword and
 battle-axe. the gay plumage, shorn from the crests, drifted upon the
 breeze like snow-flakes. all that was beautiful and graceful in the
 martial array had disappeared, and what was now visible was only
 calculated to awake terror or compassion.
 yet such is the force of habit, that not only the vulgar spectators, who
 are naturally attracted by sights of horror, but even the ladies of
 distinction who crowded the galleries, saw the conflict with a thrilling
 interest certainly, but without a wish to withdraw their eyes from a sight
 so terrible. here and there, indeed, a fair cheek might turn pale, or a
 faint scream might be heard, as a lover, a brother, or a husband, was
 struck from his horse. but, in general, the ladies around encouraged the
 combatants, not only by clapping their hands and waving their veils and
 kerchiefs, but even by exclaiming, “brave lance! good sword!” when any
 successful thrust or blow took place under their observation.
 such being the interest taken by the fair sex in this bloody game, that of
 the men is the more easily understood. it showed itself in loud
 acclamations upon every change of fortune, while all eyes were so riveted
 on the lists, that the spectators seemed as if they themselves had dealt
 and received the blows which were there so freely bestowed. and between
 every pause was heard the voice of the heralds, exclaiming, “fight on,
 brave knights! man dies, but glory lives!—fight on—death is
 better than defeat!—fight on, brave knights!—for bright eyes
 behold your deeds!”
 amid the varied fortunes of the combat, the eyes of all endeavoured to
 discover the leaders of each band, who, mingling in the thick of the
 fight, encouraged their companions both by voice and example. both
 displayed great feats of gallantry, nor did either bois-guilbert or the
 disinherited knight find in the ranks opposed to them a champion who could
 be termed their unquestioned match. they repeatedly endeavoured to single
 out each other, spurred by mutual animosity, and aware that the fall of
 either leader might be considered as decisive of victory. such, however,
 was the crowd and confusion, that, during the earlier part of the
 conflict, their efforts to meet were unavailing, and they were repeatedly
 separated by the eagerness of their followers, each of whom was anxious to
 win honour, by measuring his strength against the leader of the opposite
 party.
 but when the field became thin by the numbers on either side who had
 yielded themselves vanquished, had been compelled to the extremity of the
 lists, or been otherwise rendered incapable of continuing the strife, the
 templar and the disinherited knight at length encountered hand to hand,
 with all the fury that mortal animosity, joined to rivalry of honour,
 could inspire. such was the address of each in parrying and striking, that
 the spectators broke forth into a unanimous and involuntary shout,
 expressive of their delight and admiration.
 but at this moment the party of the disinherited knight had the worst; the
 gigantic arm of front-de-boeuf on the one flank, and the ponderous
 strength of athelstane on the other, bearing down and dispersing those
 immediately exposed to them. finding themselves freed from their immediate
 antagonists, it seems to have occurred to both these knights at the same
 instant, that they would render the most decisive advantage to their
 party, by aiding the templar in his contest with his rival. turning their
 horses, therefore, at the same moment, the norman spurred against the
 disinherited knight on the one side, and the saxon on the other. it was
 utterly impossible that the object of this unequal and unexpected assault
 could have sustained it, had he not been warned by a general cry from the
 spectators, who could not but take interest in one exposed to such
 disadvantage.
 “beware! beware! sir disinherited!” was shouted so universally, that the
 knight became aware of his danger; and, striking a full blow at the
 templar, he reined back his steed in the same moment, so as to escape the
 charge of athelstane and front-de-boeuf. these knights, therefore, their
 aim being thus eluded, rushed from opposite sides betwixt the object of
 their attack and the templar, almost running their horses against each
 other ere they could stop their career. recovering their horses however,
 and wheeling them round, the whole three pursued their united purpose of
 bearing to the earth the disinherited knight.
 nothing could have saved him, except the remarkable strength and activity
 of the noble horse which he had won on the preceding day.
 this stood him in the more stead, as the horse of bois-guilbert was
 wounded, and those of front-de-boeuf and athelstane were both tired with
 the weight of their gigantic masters, clad in complete armour, and with
 the preceding exertions of the day. the masterly horsemanship of the
 disinherited knight, and the activity of the noble animal which he
 mounted, enabled him for a few minutes to keep at sword's point his three
 antagonists, turning and wheeling with the agility of a hawk upon the
 wing, keeping his enemies as far separate as he could, and rushing now
 against the one, now against the other, dealing sweeping blows with his
 sword, without waiting to receive those which were aimed at him in return.
 but although the lists rang with the applauses of his dexterity, it was
 evident that he must at last be overpowered; and the nobles around prince
 john implored him with one voice to throw down his warder, and to save so
 brave a knight from the disgrace of being overcome by odds.
 “not i, by the light of heaven!” answered prince john; “this same
 springald, who conceals his name, and despises our proffered hospitality,
 hath already gained one prize, and may now afford to let others have their
 turn.” as he spoke thus, an unexpected incident changed the fortune of the
 day.
 there was among the ranks of the disinherited knight a champion in black
 armour, mounted on a black horse, large of size, tall, and to all
 appearance powerful and strong, like the rider by whom he was mounted.
 this knight, who bore on his shield no device of any kind, had hitherto
 evinced very little interest in the event of the fight, beating off with
 seeming ease those combatants who attacked him, but neither pursuing his
 advantages, nor himself assailing any one. in short, he had hitherto acted
 the part rather of a spectator than of a party in the tournament, a
 circumstance which procured him among the spectators the name of “le noir
 faineant”, or the black sluggard.
 at once this knight seemed to throw aside his apathy, when he discovered
 the leader of his party so hard bestead; for, setting spurs to his horse,
 which was quite fresh, he came to his assistance like a thunderbolt,
 exclaiming, in a voice like a trumpet-call, “desdichado, to the rescue!”
 it was high time; for, while the disinherited knight was pressing upon the
 templar, front-de-boeuf had got nigh to him with his uplifted sword; but
 ere the blow could descend, the sable knight dealt a stroke on his head,
 which, glancing from the polished helmet, lighted with violence scarcely
 abated on the “chamfron” of the steed, and front-de-boeuf rolled on the
 ground, both horse and man equally stunned by the fury of the blow. “le
 noir faineant” then turned his horse upon athelstane of coningsburgh; and
 his own sword having been broken in his encounter with front-de-boeuf, he
 wrenched from the hand of the bulky saxon the battle-axe which he wielded,
 and, like one familiar with the use of the weapon, bestowed him such a
 blow upon the crest, that athelstane also lay senseless on the field.
 having achieved this double feat, for which he was the more highly
 applauded that it was totally unexpected from him, the knight seemed to
 resume the sluggishness of his character, returning calmly to the northern
 extremity of the lists, leaving his leader to cope as he best could with
 brian de bois-guilbert. this was no longer matter of so much difficulty as
 formerly. the templars horse had bled much, and gave way under the shock
 of the disinherited knight's charge. brian de bois-guilbert rolled on the
 field, encumbered with the stirrup, from which he was unable to draw his
 foot. his antagonist sprung from horseback, waved his fatal sword over the
 head of his adversary, and commanded him to yield himself; when prince
 john, more moved by the templars dangerous situation than he had been by
 that of his rival, saved him the mortification of confessing himself
 vanquished, by casting down his warder, and putting an end to the
 conflict.
 it was, indeed, only the relics and embers of the fight which continued to
 burn; for of the few knights who still continued in the lists, the greater
 part had, by tacit consent, forborne the conflict for some time, leaving
 it to be determined by the strife of the leaders.
 the squires, who had found it a matter of danger and difficulty to attend
 their masters during the engagement, now thronged into the lists to pay
 their dutiful attendance to the wounded, who were removed with the utmost
 care and attention to the neighbouring pavilions, or to the quarters
 prepared for them in the adjoining village.
 thus ended the memorable field of ashby-de-la-zouche, one of the most
 gallantly contested tournaments of that age; for although only four
 knights, including one who was smothered by the heat of his armour, had
 died upon the field, yet upwards of thirty were desperately wounded, four
 or five of whom never recovered. several more were disabled for life; and
 those who escaped best carried the marks of the conflict to the grave with
 them. hence it is always mentioned in the old records, as the gentle and
 joyous passage of arms of ashby.
 it being now the duty of prince john to name the knight who had done best,
 he determined that the honour of the day remained with the knight whom the
 popular voice had termed “le noir faineant.” it was pointed out to the
 prince, in impeachment of this decree, that the victory had been in fact
 won by the disinherited knight, who, in the course of the day, had
 overcome six champions with his own hand, and who had finally unhorsed and
 struck down the leader of the opposite party. but prince john adhered to
 his own opinion, on the ground that the disinherited knight and his party
 had lost the day, but for the powerful assistance of the knight of the
 black armour, to whom, therefore, he persisted in awarding the prize.
 to the surprise of all present, however, the knight thus preferred was
 nowhere to be found. he had left the lists immediately when the conflict
 ceased, and had been observed by some spectators to move down one of the
 forest glades with the same slow pace and listless and indifferent manner
 which had procured him the epithet of the black sluggard. after he had
 been summoned twice by sound of trumpet, and proclamation of the heralds,
 it became necessary to name another to receive the honours which had been
 assigned to him. prince john had now no further excuse for resisting the
 claim of the disinherited knight, whom, therefore, he named the champion
 of the day.
 through a field slippery with blood, and encumbered with broken armour and
 the bodies of slain and wounded horses, the marshals of the lists again
 conducted the victor to the foot of prince john's throne.
 “disinherited knight,” said prince john, “since by that title only you
 will consent to be known to us, we a second time award to you the honours
 of this tournament, and announce to you your right to claim and receive
 from the hands of the queen of love and beauty, the chaplet of honour
 which your valour has justly deserved.” the knight bowed low and
 gracefully, but returned no answer.
 while the trumpets sounded, while the heralds strained their voices in
 proclaiming honour to the brave and glory to the victor—while ladies
 waved their silken kerchiefs and embroidered veils, and while all ranks
 joined in a clamorous shout of exultation, the marshals conducted the
 disinherited knight across the lists to the foot of that throne of honour
 which was occupied by the lady rowena.
 on the lower step of this throne the champion was made to kneel down.
 indeed his whole action since the fight had ended, seemed rather to have
 been upon the impulse of those around him than from his own free will; and
 it was observed that he tottered as they guided him the second time across
 the lists. rowena, descending from her station with a graceful and
 dignified step, was about to place the chaplet which she held in her hand
 upon the helmet of the champion, when the marshals exclaimed with one
 voice, “it must not be thus—his head must be bare.” the knight
 muttered faintly a few words, which were lost in the hollow of his helmet,
 but their purport seemed to be a desire that his casque might not be
 removed.
 whether from love of form, or from curiosity, the marshals paid no
 attention to his expressions of reluctance, but unhelmed him by cutting
 the laces of his casque, and undoing the fastening of his gorget. when the
 helmet was removed, the well-formed, yet sun-burnt features of a young man
 of twenty-five were seen, amidst a profusion of short fair hair. his
 countenance was as pale as death, and marked in one or two places with
 streaks of blood.
original
 rowena had no sooner beheld him than she uttered a faint shriek; but at
 once summoning up the energy of her disposition, and compelling herself,
 as it were, to proceed, while her frame yet trembled with the violence of
 sudden emotion, she placed upon the drooping head of the victor the
 splendid chaplet which was the destined reward of the day, and pronounced,
 in a clear and distinct tone, these words: “i bestow on thee this chaplet,
 sir knight, as the meed of valour assigned to this day's victor:” here she
 paused a moment, and then firmly added, “and upon brows more worthy could
 a wreath of chivalry never be placed!”
 the knight stooped his head, and kissed the hand of the lovely sovereign
 by whom his valour had been rewarded; and then, sinking yet farther
 forward, lay prostrate at her feet.
 there was a general consternation. cedric, who had been struck mute by the
 sudden appearance of his banished son, now rushed forward, as if to
 separate him from rowena. but this had been already accomplished by the
 marshals of the field, who, guessing the cause of ivanhoe's swoon, had
 hastened to undo his armour, and found that the head of a lance had
 penetrated his breastplate, and inflicted a wound in his side.
 “heroes, approach!” atrides thus aloud,
 “stand forth distinguish'd from the circling crowd,
 ye who by skill or manly force may claim,
 your rivals to surpass and merit fame.
 this cow, worth twenty oxen, is decreed,
 for him who farthest sends the winged reed.”
 —iliad
 the name of ivanhoe was no sooner pronounced than it flew from mouth to
 mouth, with all the celerity with which eagerness could convey and
 curiosity receive it. it was not long ere it reached the circle of the
 prince, whose brow darkened as he heard the news. looking around him,
 however, with an air of scorn, “my lords,” said he, “and especially you,
 sir prior, what think ye of the doctrine the learned tell us, concerning
 innate attractions and antipathies? methinks that i felt the presence of
 my brother's minion, even when i least guessed whom yonder suit of armour
 enclosed.”
 “front-de-boeuf must prepare to restore his fief of ivanhoe,” said de
 bracy, who, having discharged his part honourably in the tournament, had
 laid his shield and helmet aside, and again mingled with the prince's
 retinue.
 “ay,” answered waldemar fitzurse, “this gallant is likely to reclaim the
 castle and manor which richard assigned to him, and which your highness's
 generosity has since given to front-de-boeuf.”
 “front-de-boeuf,” replied john, “is a man more willing to swallow three
 manors such as ivanhoe, than to disgorge one of them. for the rest, sirs,
 i hope none here will deny my right to confer the fiefs of the crown upon
 the faithful followers who are around me, and ready to perform the usual
 military service, in the room of those who have wandered to foreign
 countries, and can neither render homage nor service when called upon.”
 the audience were too much interested in the question not to pronounce the
 prince's assumed right altogether indubitable. “a generous prince!—a
 most noble lord, who thus takes upon himself the task of rewarding his
 faithful followers!”
 such were the words which burst from the train, expectants all of them of
 similar grants at the expense of king richard's followers and favourites,
 if indeed they had not as yet received such. prior aymer also assented to
 the general proposition, observing, however, “that the blessed jerusalem
 could not indeed be termed a foreign country. she was 'communis mater'—the
 mother of all christians. but he saw not,” he declared, “how the knight of
 ivanhoe could plead any advantage from this, since he” (the prior) “was
 assured that the crusaders, under richard, had never proceeded much
 farther than askalon, which, as all the world knew, was a town of the
 philistines, and entitled to none of the privileges of the holy city.”
 waldemar, whose curiosity had led him towards the place where ivanhoe had
 fallen to the ground, now returned. “the gallant,” said he, “is likely to
 give your highness little disturbance, and to leave front-de-boeuf in the
 quiet possession of his gains—he is severely wounded.”
 “whatever becomes of him,” said prince john, “he is victor of the day; and
 were he tenfold our enemy, or the devoted friend of our brother, which is
 perhaps the same, his wounds must be looked to—our own physician
 shall attend him.”
 a stern smile curled the prince's lip as he spoke. waldemar fitzurse
 hastened to reply, that ivanhoe was already removed from the lists, and in
 the custody of his friends.
 “i was somewhat afflicted,” he said, “to see the grief of the queen of
 love and beauty, whose sovereignty of a day this event has changed into
 mourning. i am not a man to be moved by a woman's lament for her lover,
 but this same lady rowena suppressed her sorrow with such dignity of
 manner, that it could only be discovered by her folded hands, and her
 tearless eye, which trembled as it remained fixed on the lifeless form
 before her.”
 “who is this lady rowena,” said prince john, “of whom we have heard so
 much?”
 “a saxon heiress of large possessions,” replied the prior aymer; “a rose
 of loveliness, and a jewel of wealth; the fairest among a thousand, a
 bundle of myrrh, and a cluster of camphire.”
 “we shall cheer her sorrows,” said prince john, “and amend her blood, by
 wedding her to a norman. she seems a minor, and must therefore be at our
 royal disposal in marriage.—how sayst thou, de bracy? what thinkst
 thou of gaining fair lands and livings, by wedding a saxon, after the
 fashion of the followers of the conqueror?”
 “if the lands are to my liking, my lord,” answered de bracy, “it will be
 hard to displease me with a bride; and deeply will i hold myself bound to
 your highness for a good deed, which will fulfil all promises made in
 favour of your servant and vassal.”
 “we will not forget it,” said prince john; “and that we may instantly go
 to work, command our seneschal presently to order the attendance of the
 lady rowena and her company—that is, the rude churl her guardian,
 and the saxon ox whom the black knight struck down in the tournament, upon
 this evening's banquet.—de bigot,” he added to his seneschal, “thou
 wilt word this our second summons so courteously, as to gratify the pride
 of these saxons, and make it impossible for them again to refuse;
 although, by the bones of becket, courtesy to them is casting pearls
 before swine.”
 prince john had proceeded thus far, and was about to give the signal for
 retiring from the lists, when a small billet was put into his hand.
 “from whence?” said prince john, looking at the person by whom it was
 delivered.
 “from foreign parts, my lord, but from whence i know not” replied his
 attendant. “a frenchman brought it hither, who said, he had ridden night
 and day to put it into the hands of your highness.”
 the prince looked narrowly at the superscription, and then at the seal,
 placed so as to secure the flex-silk with which the billet was surrounded,
 and which bore the impression of three fleurs-de-lis. john then opened the
 billet with apparent agitation, which visibly and greatly increased when
 he had perused the contents, which were expressed in these words:
 “take heed to yourself for the devil is unchained!”
 the prince turned as pale as death, looked first on the earth, and then up
 to heaven, like a man who has received news that sentence of execution has
 been passed upon him. recovering from the first effects of his surprise,
 he took waldemar fitzurse and de bracy aside, and put the billet into
 their hands successively. “it means,” he added, in a faltering voice,
 “that my brother richard has obtained his freedom.”
 “this may be a false alarm, or a forged letter,” said de bracy.
 “it is france's own hand and seal,” replied prince john.
 “it is time, then,” said fitzurse, “to draw our party to a head, either at
 york, or some other centrical place. a few days later, and it will be
 indeed too late. your highness must break short this present mummery.”
 “the yeomen and commons,” said de bracy, “must not be dismissed
 discontented, for lack of their share in the sports.”
 “the day,” said waldemar, “is not yet very far spent—let the archers
 shoot a few rounds at the target, and the prize be adjudged. this will be
 an abundant fulfilment of the prince's promises, so far as this herd of
 saxon serfs is concerned.”
 “i thank thee, waldemar,” said the prince; “thou remindest me, too, that i
 have a debt to pay to that insolent peasant who yesterday insulted our
 person. our banquet also shall go forward to-night as we proposed. were
 this my last hour of power, it should be an hour sacred to revenge and to
 pleasure—let new cares come with to-morrow's new day.”
 the sound of the trumpets soon recalled those spectators who had already
 begun to leave the field; and proclamation was made that prince john,
 suddenly called by high and peremptory public duties, held himself obliged
 to discontinue the entertainments of to-morrow's festival: nevertheless,
 that, unwilling so many good yeoman should depart without a trial of
 skill, he was pleased to appoint them, before leaving the ground,
 presently to execute the competition of archery intended for the morrow.
 to the best archer a prize was to be awarded, being a bugle-horn, mounted
 with silver, and a silken baldric richly ornamented with a medallion of st
 hubert, the patron of silvan sport.
 more than thirty yeomen at first presented themselves as competitors,
 several of whom were rangers and under-keepers in the royal forests of
 needwood and charnwood. when, however, the archers understood with whom
 they were to be matched, upwards of twenty withdrew themselves from the
 contest, unwilling to encounter the dishonour of almost certain defeat.
 for in those days the skill of each celebrated marksman was as well known
 for many miles round him, as the qualities of a horse trained at newmarket
 are familiar to those who frequent that well-known meeting.
 the diminished list of competitors for silvan fame still amounted to
 eight. prince john stepped from his royal seat to view more nearly the
 persons of these chosen yeomen, several of whom wore the royal livery.
 having satisfied his curiosity by this investigation, he looked for the
 object of his resentment, whom he observed standing on the same spot, and
 with the same composed countenance which he had exhibited upon the
 preceding day.
 “fellow,” said prince john, “i guessed by thy insolent babble that thou
 wert no true lover of the longbow, and i see thou darest not adventure thy
 skill among such merry-men as stand yonder.”
 “under favour, sir,” replied the yeoman, “i have another reason for
 refraining to shoot, besides the fearing discomfiture and disgrace.”
 “and what is thy other reason?” said prince john, who, for some cause
 which perhaps he could not himself have explained, felt a painful
 curiosity respecting this individual.
 “because,” replied the woodsman, “i know not if these yeomen and i are
 used to shoot at the same marks; and because, moreover, i know not how
 your grace might relish the winning of a third prize by one who has
 unwittingly fallen under your displeasure.”
 prince john coloured as he put the question, “what is thy name, yeoman?”
 “locksley,” answered the yeoman.
 “then, locksley,” said prince john, “thou shalt shoot in thy turn, when
 these yeomen have displayed their skill. if thou carriest the prize, i
 will add to it twenty nobles; but if thou losest it, thou shalt be stript
 of thy lincoln green, and scourged out of the lists with bowstrings, for a
 wordy and insolent braggart.”
 “and how if i refuse to shoot on such a wager?” said the yeoman.—“your
 grace's power, supported, as it is, by so many men-at-arms, may indeed
 easily strip and scourge me, but cannot compel me to bend or to draw my
 bow.”
 “if thou refusest my fair proffer,” said the prince, “the provost of the
 lists shall cut thy bowstring, break thy bow and arrows, and expel thee
 from the presence as a faint-hearted craven.”
 “this is no fair chance you put on me, proud prince,” said the yeoman, “to
 compel me to peril myself against the best archers of leicester and
 staffordshire, under the penalty of infamy if they should overshoot me.
 nevertheless, i will obey your pleasure.”
 “look to him close, men-at-arms,” said prince john, “his heart is sinking;
 i am jealous lest he attempt to escape the trial.—and do you, good
 fellows, shoot boldly round; a buck and a butt of wine are ready for your
 refreshment in yonder tent, when the prize is won.”
 a target was placed at the upper end of the southern avenue which led to
 the lists. the contending archers took their station in turn, at the
 bottom of the southern access, the distance between that station and the
 mark allowing full distance for what was called a shot at rovers. the
 archers, having previously determined by lot their order of precedence,
 were to shoot each three shafts in succession. the sports were regulated
 by an officer of inferior rank, termed the provost of the games; for the
 high rank of the marshals of the lists would have been held degraded, had
 they condescended to superintend the sports of the yeomanry.
 one by one the archers, stepping forward, delivered their shafts
 yeomanlike and bravely. of twenty-four arrows, shot in succession, ten
 were fixed in the target, and the others ranged so near it, that,
 considering the distance of the mark, it was accounted good archery. of
 the ten shafts which hit the target, two within the inner ring were shot
 by hubert, a forester in the service of malvoisin, who was accordingly
 pronounced victorious.
 “now, locksley,” said prince john to the bold yeoman, with a bitter smile,
 “wilt thou try conclusions with hubert, or wilt thou yield up bow,
 baldric, and quiver, to the provost of the sports?”
 “sith it be no better,” said locksley, “i am content to try my fortune; on
 condition that when i have shot two shafts at yonder mark of hubert's, he
 shall be bound to shoot one at that which i shall propose.”
 “that is but fair,” answered prince john, “and it shall not be refused
 thee.—if thou dost beat this braggart, hubert, i will fill the bugle
 with silver-pennies for thee.”
 “a man can do but his best,” answered hubert; “but my grandsire drew a
 good long bow at hastings, and i trust not to dishonour his memory.”
 the former target was now removed, and a fresh one of the same size placed
 in its room. hubert, who, as victor in the first trial of skill, had the
 right to shoot first, took his aim with great deliberation, long measuring
 the distance with his eye, while he held in his hand his bended bow, with
 the arrow placed on the string. at length he made a step forward, and
 raising the bow at the full stretch of his left arm, till the centre or
 grasping-place was nigh level with his face, he drew his bowstring to his
 ear. the arrow whistled through the air, and lighted within the inner ring
 of the target, but not exactly in the centre.
 “you have not allowed for the wind, hubert,” said his antagonist, bending
 his bow, “or that had been a better shot.”
 so saying, and without showing the least anxiety to pause upon his aim,
 locksley stept to the appointed station, and shot his arrow as carelessly
 in appearance as if he had not even looked at the mark. he was speaking
 almost at the instant that the shaft left the bowstring, yet it alighted
 in the target two inches nearer to the white spot which marked the centre
 than that of hubert.
original
 “by the light of heaven!” said prince john to hubert, “an thou suffer that
 runagate knave to overcome thee, thou art worthy of the gallows!”
 hubert had but one set speech for all occasions. “an your highness were to
 hang me,” he said, “a man can but do his best. nevertheless, my grandsire
 drew a good bow—”
 “the foul fiend on thy grandsire and all his generation!” interrupted
 john, “shoot, knave, and shoot thy best, or it shall be the worse for
 thee!”
 thus exhorted, hubert resumed his place, and not neglecting the caution
 which he had received from his adversary, he made the necessary allowance
 for a very light air of wind, which had just arisen, and shot so
 successfully that his arrow alighted in the very centre of the target.
 “a hubert! a hubert!” shouted the populace, more interested in a known
 person than in a stranger. “in the clout!—in the clout!—a
 hubert for ever!”
 “thou canst not mend that shot, locksley,” said the prince, with an
 insulting smile.
 “i will notch his shaft for him, however,” replied locksley.
 and letting fly his arrow with a little more precaution than before, it
 lighted right upon that of his competitor, which it split to shivers. the
 people who stood around were so astonished at his wonderful dexterity,
 that they could not even give vent to their surprise in their usual
 clamour. “this must be the devil, and no man of flesh and blood,”
 whispered the yeomen to each other; “such archery was never seen since a
 bow was first bent in britain.”
 “and now,” said locksley, “i will crave your grace's permission to plant
 such a mark as is used in the north country; and welcome every brave
 yeoman who shall try a shot at it to win a smile from the bonny lass he
 loves best.”
 he then turned to leave the lists. “let your guards attend me,” he said,
 “if you please—i go but to cut a rod from the next willow-bush.”
 prince john made a signal that some attendants should follow him in case
 of his escape: but the cry of “shame! shame!” which burst from the
 multitude, induced him to alter his ungenerous purpose.
 locksley returned almost instantly with a willow wand about six feet in
 length, perfectly straight, and rather thicker than a man's thumb. he
 began to peel this with great composure, observing at the same time, that
 to ask a good woodsman to shoot at a target so broad as had hitherto been
 used, was to put shame upon his skill. “for his own part,” he said, “and
 in the land where he was bred, men would as soon take for their mark king
 arthur's round-table, which held sixty knights around it. a child of seven
 years old,” he said, “might hit yonder target with a headless shaft; but,”
 added he, walking deliberately to the other end of the lists, and sticking
 the willow wand upright in the ground, “he that hits that rod at
 five-score yards, i call him an archer fit to bear both bow and quiver
 before a king, an it were the stout king richard himself.”
 “my grandsire,” said hubert, “drew a good bow at the battle of hastings,
 and never shot at such a mark in his life—and neither will i. if
 this yeoman can cleave that rod, i give him the bucklers—or rather,
 i yield to the devil that is in his jerkin, and not to any human skill; a
 man can but do his best, and i will not shoot where i am sure to miss. i
 might as well shoot at the edge of our parson's whittle, or at a wheat
 straw, or at a sunbeam, as at a twinkling white streak which i can hardly
 see.”
 “cowardly dog!” said prince john.—“sirrah locksley, do thou shoot;
 but, if thou hittest such a mark, i will say thou art the first man ever
 did so. however it be, thou shalt not crow over us with a mere show of
 superior skill.”
 “i will do my best, as hubert says,” answered locksley; “no man can do
 more.”
 so saying, he again bent his bow, but on the present occasion looked with
 attention to his weapon, and changed the string, which he thought was no
 longer truly round, having been a little frayed by the two former shots.
 he then took his aim with some deliberation, and the multitude awaited the
 event in breathless silence. the archer vindicated their opinion of his
 skill: his arrow split the willow rod against which it was aimed. a
 jubilee of acclamations followed; and even prince john, in admiration of
 locksley's skill, lost for an instant his dislike to his person. “these
 twenty nobles,” he said, “which, with the bugle, thou hast fairly won, are
 thine own; we will make them fifty, if thou wilt take livery and service
 with us as a yeoman of our body guard, and be near to our person. for
 never did so strong a hand bend a bow, or so true an eye direct a shaft.”
 “pardon me, noble prince,” said locksley; “but i have vowed, that if ever
 i take service, it should be with your royal brother king richard. these
 twenty nobles i leave to hubert, who has this day drawn as brave a bow as
 his grandsire did at hastings. had his modesty not refused the trial, he
 would have hit the wand as well i.”
 hubert shook his head as he received with reluctance the bounty of the
 stranger, and locksley, anxious to escape further observation, mixed with
 the crowd, and was seen no more.
 the victorious archer would not perhaps have escaped john's attention so
 easily, had not that prince had other subjects of anxious and more
 important meditation pressing upon his mind at that instant. he called
 upon his chamberlain as he gave the signal for retiring from the lists,
 and commanded him instantly to gallop to ashby, and seek out isaac the
 jew. “tell the dog,” he said, “to send me, before sun-down, two thousand
 crowns. he knows the security; but thou mayst show him this ring for a
 token. the rest of the money must be paid at york within six days. if he
 neglects, i will have the unbelieving villain's head. look that thou pass
 him not on the way; for the circumcised slave was displaying his stolen
 finery amongst us.”
 so saying, the prince resumed his horse, and returned to ashby, the whole
 crowd breaking up and dispersing upon his retreat.
 in rough magnificence array'd,
 when ancient chivalry display'd
 the pomp of her heroic games,
 and crested chiefs and tissued dames
 assembled, at the clarion's call,
 in some proud castle's high arch'd hall.
 —warton
 prince john held his high festival in the castle of ashby. this was not
 the same building of which the stately ruins still interest the traveller,
 and which was erected at a later period by the lord hastings, high
 chamberlain of england, one of the first victims of the tyranny of richard
 the third, and yet better known as one of shakspeare's characters than by
 his historical fame. the castle and town of ashby, at this time, belonged
 to roger de quincy, earl of winchester, who, during the period of our
 history, was absent in the holy land. prince john, in the meanwhile,
 occupied his castle, and disposed of his domains without scruple; and
 seeking at present to dazzle men's eyes by his hospitality and
 magnificence, had given orders for great preparations, in order to render
 the banquet as splendid as possible.
 the purveyors of the prince, who exercised on this and other occasions the
 full authority of royalty, had swept the country of all that could be
 collected which was esteemed fit for their master's table. guests also
 were invited in great numbers; and in the necessity in which he then found
 himself of courting popularity, prince john had extended his invitation to
 a few distinguished saxon and danish families, as well as to the norman
 nobility and gentry of the neighbourhood. however despised and degraded on
 ordinary occasions, the great numbers of the anglo-saxons must necessarily
 render them formidable in the civil commotions which seemed approaching,
 and it was an obvious point of policy to secure popularity with their
 leaders.
 it was accordingly the prince's intention, which he for some time
 maintained, to treat these unwonted guests with a courtesy to which they
 had been little accustomed. but although no man with less scruple made his
 ordinary habits and feelings bend to his interest, it was the misfortune
 of this prince, that his levity and petulance were perpetually breaking
 out, and undoing all that had been gained by his previous dissimulation.
 of this fickle temper he gave a memorable example in ireland, when sent
 thither by his father, henry the second, with the purpose of buying golden
 opinions of the inhabitants of that new and important acquisition to the
 english crown. upon this occasion the irish chieftains contended which
 should first offer to the young prince their loyal homage and the kiss of
 peace. but, instead of receiving their salutations with courtesy, john and
 his petulant attendants could not resist the temptation of pulling the
 long beards of the irish chieftains; a conduct which, as might have been
 expected, was highly resented by these insulted dignitaries, and produced
 fatal consequences to the english domination in ireland. it is necessary
 to keep these inconsistencies of john's character in view, that the reader
 may understand his conduct during the present evening.
 in execution of the resolution which he had formed during his cooler
 moments, prince john received cedric and athelstane with distinguished
 courtesy, and expressed his disappointment, without resentment, when the
 indisposition of rowena was alleged by the former as a reason for her not
 attending upon his gracious summons. cedric and athelstane were both
 dressed in the ancient saxon garb, which, although not unhandsome in
 itself, and in the present instance composed of costly materials, was so
 remote in shape and appearance from that of the other guests, that prince
 john took great credit to himself with waldemar fitzurse for refraining
 from laughter at a sight which the fashion of the day rendered ridiculous.
 yet, in the eye of sober judgment, the short close tunic and long mantle
 of the saxons was a more graceful, as well as a more convenient dress,
 than the garb of the normans, whose under garment was a long doublet, so
 loose as to resemble a shirt or waggoner's frock, covered by a cloak of
 scanty dimensions, neither fit to defend the wearer from cold or from
 rain, and the only purpose of which appeared to be to display as much fur,
 embroidery, and jewellery work, as the ingenuity of the tailor could
 contrive to lay upon it. the emperor charlemagne, in whose reign they were
 first introduced, seems to have been very sensible of the inconveniences
 arising from the fashion of this garment. “in heaven's name,” said he, “to
 what purpose serve these abridged cloaks? if we are in bed they are no
 cover, on horseback they are no protection from the wind and rain, and
 when seated, they do not guard our legs from the damp or the frost.”
 nevertheless, spite of this imperial objurgation, the short cloaks
 continued in fashion down to the time of which we treat, and particularly
 among the princes of the house of anjou. they were therefore in universal
 use among prince john's courtiers; and the long mantle, which formed the
 upper garment of the saxons, was held in proportional derision.
 the guests were seated at a table which groaned under the quantity of good
 cheer. the numerous cooks who attended on the prince's progress, having
 exerted all their art in varying the forms in which the ordinary
 provisions were served up, had succeeded almost as well as the modern
 professors of the culinary art in rendering them perfectly unlike their
 natural appearance. besides these dishes of domestic origin, there were
 various delicacies brought from foreign parts, and a quantity of rich
 pastry, as well as of the simnel-bread and wastle cakes, which were only
 used at the tables of the highest nobility. the banquet was crowned with
 the richest wines, both foreign and domestic.
 but, though luxurious, the norman nobles were not generally speaking an
 intemperate race. while indulging themselves in the pleasures of the
 table, they aimed at delicacy, but avoided excess, and were apt to
 attribute gluttony and drunkenness to the vanquished saxons, as vices
 peculiar to their inferior station. prince john, indeed, and those who
 courted his pleasure by imitating his foibles, were apt to indulge to
 excess in the pleasures of the trencher and the goblet; and indeed it is
 well known that his death was occasioned by a surfeit upon peaches and new
 ale. his conduct, however, was an exception to the general manners of his
 countrymen.
 with sly gravity, interrupted only by private signs to each other, the
 norman knights and nobles beheld the ruder demeanour of athelstane and
 cedric at a banquet, to the form and fashion of which they were
 unaccustomed. and while their manners were thus the subject of sarcastic
 observation, the untaught saxons unwittingly transgressed several of the
 arbitrary rules established for the regulation of society. now, it is well
 known, that a man may with more impunity be guilty of an actual breach
 either of real good breeding or of good morals, than appear ignorant of
 the most minute point of fashionable etiquette. thus cedric, who dried his
 hands with a towel, instead of suffering the moisture to exhale by waving
 them gracefully in the air, incurred more ridicule than his companion
 athelstane, when he swallowed to his own single share the whole of a large
 pasty composed of the most exquisite foreign delicacies, and termed at
 that time a “karum-pie”. when, however, it was discovered, by a serious
 cross-examination, that the thane of coningsburgh (or franklin, as the
 normans termed him) had no idea what he had been devouring, and that he
 had taken the contents of the karum-pie for larks and pigeons, whereas
 they were in fact beccaficoes and nightingales, his ignorance brought him
 in for an ample share of the ridicule which would have been more justly
 bestowed on his gluttony.
 the long feast had at length its end; and, while the goblet circulated
 freely, men talked of the feats of the preceding tournament,—of the
 unknown victor in the archery games, of the black knight, whose
 self-denial had induced him to withdraw from the honours he had won,—and
 of the gallant ivanhoe, who had so dearly bought the honours of the day.
 the topics were treated with military frankness, and the jest and laugh
 went round the hall. the brow of prince john alone was overclouded during
 these discussions; some overpowering care seemed agitating his mind, and
 it was only when he received occasional hints from his attendants, that he
 seemed to take interest in what was passing around him. on such occasions
 he would start up, quaff a cup of wine as if to raise his spirits, and
 then mingle in the conversation by some observation made abruptly or at
 random.
 “we drink this beaker,” said he, “to the health of wilfred of ivanhoe,
 champion of this passage of arms, and grieve that his wound renders him
 absent from our board—let all fill to the pledge, and especially
 cedric of rotherwood, the worthy father of a son so promising.”
 “no, my lord,” replied cedric, standing up, and placing on the table his
 untasted cup, “i yield not the name of son to the disobedient youth, who
 at once despises my commands, and relinquishes the manners and customs of
 his fathers.”
 “'tis impossible,” cried prince john, with well-feigned astonishment,
 “that so gallant a knight should be an unworthy or disobedient son!”
 “yet, my lord,” answered cedric, “so it is with this wilfred. he left my
 homely dwelling to mingle with the gay nobility of your brother's court,
 where he learned to do those tricks of horsemanship which you prize so
 highly. he left it contrary to my wish and command; and in the days of
 alfred that would have been termed disobedience—ay, and a crime
 severely punishable.”
 “alas!” replied prince john, with a deep sigh of affected sympathy, “since
 your son was a follower of my unhappy brother, it need not be enquired
 where or from whom he learned the lesson of filial disobedience.”
 thus spake prince john, wilfully forgetting, that of all the sons of henry
 the second, though no one was free from the charge, he himself had been
 most distinguished for rebellion and ingratitude to his father.
 “i think,” said he, after a moment's pause, “that my brother proposed to
 confer upon his favourite the rich manor of ivanhoe.”
 “he did endow him with it,” answered cedric; “nor is it my least quarrel
 with my son, that he stooped to hold, as a feudal vassal, the very domains
 which his fathers possessed in free and independent right.”
 “we shall then have your willing sanction, good cedric,” said prince john,
 “to confer this fief upon a person whose dignity will not be diminished by
 holding land of the british crown.—sir reginald front-de-boeuf,” he
 said, turning towards that baron, “i trust you will so keep the goodly
 barony of ivanhoe, that sir wilfred shall not incur his father's farther
 displeasure by again entering upon that fief.”
 “by st anthony!” answered the black-brow'd giant, “i will consent that
 your highness shall hold me a saxon, if either cedric or wilfred, or the
 best that ever bore english blood, shall wrench from me the gift with
 which your highness has graced me.”
 “whoever shall call thee saxon, sir baron,” replied cedric, offended at a
 mode of expression by which the normans frequently expressed their
 habitual contempt of the english, “will do thee an honour as great as it
 is undeserved.”
 front-de-boeuf would have replied, but prince john's petulance and levity
 got the start.
 “assuredly,” said be, “my lords, the noble cedric speaks truth; and his
 race may claim precedence over us as much in the length of their pedigrees
 as in the longitude of their cloaks.”
 “they go before us indeed in the field—as deer before dogs,” said
 malvoisin.
 “and with good right may they go before us—forget not,” said the
 prior aymer, “the superior decency and decorum of their manners.”
 “their singular abstemiousness and temperance,” said de bracy, forgetting
 the plan which promised him a saxon bride.
 “together with the courage and conduct,” said brian de bois-guilbert, “by
 which they distinguished themselves at hastings and elsewhere.”
 while, with smooth and smiling cheek, the courtiers, each in turn,
 followed their prince's example, and aimed a shaft of ridicule at cedric,
 the face of the saxon became inflamed with passion, and he glanced his
 eyes fiercely from one to another, as if the quick succession of so many
 injuries had prevented his replying to them in turn; or, like a baited
 bull, who, surrounded by his tormentors, is at a loss to choose from among
 them the immediate object of his revenge. at length he spoke, in a voice
 half choked with passion; and, addressing himself to prince john as the
 head and front of the offence which he had received, “whatever,” he said,
 “have been the follies and vices of our race, a saxon would have been held
 'nidering',”  (the most emphatic term for
 abject worthlessness,) “who should in his own hall, and while his own
 wine-cup passed, have treated, or suffered to be treated, an unoffending
 guest as your highness has this day beheld me used; and whatever was the
 misfortune of our fathers on the field of hastings, those may at least be
 silent,” here he looked at front-de-boeuf and the templar, “who have
 within these few hours once and again lost saddle and stirrup before the
 lance of a saxon.”
 “by my faith, a biting jest!” said prince john. “how like you it, sirs?—our
 saxon subjects rise in spirit and courage; become shrewd in wit, and bold
 in bearing, in these unsettled times—what say ye, my lords?—by
 this good light, i hold it best to take our galleys, and return to
 normandy in time.”
 “for fear of the saxons?” said de bracy, laughing; “we should need no
 weapon but our hunting spears to bring these boars to bay.”
 “a truce with your raillery, sir knights,” said fitzurse;—“and it
 were well,” he added, addressing the prince, “that your highness should
 assure the worthy cedric there is no insult intended him by jests, which
 must sound but harshly in the ear of a stranger.”
 “insult?” answered prince john, resuming his courtesy of demeanour; “i
 trust it will not be thought that i could mean, or permit any, to be
 offered in my presence. here! i fill my cup to cedric himself, since he
 refuses to pledge his son's health.”
 the cup went round amid the well-dissembled applause of the courtiers,
 which, however, failed to make the impression on the mind of the saxon
 that had been designed. he was not naturally acute of perception, but
 those too much undervalued his understanding who deemed that this
 flattering compliment would obliterate the sense of the prior insult. he
 was silent, however, when the royal pledge again passed round, “to sir
 athelstane of coningsburgh.”
 the knight made his obeisance, and showed his sense of the honour by
 draining a huge goblet in answer to it.
 “and now, sirs,” said prince john, who began to be warmed with the wine
 which he had drank, “having done justice to our saxon guests, we will pray
 of them some requital to our courtesy.—worthy thane,” he continued,
 addressing cedric, “may we pray you to name to us some norman whose
 mention may least sully your mouth, and to wash down with a goblet of wine
 all bitterness which the sound may leave behind it?”
 fitzurse arose while prince john spoke, and gliding behind the seat of the
 saxon, whispered to him not to omit the opportunity of putting an end to
 unkindness betwixt the two races, by naming prince john. the saxon replied
 not to this politic insinuation, but, rising up, and filling his cup to
 the brim, he addressed prince john in these words: “your highness has
 required that i should name a norman deserving to be remembered at our
 banquet. this, perchance, is a hard task, since it calls on the slave to
 sing the praises of the master—upon the vanquished, while pressed by
 all the evils of conquest, to sing the praises of the conqueror. yet i
 will name a norman—the first in arms and in place—the best and
 the noblest of his race. and the lips that shall refuse to pledge me to
 his well-earned fame, i term false and dishonoured, and will so maintain
 them with my life.—i quaff this goblet to the health of richard the
 lion-hearted!”
 prince john, who had expected that his own name would have closed the
 saxon's speech, started when that of his injured brother was so
 unexpectedly introduced. he raised mechanically the wine-cup to his lips,
 then instantly set it down, to view the demeanour of the company at this
 unexpected proposal, which many of them felt it as unsafe to oppose as to
 comply with. some of them, ancient and experienced courtiers, closely
 imitated the example of the prince himself, raising the goblet to their
 lips, and again replacing it before them. there were many who, with a more
 generous feeling, exclaimed, “long live king richard! and may he be
 speedily restored to us!” and some few, among whom were front-de-boeuf and
 the templar, in sullen disdain suffered their goblets to stand untasted
 before them. but no man ventured directly to gainsay a pledge filled to
 the health of the reigning monarch.
 having enjoyed his triumph for about a minute, cedric said to his
 companion, “up, noble athelstane! we have remained here long enough, since
 we have requited the hospitable courtesy of prince john's banquet. those
 who wish to know further of our rude saxon manners must henceforth seek us
 in the homes of our fathers, since we have seen enough of royal banquets,
 and enough of norman courtesy.”
 so saying, he arose and left the banqueting room, followed by athelstane,
 and by several other guests, who, partaking of the saxon lineage, held
 themselves insulted by the sarcasms of prince john and his courtiers.
 “by the bones of st thomas,” said prince john, as they retreated, “the
 saxon churls have borne off the best of the day, and have retreated with
 triumph!”
 “'conclamatum est, poculatum est',” said prior aymer; “we have drunk and
 we have shouted,—it were time we left our wine flagons.”
 “the monk hath some fair penitent to shrive to-night, that he is in such a
 hurry to depart,” said de bracy.
 “not so, sir knight,” replied the abbot; “but i must move several miles
 forward this evening upon my homeward journey.”
 “they are breaking up,” said the prince in a whisper to fitzurse; “their
 fears anticipate the event, and this coward prior is the first to shrink
 from me.”
 “fear not, my lord,” said waldemar; “i will show him such reasons as shall
 induce him to join us when we hold our meeting at york.—sir prior,”
 he said, “i must speak with you in private, before you mount your
 palfrey.”
 the other guests were now fast dispersing, with the exception of those
 immediately attached to prince john's faction, and his retinue.
 “this, then, is the result of your advice,” said the prince, turning an
 angry countenance upon fitzurse; “that i should be bearded at my own board
 by a drunken saxon churl, and that, on the mere sound of my brother's
 name, men should fall off from me as if i had the leprosy?”
 “have patience, sir,” replied his counsellor; “i might retort your
 accusation, and blame the inconsiderate levity which foiled my design, and
 misled your own better judgment. but this is no time for recrimination. de
 bracy and i will instantly go among these shuffling cowards, and convince
 them they have gone too far to recede.”
 “it will be in vain,” said prince john, pacing the apartment with
 disordered steps, and expressing himself with an agitation to which the
 wine he had drank partly contributed—“it will be in vain—they
 have seen the handwriting on the wall—they have marked the paw of
 the lion in the sand—they have heard his approaching roar shake the
 wood—nothing will reanimate their courage.”
 “would to god,” said fitzurse to de bracy, “that aught could reanimate his
 own! his brother's very name is an ague to him. unhappy are the
 counsellors of a prince, who wants fortitude and perseverance alike in
 good and in evil!”
 and yet he thinks,—ha, ha, ha, ha,—he thinks
 i am the tool and servant of his will.
 well, let it be; through all the maze of trouble
 his plots and base oppression must create,
 i'll shape myself a way to higher things,
 and who will say 'tis wrong?
 —basil, a tragedy
 no spider ever took more pains to repair the shattered meshes of his web,
 than did waldemar fitzurse to reunite and combine the scattered members of
 prince john's cabal. few of these were attached to him from inclination,
 and none from personal regard. it was therefore necessary, that fitzurse
 should open to them new prospects of advantage, and remind them of those
 which they at present enjoyed. to the young and wild nobles, he held out
 the prospect of unpunished license and uncontrolled revelry; to the
 ambitious, that of power, and to the covetous, that of increased wealth
 and extended domains. the leaders of the mercenaries received a donation
 in gold; an argument the most persuasive to their minds, and without which
 all others would have proved in vain. promises were still more liberally
 distributed than money by this active agent; and, in fine, nothing was
 left undone that could determine the wavering, or animate the
 disheartened. the return of king richard he spoke of as an event
 altogether beyond the reach of probability; yet, when he observed, from
 the doubtful looks and uncertain answers which he received, that this was
 the apprehension by which the minds of his accomplices were most haunted,
 he boldly treated that event, should it really take place, as one which
 ought not to alter their political calculations.
 “if richard returns,” said fitzurse, “he returns to enrich his needy and
 impoverished crusaders at the expense of those who did not follow him to
 the holy land. he returns to call to a fearful reckoning, those who,
 during his absence, have done aught that can be construed offence or
 encroachment upon either the laws of the land or the privileges of the
 crown. he returns to avenge upon the orders of the temple and the
 hospital, the preference which they showed to philip of france during the
 wars in the holy land. he returns, in fine, to punish as a rebel every
 adherent of his brother prince john. are ye afraid of his power?”
 continued the artful confident of that prince, “we acknowledge him a
 strong and valiant knight; but these are not the days of king arthur, when
 a champion could encounter an army. if richard indeed comes back, it must
 be alone,—unfollowed—unfriended. the bones of his gallant army
 have whitened the sands of palestine. the few of his followers who have
 returned have straggled hither like this wilfred of ivanhoe, beggared and
 broken men.—and what talk ye of richard's right of birth?” he
 proceeded, in answer to those who objected scruples on that head. “is
 richard's title of primogeniture more decidedly certain than that of duke
 robert of normandy, the conqueror's eldest son? and yet william the red,
 and henry, his second and third brothers, were successively preferred to
 him by the voice of the nation, robert had every merit which can be
 pleaded for richard; he was a bold knight, a good leader, generous to his
 friends and to the church, and, to crown the whole, a crusader and a
 conqueror of the holy sepulchre; and yet he died a blind and miserable
 prisoner in the castle of cardiff, because he opposed himself to the will
 of the people, who chose that he should not rule over them. it is our
 right,” he said, “to choose from the blood royal the prince who is best
 qualified to hold the supreme power—that is,” said he, correcting
 himself, “him whose election will best promote the interests of the
 nobility. in personal qualifications,” he added, “it was possible that
 prince john might be inferior to his brother richard; but when it was
 considered that the latter returned with the sword of vengeance in his
 hand, while the former held out rewards, immunities, privileges, wealth,
 and honours, it could not be doubted which was the king whom in wisdom the
 nobility were called on to support.”
 these, and many more arguments, some adapted to the peculiar circumstances
 of those whom he addressed, had the expected weight with the nobles of
 prince john's faction. most of them consented to attend the proposed
 meeting at york, for the purpose of making general arrangements for
 placing the crown upon the head of prince john.
 it was late at night, when, worn out and exhausted with his various
 exertions, however gratified with the result, fitzurse, returning to the
 castle of ashby, met with de bracy, who had exchanged his banqueting
 garments for a short green kirtle, with hose of the same cloth and colour,
 a leathern cap or head-piece, a short sword, a horn slung over his
 shoulder, a long bow in his hand, and a bundle of arrows stuck in his
 belt. had fitzurse met this figure in an outer apartment, he would have
 passed him without notice, as one of the yeomen of the guard; but finding
 him in the inner hall, he looked at him with more attention, and
 recognised the norman knight in the dress of an english yeoman.
 “what mummery is this, de bracy?” said fitzurse, somewhat angrily; “is
 this a time for christmas gambols and quaint maskings, when the fate of
 our master, prince john, is on the very verge of decision? why hast thou
 not been, like me, among these heartless cravens, whom the very name of
 king richard terrifies, as it is said to do the children of the saracens?”
 “i have been attending to mine own business,” answered de bracy calmly,
 “as you, fitzurse, have been minding yours.”
 “i minding mine own business!” echoed waldemar; “i have been engaged in
 that of prince john, our joint patron.”
 “as if thou hadst any other reason for that, waldemar,” said de bracy,
 “than the promotion of thine own individual interest? come, fitzurse, we
 know each other—ambition is thy pursuit, pleasure is mine, and they
 become our different ages. of prince john thou thinkest as i do; that he
 is too weak to be a determined monarch, too tyrannical to be an easy
 monarch, too insolent and presumptuous to be a popular monarch, and too
 fickle and timid to be long a monarch of any kind. but he is a monarch by
 whom fitzurse and de bracy hope to rise and thrive; and therefore you aid
 him with your policy, and i with the lances of my free companions.”
 “a hopeful auxiliary,” said fitzurse impatiently; “playing the fool in the
 very moment of utter necessity.—what on earth dost thou purpose by
 this absurd disguise at a moment so urgent?”
 “to get me a wife,” answered de bracy coolly, “after the manner of the
 tribe of benjamin.”
 “the tribe of benjamin?” said fitzurse; “i comprehend thee not.”
 “wert thou not in presence yester-even,” said de bracy, “when we heard the
 prior aymer tell us a tale in reply to the romance which was sung by the
 minstrel?—he told how, long since in palestine, a deadly feud arose
 between the tribe of benjamin and the rest of the israelitish nation; and
 how they cut to pieces well-nigh all the chivalry of that tribe; and how
 they swore by our blessed lady, that they would not permit those who
 remained to marry in their lineage; and how they became grieved for their
 vow, and sent to consult his holiness the pope how they might be absolved
 from it; and how, by the advice of the holy father, the youth of the tribe
 of benjamin carried off from a superb tournament all the ladies who were
 there present, and thus won them wives without the consent either of their
 brides or their brides' families.”
 “i have heard the story,” said fitzurse, “though either the prior or thou
 has made some singular alterations in date and circumstances.”
 “i tell thee,” said de bracy, “that i mean to purvey me a wife after the
 fashion of the tribe of benjamin; which is as much as to say, that in this
 same equipment i will fall upon that herd of saxon bullocks, who have this
 night left the castle, and carry off from them the lovely rowena.”
 “art thou mad, de bracy?” said fitzurse. “bethink thee that, though the
 men be saxons, they are rich and powerful, and regarded with the more
 respect by their countrymen, that wealth and honour are but the lot of few
 of saxon descent.”
 “and should belong to none,” said de bracy; “the work of the conquest
 should be completed.”
 “this is no time for it at least,” said fitzurse “the approaching crisis
 renders the favour of the multitude indispensable, and prince john cannot
 refuse justice to any one who injures their favourites.”
 “let him grant it, if he dare,” said de bracy; “he will soon see the
 difference betwixt the support of such a lusty lot of spears as mine, and
 that of a heartless mob of saxon churls. yet i mean no immediate discovery
 of myself. seem i not in this garb as bold a forester as ever blew horn?
 the blame of the violence shall rest with the outlaws of the yorkshire
 forests. i have sure spies on the saxon's motions—to-night they
 sleep in the convent of saint wittol, or withold, or whatever they call
 that churl of a saxon saint at burton-on-trent. next day's march brings
 them within our reach, and, falcon-ways, we swoop on them at once.
 presently after i will appear in mine own shape, play the courteous
 knight, rescue the unfortunate and afflicted fair one from the hands of
 the rude ravishers, conduct her to front-de-boeuf's castle, or to
 normandy, if it should be necessary, and produce her not again to her
 kindred until she be the bride and dame of maurice de bracy.”
 “a marvellously sage plan,” said fitzurse, “and, as i think, not entirely
 of thine own device.—come, be frank, de bracy, who aided thee in the
 invention? and who is to assist in the execution? for, as i think, thine
 own band lies as far off as york.”
 “marry, if thou must needs know,” said de bracy, “it was the templar brian
 de bois-guilbert that shaped out the enterprise, which the adventure of
 the men of benjamin suggested to me. he is to aid me in the onslaught, and
 he and his followers will personate the outlaws, from whom my valorous arm
 is, after changing my garb, to rescue the lady.”
 “by my halidome,” said fitzurse, “the plan was worthy of your united
 wisdom! and thy prudence, de bracy, is most especially manifested in the
 project of leaving the lady in the hands of thy worthy confederate. thou
 mayst, i think, succeed in taking her from her saxon friends, but how thou
 wilt rescue her afterwards from the clutches of bois-guilbert seems
 considerably more doubtful—he is a falcon well accustomed to pounce
 on a partridge, and to hold his prey fast.”
 “he is a templar,” said de bracy, “and cannot therefore rival me in my
 plan of wedding this heiress;—and to attempt aught dishonourable
 against the intended bride of de bracy—by heaven! were he a whole
 chapter of his order in his single person, he dared not do me such an
 injury!”
 “then since nought that i can say,” said fitzurse, “will put this folly
 from thy imagination, (for well i know the obstinacy of thy disposition,)
 at least waste as little time as possible—let not thy folly be
 lasting as well as untimely.”
 “i tell thee,” answered de bracy, “that it will be the work of a few
 hours, and i shall be at york—at the head of my daring and valorous
 fellows, as ready to support any bold design as thy policy can be to form
 one.—but i hear my comrades assembling, and the steeds stamping and
 neighing in the outer court.—farewell.—i go, like a true
 knight, to win the smiles of beauty.”
 “like a true knight?” repeated fitzurse, looking after him; “like a fool,
 i should say, or like a child, who will leave the most serious and needful
 occupation, to chase the down of the thistle that drives past him.—but
 it is with such tools that i must work;—and for whose advantage?—for
 that of a prince as unwise as he is profligate, and as likely to be an
 ungrateful master as he has already proved a rebellious son and an
 unnatural brother.—but he—he, too, is but one of the tools
 with which i labour; and, proud as he is, should he presume to separate
 his interest from mine, this is a secret which he shall soon learn.”
 the meditations of the statesman were here interrupted by the voice of the
 prince from an interior apartment, calling out, “noble waldemar fitzurse!”
 and, with bonnet doffed, the future chancellor (for to such high
 preferment did the wily norman aspire) hastened to receive the orders of
 the future sovereign.
 far in a wild, unknown to public view,
 from youth to age a reverend hermit grew;
 the moss his bed, the cave his humble cell,
 his food the fruits, his drink the crystal well
 remote from man, with god he pass'd his days,
 prayer all his business—all his pleasure praise.
 —parnell
 the reader cannot have forgotten that the event of the tournament was
 decided by the exertions of an unknown knight, whom, on account of the
 passive and indifferent conduct which he had manifested on the former part
 of the day, the spectators had entitled, “le noir faineant”. this knight
 had left the field abruptly when the victory was achieved; and when he was
 called upon to receive the reward of his valour, he was nowhere to be
 found. in the meantime, while summoned by heralds and by trumpets, the
 knight was holding his course northward, avoiding all frequented paths,
 and taking the shortest road through the woodlands. he paused for the
 night at a small hostelry lying out of the ordinary route, where, however,
 he obtained from a wandering minstrel news of the event of the tourney.
 on the next morning the knight departed early, with the intention of
 making a long journey; the condition of his horse, which he had carefully
 spared during the preceding morning, being such as enabled him to travel
 far without the necessity of much repose. yet his purpose was baffled by
 the devious paths through which he rode, so that when evening closed upon
 him, he only found himself on the frontiers of the west riding of
 yorkshire. by this time both horse and man required refreshment, and it
 became necessary, moreover, to look out for some place in which they might
 spend the night, which was now fast approaching.
 the place where the traveller found himself seemed unpropitious for
 obtaining either shelter or refreshment, and he was likely to be reduced
 to the usual expedient of knights-errant, who, on such occasions, turned
 their horses to graze, and laid themselves down to meditate on their
 lady-mistress, with an oak-tree for a canopy. but the black knight either
 had no mistress to meditate upon, or, being as indifferent in love as he
 seemed to be in war, was not sufficiently occupied by passionate
 reflections upon her beauty and cruelty, to be able to parry the effects
 of fatigue and hunger, and suffer love to act as a substitute for the
 solid comforts of a bed and supper. he felt dissatisfied, therefore, when,
 looking around, he found himself deeply involved in woods, through which
 indeed there were many open glades, and some paths, but such as seemed
 only formed by the numerous herds of cattle which grazed in the forest, or
 by the animals of chase, and the hunters who made prey of them.
 the sun, by which the knight had chiefly directed his course, had now sunk
 behind the derbyshire hills on his left, and every effort which he might
 make to pursue his journey was as likely to lead him out of his road as to
 advance him on his route. after having in vain endeavoured to select the
 most beaten path, in hopes it might lead to the cottage of some herdsman,
 or the silvan lodge of a forester, and having repeatedly found himself
 totally unable to determine on a choice, the knight resolved to trust to
 the sagacity of his horse; experience having, on former occasions, made
 him acquainted with the wonderful talent possessed by these animals for
 extricating themselves and their riders on such emergencies.
 the good steed, grievously fatigued with so long a day's journey under a
 rider cased in mail, had no sooner found, by the slackened reins, that he
 was abandoned to his own guidance, than he seemed to assume new strength
 and spirit; and whereas, formerly he had scarce replied to the spur,
 otherwise than by a groan, he now, as if proud of the confidence reposed
 in him, pricked up his ears, and assumed, of his own accord, a more lively
 motion. the path which the animal adopted rather turned off from the
 course pursued by the knight during the day; but as the horse seemed
 confident in his choice, the rider abandoned himself to his discretion.
 he was justified by the event; for the footpath soon after appeared a
 little wider and more worn, and the tinkle of a small bell gave the knight
 to understand that he was in the vicinity of some chapel or hermitage.
 accordingly, he soon reached an open plat of turf, on the opposite side of
 which, a rock, rising abruptly from a gently sloping plain, offered its
 grey and weatherbeaten front to the traveller. ivy mantled its sides in
 some places, and in others oaks and holly bushes, whose roots found
 nourishment in the cliffs of the crag, waved over the precipices below,
 like the plumage of the warrior over his steel helmet, giving grace to
 that whose chief expression was terror. at the bottom of the rock, and
 leaning, as it were, against it, was constructed a rude hut, built chiefly
 of the trunks of trees felled in the neighbouring forest, and secured
 against the weather by having its crevices stuffed with moss mingled with
 clay. the stem of a young fir-tree lopped of its branches, with a piece of
 wood tied across near the top, was planted upright by the door, as a rude
 emblem of the holy cross. at a little distance on the right hand, a
 fountain of the purest water trickled out of the rock, and was received in
 a hollow stone, which labour had formed into a rustic basin. escaping from
 thence, the stream murmured down the descent by a channel which its course
 had long worn, and so wandered through the little plain to lose itself in
 the neighbouring wood.
 beside this fountain were the ruins of a very small chapel, of which the
 roof had partly fallen in. the building, when entire, had never been above
 sixteen feet long by twelve feet in breadth, and the roof, low in
 proportion, rested upon four concentric arches which sprung from the four
 corners of the building, each supported upon a short and heavy pillar. the
 ribs of two of these arches remained, though the roof had fallen down
 betwixt them; over the others it remained entire. the entrance to this
 ancient place of devotion was under a very low round arch, ornamented by
 several courses of that zig-zag moulding, resembling shark's teeth, which
 appears so often in the more ancient saxon architecture. a belfry rose
 above the porch on four small pillars, within which hung the green and
 weatherbeaten bell, the feeble sounds of which had been some time before
 heard by the black knight.
 the whole peaceful and quiet scene lay glimmering in twilight before the
 eyes of the traveller, giving him good assurance of lodging for the night;
 since it was a special duty of those hermits who dwelt in the woods, to
 exercise hospitality towards benighted or bewildered passengers.
 accordingly, the knight took no time to consider minutely the particulars
 which we have detailed, but thanking saint julian (the patron of
 travellers) who had sent him good harbourage, he leaped from his horse and
 assailed the door of the hermitage with the butt of his lance, in order to
 arouse attention and gain admittance.
 it was some time before he obtained any answer, and the reply, when made,
 was unpropitious.
 “pass on, whosoever thou art,” was the answer given by a deep hoarse voice
 from within the hut, “and disturb not the servant of god and st dunstan in
 his evening devotions.”
 “worthy father,” answered the knight, “here is a poor wanderer bewildered
 in these woods, who gives thee the opportunity of exercising thy charity
 and hospitality.”
 “good brother,” replied the inhabitant of the hermitage, “it has pleased
 our lady and st dunstan to destine me for the object of those virtues,
 instead of the exercise thereof. i have no provisions here which even a
 dog would share with me, and a horse of any tenderness of nurture would
 despise my couch—pass therefore on thy way, and god speed thee.”
 “but how,” replied the knight, “is it possible for me to find my way
 through such a wood as this, when darkness is coming on? i pray you,
 reverend father as you are a christian, to undo your door, and at least
 point out to me my road.”
 “and i pray you, good christian brother,” replied the anchorite, “to
 disturb me no more. you have already interrupted one 'pater', two 'aves',
 and a 'credo', which i, miserable sinner that i am, should, according to
 my vow, have said before moonrise.”
 “the road—the road!” vociferated the knight, “give me directions for
 the road, if i am to expect no more from thee.”
 “the road,” replied the hermit, “is easy to hit. the path from the wood
 leads to a morass, and from thence to a ford, which, as the rains have
 abated, may now be passable. when thou hast crossed the ford, thou wilt
 take care of thy footing up the left bank, as it is somewhat precipitous;
 and the path, which hangs over the river, has lately, as i learn, (for i
 seldom leave the duties of my chapel,) given way in sundry places. thou
 wilt then keep straight forward—-”
 “a broken path—a precipice—a ford, and a morass!” said the
 knight interrupting him,—“sir hermit, if you were the holiest that
 ever wore beard or told bead, you shall scarce prevail on me to hold this
 road to-night. i tell thee, that thou, who livest by the charity of the
 country—ill deserved, as i doubt it is—hast no right to refuse
 shelter to the wayfarer when in distress. either open the door quickly,
 or, by the rood, i will beat it down and make entry for myself.”
 “friend wayfarer,” replied the hermit, “be not importunate; if thou
 puttest me to use the carnal weapon in mine own defence, it will be e'en
 the worse for you.”
 at this moment a distant noise of barking and growling, which the
 traveller had for some time heard, became extremely loud and furious, and
 made the knight suppose that the hermit, alarmed by his threat of making
 forcible entry, had called the dogs who made this clamour to aid him in
 his defence, out of some inner recess in which they had been kennelled.
 incensed at this preparation on the hermit's part for making good his
 inhospitable purpose, the knight struck the door so furiously with his
 foot, that posts as well as staples shook with violence.
 the anchorite, not caring again to expose his door to a similar shock, now
 called out aloud, “patience, patience—spare thy strength, good
 traveller, and i will presently undo the door, though, it may be, my doing
 so will be little to thy pleasure.”
 the door accordingly was opened; and the hermit, a large, strong-built
 man, in his sackcloth gown and hood, girt with a rope of rushes, stood
 before the knight. he had in one hand a lighted torch, or link, and in the
 other a baton of crab-tree, so thick and heavy, that it might well be
 termed a club. two large shaggy dogs, half greyhound half mastiff, stood
 ready to rush upon the traveller as soon as the door should be opened. but
 when the torch glanced upon the lofty crest and golden spurs of the
 knight, who stood without, the hermit, altering probably his original
 intentions, repressed the rage of his auxiliaries, and, changing his tone
 to a sort of churlish courtesy, invited the knight to enter his hut,
 making excuse for his unwillingness to open his lodge after sunset, by
 alleging the multitude of robbers and outlaws who were abroad, and who
 gave no honour to our lady or st dunstan, nor to those holy men who spent
 life in their service.
 “the poverty of your cell, good father,” said the knight, looking around
 him, and seeing nothing but a bed of leaves, a crucifix rudely carved in
 oak, a missal, with a rough-hewn table and two stools, and one or two
 clumsy articles of furniture—“the poverty of your cell should seem a
 sufficient defence against any risk of thieves, not to mention the aid of
 two trusty dogs, large and strong enough, i think, to pull down a stag,
 and of course, to match with most men.”
 “the good keeper of the forest,” said the hermit, “hath allowed me the use
 of these animals, to protect my solitude until the times shall mend.”
 having said this, he fixed his torch in a twisted branch of iron which
 served for a candlestick; and, placing the oaken trivet before the embers
 of the fire, which he refreshed with some dry wood, he placed a stool upon
 one side of the table, and beckoned to the knight to do the same upon the
 other.
 they sat down, and gazed with great gravity at each other, each thinking
 in his heart that he had seldom seen a stronger or more athletic figure
 than was placed opposite to him.
 “reverend hermit,” said the knight, after looking long and fixedly at his
 host, “were it not to interrupt your devout meditations, i would pray to
 know three things of your holiness; first, where i am to put my horse?—secondly,
 what i can have for supper?—thirdly, where i am to take up my couch
 for the night?”
 “i will reply to you,” said the hermit, “with my finger, it being against
 my rule to speak by words where signs can answer the purpose.” so saying,
 he pointed successively to two corners of the hut. “your stable,” said he,
 “is there—your bed there; and,” reaching down a platter with two
 handfuls of parched pease upon it from the neighbouring shelf, and placing
 it upon the table, he added, “your supper is here.”
 the knight shrugged his shoulders, and leaving the hut, brought in his
 horse, (which in the interim he had fastened to a tree,) unsaddled him
 with much attention, and spread upon the steed's weary back his own
 mantle.
 the hermit was apparently somewhat moved to compassion by the anxiety as
 well as address which the stranger displayed in tending his horse; for,
 muttering something about provender left for the keeper's palfrey, he
 dragged out of a recess a bundle of forage, which he spread before the
 knight's charger, and immediately afterwards shook down a quantity of
 dried fern in the corner which he had assigned for the rider's couch. the
 knight returned him thanks for his courtesy; and, this duty done, both
 resumed their seats by the table, whereon stood the trencher of pease
 placed between them. the hermit, after a long grace, which had once been
 latin, but of which original language few traces remained, excepting here
 and there the long rolling termination of some word or phrase, set example
 to his guest, by modestly putting into a very large mouth, furnished with
 teeth which might have ranked with those of a boar both in sharpness and
 whiteness, some three or four dried pease, a miserable grist as it seemed
 for so large and able a mill.
 the knight, in order to follow so laudable an example, laid aside his
 helmet, his corslet, and the greater part of his armour, and showed to the
 hermit a head thick-curled with yellow hair, high features, blue eyes,
 remarkably bright and sparkling, a mouth well formed, having an upper lip
 clothed with mustachoes darker than his hair, and bearing altogether the
 look of a bold, daring, and enterprising man, with which his strong form
 well corresponded.
 the hermit, as if wishing to answer to the confidence of his guest, threw
 back his cowl, and showed a round bullet head belonging to a man in the
 prime of life. his close-shaven crown, surrounded by a circle of stiff
 curled black hair, had something the appearance of a parish pinfold begirt
 by its high hedge. the features expressed nothing of monastic austerity,
 or of ascetic privations; on the contrary, it was a bold bluff
 countenance, with broad black eyebrows, a well-turned forehead, and cheeks
 as round and vermilion as those of a trumpeter, from which descended a
 long and curly black beard. such a visage, joined to the brawny form of
 the holy man, spoke rather of sirloins and haunches, than of pease and
 pulse. this incongruity did not escape the guest. after he had with great
 difficulty accomplished the mastication of a mouthful of the dried pease,
 he found it absolutely necessary to request his pious entertainer to
 furnish him with some liquor; who replied to his request by placing before
 him a large can of the purest water from the fountain.
 “it is from the well of st dunstan,” said he, “in which, betwixt sun and
 sun, he baptized five hundred heathen danes and britons—blessed be
 his name!” and applying his black beard to the pitcher, he took a draught
 much more moderate in quantity than his encomium seemed to warrant.
 “it seems to me, reverend father,” said the knight, “that the small
 morsels which you eat, together with this holy, but somewhat thin
 beverage, have thriven with you marvellously. you appear a man more fit to
 win the ram at a wrestling match, or the ring at a bout at quarter-staff,
 or the bucklers at a sword-play, than to linger out your time in this
 desolate wilderness, saying masses, and living upon parched pease and cold
 water.”
 “sir knight,” answered the hermit, “your thoughts, like those of the
 ignorant laity, are according to the flesh. it has pleased our lady and my
 patron saint to bless the pittance to which i restrain myself, even as the
 pulse and water was blessed to the children shadrach, meshech, and
 abednego, who drank the same rather than defile themselves with the wine
 and meats which were appointed them by the king of the saracens.”
 “holy father,” said the knight, “upon whose countenance it hath pleased
 heaven to work such a miracle, permit a sinful layman to crave thy name?”
 “thou mayst call me,” answered the hermit, “the clerk of copmanhurst, for
 so i am termed in these parts—they add, it is true, the epithet
 holy, but i stand not upon that, as being unworthy of such addition.—and
 now, valiant knight, may i pray ye for the name of my honourable guest?”
 “truly,” said the knight, “holy clerk of copmanhurst, men call me in these
 parts the black knight,—many, sir, add to it the epithet of
 sluggard, whereby i am no way ambitious to be distinguished.”
 the hermit could scarcely forbear from smiling at his guest's reply.
 “i see,” said he, “sir sluggish knight, that thou art a man of prudence
 and of counsel; and moreover, i see that my poor monastic fare likes thee
 not, accustomed, perhaps, as thou hast been, to the license of courts and
 of camps, and the luxuries of cities; and now i bethink me, sir sluggard,
 that when the charitable keeper of this forest-walk left those dogs for my
 protection, and also those bundles of forage, he left me also some food,
 which, being unfit for my use, the very recollection of it had escaped me
 amid my more weighty meditations.”
 “i dare be sworn he did so,” said the knight; “i was convinced that there
 was better food in the cell, holy clerk, since you first doffed your cowl.—your
 keeper is ever a jovial fellow; and none who beheld thy grinders
 contending with these pease, and thy throat flooded with this ungenial
 element, could see thee doomed to such horse-provender and
 horse-beverage,” (pointing to the provisions upon the table,) “and refrain
 from mending thy cheer. let us see the keeper's bounty, therefore, without
 delay.”
 the hermit cast a wistful look upon the knight, in which there was a sort
 of comic expression of hesitation, as if uncertain how far he should act
 prudently in trusting his guest. there was, however, as much of bold
 frankness in the knight's countenance as was possible to be expressed by
 features. his smile, too, had something in it irresistibly comic, and gave
 an assurance of faith and loyalty, with which his host could not refrain
 from sympathizing.
 after exchanging a mute glance or two, the hermit went to the further side
 of the hut, and opened a hutch, which was concealed with great care and
 some ingenuity. out of the recesses of a dark closet, into which this
 aperture gave admittance, he brought a large pasty, baked in a pewter
 platter of unusual dimensions. this mighty dish he placed before his
 guest, who, using his poniard to cut it open, lost no time in making
 himself acquainted with its contents.
 “how long is it since the good keeper has been here?” said the knight to
 his host, after having swallowed several hasty morsels of this
 reinforcement to the hermit's good cheer.
 “about two months,” answered the father hastily.
 “by the true lord,” answered the knight, “every thing in your hermitage is
 miraculous, holy clerk! for i would have been sworn that the fat buck
 which furnished this venison had been running on foot within the week.”
 the hermit was somewhat discountenanced by this observation; and,
 moreover, he made but a poor figure while gazing on the diminution of the
 pasty, on which his guest was making desperate inroads; a warfare in which
 his previous profession of abstinence left him no pretext for joining.
 “i have been in palestine, sir clerk,” said the knight, stopping short of
 a sudden, “and i bethink me it is a custom there that every host who
 entertains a guest shall assure him of the wholesomeness of his food, by
 partaking of it along with him. far be it from me to suspect so holy a man
 of aught inhospitable; nevertheless i will be highly bound to you would
 you comply with this eastern custom.”
 “to ease your unnecessary scruples, sir knight, i will for once depart
 from my rule,” replied the hermit. and as there were no forks in those
 days, his clutches were instantly in the bowels of the pasty.
 the ice of ceremony being once broken, it seemed matter of rivalry between
 the guest and the entertainer which should display the best appetite; and
 although the former had probably fasted longest, yet the hermit fairly
 surpassed him.
 “holy clerk,” said the knight, when his hunger was appeased, “i would gage
 my good horse yonder against a zecchin, that that same honest keeper to
 whom we are obliged for the venison has left thee a stoup of wine, or a
 runlet of canary, or some such trifle, by way of ally to this noble pasty.
 this would be a circumstance, doubtless, totally unworthy to dwell in the
 memory of so rigid an anchorite; yet, i think, were you to search yonder
 crypt once more, you would find that i am right in my conjecture.”
 the hermit only replied by a grin; and returning to the hutch, he produced
 a leathern bottle, which might contain about four quarts. he also brought
 forth two large drinking cups, made out of the horn of the urus, and
 hooped with silver. having made this goodly provision for washing down the
 supper, he seemed to think no farther ceremonious scruple necessary on his
 part; but filling both cups, and saying, in the saxon fashion, “'waes
 hael', sir sluggish knight!” he emptied his own at a draught.
 “'drink hael', holy clerk of copmanhurst!” answered the warrior, and did
 his host reason in a similar brimmer.
 “holy clerk,” said the stranger, after the first cup was thus swallowed,
 “i cannot but marvel that a man possessed of such thews and sinews as
 thine, and who therewithal shows the talent of so goodly a trencher-man,
 should think of abiding by himself in this wilderness. in my judgment, you
 are fitter to keep a castle or a fort, eating of the fat and drinking of
 the strong, than to live here upon pulse and water, or even upon the
 charity of the keeper. at least, were i as thou, i should find myself both
 disport and plenty out of the king's deer. there is many a goodly herd in
 these forests, and a buck will never be missed that goes to the use of
 saint dunstan's chaplain.”
 “sir sluggish knight,” replied the clerk, “these are dangerous words, and
 i pray you to forbear them. i am true hermit to the king and law, and were
 i to spoil my liege's game, i should be sure of the prison, and, an my
 gown saved me not, were in some peril of hanging.”
 “nevertheless, were i as thou,” said the knight, “i would take my walk by
 moonlight, when foresters and keepers were warm in bed, and ever and anon,—as
 i pattered my prayers,—i would let fly a shaft among the herds of
 dun deer that feed in the glades—resolve me, holy clerk, hast thou
 never practised such a pastime?”
 “friend sluggard,” answered the hermit, “thou hast seen all that can
 concern thee of my housekeeping, and something more than he deserves who
 takes up his quarters by violence. credit me, it is better to enjoy the
 good which god sends thee, than to be impertinently curious how it comes.
 fill thy cup, and welcome; and do not, i pray thee, by further impertinent
 enquiries, put me to show that thou couldst hardly have made good thy
 lodging had i been earnest to oppose thee.”
 “by my faith,” said the knight, “thou makest me more curious than ever!
 thou art the most mysterious hermit i ever met; and i will know more of
 thee ere we part. as for thy threats, know, holy man, thou speakest to one
 whose trade it is to find out danger wherever it is to be met with.”
 “sir sluggish knight, i drink to thee,” said the hermit; “respecting thy
 valour much, but deeming wondrous slightly of thy discretion. if thou wilt
 take equal arms with me, i will give thee, in all friendship and brotherly
 love, such sufficing penance and complete absolution, that thou shalt not
 for the next twelve months sin the sin of excess of curiosity.”
 the knight pledged him, and desired him to name his weapons.
 “there is none,” replied the hermit, “from the scissors of delilah, and
 the tenpenny nail of jael, to the scimitar of goliath, at which i am not a
 match for thee—but, if i am to make the election, what sayst thou,
 good friend, to these trinkets?”
 thus speaking, he opened another hutch, and took out from it a couple of
 broadswords and bucklers, such as were used by the yeomanry of the period.
 the knight, who watched his motions, observed that this second place of
 concealment was furnished with two or three good long-bows, a cross-bow, a
 bundle of bolts for the latter, and half-a-dozen sheaves of arrows for the
 former. a harp, and other matters of a very uncanonical appearance, were
 also visible when this dark recess was opened.
 “i promise thee, brother clerk,” said he, “i will ask thee no more
 offensive questions. the contents of that cupboard are an answer to all my
 enquiries; and i see a weapon there” (here he stooped and took out the
 harp) “on which i would more gladly prove my skill with thee, than at the
 sword and buckler.”
 “i hope, sir knight,” said the hermit, “thou hast given no good reason for
 thy surname of the sluggard. i do promise thee i suspect thee grievously.
 nevertheless, thou art my guest, and i will not put thy manhood to the
 proof without thine own free will. sit thee down, then, and fill thy cup;
 let us drink, sing, and be merry. if thou knowest ever a good lay, thou
 shalt be welcome to a nook of pasty at copmanhurst so long as i serve the
 chapel of st dunstan, which, please god, shall be till i change my grey
 covering for one of green turf. but come, fill a flagon, for it will crave
 some time to tune the harp; and nought pitches the voice and sharpens the
 ear like a cup of wine. for my part, i love to feel the grape at my very
 finger-ends before they make the harp-strings tinkle.” 
 at eve, within yon studious nook,
 i ope my brass-embossed book,
 portray'd with many a holy deed
 of martyrs crown'd with heavenly meed;
 then, as my taper waxes dim,
 chant, ere i sleep, my measured hymn.
 who but would cast his pomp away,
 to take my staff and amice grey,
 and to the world's tumultuous stage,
 prefer the peaceful hermitage?
 —warton
 notwithstanding the prescription of the genial hermit, with which his
 guest willingly complied, he found it no easy matter to bring the harp to
 harmony.
 “methinks, holy father,” said he, “the instrument wants one string, and
 the rest have been somewhat misused.”
 “ay, mark'st thou that?” replied the hermit; “that shows thee a master of
 the craft. wine and wassail,” he added, gravely casting up his eyes—“all
 the fault of wine and wassail!—i told allan-a-dale, the northern
 minstrel, that he would damage the harp if he touched it after the seventh
 cup, but he would not be controlled—friend, i drink to thy
 successful performance.”
 so saying, he took off his cup with much gravity, at the same time shaking
 his head at the intemperance of the scottish harper.
 the knight in the meantime, had brought the strings into some order, and
 after a short prelude, asked his host whether he would choose a “sirvente”
 in the language of “oc”, or a “lai” in the language of “oui”, or a
 “virelai”, or a ballad in the vulgar english. 
 “a ballad, a ballad,” said the hermit, “against all the 'ocs' and 'ouis'
 of france. downright english am i, sir knight, and downright english was
 my patron st dunstan, and scorned 'oc' and 'oui', as he would have scorned
 the parings of the devil's hoof—downright english alone shall be
 sung in this cell.”
 “i will assay, then,” said the knight, “a ballad composed by a saxon
 glee-man, whom i knew in holy land.”
 it speedily appeared, that if the knight was not a complete master of the
 minstrel art, his taste for it had at least been cultivated under the best
 instructors. art had taught him to soften the faults of a voice which had
 little compass, and was naturally rough rather than mellow, and, in short,
 had done all that culture can do in supplying natural deficiencies. his
 performance, therefore, might have been termed very respectable by abler
 judges than the hermit, especially as the knight threw into the notes now
 a degree of spirit, and now of plaintive enthusiasm, which gave force and
 energy to the verses which he sung.
 high deeds achieved of knightly fame,
 from palestine the champion came;
 the cross upon his shoulders borne,
 battle and blast had dimm'd and torn.
 each dint upon his batter'd shield
 was token of a foughten field;
 and thus, beneath his lady's bower,
 he sung as fell the twilight hour:—
 “joy to the fair!—thy knight behold,
 return'd from yonder land of gold;
 no wealth he brings, nor wealth can need,
 save his good arms and battle-steed
 his spurs, to dash against a foe,
 his lance and sword to lay him low;
 such all the trophies of his toil,
 such—and the hope of tekla's smile!
 “joy to the fair! whose constant knight
 her favour fired to feats of might;
 unnoted shall she not remain,
 where meet the bright and noble train;
 minstrel shall sing and herald tell—
 'mark yonder maid of beauty well,
 'tis she for whose bright eyes were won
 the listed field at askalon!
 “'note well her smile!—it edged the blade
 which fifty wives to widows made,
 when, vain his strength and mahound's spell,
 iconium's turban'd soldan fell.
 seest thou her locks, whose sunny glow
 half shows, half shades, her neck of snow?
 twines not of them one golden thread,
 but for its sake a paynim bled.'
 “joy to the fair!—my name unknown,
 each deed, and all its praise thine own
 then, oh! unbar this churlish gate,
 the night dew falls, the hour is late.
 inured to syria's glowing breath,
 i feel the north breeze chill as death;
 let grateful love quell maiden shame,
 and grant him bliss who brings thee fame.”
 during this performance, the hermit demeaned himself much like a
 first-rate critic of the present day at a new opera. he reclined back upon
 his seat, with his eyes half shut; now, folding his hands and twisting his
 thumbs, he seemed absorbed in attention, and anon, balancing his expanded
 palms, he gently flourished them in time to the music. at one or two
 favourite cadences, he threw in a little assistance of his own, where the
 knight's voice seemed unable to carry the air so high as his worshipful
 taste approved. when the song was ended, the anchorite emphatically
 declared it a good one, and well sung.
 “and yet,” said he, “i think my saxon countrymen had herded long enough
 with the normans, to fall into the tone of their melancholy ditties. what
 took the honest knight from home? or what could he expect but to find his
 mistress agreeably engaged with a rival on his return, and his serenade,
 as they call it, as little regarded as the caterwauling of a cat in the
 gutter? nevertheless, sir knight, i drink this cup to thee, to the success
 of all true lovers—i fear you are none,” he added, on observing that
 the knight (whose brain began to be heated with these repeated draughts)
 qualified his flagon from the water pitcher.
 “why,” said the knight, “did you not tell me that this water was from the
 well of your blessed patron, st dunstan?”
 “ay, truly,” said the hermit, “and many a hundred of pagans did he baptize
 there, but i never heard that he drank any of it. every thing should be
 put to its proper use in this world. st dunstan knew, as well as any one,
 the prerogatives of a jovial friar.”
 and so saying, he reached the harp, and entertained his guest with the
 following characteristic song, to a sort of derry-down chorus, appropriate
 to an old english ditty. 
original
 i'll give thee, good fellow, a twelvemonth or twain,
 to search europe through, from byzantium to spain;
 but ne'er shall you find, should you search till you tire,
 so happy a man as the barefooted friar.
 your knight for his lady pricks forth in career,
 and is brought home at even-song prick'd through with a spear;
 i confess him in haste—for his lady desires
 no comfort on earth save the barefooted friar's.
 your monarch?—pshaw! many a prince has been known
 to barter his robes for our cowl and our gown,
 but which of us e'er felt the idle desire
 to exchange for a crown the grey hood of a friar!
 the friar has walk'd out, and where'er he has gone,
 the land and its fatness is mark'd for his own;
 he can roam where he lists, he can stop when he tires,
 for every man's house is the barefooted friar's.
 he's expected at noon, and no wight till he comes
 may profane the great chair, or the porridge of plums
 for the best of the cheer, and the seat by the fire,
 is the undenied right of the barefooted friar.
 he's expected at night, and the pasty's made hot,
 they broach the brown ale, and they fill the black pot,
 and the goodwife would wish the goodman in the mire,
 ere he lack'd a soft pillow, the barefooted friar.
 long flourish the sandal, the cord, and the cope,
 the dread of the devil and trust of the pope;
 for to gather life's roses, unscathed by the briar,
 is granted alone to the barefooted friar.
 “by my troth,” said the knight, “thou hast sung well and lustily, and in
 high praise of thine order. and, talking of the devil, holy clerk, are you
 not afraid that he may pay you a visit during some of your uncanonical
 pastimes?”
 “i uncanonical!” answered the hermit; “i scorn the charge—i scorn it
 with my heels!—i serve the duty of my chapel duly and truly—two
 masses daily, morning and evening, primes, noons, and vespers, 'aves,
 credos, paters'—-”
 “excepting moonlight nights, when the venison is in season,” said his
 guest.
 “'exceptis excipiendis'” replied the hermit, “as our old abbot taught me
 to say, when impertinent laymen should ask me if i kept every punctilio of
 mine order.”
 “true, holy father,” said the knight; “but the devil is apt to keep an eye
 on such exceptions; he goes about, thou knowest, like a roaring lion.”
 “let him roar here if he dares,” said the friar; “a touch of my cord will
 make him roar as loud as the tongs of st dunstan himself did. i never
 feared man, and i as little fear the devil and his imps. saint dunstan,
 saint dubric, saint winibald, saint winifred, saint swibert, saint
 willick, not forgetting saint thomas a kent, and my own poor merits to
 speed, i defy every devil of them, come cut and long tail.—but to
 let you into a secret, i never speak upon such subjects, my friend, until
 after morning vespers.”
 he changed the conversation; fast and furious grew the mirth of the
 parties, and many a song was exchanged betwixt them, when their revels
 were interrupted by a loud knocking at the door of the hermitage.
 the occasion of this interruption we can only explain by resuming the
 adventures of another set of our characters; for, like old ariosto, we do
 not pique ourselves upon continuing uniformly to keep company with any one
 personage of our drama.
 away! our journey lies through dell and dingle,
 where the blithe fawn trips by its timid mother,
 where the broad oak, with intercepting boughs,
 chequers the sunbeam in the green-sward alley—
 up and away!—for lovely paths are these
 to tread, when the glad sun is on his throne
 less pleasant, and less safe, when cynthia's lamp
 with doubtful glimmer lights the dreary forest.
 —ettrick forest
 when cedric the saxon saw his son drop down senseless in the lists at
 ashby, his first impulse was to order him into the custody and care of his
 own attendants, but the words choked in his throat. he could not bring
 himself to acknowledge, in presence of such an assembly, the son whom he
 had renounced and disinherited. he ordered, however, oswald to keep an eye
 upon him; and directed that officer, with two of his serfs, to convey
 ivanhoe to ashby as soon as the crowd had dispersed. oswald, however, was
 anticipated in this good office. the crowd dispersed, indeed, but the
 knight was nowhere to be seen.
 it was in vain that cedric's cupbearer looked around for his young master—he
 saw the bloody spot on which he had lately sunk down, but himself he saw
 no longer; it seemed as if the fairies had conveyed him from the spot.
 perhaps oswald (for the saxons were very superstitious) might have adopted
 some such hypothesis, to account for ivanhoe's disappearance, had he not
 suddenly cast his eye upon a person attired like a squire, in whom he
 recognised the features of his fellow-servant gurth. anxious concerning
 his master's fate, and in despair at his sudden disappearance, the
 translated swineherd was searching for him everywhere, and had neglected,
 in doing so, the concealment on which his own safety depended. oswald
 deemed it his duty to secure gurth, as a fugitive of whose fate his master
 was to judge.
 renewing his enquiries concerning the fate of ivanhoe, the only
 information which the cupbearer could collect from the bystanders was,
 that the knight had been raised with care by certain well-attired grooms,
 and placed in a litter belonging to a lady among the spectators, which had
 immediately transported him out of the press. oswald, on receiving this
 intelligence, resolved to return to his master for farther instructions,
 carrying along with him gurth, whom he considered in some sort as a
 deserter from the service of cedric.
 the saxon had been under very intense and agonizing apprehensions
 concerning his son; for nature had asserted her rights, in spite of the
 patriotic stoicism which laboured to disown her. but no sooner was he
 informed that ivanhoe was in careful, and probably in friendly hands, than
 the paternal anxiety which had been excited by the dubiety of his fate,
 gave way anew to the feeling of injured pride and resentment, at what he
 termed wilfred's filial disobedience.
 “let him wander his way,” said he—“let those leech his wounds for
 whose sake he encountered them. he is fitter to do the juggling tricks of
 the norman chivalry than to maintain the fame and honour of his english
 ancestry with the glaive and brown-bill, the good old weapons of his
 country.”
 “if to maintain the honour of ancestry,” said rowena, who was present, “it
 is sufficient to be wise in council and brave in execution—to be
 boldest among the bold, and gentlest among the gentle, i know no voice,
 save his father's—-”
 “be silent, lady rowena!—on this subject only i hear you not.
 prepare yourself for the prince's festival: we have been summoned thither
 with unwonted circumstance of honour and of courtesy, such as the haughty
 normans have rarely used to our race since the fatal day of hastings.
 thither will i go, were it only to show these proud normans how little the
 fate of a son, who could defeat their bravest, can affect a saxon.”
 “thither,” said rowena, “do i not go; and i pray you to beware, lest what
 you mean for courage and constancy, shall be accounted hardness of heart.”
 “remain at home, then, ungrateful lady,” answered cedric; “thine is the
 hard heart, which can sacrifice the weal of an oppressed people to an idle
 and unauthorized attachment. i seek the noble athelstane, and with him
 attend the banquet of john of anjou.”
 he went accordingly to the banquet, of which we have already mentioned the
 principal events. immediately upon retiring from the castle, the saxon
 thanes, with their attendants, took horse; and it was during the bustle
 which attended their doing so, that cedric, for the first time, cast his
 eyes upon the deserter gurth. the noble saxon had returned from the
 banquet, as we have seen, in no very placid humour, and wanted but a
 pretext for wreaking his anger upon some one.
 “the gyves!” he said, “the gyves!—oswald—hundibert!—dogs
 and villains!—why leave ye the knave unfettered?”
 without daring to remonstrate, the companions of gurth bound him with a
 halter, as the readiest cord which occurred. he submitted to the operation
 without remonstrance, except that, darting a reproachful look at his
 master, he said, “this comes of loving your flesh and blood better than
 mine own.”
 “to horse, and forward!” said cedric.
 “it is indeed full time,” said the noble athelstane; “for, if we ride not
 the faster, the worthy abbot waltheoff's preparations for a rere-supper 
 will be altogether spoiled.”
 the travellers, however, used such speed as to reach the convent of st
 withold's before the apprehended evil took place. the abbot, himself of
 ancient saxon descent, received the noble saxons with the profuse and
 exuberant hospitality of their nation, wherein they indulged to a late, or
 rather an early hour; nor did they take leave of their reverend host the
 next morning until they had shared with him a sumptuous refection.
 as the cavalcade left the court of the monastery, an incident happened
 somewhat alarming to the saxons, who, of all people of europe, were most
 addicted to a superstitious observance of omens, and to whose opinions can
 be traced most of those notions upon such subjects, still to be found
 among our popular antiquities. for the normans being a mixed race, and
 better informed according to the information of the times, had lost most
 of the superstitious prejudices which their ancestors had brought from
 scandinavia, and piqued themselves upon thinking freely on such topics.
 in the present instance, the apprehension of impending evil was inspired
 by no less respectable a prophet than a large lean black dog, which,
 sitting upright, howled most piteously as the foremost riders left the
 gate, and presently afterwards, barking wildly, and jumping to and fro,
 seemed bent upon attaching itself to the party.
 “i like not that music, father cedric,” said athelstane; for by this title
 of respect he was accustomed to address him.
 “nor i either, uncle,” said wamba; “i greatly fear we shall have to pay
 the piper.”
 “in my mind,” said athelstane, upon whose memory the abbot's good ale (for
 burton was already famous for that genial liquor) had made a favourable
 impression,—“in my mind we had better turn back, and abide with the
 abbot until the afternoon. it is unlucky to travel where your path is
 crossed by a monk, a hare, or a howling dog, until you have eaten your
 next meal.”
 “away!” said cedric, impatiently; “the day is already too short for our
 journey. for the dog, i know it to be the cur of the runaway slave gurth,
 a useless fugitive like its master.”
 so saying, and rising at the same time in his stirrups, impatient at the
 interruption of his journey, he launched his javelin at poor fangs—for
 fangs it was, who, having traced his master thus far upon his stolen
 expedition, had here lost him, and was now, in his uncouth way, rejoicing
 at his reappearance. the javelin inflicted a wound upon the animal's
 shoulder, and narrowly missed pinning him to the earth; and fangs fled
 howling from the presence of the enraged thane. gurth's heart swelled
 within him; for he felt this meditated slaughter of his faithful adherent
 in a degree much deeper than the harsh treatment he had himself received.
 having in vain attempted to raise his hand to his eyes, he said to wamba,
 who, seeing his master's ill humour had prudently retreated to the rear,
 “i pray thee, do me the kindness to wipe my eyes with the skirt of thy
 mantle; the dust offends me, and these bonds will not let me help myself
 one way or another.”
 wamba did him the service he required, and they rode side by side for some
 time, during which gurth maintained a moody silence. at length he could
 repress his feelings no longer.
 “friend wamba,” said he, “of all those who are fools enough to serve
 cedric, thou alone hast dexterity enough to make thy folly acceptable to
 him. go to him, therefore, and tell him that neither for love nor fear
 will gurth serve him longer. he may strike the head from me—he may
 scourge me—he may load me with irons—but henceforth he shall
 never compel me either to love or to obey him. go to him, then, and tell
 him that gurth the son of beowulph renounces his service.”
 “assuredly,” said wamba, “fool as i am, i shall not do your fool's errand.
 cedric hath another javelin stuck into his girdle, and thou knowest he
 does not always miss his mark.”
 “i care not,” replied gurth, “how soon he makes a mark of me. yesterday he
 left wilfred, my young master, in his blood. to-day he has striven to kill
 before my face the only other living creature that ever showed me
 kindness. by st edmund, st dunstan, st withold, st edward the confessor,
 and every other saxon saint in the calendar,” (for cedric never swore by
 any that was not of saxon lineage, and all his household had the same
 limited devotion,) “i will never forgive him!”
 “to my thinking now,” said the jester, who was frequently wont to act as
 peace-maker in the family, “our master did not propose to hurt fangs, but
 only to affright him. for, if you observed, he rose in his stirrups, as
 thereby meaning to overcast the mark; and so he would have done, but fangs
 happening to bound up at the very moment, received a scratch, which i will
 be bound to heal with a penny's breadth of tar.”
 “if i thought so,” said gurth—“if i could but think so—but no—i
 saw the javelin was well aimed—i heard it whizz through the air with
 all the wrathful malevolence of him who cast it, and it quivered after it
 had pitched in the ground, as if with regret for having missed its mark.
 by the hog dear to st anthony, i renounce him!”
 and the indignant swineherd resumed his sullen silence, which no efforts
 of the jester could again induce him to break.
 meanwhile cedric and athelstane, the leaders of the troop, conversed
 together on the state of the land, on the dissensions of the royal family,
 on the feuds and quarrels among the norman nobles, and on the chance which
 there was that the oppressed saxons might be able to free themselves from
 the yoke of the normans, or at least to elevate themselves into national
 consequence and independence, during the civil convulsions which were
 likely to ensue. on this subject cedric was all animation. the restoration
 of the independence of his race was the idol of his heart, to which he had
 willingly sacrificed domestic happiness and the interests of his own son.
 but, in order to achieve this great revolution in favour of the native
 english, it was necessary that they should be united among themselves, and
 act under an acknowledged head. the necessity of choosing their chief from
 the saxon blood-royal was not only evident in itself, but had been made a
 solemn condition by those whom cedric had intrusted with his secret plans
 and hopes. athelstane had this quality at least; and though he had few
 mental accomplishments or talents to recommend him as a leader, he had
 still a goodly person, was no coward, had been accustomed to martial
 exercises, and seemed willing to defer to the advice of counsellors more
 wise than himself. above all, he was known to be liberal and hospitable,
 and believed to be good-natured. but whatever pretensions athelstane had
 to be considered as head of the saxon confederacy, many of that nation
 were disposed to prefer to the title of the lady rowena, who drew her
 descent from alfred, and whose father having been a chief renowned for
 wisdom, courage, and generosity, his memory was highly honoured by his
 oppressed countrymen.
 it would have been no difficult thing for cedric, had he been so disposed,
 to have placed himself at the head of a third party, as formidable at
 least as any of the others. to counterbalance their royal descent, he had
 courage, activity, energy, and, above all, that devoted attachment to the
 cause which had procured him the epithet of the saxon, and his birth was
 inferior to none, excepting only that of athelstane and his ward. these
 qualities, however, were unalloyed by the slightest shade of selfishness;
 and, instead of dividing yet farther his weakened nation by forming a
 faction of his own, it was a leading part of cedric's plan to extinguish
 that which already existed, by promoting a marriage betwixt rowena and
 athelstane. an obstacle occurred to this his favourite project, in the
 mutual attachment of his ward and his son and hence the original cause of
 the banishment of wilfred from the house of his father.
 this stern measure cedric had adopted, in hopes that, during wilfred's
 absence, rowena might relinquish her preference, but in this hope he was
 disappointed; a disappointment which might be attributed in part to the
 mode in which his ward had been educated. cedric, to whom the name of
 alfred was as that of a deity, had treated the sole remaining scion of
 that great monarch with a degree of observance, such as, perhaps, was in
 those days scarce paid to an acknowledged princess. rowena's will had been
 in almost all cases a law to his household; and cedric himself, as if
 determined that her sovereignty should be fully acknowledged within that
 little circle at least, seemed to take a pride in acting as the first of
 her subjects. thus trained in the exercise not only of free will, but
 despotic authority, rowena was, by her previous education, disposed both
 to resist and to resent any attempt to control her affections, or dispose
 of her hand contrary to her inclinations, and to assert her independence
 in a case in which even those females who have been trained up to
 obedience and subjection, are not infrequently apt to dispute the
 authority of guardians and parents. the opinions which she felt strongly,
 she avowed boldly; and cedric, who could not free himself from his
 habitual deference to her opinions, felt totally at a loss how to enforce
 his authority of guardian.
 it was in vain that he attempted to dazzle her with the prospect of a
 visionary throne. rowena, who possessed strong sense, neither considered
 his plan as practicable, nor as desirable, so far as she was concerned,
 could it have been achieved. without attempting to conceal her avowed
 preference of wilfred of ivanhoe, she declared that, were that favoured
 knight out of question, she would rather take refuge in a convent, than
 share a throne with athelstane, whom, having always despised, she now
 began, on account of the trouble she received on his account, thoroughly
 to detest.
 nevertheless, cedric, whose opinions of women's constancy was far from
 strong, persisted in using every means in his power to bring about the
 proposed match, in which he conceived he was rendering an important
 service to the saxon cause. the sudden and romantic appearance of his son
 in the lists at ashby, he had justly regarded as almost a death's blow to
 his hopes. his paternal affection, it is true, had for an instant gained
 the victory over pride and patriotism; but both had returned in full
 force, and under their joint operation, he was now bent upon making a
 determined effort for the union of athelstane and rowena, together with
 expediting those other measures which seemed necessary to forward the
 restoration of saxon independence.
 on this last subject, he was now labouring with athelstane, not without
 having reason, every now and then, to lament, like hotspur, that he should
 have moved such a dish of skimmed milk to so honourable an action.
 athelstane, it is true, was vain enough, and loved to have his ears
 tickled with tales of his high descent, and of his right by inheritance to
 homage and sovereignty. but his petty vanity was sufficiently gratified by
 receiving this homage at the hands of his immediate attendants, and of the
 saxons who approached him. if he had the courage to encounter danger, he
 at least hated the trouble of going to seek it; and while he agreed in the
 general principles laid down by cedric concerning the claim of the saxons
 to independence, and was still more easily convinced of his own title to
 reign over them when that independence should be attained, yet when the
 means of asserting these rights came to be discussed, he was still
 “athelstane the unready,” slow, irresolute, procrastinating, and
 unenterprising. the warm and impassioned exhortations of cedric had as
 little effect upon his impassive temper, as red-hot balls alighting in the
 water, which produce a little sound and smoke, and are instantly
 extinguished.
 if, leaving this task, which might be compared to spurring a tired jade,
 or to hammering upon cold iron, cedric fell back to his ward rowena, he
 received little more satisfaction from conferring with her. for, as his
 presence interrupted the discourse between the lady and her favourite
 attendant upon the gallantry and fate of wilfred, elgitha failed not to
 revenge both her mistress and herself, by recurring to the overthrow of
 athelstane in the lists, the most disagreeable subject which could greet
 the ears of cedric. to this sturdy saxon, therefore, the day's journey was
 fraught with all manner of displeasure and discomfort; so that he more
 than once internally cursed the tournament, and him who had proclaimed it,
 together with his own folly in ever thinking of going thither.
 at noon, upon the motion of athelstane, the travellers paused in a
 woodland shade by a fountain, to repose their horses and partake of some
 provisions, with which the hospitable abbot had loaded a sumpter mule.
 their repast was a pretty long one; and these several interruptions
 rendered it impossible for them to hope to reach rotherwood without
 travelling all night, a conviction which induced them to proceed on their
 way at a more hasty pace than they had hitherto used.
 a train of armed men, some noble dame
 escorting, (so their scatter'd words discover'd,
 as unperceived i hung upon their rear,)
 are close at hand, and mean to pass the night
 within the castle.
 —orra, a tragedy
 the travellers had now reached the verge of the wooded country, and were
 about to plunge into its recesses, held dangerous at that time from the
 number of outlaws whom oppression and poverty had driven to despair, and
 who occupied the forests in such large bands as could easily bid defiance
 to the feeble police of the period. from these rovers, however,
 notwithstanding the lateness of the hour cedric and athelstane accounted
 themselves secure, as they had in attendance ten servants, besides wamba
 and gurth, whose aid could not be counted upon, the one being a jester and
 the other a captive. it may be added, that in travelling thus late through
 the forest, cedric and athelstane relied on their descent and character,
 as well as their courage. the outlaws, whom the severity of the forest
 laws had reduced to this roving and desperate mode of life, were chiefly
 peasants and yeomen of saxon descent, and were generally supposed to
 respect the persons and property of their countrymen.
 as the travellers journeyed on their way, they were alarmed by repeated
 cries for assistance; and when they rode up to the place from whence they
 came, they were surprised to find a horse-litter placed upon the ground,
 beside which sat a young woman, richly dressed in the jewish fashion,
 while an old man, whose yellow cap proclaimed him to belong to the same
 nation, walked up and down with gestures expressive of the deepest
 despair, and wrung his hands, as if affected by some strange disaster.
 to the enquiries of athelstane and cedric, the old jew could for some time
 only answer by invoking the protection of all the patriarchs of the old
 testament successively against the sons of ishmael, who were coming to
 smite them, hip and thigh, with the edge of the sword. when he began to
 come to himself out of this agony of terror, isaac of york (for it was our
 old friend) was at length able to explain, that he had hired a body-guard
 of six men at ashby, together with mules for carrying the litter of a sick
 friend. this party had undertaken to escort him as far as doncaster. they
 had come thus far in safety; but having received information from a
 wood-cutter that there was a strong band of outlaws lying in wait in the
 woods before them, isaac's mercenaries had not only taken flight, but had
 carried off with them the horses which bore the litter and left the jew
 and his daughter without the means either of defence or of retreat, to be
 plundered, and probably murdered, by the banditti, who they expected every
 moment would bring down upon them. “would it but please your valours,”
 added isaac, in a tone of deep humiliation, “to permit the poor jews to
 travel under your safeguard, i swear by the tables of our law, that never
 has favour been conferred upon a child of israel since the days of our
 captivity, which shall be more gratefully acknowledged.”
 “dog of a jew!” said athelstane, whose memory was of that petty kind which
 stores up trifles of all kinds, but particularly trifling offences, “dost
 not remember how thou didst beard us in the gallery at the tilt-yard?
 fight or flee, or compound with the outlaws as thou dost list, ask neither
 aid nor company from us; and if they rob only such as thee, who rob all
 the world, i, for mine own share, shall hold them right honest folk.”
 cedric did not assent to the severe proposal of his companion. “we shall
 do better,” said he, “to leave them two of our attendants and two horses
 to convey them back to the next village. it will diminish our strength but
 little; and with your good sword, noble athelstane, and the aid of those
 who remain, it will be light work for us to face twenty of those
 runagates.”
 rowena, somewhat alarmed by the mention of outlaws in force, and so near
 them, strongly seconded the proposal of her guardian. but rebecca suddenly
 quitting her dejected posture, and making her way through the attendants
 to the palfrey of the saxon lady, knelt down, and, after the oriental
 fashion in addressing superiors, kissed the hem of rowena's garment. then
 rising, and throwing back her veil, she implored her in the great name of
 the god whom they both worshipped, and by that revelation of the law upon
 mount sinai, in which they both believed, that she would have compassion
 upon them, and suffer them to go forward under their safeguard. “it is not
 for myself that i pray this favour,” said rebecca; “nor is it even for
 that poor old man. i know that to wrong and to spoil our nation is a light
 fault, if not a merit, with the christians; and what is it to us whether
 it be done in the city, in the desert, or in the field? but it is in the
 name of one dear to many, and dear even to you, that i beseech you to let
 this sick person be transported with care and tenderness under your
 protection. for, if evil chance him, the last moment of your life would be
 embittered with regret for denying that which i ask of you.”
 the noble and solemn air with which rebecca made this appeal, gave it
 double weight with the fair saxon.
 “the man is old and feeble,” she said to her guardian, “the maiden young
 and beautiful, their friend sick and in peril of his life—jews
 though they be, we cannot as christians leave them in this extremity. let
 them unload two of the sumpter-mules, and put the baggage behind two of
 the serfs. the mules may transport the litter, and we have led horses for
 the old man and his daughter.”
 cedric readily assented to what she proposed, and athelstane only added
 the condition, “that they should travel in the rear of the whole party,
 where wamba,” he said, “might attend them with his shield of boar's
 brawn.”
 “i have left my shield in the tilt-yard,” answered the jester, “as has
 been the fate of many a better knight than myself.”
 athelstane coloured deeply, for such had been his own fate on the last day
 of the tournament; while rowena, who was pleased in the same proportion,
 as if to make amends for the brutal jest of her unfeeling suitor,
 requested rebecca to ride by her side.
 “it were not fit i should do so,” answered rebecca, with proud humility,
 “where my society might be held a disgrace to my protectress.”
 by this time the change of baggage was hastily achieved; for the single
 word “outlaws” rendered every one sufficiently alert, and the approach of
 twilight made the sound yet more impressive. amid the bustle, gurth was
 taken from horseback, in the course of which removal he prevailed upon the
 jester to slack the cord with which his arms were bound. it was so
 negligently refastened, perhaps intentionally, on the part of wamba, that
 gurth found no difficulty in freeing his arms altogether from bondage, and
 then, gliding into the thicket, he made his escape from the party.
 the bustle had been considerable, and it was some time before gurth was
 missed; for, as he was to be placed for the rest of the journey behind a
 servant, every one supposed that some other of his companions had him
 under his custody, and when it began to be whispered among them that gurth
 had actually disappeared, they were under such immediate expectation of an
 attack from the outlaws, that it was not held convenient to pay much
 attention to the circumstance.
 the path upon which the party travelled was now so narrow, as not to
 admit, with any sort of convenience, above two riders abreast, and began
 to descend into a dingle, traversed by a brook whose banks were broken,
 swampy, and overgrown with dwarf willows. cedric and athelstane, who were
 at the head of their retinue, saw the risk of being attacked at this pass;
 but neither of them having had much practice in war, no better mode of
 preventing the danger occurred to them than that they should hasten
 through the defile as fast as possible. advancing, therefore, without much
 order, they had just crossed the brook with a part of their followers,
 when they were assailed in front, flank, and rear at once, with an
 impetuosity to which, in their confused and ill-prepared condition, it was
 impossible to offer effectual resistance. the shout of “a white dragon!—a
 white dragon!—saint george for merry england!” war-cries adopted by
 the assailants, as belonging to their assumed character of saxon outlaws,
 was heard on every side, and on every side enemies appeared with a
 rapidity of advance and attack which seemed to multiply their numbers.
 both the saxon chiefs were made prisoners at the same moment, and each
 under circumstances expressive of his character. cedric, the instant that
 an enemy appeared, launched at him his remaining javelin, which, taking
 better effect than that which he had hurled at fangs, nailed the man
 against an oak-tree that happened to be close behind him. thus far
 successful, cedric spurred his horse against a second, drawing his sword
 at the same time, and striking with such inconsiderate fury, that his
 weapon encountered a thick branch which hung over him, and he was disarmed
 by the violence of his own blow. he was instantly made prisoner, and
 pulled from his horse by two or three of the banditti who crowded around
 him. athelstane shared his captivity, his bridle having been seized, and
 he himself forcibly dismounted, long before he could draw his weapon, or
 assume any posture of effectual defence.
 the attendants, embarrassed with baggage, surprised and terrified at the
 fate of their masters, fell an easy prey to the assailants; while the lady
 rowena, in the centre of the cavalcade, and the jew and his daughter in
 the rear, experienced the same misfortune.
 of all the train none escaped except wamba, who showed upon the occasion
 much more courage than those who pretended to greater sense. he possessed
 himself of a sword belonging to one of the domestics, who was just drawing
 it with a tardy and irresolute hand, laid it about him like a lion, drove
 back several who approached him, and made a brave though ineffectual
 attempt to succour his master. finding himself overpowered, the jester at
 length threw himself from his horse, plunged into the thicket, and,
 favoured by the general confusion, escaped from the scene of action. yet
 the valiant jester, as soon as he found himself safe, hesitated more than
 once whether he should not turn back and share the captivity of a master
 to whom he was sincerely attached.
 “i have heard men talk of the blessings of freedom,” he said to himself,
 “but i wish any wise man would teach me what use to make of it now that i
 have it.”
 as he pronounced these words aloud, a voice very near him called out in a
 low and cautious tone, “wamba!” and, at the same time, a dog, which he
 recognised to be fangs, jumped up and fawned upon him. “gurth!” answered
 wamba, with the same caution, and the swineherd immediately stood before
 him.
 “what is the matter?” said he eagerly; “what mean these cries, and that
 clashing of swords?”
 “only a trick of the times,” said wamba; “they are all prisoners.”
 “who are prisoners?” exclaimed gurth, impatiently.
 “my lord, and my lady, and athelstane, and hundibert, and oswald.”
 “in the name of god!” said gurth, “how came they prisoners?—and to
 whom?”
 “our master was too ready to fight,” said the jester; “and athelstane was
 not ready enough, and no other person was ready at all. and they are
 prisoners to green cassocks, and black visors. and they lie all tumbled
 about on the green, like the crab-apples that you shake down to your
 swine. and i would laugh at it,” said the honest jester, “if i could for
 weeping.” and he shed tears of unfeigned sorrow.
 gurth's countenance kindled—“wamba,” he said, “thou hast a weapon,
 and thy heart was ever stronger than thy brain,—we are only two—but
 a sudden attack from men of resolution will do much—follow me!”
 “whither?—and for what purpose?” said the jester.
 “to rescue cedric.”
 “but you have renounced his service but now,” said wamba.
 “that,” said gurth, “was but while he was fortunate—follow me!”
 as the jester was about to obey, a third person suddenly made his
 appearance, and commanded them both to halt. from his dress and arms,
 wamba would have conjectured him to be one of those outlaws who had just
 assailed his master; but, besides that he wore no mask, the glittering
 baldric across his shoulder, with the rich bugle-horn which it supported,
 as well as the calm and commanding expression of his voice and manner,
 made him, notwithstanding the twilight, recognise locksley the yeoman, who
 had been victorious, under such disadvantageous circumstances, in the
 contest for the prize of archery.
 “what is the meaning of all this,” said he, “or who is it that rifle, and
 ransom, and make prisoners, in these forests?”
 “you may look at their cassocks close by,” said wamba, “and see whether
 they be thy children's coats or no—for they are as like thine own,
 as one green pea-cod is to another.”
 “i will learn that presently,” answered locksley; “and i charge ye, on
 peril of your lives, not to stir from the place where ye stand, until i
 have returned. obey me, and it shall be the better for you and your
 masters.—yet stay, i must render myself as like these men as
 possible.”
 so saying he unbuckled his baldric with the bugle, took a feather from his
 cap, and gave them to wamba; then drew a vizard from his pouch, and,
 repeating his charges to them to stand fast, went to execute his purposes
 of reconnoitring.
 “shall we stand fast, gurth?” said wamba; “or shall we e'en give him
 leg-bail? in my foolish mind, he had all the equipage of a thief too much
 in readiness, to be himself a true man.”
 “let him be the devil,” said gurth, “an he will. we can be no worse of
 waiting his return. if he belong to that party, he must already have given
 them the alarm, and it will avail nothing either to fight or fly. besides,
 i have late experience, that errant thieves are not the worst men in the
 world to have to deal with.”
 the yeoman returned in the course of a few minutes.
 “friend gurth,” he said, “i have mingled among yon men, and have learnt to
 whom they belong, and whither they are bound. there is, i think, no chance
 that they will proceed to any actual violence against their prisoners. for
 three men to attempt them at this moment, were little else than madness;
 for they are good men of war, and have, as such, placed sentinels to give
 the alarm when any one approaches. but i trust soon to gather such a
 force, as may act in defiance of all their precautions; you are both
 servants, and, as i think, faithful servants, of cedric the saxon, the
 friend of the rights of englishmen. he shall not want english hands to
 help him in this extremity. come then with me, until i gather more aid.”
 so saying, he walked through the wood at a great pace, followed by the
 jester and the swineherd. it was not consistent with wamba's humour to
 travel long in silence.
 “i think,” said he, looking at the baldric and bugle which he still
 carried, “that i saw the arrow shot which won this gay prize, and that not
 so long since as christmas.”
 “and i,” said gurth, “could take it on my halidome, that i have heard the
 voice of the good yeoman who won it, by night as well as by day, and that
 the moon is not three days older since i did so.”
 “mine honest friends,” replied the yeoman, “who, or what i am, is little
 to the present purpose; should i free your master, you will have reason to
 think me the best friend you have ever had in your lives. and whether i am
 known by one name or another—or whether i can draw a bow as well or
 better than a cow-keeper, or whether it is my pleasure to walk in sunshine
 or by moonlight, are matters, which, as they do not concern you, so
 neither need ye busy yourselves respecting them.”
 “our heads are in the lion's mouth,” said wamba, in a whisper to gurth,
 “get them out how we can.”
 “hush—be silent,” said gurth. “offend him not by thy folly, and i
 trust sincerely that all will go well.”
 when autumn nights were long and drear,
 and forest walks were dark and dim,
 how sweetly on the pilgrim's ear
 was wont to steal the hermit's hymn
 devotion borrows music's tone,
 and music took devotion's wing;
 and, like the bird that hails the sun,
 they soar to heaven, and soaring sing.
 the hermit of st clement's well
 it was after three hours' good walking that the servants of cedric, with
 their mysterious guide, arrived at a small opening in the forest, in the
 centre of which grew an oak-tree of enormous magnitude, throwing its
 twisted branches in every direction. beneath this tree four or five yeomen
 lay stretched on the ground, while another, as sentinel, walked to and fro
 in the moonlight shade.
 upon hearing the sound of feet approaching, the watch instantly gave the
 alarm, and the sleepers as suddenly started up and bent their bows. six
 arrows placed on the string were pointed towards the quarter from which
 the travellers approached, when their guide, being recognised, was
 welcomed with every token of respect and attachment, and all signs and
 fears of a rough reception at once subsided.
 “where is the miller?” was his first question.
 “on the road towards rotherham.”
 “with how many?” demanded the leader, for such he seemed to be.
 “with six men, and good hope of booty, if it please st nicholas.”
 “devoutly spoken,” said locksley; “and where is allan-a-dale?”
 “walked up towards the watling-street, to watch for the prior of
 jorvaulx.”
 “that is well thought on also,” replied the captain;—“and where is
 the friar?”
 “in his cell.”
 “thither will i go,” said locksley. “disperse and seek your companions.
 collect what force you can, for there's game afoot that must be hunted
 hard, and will turn to bay. meet me here by daybreak.—and stay,” he
 added, “i have forgotten what is most necessary of the whole—two of
 you take the road quickly towards torquilstone, the castle of
 front-de-boeuf. a set of gallants, who have been masquerading in such
 guise as our own, are carrying a band of prisoners thither—watch
 them closely, for even if they reach the castle before we collect our
 force, our honour is concerned to punish them, and we will find means to
 do so. keep a close watch on them therefore; and dispatch one of your
 comrades, the lightest of foot, to bring the news of the yeomen
 thereabout.”
 they promised implicit obedience, and departed with alacrity on their
 different errands. in the meanwhile, their leader and his two companions,
 who now looked upon him with great respect, as well as some fear, pursued
 their way to the chapel of copmanhurst.
 when they had reached the little moonlight glade, having in front the
 reverend, though ruinous chapel, and the rude hermitage, so well suited to
 ascetic devotion, wamba whispered to gurth, “if this be the habitation of
 a thief, it makes good the old proverb, the nearer the church the farther
 from god.—and by my coxcomb,” he added, “i think it be even so—hearken
 but to the black sanctus which they are singing in the hermitage!”
 in fact the anchorite and his guest were performing, at the full extent of
 their very powerful lungs, an old drinking song, of which this was the
 burden:—
 “come, trowl the brown bowl to me,
 bully boy, bully boy,
 come, trowl the brown bowl to me:
 ho! jolly jenkin, i spy a knave in drinking,
 come, trowl the brown bowl to me.”
 “now, that is not ill sung,” said wamba, who had thrown in a few of his
 own flourishes to help out the chorus. “but who, in the saint's name, ever
 expected to have heard such a jolly chant come from out a hermit's cell at
 midnight!”
 “marry, that should i,” said gurth, “for the jolly clerk of copmanhurst is
 a known man, and kills half the deer that are stolen in this walk. men say
 that the keeper has complained to his official, and that he will be
 stripped of his cowl and cope altogether, if he keeps not better order.”
 while they were thus speaking, locksley's loud and repeated knocks had at
 length disturbed the anchorite and his guest. “by my beads,” said the
 hermit, stopping short in a grand flourish, “here come more benighted
 guests. i would not for my cowl that they found us in this goodly
 exercise. all men have their enemies, good sir sluggard; and there be
 those malignant enough to construe the hospitable refreshment which i have
 been offering to you, a weary traveller, for the matter of three short
 hours, into sheer drunkenness and debauchery, vices alike alien to my
 profession and my disposition.”
 “base calumniators!” replied the knight; “i would i had the chastising of
 them. nevertheless, holy clerk, it is true that all have their enemies;
 and there be those in this very land whom i would rather speak to through
 the bars of my helmet than barefaced.”
 “get thine iron pot on thy head then, friend sluggard, as quickly as thy
 nature will permit,” said the hermit, “while i remove these pewter
 flagons, whose late contents run strangely in mine own pate; and to drown
 the clatter—for, in faith, i feel somewhat unsteady—strike
 into the tune which thou hearest me sing; it is no matter for the words—i
 scarce know them myself.”
 so saying, he struck up a thundering “de profundis clamavi”, under cover
 of which he removed the apparatus of their banquet: while the knight,
 laughing heartily, and arming himself all the while, assisted his host
 with his voice from time to time as his mirth permitted.
 “what devil's matins are you after at this hour?” said a voice from
 without.
 “heaven forgive you, sir traveller!” said the hermit, whose own noise, and
 perhaps his nocturnal potations, prevented from recognising accents which
 were tolerably familiar to him—“wend on your way, in the name of god
 and saint dunstan, and disturb not the devotions of me and my holy
 brother.”
 “mad priest,” answered the voice from without, “open to locksley!”
 “all's safe—all's right,” said the hermit to his companion.
 “but who is he?” said the black knight; “it imports me much to know.”
 “who is he?” answered the hermit; “i tell thee he is a friend.”
 “but what friend?” answered the knight; “for he may be friend to thee and
 none of mine?”
 “what friend?” replied the hermit; “that, now, is one of the questions
 that is more easily asked than answered. what friend?—why, he is,
 now that i bethink me a little, the very same honest keeper i told thee of
 a while since.”
 “ay, as honest a keeper as thou art a pious hermit,” replied the knight,
 “i doubt it not. but undo the door to him before he beat it from its
 hinges.”
 the dogs, in the meantime, which had made a dreadful baying at the
 commencement of the disturbance, seemed now to recognise the voice of him
 who stood without; for, totally changing their manner, they scratched and
 whined at the door, as if interceding for his admission. the hermit
 speedily unbolted his portal, and admitted locksley, with his two
 companions.
 “why, hermit,” was the yeoman's first question as soon as he beheld the
 knight, “what boon companion hast thou here?”
 “a brother of our order,” replied the friar, shaking his head; “we have
 been at our orisons all night.”
 “he is a monk of the church militant, i think,” answered locksley; “and
 there be more of them abroad. i tell thee, friar, thou must lay down the
 rosary and take up the quarter-staff; we shall need every one of our merry
 men, whether clerk or layman.—but,” he added, taking him a step
 aside, “art thou mad? to give admittance to a knight thou dost not know?
 hast thou forgot our articles?”
 “not know him!” replied the friar, boldly, “i know him as well as the
 beggar knows his dish.”
 “and what is his name, then?” demanded locksley.
 “his name,” said the hermit—“his name is sir anthony of scrabelstone—as
 if i would drink with a man, and did not know his name!”
 “thou hast been drinking more than enough, friar,” said the woodsman,
 “and, i fear, prating more than enough too.”
 “good yeoman,” said the knight, coming forward, “be not wroth with my
 merry host. he did but afford me the hospitality which i would have
 compelled from him if he had refused it.”
 “thou compel!” said the friar; “wait but till have changed this grey gown
 for a green cassock, and if i make not a quarter-staff ring twelve upon
 thy pate, i am neither true clerk nor good woodsman.”
 while he spoke thus, he stript off his gown, and appeared in a close black
 buckram doublet and drawers, over which he speedily did on a cassock of
 green, and hose of the same colour. “i pray thee truss my points,” said he
 to wamba, “and thou shalt have a cup of sack for thy labour.”
 “gramercy for thy sack,” said wamba; “but think'st thou it is lawful for
 me to aid you to transmew thyself from a holy hermit into a sinful
 forester?”
 “never fear,” said the hermit; “i will but confess the sins of my green
 cloak to my greyfriar's frock, and all shall be well again.”
 “amen!” answered the jester; “a broadcloth penitent should have a
 sackcloth confessor, and your frock may absolve my motley doublet into the
 bargain.”
 so saying, he accommodated the friar with his assistance in tying the
 endless number of points, as the laces which attached the hose to the
 doublet were then termed.
 while they were thus employed, locksley led the knight a little apart, and
 addressed him thus:—“deny it not, sir knight—you are he who
 decided the victory to the advantage of the english against the strangers
 on the second day of the tournament at ashby.”
 “and what follows if you guess truly, good yeoman?” replied the knight.
 “i should in that case hold you,” replied the yeoman, “a friend to the
 weaker party.”
 “such is the duty of a true knight at least,” replied the black champion;
 “and i would not willingly that there were reason to think otherwise of
 me.”
 “but for my purpose,” said the yeoman, “thou shouldst be as well a good
 englishman as a good knight; for that, which i have to speak of, concerns,
 indeed, the duty of every honest man, but is more especially that of a
 true-born native of england.”
 “you can speak to no one,” replied the knight, “to whom england, and the
 life of every englishman, can be dearer than to me.”
 “i would willingly believe so,” said the woodsman, “for never had this
 country such need to be supported by those who love her. hear me, and i
 will tell thee of an enterprise, in which, if thou be'st really that which
 thou seemest, thou mayst take an honourable part. a band of villains, in
 the disguise of better men than themselves, have made themselves master of
 the person of a noble englishman, called cedric the saxon, together with
 his ward, and his friend athelstane of coningsburgh, and have transported
 them to a castle in this forest, called torquilstone. i ask of thee, as a
 good knight and a good englishman, wilt thou aid in their rescue?”
 “i am bound by my vow to do so,” replied the knight; “but i would
 willingly know who you are, who request my assistance in their behalf?”
 “i am,” said the forester, “a nameless man; but i am the friend of my
 country, and of my country's friends—with this account of me you
 must for the present remain satisfied, the more especially since you
 yourself desire to continue unknown. believe, however, that my word, when
 pledged, is as inviolate as if i wore golden spurs.”
 “i willingly believe it,” said the knight; “i have been accustomed to
 study men's countenances, and i can read in thine honesty and resolution.
 i will, therefore, ask thee no further questions, but aid thee in setting
 at freedom these oppressed captives; which done, i trust we shall part
 better acquainted, and well satisfied with each other.”
 “so,” said wamba to gurth,—for the friar being now fully equipped,
 the jester, having approached to the other side of the hut, had heard the
 conclusion of the conversation,—“so we have got a new ally?—l
 trust the valour of the knight will be truer metal than the religion of
 the hermit, or the honesty of the yeoman; for this locksley looks like a
 born deer-stealer, and the priest like a lusty hypocrite.”
 “hold thy peace, wamba,” said gurth; “it may all be as thou dost guess;
 but were the horned devil to rise and proffer me his assistance to set at
 liberty cedric and the lady rowena, i fear i should hardly have religion
 enough to refuse the foul fiend's offer, and bid him get behind me.”
 the friar was now completely accoutred as a yeoman, with sword and
 buckler, bow, and quiver, and a strong partisan over his shoulder. he left
 his cell at the head of the party, and, having carefully locked the door,
 deposited the key under the threshold.
 “art thou in condition to do good service, friar,” said locksley, “or does
 the brown bowl still run in thy head?”
 “not more than a drought of st dunstan's fountain will allay,” answered
 the priest; “something there is of a whizzing in my brain, and of
 instability in my legs, but you shall presently see both pass away.”
 so saying, he stepped to the stone basin, in which the waters of the
 fountain as they fell formed bubbles which danced in the white moonlight,
 and took so long a drought as if he had meant to exhaust the spring.
 “when didst thou drink as deep a drought of water before, holy clerk of
 copmanhurst?” said the black knight.
 “never since my wine-butt leaked, and let out its liquor by an illegal
 vent,” replied the friar, “and so left me nothing to drink but my patron's
 bounty here.”
 then plunging his hands and head into the fountain, he washed from them
 all marks of the midnight revel.
 thus refreshed and sobered, the jolly priest twirled his heavy partisan
 round his head with three fingers, as if he had been balancing a reed,
 exclaiming at the same time, “where be those false ravishers, who carry
 off wenches against their will? may the foul fiend fly off with me, if i
 am not man enough for a dozen of them.”
 “swearest thou, holy clerk?” said the black knight.
 “clerk me no clerks,” replied the transformed priest; “by saint george and
 the dragon, i am no longer a shaveling than while my frock is on my back—when
 i am cased in my green cassock, i will drink, swear, and woo a lass, with
 any blithe forester in the west riding.”
 “come on, jack priest,” said locksley, “and be silent; thou art as noisy
 as a whole convent on a holy eve, when the father abbot has gone to bed.—come
 on you, too, my masters, tarry not to talk of it—i say, come on, we
 must collect all our forces, and few enough we shall have, if we are to
 storm the castle of reginald front-de-boeuf.”
 “what! is it front-de-boeuf,” said the black knight, “who has stopt on the
 king's highway the king's liege subjects?—is he turned thief and
 oppressor?”
 “oppressor he ever was,” said locksley.
 “and for thief,” said the priest, “i doubt if ever he were even half so
 honest a man as many a thief of my acquaintance.”
 “move on, priest, and be silent,” said the yeoman; “it were better you led
 the way to the place of rendezvous, than say what should be left unsaid,
 both in decency and prudence.”
 alas, how many hours and years have past,
 since human forms have round this table sate,
 or lamp, or taper, on its surface gleam'd!
 methinks, i hear the sound of time long pass'd
 still murmuring o'er us, in the lofty void
 of these dark arches, like the ling'ring voices
 of those who long within their graves have slept.
 orra, a tragedy
 while these measures were taking in behalf of cedric and his companions,
 the armed men by whom the latter had been seized, hurried their captives
 along towards the place of security, where they intended to imprison them.
 but darkness came on fast, and the paths of the wood seemed but
 imperfectly known to the marauders. they were compelled to make several
 long halts, and once or twice to return on their road to resume the
 direction which they wished to pursue. the summer morn had dawned upon
 them ere they could travel in full assurance that they held the right
 path. but confidence returned with light, and the cavalcade now moved
 rapidly forward. meanwhile, the following dialogue took place between the
 two leaders of the banditti.
 “it is time thou shouldst leave us, sir maurice,” said the templar to de
 bracy, “in order to prepare the second part of thy mystery. thou art next,
 thou knowest, to act the knight deliverer.”
 “i have thought better of it,” said de bracy; “i will not leave thee till
 the prize is fairly deposited in front-de-boeuf's castle. there will i
 appear before the lady rowena in mine own shape, and trust that she will
 set down to the vehemence of my passion the violence of which i have been
 guilty.”
 “and what has made thee change thy plan, de bracy?” replied the knight
 templar.
 “that concerns thee nothing,” answered his companion.
 “i would hope, however, sir knight,” said the templar, “that this
 alteration of measures arises from no suspicion of my honourable meaning,
 such as fitzurse endeavoured to instil into thee?”
 “my thoughts are my own,” answered de bracy; “the fiend laughs, they say,
 when one thief robs another; and we know, that were he to spit fire and
 brimstone instead, it would never prevent a templar from following his
 bent.”
 “or the leader of a free company,” answered the templar, “from dreading at
 the hands of a comrade and friend, the injustice he does to all mankind.”
 “this is unprofitable and perilous recrimination,” answered de bracy;
 “suffice it to say, i know the morals of the temple-order, and i will not
 give thee the power of cheating me out of the fair prey for which i have
 run such risks.”
 “psha,” replied the templar, “what hast thou to fear?—thou knowest
 the vows of our order.”
 “right well,” said de bracy, “and also how they are kept. come, sir
 templar, the laws of gallantry have a liberal interpretation in palestine,
 and this is a case in which i will trust nothing to your conscience.”
 “hear the truth, then,” said the templar; “i care not for your blue-eyed
 beauty. there is in that train one who will make me a better mate.”
 “what! wouldst thou stoop to the waiting damsel?” said de bracy.
 “no, sir knight,” said the templar, haughtily. “to the waiting-woman will
 i not stoop. i have a prize among the captives as lovely as thine own.”
 “by the mass, thou meanest the fair jewess!” said de bracy.
 “and if i do,” said bois-guilbert, “who shall gainsay me?”
 “no one that i know,” said de bracy, “unless it be your vow of celibacy,
 or a check of conscience for an intrigue with a jewess.”
 “for my vow,” said the templar, “our grand master hath granted me a
 dispensation. and for my conscience, a man that has slain three hundred
 saracens, need not reckon up every little failing, like a village girl at
 her first confession upon good friday eve.”
 “thou knowest best thine own privileges,” said de bracy. “yet, i would
 have sworn thy thought had been more on the old usurer's money bags, than
 on the black eyes of the daughter.”
 “i can admire both,” answered the templar; “besides, the old jew is but
 half-prize. i must share his spoils with front-de-boeuf, who will not lend
 us the use of his castle for nothing. i must have something that i can
 term exclusively my own by this foray of ours, and i have fixed on the
 lovely jewess as my peculiar prize. but, now thou knowest my drift, thou
 wilt resume thine own original plan, wilt thou not?—thou hast
 nothing, thou seest, to fear from my interference.”
 “no,” replied de bracy, “i will remain beside my prize. what thou sayst is
 passing true, but i like not the privileges acquired by the dispensation
 of the grand master, and the merit acquired by the slaughter of three
 hundred saracens. you have too good a right to a free pardon, to render
 you very scrupulous about peccadilloes.”
 while this dialogue was proceeding, cedric was endeavouring to wring out
 of those who guarded him an avowal of their character and purpose. “you
 should be englishmen,” said he; “and yet, sacred heaven! you prey upon
 your countrymen as if you were very normans. you should be my neighbours,
 and, if so, my friends; for which of my english neighbours have reason to
 be otherwise? i tell ye, yeomen, that even those among ye who have been
 branded with outlawry have had from me protection; for i have pitied their
 miseries, and curst the oppression of their tyrannic nobles. what, then,
 would you have of me? or in what can this violence serve ye?—ye are
 worse than brute beasts in your actions, and will you imitate them in
 their very dumbness?”
 it was in vain that cedric expostulated with his guards, who had too many
 good reasons for their silence to be induced to break it either by his
 wrath or his expostulations. they continued to hurry him along, travelling
 at a very rapid rate, until, at the end of an avenue of huge trees, arose
 torquilstone, now the hoary and ancient castle of reginald front-de-boeuf.
 it was a fortress of no great size, consisting of a donjon, or large and
 high square tower, surrounded by buildings of inferior height, which were
 encircled by an inner court-yard. around the exterior wall was a deep
 moat, supplied with water from a neighbouring rivulet. front-de-boeuf,
 whose character placed him often at feud with his enemies, had made
 considerable additions to the strength of his castle, by building towers
 upon the outward wall, so as to flank it at every angle. the access, as
 usual in castles of the period, lay through an arched barbican, or
 outwork, which was terminated and defended by a small turret at each
 corner.
 cedric no sooner saw the turrets of front-de-boeuf's castle raise their
 grey and moss-grown battlements, glimmering in the morning sun above the
 wood by which they were surrounded, than he instantly augured more truly
 concerning the cause of his misfortune.
 “i did injustice,” he said, “to the thieves and outlaws of these woods,
 when i supposed such banditti to belong to their bands; i might as justly
 have confounded the foxes of these brakes with the ravening wolves of
 france. tell me, dogs—is it my life or my wealth that your master
 aims at? is it too much that two saxons, myself and the noble athelstane,
 should hold land in the country which was once the patrimony of our race?—put
 us then to death, and complete your tyranny by taking our lives, as you
 began with our liberties. if the saxon cedric cannot rescue england, he is
 willing to die for her. tell your tyrannical master, i do only beseech him
 to dismiss the lady rowena in honour and safety. she is a woman, and he
 need not dread her; and with us will die all who dare fight in her cause.”
 the attendants remained as mute to this address as to the former, and they
 now stood before the gate of the castle. de bracy winded his horn three
 times, and the archers and cross-bow men, who had manned the wall upon
 seeing their approach, hastened to lower the drawbridge, and admit them.
 the prisoners were compelled by their guards to alight, and were conducted
 to an apartment where a hasty repast was offered them, of which none but
 athelstane felt any inclination to partake. neither had the descendant of
 the confessor much time to do justice to the good cheer placed before
 them, for their guards gave him and cedric to understand that they were to
 be imprisoned in a chamber apart from rowena. resistance was vain; and
 they were compelled to follow to a large room, which, rising on clumsy
 saxon pillars, resembled those refectories and chapter-houses which may be
 still seen in the most ancient parts of our most ancient monasteries.
 the lady rowena was next separated from her train, and conducted, with
 courtesy, indeed, but still without consulting her inclination, to a
 distant apartment. the same alarming distinction was conferred on rebecca,
 in spite of her father's entreaties, who offered even money, in this
 extremity of distress, that she might be permitted to abide with him.
 “base unbeliever,” answered one of his guards, “when thou hast seen thy
 lair, thou wilt not wish thy daughter to partake it.” and, without farther
 discussion, the old jew was forcibly dragged off in a different direction
 from the other prisoners. the domestics, after being carefully searched
 and disarmed, were confined in another part of the castle; and rowena was
 refused even the comfort she might have derived from the attendance of her
 handmaiden elgitha.
 the apartment in which the saxon chiefs were confined, for to them we turn
 our first attention, although at present used as a sort of guard-room, had
 formerly been the great hall of the castle. it was now abandoned to meaner
 purposes, because the present lord, among other additions to the
 convenience, security, and beauty of his baronial residence, had erected a
 new and noble hall, whose vaulted roof was supported by lighter and more
 elegant pillars, and fitted up with that higher degree of ornament, which
 the normans had already introduced into architecture.
 cedric paced the apartment, filled with indignant reflections on the past
 and on the present, while the apathy of his companion served, instead of
 patience and philosophy, to defend him against every thing save the
 inconvenience of the present moment; and so little did he feel even this
 last, that he was only from time to time roused to a reply by cedric's
 animated and impassioned appeal to him.
 “yes,” said cedric, half speaking to himself, and half addressing himself
 to athelstane, “it was in this very hall that my father feasted with
 torquil wolfganger, when he entertained the valiant and unfortunate
 harold, then advancing against the norwegians, who had united themselves
 to the rebel tosti. it was in this hall that harold returned the
 magnanimous answer to the ambassador of his rebel brother. oft have i
 heard my father kindle as he told the tale. the envoy of tosti was
 admitted, when this ample room could scarce contain the crowd of noble
 saxon leaders, who were quaffing the blood-red wine around their monarch.”
 “i hope,” said athelstane, somewhat moved by this part of his friend's
 discourse, “they will not forget to send us some wine and refactions at
 noon—we had scarce a breathing-space allowed to break our fast, and
 i never have the benefit of my food when i eat immediately after
 dismounting from horseback, though the leeches recommend that practice.”
 cedric went on with his story without noticing this interjectional
 observation of his friend.
 “the envoy of tosti,” he said, “moved up the hall, undismayed by the
 frowning countenances of all around him, until he made his obeisance
 before the throne of king harold.
 “'what terms,' he said, 'lord king, hath thy brother tosti to hope, if he
 should lay down his arms, and crave peace at thy hands?'
 “'a brother's love,' cried the generous harold, 'and the fair earldom of
 northumberland.'
 “'but should tosti accept these terms,' continued the envoy, 'what lands
 shall be assigned to his faithful ally, hardrada, king of norway?'
 “'seven feet of english ground,' answered harold, fiercely, 'or, as
 hardrada is said to be a giant, perhaps we may allow him twelve inches
 more.'
 “the hall rung with acclamations, and cup and horn was filled to the
 norwegian, who should be speedily in possession of his english territory.”
 “i could have pledged him with all my soul,” said athelstane, “for my
 tongue cleaves to my palate.”
 “the baffled envoy,” continued cedric, pursuing with animation his tale,
 though it interested not the listener, “retreated, to carry to tosti and
 his ally the ominous answer of his injured brother. it was then that the
 distant towers of york, and the bloody streams of the derwent, 
 beheld that direful conflict, in which, after displaying the most
 undaunted valour, the king of norway, and tosti, both fell, with ten
 thousand of their bravest followers. who would have thought that upon the
 proud day when this battle was won, the very gale which waved the saxon
 banners in triumph, was filling the norman sails, and impelling them to
 the fatal shores of sussex?—who would have thought that harold,
 within a few brief days, would himself possess no more of his kingdom,
 than the share which he allotted in his wrath to the norwegian invader?—who
 would have thought that you, noble athelstane—that you, descended of
 harold's blood, and that i, whose father was not the worst defender of the
 saxon crown, should be prisoners to a vile norman, in the very hall in
 which our ancestors held such high festival?”
 “it is sad enough,” replied athelstane; “but i trust they will hold us to
 a moderate ransom—at any rate it cannot be their purpose to starve
 us outright; and yet, although it is high noon, i see no preparations for
 serving dinner. look up at the window, noble cedric, and judge by the
 sunbeams if it is not on the verge of noon.”
 “it may be so,” answered cedric; “but i cannot look on that stained
 lattice without its awakening other reflections than those which concern
 the passing moment, or its privations. when that window was wrought, my
 noble friend, our hardy fathers knew not the art of making glass, or of
 staining it—the pride of wolfganger's father brought an artist from
 normandy to adorn his hall with this new species of emblazonment, that
 breaks the golden light of god's blessed day into so many fantastic hues.
 the foreigner came here poor, beggarly, cringing, and subservient, ready
 to doff his cap to the meanest native of the household. he returned
 pampered and proud, to tell his rapacious countrymen of the wealth and the
 simplicity of the saxon nobles—a folly, oh, athelstane, foreboded of
 old, as well as foreseen, by those descendants of hengist and his hardy
 tribes, who retained the simplicity of their manners. we made these
 strangers our bosom friends, our confidential servants; we borrowed their
 artists and their arts, and despised the honest simplicity and hardihood
 with which our brave ancestors supported themselves, and we became
 enervated by norman arts long ere we fell under norman arms. far better
 was our homely diet, eaten in peace and liberty, than the luxurious
 dainties, the love of which hath delivered us as bondsmen to the foreign
 conqueror!”
 “i should,” replied athelstane, “hold very humble diet a luxury at
 present; and it astonishes me, noble cedric, that you can bear so truly in
 mind the memory of past deeds, when it appeareth you forget the very hour
 of dinner.”
 “it is time lost,” muttered cedric apart and impatiently, “to speak to him
 of aught else but that which concerns his appetite! the soul of
 hardicanute hath taken possession of him, and he hath no pleasure save to
 fill, to swill, and to call for more.—alas!” said he, looking at
 athelstane with compassion, “that so dull a spirit should be lodged in so
 goodly a form! alas! that such an enterprise as the regeneration of
 england should turn on a hinge so imperfect! wedded to rowena, indeed, her
 nobler and more generous soul may yet awake the better nature which is
 torpid within him. yet how should this be, while rowena, athelstane, and i
 myself, remain the prisoners of this brutal marauder and have been made so
 perhaps from a sense of the dangers which our liberty might bring to the
 usurped power of his nation?”
 while the saxon was plunged in these painful reflections, the door of
 their prison opened, and gave entrance to a sewer, holding his white rod
 of office. this important person advanced into the chamber with a grave
 pace, followed by four attendants, bearing in a table covered with dishes,
 the sight and smell of which seemed to be an instant compensation to
 athelstane for all the inconvenience he had undergone. the persons who
 attended on the feast were masked and cloaked.
 “what mummery is this?” said cedric; “think you that we are ignorant whose
 prisoners we are, when we are in the castle of your master? tell him,” he
 continued, willing to use this opportunity to open a negotiation for his
 freedom,—“tell your master, reginald front-de-boeuf, that we know no
 reason he can have for withholding our liberty, excepting his unlawful
 desire to enrich himself at our expense. tell him that we yield to his
 rapacity, as in similar circumstances we should do to that of a literal
 robber. let him name the ransom at which he rates our liberty, and it
 shall be paid, providing the exaction is suited to our means.” the sewer
 made no answer, but bowed his head.
 “and tell sir reginald front-de-boeuf,” said athelstane, “that i send him
 my mortal defiance, and challenge him to combat with me, on foot or
 horseback, at any secure place, within eight days after our liberation;
 which, if he be a true knight, he will not, under these circumstances,
 venture to refuse or to delay.”
 “i shall deliver to the knight your defiance,” answered the sewer;
 “meanwhile i leave you to your food.”
 the challenge of athelstane was delivered with no good grace; for a large
 mouthful, which required the exercise of both jaws at once, added to a
 natural hesitation, considerably damped the effect of the bold defiance it
 contained. still, however, his speech was hailed by cedric as an
 incontestible token of reviving spirit in his companion, whose previous
 indifference had begun, notwithstanding his respect for athelstane's
 descent, to wear out his patience. but he now cordially shook hands with
 him in token of his approbation, and was somewhat grieved when athelstane
 observed, “that he would fight a dozen such men as front-de-boeuf, if, by
 so doing, he could hasten his departure from a dungeon where they put so
 much garlic into their pottage.” notwithstanding this intimation of a
 relapse into the apathy of sensuality, cedric placed himself opposite to
 athelstane, and soon showed, that if the distresses of his country could
 banish the recollection of food while the table was uncovered, yet no
 sooner were the victuals put there, than he proved that the appetite of
 his saxon ancestors had descended to him along with their other qualities.
 the captives had not long enjoyed their refreshment, however, ere their
 attention was disturbed even from this most serious occupation by the
 blast of a horn winded before the gate. it was repeated three times, with
 as much violence as if it had been blown before an enchanted castle by the
 destined knight, at whose summons halls and towers, barbican and
 battlement, were to roll off like a morning vapour. the saxons started
 from the table, and hastened to the window. but their curiosity was
 disappointed; for these outlets only looked upon the court of the castle,
 and the sound came from beyond its precincts. the summons, however, seemed
 of importance, for a considerable degree of bustle instantly took place in
 the castle.
 my daughter—o my ducats—o my daughter!
 ———o my christian ducats!
 justice—the law—my ducats, and my daughter!
 —merchant of venice
 leaving the saxon chiefs to return to their banquet as soon as their
 ungratified curiosity should permit them to attend to the calls of their
 half-satiated appetite, we have to look in upon the yet more severe
 imprisonment of isaac of york. the poor jew had been hastily thrust into a
 dungeon-vault of the castle, the floor of which was deep beneath the level
 of the ground, and very damp, being lower than even the moat itself. the
 only light was received through one or two loop-holes far above the reach
 of the captive's hand. these apertures admitted, even at mid-day, only a
 dim and uncertain light, which was changed for utter darkness long before
 the rest of the castle had lost the blessing of day. chains and shackles,
 which had been the portion of former captives, from whom active exertions
 to escape had been apprehended, hung rusted and empty on the walls of the
 prison, and in the rings of one of those sets of fetters there remained
 two mouldering bones, which seemed to have been once those of the human
 leg, as if some prisoner had been left not only to perish there, but to be
 consumed to a skeleton.
 at one end of this ghastly apartment was a large fire-grate, over the top
 of which were stretched some transverse iron bars, half devoured with
 rust.
 the whole appearance of the dungeon might have appalled a stouter heart
 than that of isaac, who, nevertheless, was more composed under the
 imminent pressure of danger, than he had seemed to be while affected by
 terrors, of which the cause was as yet remote and contingent. the lovers
 of the chase say that the hare feels more agony during the pursuit of the
 greyhounds, than when she is struggling in their fangs. 
 and thus it is probable, that the jews, by the very frequency of their
 fear on all occasions, had their minds in some degree prepared for every
 effort of tyranny which could be practised upon them; so that no
 aggression, when it had taken place, could bring with it that surprise
 which is the most disabling quality of terror. neither was it the first
 time that isaac had been placed in circumstances so dangerous. he had
 therefore experience to guide him, as well as hope, that he might again,
 as formerly, be delivered as a prey from the fowler. above all, he had
 upon his side the unyielding obstinacy of his nation, and that unbending
 resolution, with which israelites have been frequently known to submit to
 the uttermost evils which power and violence can inflict upon them, rather
 than gratify their oppressors by granting their demands.
 in this humour of passive resistance, and with his garment collected
 beneath him to keep his limbs from the wet pavement, isaac sat in a corner
 of his dungeon, where his folded hands, his dishevelled hair and beard,
 his furred cloak and high cap, seen by the wiry and broken light, would
 have afforded a study for rembrandt, had that celebrated painter existed
 at the period. the jew remained, without altering his position, for nearly
 three hours, at the expiry of which steps were heard on the dungeon stair.
 the bolts screamed as they were withdrawn—the hinges creaked as the
 wicket opened, and reginald front-de-boeuf, followed by the two saracen
 slaves of the templar, entered the prison.
 front-de-boeuf, a tall and strong man, whose life had been spent in public
 war or in private feuds and broils, and who had hesitated at no means of
 extending his feudal power, had features corresponding to his character,
 and which strongly expressed the fiercer and more malignant passions of
 the mind. the scars with which his visage was seamed, would, on features
 of a different cast, have excited the sympathy and veneration due to the
 marks of honourable valour; but, in the peculiar case of front-de-boeuf,
 they only added to the ferocity of his countenance, and to the dread which
 his presence inspired. this formidable baron was clad in a leathern
 doublet, fitted close to his body, which was frayed and soiled with the
 stains of his armour. he had no weapon, excepting a poniard at his belt,
 which served to counterbalance the weight of the bunch of rusty keys that
 hung at his right side.
 the black slaves who attended front-de-boeuf were stripped of their
 gorgeous apparel, and attired in jerkins and trowsers of coarse linen,
 their sleeves being tucked up above the elbow, like those of butchers when
 about to exercise their function in the slaughter-house. each had in his
 hand a small pannier; and, when they entered the dungeon, they stopt at
 the door until front-de-boeuf himself carefully locked and double-locked
 it. having taken this precaution, he advanced slowly up the apartment
 towards the jew, upon whom he kept his eye fixed, as if he wished to
 paralyze him with his glance, as some animals are said to fascinate their
 prey. it seemed indeed as if the sullen and malignant eye of
 front-de-boeuf possessed some portion of that supposed power over his
 unfortunate prisoner. the jew sat with his mouth agape, and his eyes fixed
 on the savage baron with such earnestness of terror, that his frame seemed
 literally to shrink together, and to diminish in size while encountering
 the fierce norman's fixed and baleful gaze. the unhappy isaac was deprived
 not only of the power of rising to make the obeisance which his terror
 dictated, but he could not even doff his cap, or utter any word of
 supplication; so strongly was he agitated by the conviction that tortures
 and death were impending over him.
 on the other hand, the stately form of the norman appeared to dilate in
 magnitude, like that of the eagle, which ruffles up its plumage when about
 to pounce on its defenceless prey. he paused within three steps of the
 corner in which the unfortunate jew had now, as it were, coiled himself up
 into the smallest possible space, and made a sign for one of the slaves to
 approach. the black satellite came forward accordingly, and, producing
 from his basket a large pair of scales and several weights, he laid them
 at the feet of front-de-boeuf, and again retired to the respectful
 distance, at which his companion had already taken his station.
 the motions of these men were slow and solemn, as if there impended over
 their souls some preconception of horror and of cruelty. front-de-boeuf
 himself opened the scene by thus addressing his ill-fated captive.
 “most accursed dog of an accursed race,” he said, awaking with his deep
 and sullen voice the sullen echoes of his dungeon vault, “seest thou these
 scales?”
 the unhappy jew returned a feeble affirmative.
 “in these very scales shalt thou weigh me out,” said the relentless baron,
 “a thousand silver pounds, after the just measure and weight of the tower
 of london.”
 “holy abraham!” returned the jew, finding voice through the very extremity
 of his danger, “heard man ever such a demand?—who ever heard, even
 in a minstrel's tale, of such a sum as a thousand pounds of silver?—what
 human sight was ever blessed with the vision of such a mass of treasure?—not
 within the walls of york, ransack my house and that of all my tribe, wilt
 thou find the tithe of that huge sum of silver that thou speakest of.”
 “i am reasonable,” answered front-de-boeuf, “and if silver be scant, i
 refuse not gold. at the rate of a mark of gold for each six pounds of
 silver, thou shalt free thy unbelieving carcass from such punishment as
 thy heart has never even conceived.”
 “have mercy on me, noble knight!” exclaimed isaac; “i am old, and poor,
 and helpless. it were unworthy to triumph over me—it is a poor deed
 to crush a worm.”
 “old thou mayst be,” replied the knight; “more shame to their folly who
 have suffered thee to grow grey in usury and knavery—feeble thou
 mayst be, for when had a jew either heart or hand—but rich it is
 well known thou art.”
 “i swear to you, noble knight,” said the jew “by all which i believe, and
 by all which we believe in common—-”
 “perjure not thyself,” said the norman, interrupting him, “and let not
 thine obstinacy seal thy doom, until thou hast seen and well considered
 the fate that awaits thee. think not i speak to thee only to excite thy
 terror, and practise on the base cowardice thou hast derived from thy
 tribe. i swear to thee by that which thou dost not believe, by the gospel
 which our church teaches, and by the keys which are given her to bind and
 to loose, that my purpose is deep and peremptory. this dungeon is no place
 for trifling. prisoners ten thousand times more distinguished than thou
 have died within these walls, and their fate hath never been known! but
 for thee is reserved a long and lingering death, to which theirs were
 luxury.”
 he again made a signal for the slaves to approach, and spoke to them
 apart, in their own language; for he also had been in palestine, where
 perhaps, he had learnt his lesson of cruelty. the saracens produced from
 their baskets a quantity of charcoal, a pair of bellows, and a flask of
 oil. while the one struck a light with a flint and steel, the other
 disposed the charcoal in the large rusty grate which we have already
 mentioned, and exercised the bellows until the fuel came to a red glow.
 “seest thou, isaac,” said front-de-boeuf, “the range of iron bars above
 the glowing charcoal?—  on that warm couch thou shalt
 lie, stripped of thy clothes as if thou wert to rest on a bed of down. one
 of these slaves shall maintain the fire beneath thee, while the other
 shall anoint thy wretched limbs with oil, lest the roast should burn.—now,
 choose betwixt such a scorching bed and the payment of a thousand pounds
 of silver; for, by the head of my father, thou hast no other option.”
original
 “it is impossible,” exclaimed the miserable jew—“it is impossible
 that your purpose can be real! the good god of nature never made a heart
 capable of exercising such cruelty!”
 “trust not to that, isaac,” said front-de-boeuf, “it were a fatal error.
 dost thou think that i, who have seen a town sacked, in which thousands of
 my christian countrymen perished by sword, by flood, and by fire, will
 blench from my purpose for the outcries or screams of one single wretched
 jew?—or thinkest thou that these swarthy slaves, who have neither
 law, country, nor conscience, but their master's will—who use the
 poison, or the stake, or the poniard, or the cord, at his slightest wink—thinkest
 thou that they will have mercy, who do not even understand the language in
 which it is asked?—be wise, old man; discharge thyself of a portion
 of thy superfluous wealth; repay to the hands of a christian a part of
 what thou hast acquired by the usury thou hast practised on those of his
 religion. thy cunning may soon swell out once more thy shrivelled purse,
 but neither leech nor medicine can restore thy scorched hide and flesh
 wert thou once stretched on these bars. tell down thy ransom, i say, and
 rejoice that at such rate thou canst redeem thee from a dungeon, the
 secrets of which few have returned to tell. i waste no more words with
 thee—choose between thy dross and thy flesh and blood, and as thou
 choosest, so shall it be.”
 “so may abraham, jacob, and all the fathers of our people assist me,” said
 isaac, “i cannot make the choice, because i have not the means of
 satisfying your exorbitant demand!”
 “seize him and strip him, slaves,” said the knight, “and let the fathers
 of his race assist him if they can.”
 the assistants, taking their directions more from the baron's eye and his
 hand than his tongue, once more stepped forward, laid hands on the
 unfortunate isaac, plucked him up from the ground, and, holding him
 between them, waited the hard-hearted baron's farther signal. the unhappy
 jew eyed their countenances and that of front-de-boeuf, in hope of
 discovering some symptoms of relenting; but that of the baron exhibited
 the same cold, half-sullen, half-sarcastic smile which had been the
 prelude to his cruelty; and the savage eyes of the saracens, rolling
 gloomily under their dark brows, acquiring a yet more sinister expression
 by the whiteness of the circle which surrounds the pupil, evinced rather
 the secret pleasure which they expected from the approaching scene, than
 any reluctance to be its directors or agents. the jew then looked at the
 glowing furnace, over which he was presently to be stretched, and seeing
 no chance of his tormentor's relenting, his resolution gave way.
 “i will pay,” he said, “the thousand pounds of silver—that is,” he
 added, after a moment's pause, “i will pay it with the help of my
 brethren; for i must beg as a mendicant at the door of our synagogue ere i
 make up so unheard-of a sum.—when and where must it be delivered?”
 “here,” replied front-de-boeuf, “here it must be delivered—weighed
 it must be—weighed and told down on this very dungeon floor.—thinkest
 thou i will part with thee until thy ransom is secure?”
 “and what is to be my surety,” said the jew, “that i shall be at liberty
 after this ransom is paid?”
 “the word of a norman noble, thou pawn-broking slave,” answered
 front-de-boeuf; “the faith of a norman nobleman, more pure than the gold
 and silver of thee and all thy tribe.”
 “i crave pardon, noble lord,” said isaac timidly, “but wherefore should i
 rely wholly on the word of one who will trust nothing to mine?”
 “because thou canst not help it, jew,” said the knight, sternly. “wert
 thou now in thy treasure-chamber at york, and were i craving a loan of thy
 shekels, it would be thine to dictate the time of payment, and the pledge
 of security. this is my treasure-chamber. here i have thee at advantage,
 nor will i again deign to repeat the terms on which i grant thee liberty.”
 the jew groaned deeply.—“grant me,” he said, “at least with my own
 liberty, that of the companions with whom i travel. they scorned me as a
 jew, yet they pitied my desolation, and because they tarried to aid me by
 the way, a share of my evil hath come upon them; moreover, they may
 contribute in some sort to my ransom.”
 “if thou meanest yonder saxon churls,” said front-de-boeuf, “their ransom
 will depend upon other terms than thine. mind thine own concerns, jew, i
 warn thee, and meddle not with those of others.”
 “i am, then,” said isaac, “only to be set at liberty, together with mine
 wounded friend?”
 “shall i twice recommend it,” said front-de-boeuf, “to a son of israel, to
 meddle with his own concerns, and leave those of others alone?—since
 thou hast made thy choice, it remains but that thou payest down thy
 ransom, and that at a short day.”
 “yet hear me,” said the jew—“for the sake of that very wealth which
 thou wouldst obtain at the expense of thy—-” here he stopt short,
 afraid of irritating the savage norman. but front-de-boeuf only laughed,
 and himself filled up the blank at which the jew had hesitated.
 “at the expense of my conscience, thou wouldst say, isaac; speak it out—i
 tell thee, i am reasonable. i can bear the reproaches of a loser, even
 when that loser is a jew. thou wert not so patient, isaac, when thou didst
 invoke justice against jacques fitzdotterel, for calling thee a usurious
 blood-sucker, when thy exactions had devoured his patrimony.”
 “i swear by the talmud,” said the jew, “that your valour has been misled
 in that matter. fitzdotterel drew his poniard upon me in mine own chamber,
 because i craved him for mine own silver. the term of payment was due at
 the passover.”
 “i care not what he did,” said front-de-boeuf; “the question is, when
 shall i have mine own?—when shall i have the shekels, isaac?”
 “let my daughter rebecca go forth to york,” answered isaac, “with your
 safe conduct, noble knight, and so soon as man and horse can return, the
 treasure—-” here he groaned deeply, but added, after the pause of a
 few seconds,—“the treasure shall be told down on this very floor.”
 “thy daughter!” said front-de-boeuf, as if surprised,—“by heavens,
 isaac, i would i had known of this. i deemed that yonder black-browed girl
 had been thy concubine, and i gave her to be a handmaiden to sir brian de
 bois-guilbert, after the fashion of patriarchs and heroes of the days of
 old, who set us in these matters a wholesome example.”
 the yell which isaac raised at this unfeeling communication made the very
 vault to ring, and astounded the two saracens so much that they let go
 their hold of the jew. he availed himself of his enlargement to throw
 himself on the pavement, and clasp the knees of front-de-boeuf.
 “take all that you have asked,” said he, “sir knight—take ten times
 more—reduce me to ruin and to beggary, if thou wilt,—nay,
 pierce me with thy poniard, broil me on that furnace, but spare my
 daughter, deliver her in safety and honour!—as thou art born of
 woman, spare the honour of a helpless maiden—she is the image of my
 deceased rachel, she is the last of six pledges of her love—will you
 deprive a widowed husband of his sole remaining comfort?—will you
 reduce a father to wish that his only living child were laid beside her
 dead mother, in the tomb of our fathers?”
 “i would,” said the norman, somewhat relenting, “that i had known of this
 before. i thought your race had loved nothing save their moneybags.”
 “think not so vilely of us, jews though we be,” said isaac, eager to
 improve the moment of apparent sympathy; “the hunted fox, the tortured
 wildcat loves its young—the despised and persecuted race of abraham
 love their children!”
 “be it so,” said front-de-boeuf; “i will believe it in future, isaac, for
 thy very sake—but it aids us not now, i cannot help what has
 happened, or what is to follow; my word is passed to my comrade in arms,
 nor would i break it for ten jews and jewesses to boot. besides, why
 shouldst thou think evil is to come to the girl, even if she became
 bois-guilbert's booty?”
 “there will, there must!” exclaimed isaac, wringing his hands in agony;
 “when did templars breathe aught but cruelty to men, and dishonour to
 women!”
 “dog of an infidel,” said front-de-boeuf, with sparkling eyes, and not
 sorry, perhaps, to seize a pretext for working himself into a passion,
 “blaspheme not the holy order of the temple of zion, but take thought
 instead to pay me the ransom thou hast promised, or woe betide thy jewish
 throat!”
 “robber and villain!” said the jew, retorting the insults of his oppressor
 with passion, which, however impotent, he now found it impossible to
 bridle, “i will pay thee nothing—not one silver penny will i pay
 thee, unless my daughter is delivered to me in safety and honour!”
 “art thou in thy senses, israelite?” said the norman, sternly—“has
 thy flesh and blood a charm against heated iron and scalding oil?”
 “i care not!” said the jew, rendered desperate by paternal affection; “do
 thy worst. my daughter is my flesh and blood, dearer to me a thousand
 times than those limbs which thy cruelty threatens. no silver will i give
 thee, unless i were to pour it molten down thy avaricious throat—no,
 not a silver penny will i give thee, nazarene, were it to save thee from
 the deep damnation thy whole life has merited! take my life if thou wilt,
 and say, the jew, amidst his tortures, knew how to disappoint the
 christian.”
 “we shall see that,” said front-de-boeuf; “for by the blessed rood, which
 is the abomination of thy accursed tribe, thou shalt feel the extremities
 of fire and steel!—strip him, slaves, and chain him down upon the
 bars.”
 in spite of the feeble struggles of the old man, the saracens had already
 torn from him his upper garment, and were proceeding totally to disrobe
 him, when the sound of a bugle, twice winded without the castle,
 penetrated even to the recesses of the dungeon, and immediately after loud
 voices were heard calling for sir reginald front-de-boeuf. unwilling to be
 found engaged in his hellish occupation, the savage baron gave the slaves
 a signal to restore isaac's garment, and, quitting the dungeon with his
 attendants, he left the jew to thank god for his own deliverance, or to
 lament over his daughter's captivity, and probable fate, as his personal
 or parental feelings might prove strongest.
 nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words
 can no way change you to a milder form,
 i'll woo you, like a soldier, at arms' end,
 and love you 'gainst the nature of love, force you.
 —two gentlemen of verona
 the apartment to which the lady rowena had been introduced was fitted up
 with some rude attempts at ornament and magnificence, and her being placed
 there might be considered as a peculiar mark of respect not offered to the
 other prisoners. but the wife of front-de-boeuf, for whom it had been
 originally furnished, was long dead, and decay and neglect had impaired
 the few ornaments with which her taste had adorned it. the tapestry hung
 down from the walls in many places, and in others was tarnished and faded
 under the effects of the sun, or tattered and decayed by age. desolate,
 however, as it was, this was the apartment of the castle which had been
 judged most fitting for the accommodation of the saxon heiress; and here
 she was left to meditate upon her fate, until the actors in this nefarious
 drama had arranged the several parts which each of them was to perform.
 this had been settled in a council held by front-de-boeuf, de bracy, and
 the templar, in which, after a long and warm debate concerning the several
 advantages which each insisted upon deriving from his peculiar share in
 this audacious enterprise, they had at length determined the fate of their
 unhappy prisoners.
 it was about the hour of noon, therefore, when de bracy, for whose
 advantage the expedition had been first planned, appeared to prosecute his
 views upon the hand and possessions of the lady rowena.
 the interval had not entirely been bestowed in holding council with his
 confederates, for de bracy had found leisure to decorate his person with
 all the foppery of the times. his green cassock and vizard were now flung
 aside. his long luxuriant hair was trained to flow in quaint tresses down
 his richly furred cloak. his beard was closely shaved, his doublet reached
 to the middle of his leg, and the girdle which secured it, and at the same
 time supported his ponderous sword, was embroidered and embossed with gold
 work. we have already noticed the extravagant fashion of the shoes at this
 period, and the points of maurice de bracy's might have challenged the
 prize of extravagance with the gayest, being turned up and twisted like
 the horns of a ram. such was the dress of a gallant of the period; and, in
 the present instance, that effect was aided by the handsome person and
 good demeanour of the wearer, whose manners partook alike of the grace of
 a courtier, and the frankness of a soldier.
 he saluted rowena by doffing his velvet bonnet, garnished with a golden
 broach, representing st michael trampling down the prince of evil. with
 this, he gently motioned the lady to a seat; and, as she still retained
 her standing posture, the knight ungloved his right hand, and motioned to
 conduct her thither. but rowena declined, by her gesture, the proffered
 compliment, and replied, “if i be in the presence of my jailor, sir knight—nor
 will circumstances allow me to think otherwise—it best becomes his
 prisoner to remain standing till she learns her doom.”
 “alas! fair rowena,” returned de bracy, “you are in presence of your
 captive, not your jailor; and it is from your fair eyes that de bracy must
 receive that doom which you fondly expect from him.”
 “i know you not, sir,” said the lady, drawing herself up with all the
 pride of offended rank and beauty; “i know you not—and the insolent
 familiarity with which you apply to me the jargon of a troubadour, forms
 no apology for the violence of a robber.”
 “to thyself, fair maid,” answered de bracy, in his former tone—“to
 thine own charms be ascribed whate'er i have done which passed the respect
 due to her, whom i have chosen queen of my heart, and lodestar of my
 eyes.”
 “i repeat to you, sir knight, that i know you not, and that no man wearing
 chain and spurs ought thus to intrude himself upon the presence of an
 unprotected lady.”
 “that i am unknown to you,” said de bracy, “is indeed my misfortune; yet
 let me hope that de bracy's name has not been always unspoken, when
 minstrels or heralds have praised deeds of chivalry, whether in the lists
 or in the battle-field.”
 “to heralds and to minstrels, then, leave thy praise, sir knight,” replied
 rowena, “more suiting for their mouths than for thine own; and tell me
 which of them shall record in song, or in book of tourney, the memorable
 conquest of this night, a conquest obtained over an old man, followed by a
 few timid hinds; and its booty, an unfortunate maiden, transported against
 her will to the castle of a robber?”
 “you are unjust, lady rowena,” said the knight, biting his lips in some
 confusion, and speaking in a tone more natural to him than that of
 affected gallantry, which he had at first adopted; “yourself free from
 passion, you can allow no excuse for the frenzy of another, although
 caused by your own beauty.”
 “i pray you, sir knight,” said rowena, “to cease a language so commonly
 used by strolling minstrels, that it becomes not the mouth of knights or
 nobles. certes, you constrain me to sit down, since you enter upon such
 commonplace terms, of which each vile crowder hath a stock that might last
 from hence to christmas.”
 “proud damsel,” said de bracy, incensed at finding his gallant style
 procured him nothing but contempt—“proud damsel, thou shalt be as
 proudly encountered. know then, that i have supported my pretensions to
 your hand in the way that best suited thy character. it is meeter for thy
 humour to be wooed with bow and bill, than in set terms, and in courtly
 language.”
 “courtesy of tongue,” said rowena, “when it is used to veil churlishness
 of deed, is but a knight's girdle around the breast of a base clown. i
 wonder not that the restraint appears to gall you—more it were for
 your honour to have retained the dress and language of an outlaw, than to
 veil the deeds of one under an affectation of gentle language and
 demeanour.”
 “you counsel well, lady,” said the norman; “and in the bold language which
 best justifies bold action i tell thee, thou shalt never leave this
 castle, or thou shalt leave it as maurice de bracy's wife. i am not wont
 to be baffled in my enterprises, nor needs a norman noble scrupulously to
 vindicate his conduct to the saxon maiden whom he distinguishes by the
 offer of his hand. thou art proud, rowena, and thou art the fitter to be
 my wife. by what other means couldst thou be raised to high honour and to
 princely place, saving by my alliance? how else wouldst thou escape from
 the mean precincts of a country grange, where saxons herd with the swine
 which form their wealth, to take thy seat, honoured as thou shouldst be,
 and shalt be, amid all in england that is distinguished by beauty, or
 dignified by power?”
 “sir knight,” replied rowena, “the grange which you contemn hath been my
 shelter from infancy; and, trust me, when i leave it—should that day
 ever arrive—it shall be with one who has not learnt to despise the
 dwelling and manners in which i have been brought up.”
 “i guess your meaning, lady,” said de bracy, “though you may think it lies
 too obscure for my apprehension. but dream not, that richard coeur de lion
 will ever resume his throne, far less that wilfred of ivanhoe, his minion,
 will ever lead thee to his footstool, to be there welcomed as the bride of
 a favourite. another suitor might feel jealousy while he touched this
 string; but my firm purpose cannot be changed by a passion so childish and
 so hopeless. know, lady, that this rival is in my power, and that it rests
 but with me to betray the secret of his being within the castle to
 front-de-boeuf, whose jealousy will be more fatal than mine.”
 “wilfred here?” said rowena, in disdain; “that is as true as that
 front-de-boeuf is his rival.”
 de bracy looked at her steadily for an instant.
 “wert thou really ignorant of this?” said he; “didst thou not know that
 wilfred of ivanhoe travelled in the litter of the jew?—a meet
 conveyance for the crusader, whose doughty arm was to reconquer the holy
 sepulchre!” and he laughed scornfully.
 “and if he is here,” said rowena, compelling herself to a tone of
 indifference, though trembling with an agony of apprehension which she
 could not suppress, “in what is he the rival of front-de-boeuf? or what
 has he to fear beyond a short imprisonment, and an honourable ransom,
 according to the use of chivalry?”
 “rowena,” said de bracy, “art thou, too, deceived by the common error of
 thy sex, who think there can be no rivalry but that respecting their own
 charms? knowest thou not there is a jealousy of ambition and of wealth, as
 well as of love; and that this our host, front-de-boeuf, will push from
 his road him who opposes his claim to the fair barony of ivanhoe, as
 readily, eagerly, and unscrupulously, as if he were preferred to him by
 some blue-eyed damsel? but smile on my suit, lady, and the wounded
 champion shall have nothing to fear from front-de-boeuf, whom else thou
 mayst mourn for, as in the hands of one who has never shown compassion.”
 “save him, for the love of heaven!” said rowena, her firmness giving way
 under terror for her lover's impending fate.
 “i can—i will—it is my purpose,” said de bracy; “for, when
 rowena consents to be the bride of de bracy, who is it shall dare to put
 forth a violent hand upon her kinsman—the son of her guardian—the
 companion of her youth? but it is thy love must buy his protection. i am
 not romantic fool enough to further the fortune, or avert the fate, of one
 who is likely to be a successful obstacle between me and my wishes. use
 thine influence with me in his behalf, and he is safe,—refuse to
 employ it, wilfred dies, and thou thyself art not the nearer to freedom.”
 “thy language,” answered rowena, “hath in its indifferent bluntness
 something which cannot be reconciled with the horrors it seems to express.
 i believe not that thy purpose is so wicked, or thy power so great.”
 “flatter thyself, then, with that belief,” said de bracy, “until time
 shall prove it false. thy lover lies wounded in this castle—thy
 preferred lover. he is a bar betwixt front-de-boeuf and that which
 front-de-boeuf loves better than either ambition or beauty. what will it
 cost beyond the blow of a poniard, or the thrust of a javelin, to silence
 his opposition for ever? nay, were front-de-boeuf afraid to justify a deed
 so open, let the leech but give his patient a wrong draught—let the
 chamberlain, or the nurse who tends him, but pluck the pillow from his
 head, and wilfred in his present condition, is sped without the effusion
 of blood. cedric also—”
 “and cedric also,” said rowena, repeating his words; “my noble—my
 generous guardian! i deserved the evil i have encountered, for forgetting
 his fate even in that of his son!”
 “cedric's fate also depends upon thy determination,” said de bracy; “and i
 leave thee to form it.”
 hitherto, rowena had sustained her part in this trying scene with
 undismayed courage, but it was because she had not considered the danger
 as serious and imminent. her disposition was naturally that which
 physiognomists consider as proper to fair complexions, mild, timid, and
 gentle; but it had been tempered, and, as it were, hardened, by the
 circumstances of her education. accustomed to see the will of all, even of
 cedric himself, (sufficiently arbitrary with others,) give way before her
 wishes, she had acquired that sort of courage and self-confidence which
 arises from the habitual and constant deference of the circle in which we
 move. she could scarce conceive the possibility of her will being opposed,
 far less that of its being treated with total disregard.
 her haughtiness and habit of domination was, therefore, a fictitious
 character, induced over that which was natural to her, and it deserted her
 when her eyes were opened to the extent of her own danger, as well as that
 of her lover and her guardian; and when she found her will, the slightest
 expression of which was wont to command respect and attention, now placed
 in opposition to that of a man of a strong, fierce, and determined mind,
 who possessed the advantage over her, and was resolved to use it, she
 quailed before him.
 after casting her eyes around, as if to look for the aid which was nowhere
 to be found, and after a few broken interjections, she raised her hands to
 heaven, and burst into a passion of uncontrolled vexation and sorrow. it
 was impossible to see so beautiful a creature in such extremity without
 feeling for her, and de bracy was not unmoved, though he was yet more
 embarrassed than touched. he had, in truth, gone too far to recede; and
 yet, in rowena's present condition, she could not be acted on either by
 argument or threats. he paced the apartment to and fro, now vainly
 exhorting the terrified maiden to compose herself, now hesitating
 concerning his own line of conduct.
 if, thought he, i should be moved by the tears and sorrow of this
 disconsolate damsel, what should i reap but the loss of these fair hopes
 for which i have encountered so much risk, and the ridicule of prince john
 and his jovial comrades? “and yet,” he said to himself, “i feel myself ill
 framed for the part which i am playing. i cannot look on so fair a face
 while it is disturbed with agony, or on those eyes when they are drowned
 in tears. i would she had retained her original haughtiness of
 disposition, or that i had a larger share of front-de-boeuf's
 thrice-tempered hardness of heart!”
 agitated by these thoughts, he could only bid the unfortunate rowena be
 comforted, and assure her, that as yet she had no reason for the excess of
 despair to which she was now giving way. but in this task of consolation
 de bracy was interrupted by the horn, “hoarse-winded blowing far and
 keen,” which had at the same time alarmed the other inmates of the castle,
 and interrupted their several plans of avarice and of license. of them
 all, perhaps, de bracy least regretted the interruption; for his
 conference with the lady rowena had arrived at a point, where he found it
 equally difficult to prosecute or to resign his enterprise.
 and here we cannot but think it necessary to offer some better proof than
 the incidents of an idle tale, to vindicate the melancholy representation
 of manners which has been just laid before the reader. it is grievous to
 think that those valiant barons, to whose stand against the crown the
 liberties of england were indebted for their existence, should themselves
 have been such dreadful oppressors, and capable of excesses contrary not
 only to the laws of england, but to those of nature and humanity. but,
 alas! we have only to extract from the industrious henry one of those
 numerous passages which he has collected from contemporary historians, to
 prove that fiction itself can hardly reach the dark reality of the horrors
 of the period.
 the description given by the author of the saxon chronicle of the
 cruelties exercised in the reign of king stephen by the great barons and
 lords of castles, who were all normans, affords a strong proof of the
 excesses of which they were capable when their passions were inflamed.
 “they grievously oppressed the poor people by building castles; and when
 they were built, they filled them with wicked men, or rather devils, who
 seized both men and women who they imagined had any money, threw them into
 prison, and put them to more cruel tortures than the martyrs ever endured.
 they suffocated some in mud, and suspended others by the feet, or the
 head, or the thumbs, kindling fires below them. they squeezed the heads of
 some with knotted cords till they pierced their brains, while they threw
 others into dungeons swarming with serpents, snakes, and toads.” but it
 would be cruel to put the reader to the pain of perusing the remainder of
 this description. 
 as another instance of these bitter fruits of conquest, and perhaps the
 strongest that can be quoted, we may mention, that the princess matilda,
 though a daughter of the king of scotland, and afterwards both queen of
 england, niece to edgar atheling, and mother to the empress of germany,
 the daughter, the wife, and the mother of monarchs, was obliged, during
 her early residence for education in england, to assume the veil of a nun,
 as the only means of escaping the licentious pursuit of the norman nobles.
 this excuse she stated before a great council of the clergy of england, as
 the sole reason for her having taken the religious habit. the assembled
 clergy admitted the validity of the plea, and the notoriety of the
 circumstances upon which it was founded; giving thus an indubitable and
 most remarkable testimony to the existence of that disgraceful license by
 which that age was stained. it was a matter of public knowledge, they
 said, that after the conquest of king william, his norman followers,
 elated by so great a victory, acknowledged no law but their own wicked
 pleasure, and not only despoiled the conquered saxons of their lands and
 their goods, but invaded the honour of their wives and of their daughters
 with the most unbridled license; and hence it was then common for matrons
 and maidens of noble families to assume the veil, and take shelter in
 convents, not as called thither by the vocation of god, but solely to
 preserve their honour from the unbridled wickedness of man.
 such and so licentious were the times, as announced by the public
 declaration of the assembled clergy, recorded by eadmer; and we need add
 nothing more to vindicate the probability of the scenes which we have
 detailed, and are about to detail, upon the more apocryphal authority of
 the wardour ms.
 i'll woo her as the lion woos his bride.
 —douglas
 while the scenes we have described were passing in other parts of the
 castle, the jewess rebecca awaited her fate in a distant and sequestered
 turret. hither she had been led by two of her disguised ravishers, and on
 being thrust into the little cell, she found herself in the presence of an
 old sibyl, who kept murmuring to herself a saxon rhyme, as if to beat time
 to the revolving dance which her spindle was performing upon the floor.
 the hag raised her head as rebecca entered, and scowled at the fair jewess
 with the malignant envy with which old age and ugliness, when united with
 evil conditions, are apt to look upon youth and beauty.
 “thou must up and away, old house-cricket,” said one of the men; “our
 noble master commands it—thou must e'en leave this chamber to a
 fairer guest.”
 “ay,” grumbled the hag, “even thus is service requited. i have known when
 my bare word would have cast the best man-at-arms among ye out of saddle
 and out of service; and now must i up and away at the command of every
 groom such as thou.”
 “good dame urfried,” said the other man, “stand not to reason on it, but
 up and away. lords' hests must be listened to with a quick ear. thou hast
 had thy day, old dame, but thy sun has long been set. thou art now the
 very emblem of an old war-horse turned out on the barren heath—thou
 hast had thy paces in thy time, but now a broken amble is the best of them—come,
 amble off with thee.”
 “ill omens dog ye both!” said the old woman; “and a kennel be your
 burying-place! may the evil demon zernebock tear me limb from limb, if i
 leave my own cell ere i have spun out the hemp on my distaff!”
 “answer it to our lord, then, old housefiend,” said the man, and retired;
 leaving rebecca in company with the old woman, upon whose presence she had
 been thus unwillingly forced.
 “what devil's deed have they now in the wind?” said the old hag, murmuring
 to herself, yet from time to time casting a sidelong and malignant glance
 at rebecca; “but it is easy to guess—bright eyes, black locks, and a
 skin like paper, ere the priest stains it with his black unguent—ay,
 it is easy to guess why they send her to this lone turret, whence a shriek
 could no more be heard than at the depth of five hundred fathoms beneath
 the earth.—thou wilt have owls for thy neighbours, fair one; and
 their screams will be heard as far, and as much regarded, as thine own.
 outlandish, too,” she said, marking the dress and turban of rebecca—“what
 country art thou of?—a saracen? or an egyptian?—why dost not
 answer?—thou canst weep, canst thou not speak?”
 “be not angry, good mother,” said rebecca.
 “thou needst say no more,” replied urfried “men know a fox by the train,
 and a jewess by her tongue.”
 “for the sake of mercy,” said rebecca, “tell me what i am to expect as the
 conclusion of the violence which hath dragged me hither! is it my life
 they seek, to atone for my religion? i will lay it down cheerfully.”
 “thy life, minion?” answered the sibyl; “what would taking thy life
 pleasure them?—trust me, thy life is in no peril. such usage shalt
 thou have as was once thought good enough for a noble saxon maiden. and
 shall a jewess, like thee, repine because she hath no better? look at me—i
 was as young and twice as fair as thou, when front-de-boeuf, father of
 this reginald, and his normans, stormed this castle. my father and his
 seven sons defended their inheritance from story to story, from chamber to
 chamber—there was not a room, not a step of the stair, that was not
 slippery with their blood. they died—they died every man; and ere
 their bodies were cold, and ere their blood was dried, i had become the
 prey and the scorn of the conqueror!”
 “is there no help?—are there no means of escape?” said rebecca—“richly,
 richly would i requite thine aid.”
 “think not of it,” said the hag; “from hence there is no escape but
 through the gates of death; and it is late, late,” she added, shaking her
 grey head, “ere these open to us—yet it is comfort to think that we
 leave behind us on earth those who shall be wretched as ourselves. fare
 thee well, jewess!—jew or gentile, thy fate would be the same; for
 thou hast to do with them that have neither scruple nor pity. fare thee
 well, i say. my thread is spun out—thy task is yet to begin.”
 “stay! stay! for heaven's sake!” said rebecca; “stay, though it be to
 curse and to revile me—thy presence is yet some protection.”
 “the presence of the mother of god were no protection,” answered the old
 woman. “there she stands,” pointing to a rude image of the virgin mary,
 “see if she can avert the fate that awaits thee.”
 she left the room as she spoke, her features writhed into a sort of
 sneering laugh, which made them seem even more hideous than their habitual
 frown. she locked the door behind her, and rebecca might hear her curse
 every step for its steepness, as slowly and with difficulty she descended
 the turret-stair.
 rebecca was now to expect a fate even more dreadful than that of rowena;
 for what probability was there that either softness or ceremony would be
 used towards one of her oppressed race, whatever shadow of these might be
 preserved towards a saxon heiress? yet had the jewess this advantage, that
 she was better prepared by habits of thought, and by natural strength of
 mind, to encounter the dangers to which she was exposed. of a strong and
 observing character, even from her earliest years, the pomp and wealth
 which her father displayed within his walls, or which she witnessed in the
 houses of other wealthy hebrews, had not been able to blind her to the
 precarious circumstances under which they were enjoyed. like damocles at
 his celebrated banquet, rebecca perpetually beheld, amid that gorgeous
 display, the sword which was suspended over the heads of her people by a
 single hair. these reflections had tamed and brought down to a pitch of
 sounder judgment a temper, which, under other circumstances, might have
 waxed haughty, supercilious, and obstinate.
 from her father's example and injunctions, rebecca had learnt to bear
 herself courteously towards all who approached her. she could not indeed
 imitate his excess of subservience, because she was a stranger to the
 meanness of mind, and to the constant state of timid apprehension, by
 which it was dictated; but she bore herself with a proud humility, as if
 submitting to the evil circumstances in which she was placed as the
 daughter of a despised race, while she felt in her mind the consciousness
 that she was entitled to hold a higher rank from her merit, than the
 arbitrary despotism of religious prejudice permitted her to aspire to.
 thus prepared to expect adverse circumstances, she had acquired the
 firmness necessary for acting under them. her present situation required
 all her presence of mind, and she summoned it up accordingly.
 her first care was to inspect the apartment; but it afforded few hopes
 either of escape or protection. it contained neither secret passage nor
 trap-door, and unless where the door by which she had entered joined the
 main building, seemed to be circumscribed by the round exterior wall of
 the turret. the door had no inside bolt or bar. the single window opened
 upon an embattled space surmounting the turret, which gave rebecca, at
 first sight, some hopes of escaping; but she soon found it had no
 communication with any other part of the battlements, being an isolated
 bartisan, or balcony, secured, as usual, by a parapet, with embrasures, at
 which a few archers might be stationed for defending the turret, and
 flanking with their shot the wall of the castle on that side.
 there was therefore no hope but in passive fortitude, and in that strong
 reliance on heaven natural to great and generous characters. rebecca,
 however erroneously taught to interpret the promises of scripture to the
 chosen people of heaven, did not err in supposing the present to be their
 hour of trial, or in trusting that the children of zion would be one day
 called in with the fulness of the gentiles. in the meanwhile, all around
 her showed that their present state was that of punishment and probation,
 and that it was their especial duty to suffer without sinning. thus
 prepared to consider herself as the victim of misfortune, rebecca had
 early reflected upon her own state, and schooled her mind to meet the
 dangers which she had probably to encounter.
 the prisoner trembled, however, and changed colour, when a step was heard
 on the stair, and the door of the turret-chamber slowly opened, and a tall
 man, dressed as one of those banditti to whom they owed their misfortune,
 slowly entered, and shut the door behind him; his cap, pulled down upon
 his brows, concealed the upper part of his face, and he held his mantle in
 such a manner as to muffle the rest. in this guise, as if prepared for the
 execution of some deed, at the thought of which he was himself ashamed, he
 stood before the affrighted prisoner; yet, ruffian as his dress bespoke
 him, he seemed at a loss to express what purpose had brought him thither,
 so that rebecca, making an effort upon herself, had time to anticipate his
 explanation. she had already unclasped two costly bracelets and a collar,
 which she hastened to proffer to the supposed outlaw, concluding naturally
 that to gratify his avarice was to bespeak his favour.
 “take these,” she said, “good friend, and for god's sake be merciful to me
 and my aged father! these ornaments are of value, yet are they trifling to
 what he would bestow to obtain our dismissal from this castle, free and
 uninjured.”
 “fair flower of palestine,” replied the outlaw, “these pearls are orient,
 but they yield in whiteness to your teeth; the diamonds are brilliant, but
 they cannot match your eyes; and ever since i have taken up this wild
 trade, i have made a vow to prefer beauty to wealth.”
 “do not do yourself such wrong,” said rebecca; “take ransom, and have
 mercy!—gold will purchase you pleasure,—to misuse us, could
 only bring thee remorse. my father will willingly satiate thy utmost
 wishes; and if thou wilt act wisely, thou mayst purchase with our spoils
 thy restoration to civil society—mayst obtain pardon for past
 errors, and be placed beyond the necessity of committing more.”
 “it is well spoken,” replied the outlaw in french, finding it difficult
 probably to sustain, in saxon, a conversation which rebecca had opened in
 that language; “but know, bright lily of the vale of baca! that thy father
 is already in the hands of a powerful alchemist, who knows how to convert
 into gold and silver even the rusty bars of a dungeon grate. the venerable
 isaac is subjected to an alembic, which will distil from him all he holds
 dear, without any assistance from my requests or thy entreaty. the ransom
 must be paid by love and beauty, and in no other coin will i accept it.”
 “thou art no outlaw,” said rebecca, in the same language in which he
 addressed her; “no outlaw had refused such offers. no outlaw in this land
 uses the dialect in which thou hast spoken. thou art no outlaw, but a
 norman—a norman, noble perhaps in birth—o, be so in thy
 actions, and cast off this fearful mask of outrage and violence!”
 “and thou, who canst guess so truly,” said brian de bois-guilbert,
 dropping the mantle from his face, “art no true daughter of israel, but in
 all, save youth and beauty, a very witch of endor. i am not an outlaw,
 then, fair rose of sharon. and i am one who will be more prompt to hang
 thy neck and arms with pearls and diamonds, which so well become them,
 than to deprive thee of these ornaments.”
 “what wouldst thou have of me,” said rebecca, “if not my wealth?—we
 can have nought in common between us—you are a christian—i am
 a jewess.—our union were contrary to the laws, alike of the church
 and the synagogue.”
 “it were so, indeed,” replied the templar, laughing; “wed with a jewess?
 'despardieux!'—not if she were the queen of sheba! and know,
 besides, sweet daughter of zion, that were the most christian king to
 offer me his most christian daughter, with languedoc for a dowery, i could
 not wed her. it is against my vow to love any maiden, otherwise than 'par
 amours', as i will love thee. i am a templar. behold the cross of my holy
 order.”
 “darest thou appeal to it,” said rebecca, “on an occasion like the
 present?”
 “and if i do so,” said the templar, “it concerns not thee, who art no
 believer in the blessed sign of our salvation.”
 “i believe as my fathers taught,” said rebecca; “and may god forgive my
 belief if erroneous! but you, sir knight, what is yours, when you appeal
 without scruple to that which you deem most holy, even while you are about
 to transgress the most solemn of your vows as a knight, and as a man of
 religion?”
 “it is gravely and well preached, o daughter of sirach!” answered the
 templar; “but, gentle ecclesiastics, thy narrow jewish prejudices make
 thee blind to our high privilege. marriage were an enduring crime on the
 part of a templar; but what lesser folly i may practise, i shall speedily
 be absolved from at the next preceptory of our order. not the wisest of
 monarchs, not his father, whose examples you must needs allow are weighty,
 claimed wider privileges than we poor soldiers of the temple of zion have
 won by our zeal in its defence. the protectors of solomon's temple may
 claim license by the example of solomon.”
 “if thou readest the scripture,” said the jewess, “and the lives of the
 saints, only to justify thine own license and profligacy, thy crime is
 like that of him who extracts poison from the most healthful and necessary
 herbs.”
 the eyes of the templar flashed fire at this reproof—“hearken,” he
 said, “rebecca; i have hitherto spoken mildly to thee, but now my language
 shall be that of a conqueror. thou art the captive of my bow and spear—subject
 to my will by the laws of all nations; nor will i abate an inch of my
 right, or abstain from taking by violence what thou refusest to entreaty
 or necessity.”
 “stand back,” said rebecca—“stand back, and hear me ere thou
 offerest to commit a sin so deadly! my strength thou mayst indeed
 overpower for god made women weak, and trusted their defence to man's
 generosity. but i will proclaim thy villainy, templar, from one end of
 europe to the other. i will owe to the superstition of thy brethren what
 their compassion might refuse me, each preceptory—each chapter of
 thy order, shall learn, that, like a heretic, thou hast sinned with a
 jewess. those who tremble not at thy crime, will hold thee accursed for
 having so far dishonoured the cross thou wearest, as to follow a daughter
 of my people.”
 “thou art keen-witted, jewess,” replied the templar, well aware of the
 truth of what she spoke, and that the rules of his order condemned in the
 most positive manner, and under high penalties, such intrigues as he now
 prosecuted, and that, in some instances, even degradation had followed
 upon it—“thou art sharp-witted,” he said; “but loud must be thy
 voice of complaint, if it is heard beyond the iron walls of this castle;
 within these, murmurs, laments, appeals to justice, and screams for help,
 die alike silent away. one thing only can save thee, rebecca. submit to
 thy fate—embrace our religion, and thou shalt go forth in such
 state, that many a norman lady shall yield as well in pomp as in beauty to
 the favourite of the best lance among the defenders of the temple.”
 “submit to my fate!” said rebecca—“and, sacred heaven! to what fate?—embrace
 thy religion! and what religion can it be that harbours such a villain?—thou
 the best lance of the templars!—craven knight!—forsworn
 priest! i spit at thee, and i defy thee.—the god of abraham's
 promise hath opened an escape to his daughter—even from this abyss
 of infamy!”
 as she spoke, she threw open the latticed window which led to the
 bartisan, and in an instant after, stood on the very verge of the parapet,
 with not the slightest screen between her and the tremendous depth below.
 unprepared for such a desperate effort, for she had hitherto stood
 perfectly motionless, bois-guilbert had neither time to intercept nor to
 stop her. as he offered to advance, she exclaimed, “remain where thou art,
 proud templar, or at thy choice advance!—one foot nearer, and i
 plunge myself from the precipice; my body shall be crushed out of the very
 form of humanity upon the stones of that court-yard, ere it become the
 victim of thy brutality!”
 as she spoke this, she clasped her hands and extended them towards heaven,
 as if imploring mercy on her soul before she made the final plunge. the
 templar hesitated, and a resolution which had never yielded to pity or
 distress, gave way to his admiration of her fortitude. “come down,” he
 said, “rash girl!—i swear by earth, and sea, and sky, i will offer
 thee no offence.”
 “i will not trust thee, templar,” said rebecca; “thou hast taught me
 better how to estimate the virtues of thine order. the next preceptory
 would grant thee absolution for an oath, the keeping of which concerned
 nought but the honour or the dishonour of a miserable jewish maiden.”
 “you do me injustice,” exclaimed the templar fervently; “i swear to you by
 the name which i bear—by the cross on my bosom—by the sword on
 my side—by the ancient crest of my fathers do i swear, i will do
 thee no injury whatsoever! if not for thyself, yet for thy father's sake
 forbear! i will be his friend, and in this castle he will need a powerful
 one.”
 “alas!” said rebecca, “i know it but too well—dare i trust thee?”
 “may my arms be reversed, and my name dishonoured,” said brian de
 bois-guilbert, “if thou shalt have reason to complain of me! many a law,
 many a commandment have i broken, but my word never.”
 “i will then trust thee,” said rebecca, “thus far;” and she descended from
 the verge of the battlement, but remained standing close by one of the
 embrasures, or “machicolles”, as they were then called.—“here,” she
 said, “i take my stand. remain where thou art, and if thou shalt attempt
 to diminish by one step the distance now between us, thou shalt see that
 the jewish maiden will rather trust her soul with god, than her honour to
 the templar!”
 while rebecca spoke thus, her high and firm resolve, which corresponded so
 well with the expressive beauty of her countenance, gave to her looks,
 air, and manner, a dignity that seemed more than mortal. her glance
 quailed not, her cheek blanched not, for the fear of a fate so instant and
 so horrible; on the contrary, the thought that she had her fate at her
 command, and could escape at will from infamy to death, gave a yet deeper
 colour of carnation to her complexion, and a yet more brilliant fire to
 her eye. bois-guilbert, proud himself and high-spirited, thought he had
 never beheld beauty so animated and so commanding.
 “let there be peace between us, rebecca,” he said.
 “peace, if thou wilt,” answered rebecca—“peace—but with this
 space between.”
 “thou needst no longer fear me,” said bois-guilbert.
 “i fear thee not,” replied she; “thanks to him that reared this dizzy
 tower so high, that nought could fall from it and live—thanks to
 him, and to the god of israel!—i fear thee not.”
 “thou dost me injustice,” said the templar; “by earth, sea, and sky, thou
 dost me injustice! i am not naturally that which you have seen me, hard,
 selfish, and relentless. it was woman that taught me cruelty, and on woman
 therefore i have exercised it; but not upon such as thou. hear me, rebecca—never
 did knight take lance in his hand with a heart more devoted to the lady of
 his love than brian de bois-guilbert. she, the daughter of a petty baron,
 who boasted for all his domains but a ruinous tower, and an unproductive
 vineyard, and some few leagues of the barren landes of bourdeaux, her name
 was known wherever deeds of arms were done, known wider than that of many
 a lady's that had a county for a dowery.—yes,” he continued, pacing
 up and down the little platform, with an animation in which he seemed to
 lose all consciousness of rebecca's presence—“yes, my deeds, my
 danger, my blood, made the name of adelaide de montemare known from the
 court of castile to that of byzantium. and how was i requited?—when
 i returned with my dear-bought honours, purchased by toil and blood, i
 found her wedded to a gascon squire, whose name was never heard beyond the
 limits of his own paltry domain! truly did i love her, and bitterly did i
 revenge me of her broken faith! but my vengeance has recoiled on myself.
 since that day i have separated myself from life and its ties—my
 manhood must know no domestic home—must be soothed by no
 affectionate wife—my age must know no kindly hearth—my grave
 must be solitary, and no offspring must outlive me, to bear the ancient
 name of bois-guilbert. at the feet of my superior i have laid down the
 right of self-action—the privilege of independence. the templar, a
 serf in all but the name, can possess neither lands nor goods, and lives,
 moves, and breathes, but at the will and pleasure of another.”
 “alas!” said rebecca, “what advantages could compensate for such an
 absolute sacrifice?”
 “the power of vengeance, rebecca,” replied the templar, “and the prospects
 of ambition.”
 “an evil recompense,” said rebecca, “for the surrender of the rights which
 are dearest to humanity.”
 “say not so, maiden,” answered the templar; “revenge is a feast for the
 gods! and if they have reserved it, as priests tell us, to themselves, it
 is because they hold it an enjoyment too precious for the possession of
 mere mortals.—and ambition? it is a temptation which could disturb
 even the bliss of heaven itself.”—he paused a moment, and then
 added, “rebecca! she who could prefer death to dishonour, must have a
 proud and a powerful soul. mine thou must be!—nay, start not,” he
 added, “it must be with thine own consent, and on thine own terms. thou
 must consent to share with me hopes more extended than can be viewed from
 the throne of a monarch!—hear me ere you answer and judge ere you
 refuse.—the templar loses, as thou hast said, his social rights, his
 power of free agency, but he becomes a member and a limb of a mighty body,
 before which thrones already tremble,—even as the single drop of
 rain which mixes with the sea becomes an individual part of that
 resistless ocean, which undermines rocks and ingulfs royal armadas. such a
 swelling flood is that powerful league. of this mighty order i am no mean
 member, but already one of the chief commanders, and may well aspire one
 day to hold the batoon of grand master. the poor soldiers of the temple
 will not alone place their foot upon the necks of kings—a
 hemp-sandall'd monk can do that. our mailed step shall ascend their throne—our
 gauntlet shall wrench the sceptre from their gripe. not the reign of your
 vainly-expected messiah offers such power to your dispersed tribes as my
 ambition may aim at. i have sought but a kindred spirit to share it, and i
 have found such in thee.”
 “sayest thou this to one of my people?” answered rebecca. “bethink thee—”
 “answer me not,” said the templar, “by urging the difference of our
 creeds; within our secret conclaves we hold these nursery tales in
 derision. think not we long remained blind to the idiotical folly of our
 founders, who forswore every delight of life for the pleasure of dying
 martyrs by hunger, by thirst, and by pestilence, and by the swords of
 savages, while they vainly strove to defend a barren desert, valuable only
 in the eyes of superstition. our order soon adopted bolder and wider
 views, and found out a better indemnification for our sacrifices. our
 immense possessions in every kingdom of europe, our high military fame,
 which brings within our circle the flower of chivalry from every christian
 clime—these are dedicated to ends of which our pious founders little
 dreamed, and which are equally concealed from such weak spirits as embrace
 our order on the ancient principles, and whose superstition makes them our
 passive tools. but i will not further withdraw the veil of our mysteries.
 that bugle-sound announces something which may require my presence. think
 on what i have said.—farewell!—i do not say forgive me the
 violence i have threatened, for it was necessary to the display of thy
 character. gold can be only known by the application of the touchstone. i
 will soon return, and hold further conference with thee.”
 he re-entered the turret-chamber, and descended the stair, leaving rebecca
 scarcely more terrified at the prospect of the death to which she had been
 so lately exposed, than at the furious ambition of the bold bad man in
 whose power she found herself so unhappily placed. when she entered the
 turret-chamber, her first duty was to return thanks to the god of jacob
 for the protection which he had afforded her, and to implore its
 continuance for her and for her father. another name glided into her
 petition—it was that of the wounded christian, whom fate had placed
 in the hands of bloodthirsty men, his avowed enemies. her heart indeed
 checked her, as if, even in communing with the deity in prayer, she
 mingled in her devotions the recollection of one with whose fate hers
 could have no alliance—a nazarene, and an enemy to her faith. but
 the petition was already breathed, nor could all the narrow prejudices of
 her sect induce rebecca to wish it recalled.
 a damn'd cramp piece of penmanship as ever i saw in my life!
 —she stoops to conquer
 when the templar reached the hall of the castle, he found de bracy already
 there. “your love-suit,” said de bracy, “hath, i suppose, been disturbed,
 like mine, by this obstreperous summons. but you have come later and more
 reluctantly, and therefore i presume your interview has proved more
 agreeable than mine.”
 “has your suit, then, been unsuccessfully paid to the saxon heiress?” said
 the templar.
 “by the bones of thomas a becket,” answered de bracy, “the lady rowena
 must have heard that i cannot endure the sight of women's tears.”
 “away!” said the templar; “thou a leader of a free company, and regard a
 woman's tears! a few drops sprinkled on the torch of love, make the flame
 blaze the brighter.”
 “gramercy for the few drops of thy sprinkling,” replied de bracy; “but
 this damsel hath wept enough to extinguish a beacon-light. never was such
 wringing of hands and such overflowing of eyes, since the days of st
 niobe, of whom prior aymer told us.  a
 water-fiend hath possessed the fair saxon.”
 “a legion of fiends have occupied the bosom of the jewess,” replied the
 templar; “for, i think no single one, not even apollyon himself, could
 have inspired such indomitable pride and resolution.—but where is
 front-de-boeuf? that horn is sounded more and more clamorously.”
 “he is negotiating with the jew, i suppose,” replied de bracy, coolly;
 “probably the howls of isaac have drowned the blast of the bugle. thou
 mayst know, by experience, sir brian, that a jew parting with his
 treasures on such terms as our friend front-de-boeuf is like to offer,
 will raise a clamour loud enough to be heard over twenty horns and
 trumpets to boot. but we will make the vassals call him.”
 they were soon after joined by front-de-boeuf, who had been disturbed in
 his tyrannic cruelty in the manner with which the reader is acquainted,
 and had only tarried to give some necessary directions.
 “let us see the cause of this cursed clamour,” said front-de-boeuf—“here
 is a letter, and, if i mistake not, it is in saxon.”
 he looked at it, turning it round and round as if he had had really some
 hopes of coming at the meaning by inverting the position of the paper, and
 then handed it to de bracy.
 “it may be magic spells for aught i know,” said de bracy, who possessed
 his full proportion of the ignorance which characterised the chivalry of
 the period. “our chaplain attempted to teach me to write,” he said, “but
 all my letters were formed like spear-heads and sword-blades, and so the
 old shaveling gave up the task.”
 “give it me,” said the templar. “we have that of the priestly character,
 that we have some knowledge to enlighten our valour.”
 “let us profit by your most reverend knowledge, then,” said de bracy;
 “what says the scroll?”
 “it is a formal letter of defiance,” answered the templar; “but, by our
 lady of bethlehem, if it be not a foolish jest, it is the most
 extraordinary cartel that ever was sent across the drawbridge of a
 baronial castle.”
 “jest!” said front-de-boeuf, “i would gladly know who dares jest with me
 in such a matter!—read it, sir brian.”
 the templar accordingly read it as follows:—“i, wamba, the son of
 witless, jester to a noble and free-born man, cedric of rotherwood, called
 the saxon,—and i, gurth, the son of beowulph, the swineherd—-”
 “thou art mad,” said front-de-boeuf, interrupting the reader.
 “by st luke, it is so set down,” answered the templar. then resuming his
 task, he went on,—“i, gurth, the son of beowulph, swineherd unto the
 said cedric, with the assistance of our allies and confederates, who make
 common cause with us in this our feud, namely, the good knight, called for
 the present 'le noir faineant', and the stout yeoman, robert locksley,
 called cleave-the-wand. do you, reginald front de-boeuf, and your allies
 and accomplices whomsoever, to wit, that whereas you have, without cause
 given or feud declared, wrongfully and by mastery seized upon the person
 of our lord and master the said cedric; also upon the person of a noble
 and freeborn damsel, the lady rowena of hargottstandstede; also upon the
 person of a noble and freeborn man, athelstane of coningsburgh; also upon
 the persons of certain freeborn men, their 'cnichts'; also upon certain
 serfs, their born bondsmen; also upon a certain jew, named isaac of york,
 together with his daughter, a jewess, and certain horses and mules: which
 noble persons, with their 'cnichts' and slaves, and also with the horses
 and mules, jew and jewess beforesaid, were all in peace with his majesty,
 and travelling as liege subjects upon the king's highway; therefore we
 require and demand that the said noble persons, namely, cedric of
 rotherwood, rowena of hargottstandstede, athelstane of coningsburgh, with
 their servants, 'cnichts', and followers, also the horses and mules, jew
 and jewess aforesaid, together with all goods and chattels to them
 pertaining, be, within an hour after the delivery hereof, delivered to us,
 or to those whom we shall appoint to receive the same, and that untouched
 and unharmed in body and goods. failing of which, we do pronounce to you,
 that we hold ye as robbers and traitors, and will wager our bodies against
 ye in battle, siege, or otherwise, and do our utmost to your annoyance and
 destruction. wherefore may god have you in his keeping.—signed by us
 upon the eve of st withold's day, under the great trysting oak in the
 hart-hill walk, the above being written by a holy man, clerk to god, our
 lady, and st dunstan, in the chapel of copmanhurst.”
 at the bottom of this document was scrawled, in the first place, a rude
 sketch of a cock's head and comb, with a legend expressing this
 hieroglyphic to be the sign-manual of wamba, son of witless. under this
 respectable emblem stood a cross, stated to be the mark of gurth, the son
 of beowulph. then was written, in rough bold characters, the words, “le
 noir faineant”. and, to conclude the whole, an arrow, neatly enough drawn,
 was described as the mark of the yeoman locksley.
 the knights heard this uncommon document read from end to end, and then
 gazed upon each other in silent amazement, as being utterly at a loss to
 know what it could portend. de bracy was the first to break silence by an
 uncontrollable fit of laughter, wherein he was joined, though with more
 moderation, by the templar. front-de-boeuf, on the contrary, seemed
 impatient of their ill-timed jocularity.
 “i give you plain warning,” he said, “fair sirs, that you had better
 consult how to bear yourselves under these circumstances, than give way to
 such misplaced merriment.”
 “front-de-boeuf has not recovered his temper since his late overthrow,”
 said de bracy to the templar; “he is cowed at the very idea of a cartel,
 though it come but from a fool and a swineherd.”
 “by st michael,” answered front-de-boeuf, “i would thou couldst stand the
 whole brunt of this adventure thyself, de bracy. these fellows dared not
 have acted with such inconceivable impudence, had they not been supported
 by some strong bands. there are enough of outlaws in this forest to resent
 my protecting the deer. i did but tie one fellow, who was taken redhanded
 and in the fact, to the horns of a wild stag, which gored him to death in
 five minutes, and i had as many arrows shot at me as there were launched
 against yonder target at ashby.—here, fellow,” he added, to one of
 his attendants, “hast thou sent out to see by what force this precious
 challenge is to be supported?”
 “there are at least two hundred men assembled in the woods,” answered a
 squire who was in attendance.
 “here is a proper matter!” said front-de-boeuf, “this comes of lending you
 the use of my castle, that cannot manage your undertaking quietly, but you
 must bring this nest of hornets about my ears!”
 “of hornets?” said de bracy; “of stingless drones rather; a band of lazy
 knaves, who take to the wood, and destroy the venison rather than labour
 for their maintenance.”
 “stingless!” replied front-de-boeuf; “fork-headed shafts of a cloth-yard
 in length, and these shot within the breadth of a french crown, are sting
 enough.”
 “for shame, sir knight!” said the templar. “let us summon our people, and
 sally forth upon them. one knight—ay, one man-at-arms, were enough
 for twenty such peasants.”
 “enough, and too much,” said de bracy; “i should only be ashamed to couch
 lance against them.”
 “true,” answered front-de-boeuf; “were they black turks or moors, sir
 templar, or the craven peasants of france, most valiant de bracy; but
 these are english yeomen, over whom we shall have no advantage, save what
 we may derive from our arms and horses, which will avail us little in the
 glades of the forest. sally, saidst thou? we have scarce men enough to
 defend the castle. the best of mine are at york; so is all your band, de
 bracy; and we have scarcely twenty, besides the handful that were engaged
 in this mad business.”
 “thou dost not fear,” said the templar, “that they can assemble in force
 sufficient to attempt the castle?”
 “not so, sir brian,” answered front-de-boeuf. “these outlaws have indeed a
 daring captain; but without machines, scaling ladders, and experienced
 leaders, my castle may defy them.”
 “send to thy neighbours,” said the templar, “let them assemble their
 people, and come to the rescue of three knights, besieged by a jester and
 a swineherd in the baronial castle of reginald front-de-boeuf!”
 “you jest, sir knight,” answered the baron; “but to whom should i send?—malvoisin
 is by this time at york with his retainers, and so are my other allies;
 and so should i have been, but for this infernal enterprise.”
 “then send to york, and recall our people,” said de bracy. “if they abide
 the shaking of my standard, or the sight of my free companions, i will
 give them credit for the boldest outlaws ever bent bow in green-wood.”
 “and who shall bear such a message?” said front-de-boeuf; “they will beset
 every path, and rip the errand out of his bosom.—i have it,” he
 added, after pausing for a moment—“sir templar, thou canst write as
 well as read, and if we can but find the writing materials of my chaplain,
 who died a twelvemonth since in the midst of his christmas carousals—”
 “so please ye,” said the squire, who was still in attendance, “i think old
 urfried has them somewhere in keeping, for love of the confessor. he was
 the last man, i have heard her tell, who ever said aught to her, which man
 ought in courtesy to address to maid or matron.”
 “go, search them out, engelred,” said front-de-boeuf; “and then, sir
 templar, thou shalt return an answer to this bold challenge.”
 “i would rather do it at the sword's point than at that of the pen,” said
 bois-guilbert; “but be it as you will.”
 he sat down accordingly, and indited, in the french language, an epistle
 of the following tenor:—“sir reginald front-de-boeuf, with his noble
 and knightly allies and confederates, receive no defiances at the hands of
 slaves, bondsmen, or fugitives. if the person calling himself the black
 knight have indeed a claim to the honours of chivalry, he ought to know
 that he stands degraded by his present association, and has no right to
 ask reckoning at the hands of good men of noble blood. touching the
 prisoners we have made, we do in christian charity require you to send a
 man of religion, to receive their confession, and reconcile them with god;
 since it is our fixed intention to execute them this morning before noon,
 so that their heads being placed on the battlements, shall show to all men
 how lightly we esteem those who have bestirred themselves in their rescue.
 wherefore, as above, we require you to send a priest to reconcile them to
 god, in doing which you shall render them the last earthly service.”
 this letter being folded, was delivered to the squire, and by him to the
 messenger who waited without, as the answer to that which he had brought.
 the yeoman having thus accomplished his mission, returned to the
 head-quarters of the allies, which were for the present established under
 a venerable oak-tree, about three arrow-flights distant from the castle.
 here wamba and gurth, with their allies the black knight and locksley, and
 the jovial hermit, awaited with impatience an answer to their summons.
 around, and at a distance from them, were seen many a bold yeoman, whose
 silvan dress and weatherbeaten countenances showed the ordinary nature of
 their occupation. more than two hundred had already assembled, and others
 were fast coming in. those whom they obeyed as leaders were only
 distinguished from the others by a feather in the cap, their dress, arms,
 and equipments being in all other respects the same.
 besides these bands, a less orderly and a worse armed force, consisting of
 the saxon inhabitants of the neighbouring township, as well as many
 bondsmen and servants from cedric's extensive estate, had already arrived,
 for the purpose of assisting in his rescue. few of these were armed
 otherwise than with such rustic weapons as necessity sometimes converts to
 military purposes. boar-spears, scythes, flails, and the like, were their
 chief arms; for the normans, with the usual policy of conquerors, were
 jealous of permitting to the vanquished saxons the possession or the use
 of swords and spears. these circumstances rendered the assistance of the
 saxons far from being so formidable to the besieged, as the strength of
 the men themselves, their superior numbers, and the animation inspired by
 a just cause, might otherwise well have made them. it was to the leaders
 of this motley army that the letter of the templar was now delivered.
 reference was at first made to the chaplain for an exposition of its
 contents.
 “by the crook of st dunstan,” said that worthy ecclesiastic, “which hath
 brought more sheep within the sheepfold than the crook of e'er another
 saint in paradise, i swear that i cannot expound unto you this jargon,
 which, whether it be french or arabic, is beyond my guess.”
 he then gave the letter to gurth, who shook his head gruffly, and passed
 it to wamba. the jester looked at each of the four corners of the paper
 with such a grin of affected intelligence as a monkey is apt to assume
 upon similar occasions, then cut a caper, and gave the letter to locksley.
 “if the long letters were bows, and the short letters broad arrows, i
 might know something of the matter,” said the brave yeoman; “but as the
 matter stands, the meaning is as safe, for me, as the stag that's at
 twelve miles distance.”
 “i must be clerk, then,” said the black knight; and taking the letter from
 locksley, he first read it over to himself, and then explained the meaning
 in saxon to his confederates.
 “execute the noble cedric!” exclaimed wamba; “by the rood, thou must be
 mistaken, sir knight.”
 “not i, my worthy friend,” replied the knight, “i have explained the words
 as they are here set down.”
 “then, by st thomas of canterbury,” replied gurth, “we will have the
 castle, should we tear it down with our hands!”
 “we have nothing else to tear it with,” replied wamba; “but mine are
 scarce fit to make mammocks of freestone and mortar.”
 “'tis but a contrivance to gain time,” said locksley; “they dare not do a
 deed for which i could exact a fearful penalty.”
 “i would,” said the black knight, “there were some one among us who could
 obtain admission into the castle, and discover how the case stands with
 the besieged. methinks, as they require a confessor to be sent, this holy
 hermit might at once exercise his pious vocation, and procure us the
 information we desire.”
 “a plague on thee, and thy advice!” said the pious hermit; “i tell thee,
 sir slothful knight, that when i doff my friar's frock, my priesthood, my
 sanctity, my very latin, are put off along with it; and when in my green
 jerkin, i can better kill twenty deer than confess one christian.”
 “i fear,” said the black knight, “i fear greatly, there is no one here
 that is qualified to take upon him, for the nonce, this same character of
 father confessor?”
 all looked on each other, and were silent.
 “i see,” said wamba, after a short pause, “that the fool must be still the
 fool, and put his neck in the venture which wise men shrink from. you must
 know, my dear cousins and countrymen, that i wore russet before i wore
 motley, and was bred to be a friar, until a brain-fever came upon me and
 left me just wit enough to be a fool. i trust, with the assistance of the
 good hermit's frock, together with the priesthood, sanctity, and learning
 which are stitched into the cowl of it, i shall be found qualified to
 administer both worldly and ghostly comfort to our worthy master cedric,
 and his companions in adversity.”
 “hath he sense enough, thinkst thou?” said the black knight, addressing
 gurth.
 “i know not,” said gurth; “but if he hath not, it will be the first time
 he hath wanted wit to turn his folly to account.”
 “on with the frock, then, good fellow,” quoth the knight, “and let thy
 master send us an account of their situation within the castle. their
 numbers must be few, and it is five to one they may be accessible by a
 sudden and bold attack. time wears—away with thee.”
 “and, in the meantime,” said locksley, “we will beset the place so
 closely, that not so much as a fly shall carry news from thence. so that,
 my good friend,” he continued, addressing wamba, “thou mayst assure these
 tyrants, that whatever violence they exercise on the persons of their
 prisoners, shall be most severely repaid upon their own.”
 “pax vobiscum,” said wamba, who was now muffled in his religious disguise.
 and so saying he imitated the solemn and stately deportment of a friar,
 and departed to execute his mission.
 the hottest horse will oft be cool,
 the dullest will show fire;
 the friar will often play the fool,
 the fool will play the friar.
 —old song
 when the jester, arrayed in the cowl and frock of the hermit, and having
 his knotted cord twisted round his middle, stood before the portal of the
 castle of front-de-boeuf, the warder demanded of him his name and errand.
 “pax vobiscum,” answered the jester, “i am a poor brother of the order of
 st francis, who come hither to do my office to certain unhappy prisoners
 now secured within this castle.”
 “thou art a bold friar,” said the warder, “to come hither, where, saving
 our own drunken confessor, a cock of thy feather hath not crowed these
 twenty years.”
 “yet i pray thee, do mine errand to the lord of the castle,” answered the
 pretended friar; “trust me it will find good acceptance with him, and the
 cock shall crow, that the whole castle shall hear him.”
 “gramercy,” said the warder; “but if i come to shame for leaving my post
 upon thine errand, i will try whether a friar's grey gown be proof against
 a grey-goose shaft.”
 with this threat he left his turret, and carried to the hall of the castle
 his unwonted intelligence, that a holy friar stood before the gate and
 demanded instant admission. with no small wonder he received his master's
 commands to admit the holy man immediately; and, having previously manned
 the entrance to guard against surprise, he obeyed, without further
 scruple, the commands which he had received. the harebrained self-conceit
 which had emboldened wamba to undertake this dangerous office, was scarce
 sufficient to support him when he found himself in the presence of a man
 so dreadful, and so much dreaded, as reginald front-de-boeuf, and he
 brought out his “pax vobiscum”, to which he, in a good measure, trusted
 for supporting his character, with more anxiety and hesitation than had
 hitherto accompanied it. but front-de-boeuf was accustomed to see men of
 all ranks tremble in his presence, so that the timidity of the supposed
 father did not give him any cause of suspicion.
 “who and whence art thou, priest?” said he.
 “'pax vobiscum',” reiterated the jester, “i am a poor servant of st
 francis, who, travelling through this wilderness, have fallen among
 thieves, (as scripture hath it,) 'quidam viator incidit in latrones',
 which thieves have sent me unto this castle in order to do my ghostly
 office on two persons condemned by your honourable justice.”
 “ay, right,” answered front-de-boeuf; “and canst thou tell me, holy
 father, the number of those banditti?”
 “gallant sir,” answered the jester, “'nomen illis legio', their name is
 legion.”
 “tell me in plain terms what numbers there are, or, priest, thy cloak and
 cord will ill protect thee.”
 “alas!” said the supposed friar, “'cor meum eructavit', that is to say, i
 was like to burst with fear! but i conceive they may be—what of
 yeomen—what of commons, at least five hundred men.”
 “what!” said the templar, who came into the hall that moment, “muster the
 wasps so thick here? it is time to stifle such a mischievous brood.” then
 taking front-de-boeuf aside “knowest thou the priest?”
 “he is a stranger from a distant convent,” said front-de-boeuf; “i know
 him not.”
 “then trust him not with thy purpose in words,” answered the templar. “let
 him carry a written order to de bracy's company of free companions, to
 repair instantly to their master's aid. in the meantime, and that the
 shaveling may suspect nothing, permit him to go freely about his task of
 preparing these saxon hogs for the slaughter-house.”
 “it shall be so,” said front-de-boeuf. and he forthwith appointed a
 domestic to conduct wamba to the apartment where cedric and athelstane
 were confined.
 the impatience of cedric had been rather enhanced than diminished by his
 confinement. he walked from one end of the hall to the other, with the
 attitude of one who advances to charge an enemy, or to storm the breach of
 a beleaguered place, sometimes ejaculating to himself, sometimes
 addressing athelstane, who stoutly and stoically awaited the issue of the
 adventure, digesting, in the meantime, with great composure, the liberal
 meal which he had made at noon, and not greatly interesting himself about
 the duration of his captivity, which he concluded, would, like all earthly
 evils, find an end in heaven's good time.
 “'pax vobiscum',” said the jester, entering the apartment; “the blessing
 of st dunstan, st dennis, st duthoc, and all other saints whatsoever, be
 upon ye and about ye.”
 “enter freely,” answered cedric to the supposed friar; “with what intent
 art thou come hither?”
 “to bid you prepare yourselves for death,” answered the jester.
 “it is impossible!” replied cedric, starting. “fearless and wicked as they
 are, they dare not attempt such open and gratuitous cruelty!”
 “alas!” said the jester, “to restrain them by their sense of humanity, is
 the same as to stop a runaway horse with a bridle of silk thread. bethink
 thee, therefore, noble cedric, and you also, gallant athelstane, what
 crimes you have committed in the flesh; for this very day will ye be
 called to answer at a higher tribunal.”
 “hearest thou this, athelstane?” said cedric; “we must rouse up our hearts
 to this last action, since better it is we should die like men, than live
 like slaves.”
 “i am ready,” answered athelstane, “to stand the worst of their malice,
 and shall walk to my death with as much composure as ever i did to my
 dinner.”
 “let us then unto our holy gear, father,” said cedric.
 “wait yet a moment, good uncle,” said the jester, in his natural tone;
 “better look long before you leap in the dark.”
 “by my faith,” said cedric, “i should know that voice!”
 “it is that of your trusty slave and jester,” answered wamba, throwing
 back his cowl. “had you taken a fool's advice formerly, you would not have
 been here at all. take a fool's advice now, and you will not be here
 long.”
 “how mean'st thou, knave?” answered the saxon.
 “even thus,” replied wamba; “take thou this frock and cord, which are all
 the orders i ever had, and march quietly out of the castle, leaving me
 your cloak and girdle to take the long leap in thy stead.”
 “leave thee in my stead!” said cedric, astonished at the proposal; “why,
 they would hang thee, my poor knave.”
 “e'en let them do as they are permitted,” said wamba; “i trust—no
 disparagement to your birth—that the son of witless may hang in a
 chain with as much gravity as the chain hung upon his ancestor the
 alderman.”
 “well, wamba,” answered cedric, “for one thing will i grant thy request.
 and that is, if thou wilt make the exchange of garments with lord
 athelstane instead of me.”
 “no, by st dunstan,” answered wamba; “there were little reason in that.
 good right there is, that the son of witless should suffer to save the son
 of hereward; but little wisdom there were in his dying for the benefit of
 one whose fathers were strangers to his.”
 “villain,” said cedric, “the fathers of athelstane were monarchs of
 england!”
 “they might be whomsoever they pleased,” replied wamba; “but my neck
 stands too straight upon my shoulders to have it twisted for their sake.
 wherefore, good my master, either take my proffer yourself, or suffer me
 to leave this dungeon as free as i entered.”
 “let the old tree wither,” continued cedric, “so the stately hope of the
 forest be preserved. save the noble athelstane, my trusty wamba! it is the
 duty of each who has saxon blood in his veins. thou and i will abide
 together the utmost rage of our injurious oppressors, while he, free and
 safe, shall arouse the awakened spirits of our countrymen to avenge us.”
 “not so, father cedric,” said athelstane, grasping his hand,—for,
 when roused to think or act, his deeds and sentiments were not unbecoming
 his high race—“not so,” he continued; “i would rather remain in this
 hall a week without food save the prisoner's stinted loaf, or drink save
 the prisoner's measure of water, than embrace the opportunity to escape
 which the slave's untaught kindness has purveyed for his master.”
 “you are called wise men, sirs,” said the jester, “and i a crazed fool;
 but, uncle cedric, and cousin athelstane, the fool shall decide this
 controversy for ye, and save ye the trouble of straining courtesies any
 farther. i am like john-a-duck's mare, that will let no man mount her but
 john-a-duck. i came to save my master, and if he will not consent—basta—i
 can but go away home again. kind service cannot be chucked from hand to
 hand like a shuttlecock or stool-ball. i'll hang for no man but my own
 born master.”
 “go, then, noble cedric,” said athelstane, “neglect not this opportunity.
 your presence without may encourage friends to our rescue—your
 remaining here would ruin us all.”
 “and is there any prospect, then, of rescue from without?” said cedric,
 looking to the jester.
 “prospect, indeed!” echoed wamba; “let me tell you, when you fill my
 cloak, you are wrapped in a general's cassock. five hundred men are there
 without, and i was this morning one of the chief leaders. my fool's cap
 was a casque, and my bauble a truncheon. well, we shall see what good they
 will make by exchanging a fool for a wise man. truly, i fear they will
 lose in valour what they may gain in discretion. and so farewell, master,
 and be kind to poor gurth and his dog fangs; and let my cockscomb hang in
 the hall at rotherwood, in memory that i flung away my life for my master,
 like a faithful—-fool.”
 the last word came out with a sort of double expression, betwixt jest and
 earnest. the tears stood in cedric's eyes.
 “thy memory shall be preserved,” he said, “while fidelity and affection
 have honour upon earth! but that i trust i shall find the means of saving
 rowena, and thee, athelstane, and thee, also, my poor wamba, thou shouldst
 not overbear me in this matter.”
 the exchange of dress was now accomplished, when a sudden doubt struck
 cedric.
 “i know no language,” he said, “but my own, and a few words of their
 mincing norman. how shall i bear myself like a reverend brother?”
 “the spell lies in two words,” replied wamba—“'pax vobiscum' will
 answer all queries. if you go or come, eat or drink, bless or ban, 'pax
 vobiscum' carries you through it all. it is as useful to a friar as a
 broomstick to a witch, or a wand to a conjurer. speak it but thus, in a
 deep grave tone,—'pax vobiscum!'—it is irresistible—watch
 and ward, knight and squire, foot and horse, it acts as a charm upon them
 all. i think, if they bring me out to be hanged to-morrow, as is much to
 be doubted they may, i will try its weight upon the finisher of the
 sentence.”
 “if such prove the case,” said the master, “my religious orders are soon
 taken—'pax vobiscum'. i trust i shall remember the pass-word.—noble
 athelstane, farewell; and farewell, my poor boy, whose heart might make
 amends for a weaker head—i will save you, or return and die with
 you. the royal blood of our saxon kings shall not be spilt while mine
 beats in my veins; nor shall one hair fall from the head of the kind knave
 who risked himself for his master, if cedric's peril can prevent it.—farewell.”
 “farewell, noble cedric,” said athelstane; “remember it is the true part
 of a friar to accept refreshment, if you are offered any.”
 “farewell, uncle,” added wamba; “and remember 'pax vobiscum'.”
 thus exhorted, cedric sallied forth upon his expedition; and it was not
 long ere he had occasion to try the force of that spell which his jester
 had recommended as omnipotent. in a low-arched and dusky passage, by which
 he endeavoured to work his way to the hall of the castle, he was
 interrupted by a female form.
 “'pax vobiscum!'” said the pseudo friar, and was endeavouring to hurry
 past, when a soft voice replied, “'et vobis—quaso, domine
 reverendissime, pro misericordia vestra'.”
 “i am somewhat deaf,” replied cedric, in good saxon, and at the same time
 muttered to himself, “a curse on the fool and his 'pax vobiscum!' i have
 lost my javelin at the first cast.”
 it was, however, no unusual thing for a priest of those days to be deaf of
 his latin ear, and this the person who now addressed cedric knew full
 well.
 “i pray you of dear love, reverend father,” she replied in his own
 language, “that you will deign to visit with your ghostly comfort a
 wounded prisoner of this castle, and have such compassion upon him and us
 as thy holy office teaches—never shall good deed so highly advantage
 thy convent.”
 “daughter,” answered cedric, much embarrassed, “my time in this castle
 will not permit me to exercise the duties of mine office—i must
 presently forth—there is life and death upon my speed.”
 “yet, father, let me entreat you by the vow you have taken on you,”
 replied the suppliant, “not to leave the oppressed and endangered without
 counsel or succour.”
 “may the fiend fly away with me, and leave me in ifrin with the souls of
 odin and of thor!” answered cedric impatiently, and would probably have
 proceeded in the same tone of total departure from his spiritual
 character, when the colloquy was interrupted by the harsh voice of
 urfried, the old crone of the turret.
 “how, minion,” said she to the female speaker, “is this the manner in
 which you requite the kindness which permitted thee to leave thy
 prison-cell yonder?—puttest thou the reverend man to use ungracious
 language to free himself from the importunities of a jewess?”
 “a jewess!” said cedric, availing himself of the information to get clear
 of their interruption,—“let me pass, woman! stop me not at your
 peril. i am fresh from my holy office, and would avoid pollution.”
 “come this way, father,” said the old hag, “thou art a stranger in this
 castle, and canst not leave it without a guide. come hither, for i would
 speak with thee.—and you, daughter of an accursed race, go to the
 sick man's chamber, and tend him until my return; and woe betide you if
 you again quit it without my permission!”
 rebecca retreated. her importunities had prevailed upon urfried to suffer
 her to quit the turret, and urfried had employed her services where she
 herself would most gladly have paid them, by the bedside of the wounded
 ivanhoe. with an understanding awake to their dangerous situation, and
 prompt to avail herself of each means of safety which occurred, rebecca
 had hoped something from the presence of a man of religion, who, she
 learned from urfried, had penetrated into this godless castle. she watched
 the return of the supposed ecclesiastic, with the purpose of addressing
 him, and interesting him in favour of the prisoners; with what imperfect
 success the reader has been just acquainted.
 fond wretch! and what canst thou relate,
 but deeds of sorrow, shame, and sin?
 thy deeds are proved—thou know'st thy fate;
 but come, thy tale—begin—begin.
 but i have griefs of other kind,
 troubles and sorrows more severe;
 give me to ease my tortured mind,
 lend to my woes a patient ear;
 and let me, if i may not find
 a friend to help—find one to hear.
 —crabbe's hall of justice
 when urfried had with clamours and menaces driven rebecca back to the
 apartment from which she had sallied, she proceeded to conduct the
 unwilling cedric into a small apartment, the door of which she heedfully
 secured. then fetching from a cupboard a stoup of wine and two flagons,
 she placed them on the table, and said in a tone rather asserting a fact
 than asking a question, “thou art saxon, father—deny it not,” she
 continued, observing that cedric hastened not to reply; “the sounds of my
 native language are sweet to mine ears, though seldom heard save from the
 tongues of the wretched and degraded serfs on whom the proud normans
 impose the meanest drudgery of this dwelling. thou art a saxon, father—a
 saxon, and, save as thou art a servant of god, a freeman.—thine
 accents are sweet in mine ear.”
 “do not saxon priests visit this castle, then?” replied cedric; “it were,
 methinks, their duty to comfort the outcast and oppressed children of the
 soil.”
 “they come not—or if they come, they better love to revel at the
 boards of their conquerors,” answered urfried, “than to hear the groans of
 their countrymen—so, at least, report speaks of them—of myself
 i can say little. this castle, for ten years, has opened to no priest save
 the debauched norman chaplain who partook the nightly revels of
 front-de-boeuf, and he has been long gone to render an account of his
 stewardship.—but thou art a saxon—a saxon priest, and i have
 one question to ask of thee.”
 “i am a saxon,” answered cedric, “but unworthy, surely, of the name of
 priest. let me begone on my way—i swear i will return, or send one
 of our fathers more worthy to hear your confession.”
 “stay yet a while,” said urfried; “the accents of the voice which thou
 hearest now will soon be choked with the cold earth, and i would not
 descend to it like the beast i have lived. but wine must give me strength
 to tell the horrors of my tale.” she poured out a cup, and drank it with a
 frightful avidity, which seemed desirous of draining the last drop in the
 goblet. “it stupifies,” she said, looking upwards as she finished her
 drought, “but it cannot cheer—partake it, father, if you would hear
 my tale without sinking down upon the pavement.” cedric would have avoided
 pledging her in this ominous conviviality, but the sign which she made to
 him expressed impatience and despair. he complied with her request, and
 answered her challenge in a large wine-cup; she then proceeded with her
 story, as if appeased by his complaisance.
 “i was not born,” she said, “father, the wretch that thou now seest me. i
 was free, was happy, was honoured, loved, and was beloved. i am now a
 slave, miserable and degraded—the sport of my masters' passions
 while i had yet beauty—the object of their contempt, scorn, and
 hatred, since it has passed away. dost thou wonder, father, that i should
 hate mankind, and, above all, the race that has wrought this change in me?
 can the wrinkled decrepit hag before thee, whose wrath must vent itself in
 impotent curses, forget she was once the daughter of the noble thane of
 torquilstone, before whose frown a thousand vassals trembled?”
 “thou the daughter of torquil wolfganger!” said cedric, receding as he
 spoke; “thou—thou—the daughter of that noble saxon, my
 father's friend and companion in arms!”
 “thy father's friend!” echoed urfried; “then cedric called the saxon
 stands before me, for the noble hereward of rotherwood had but one son,
 whose name is well known among his countrymen. but if thou art cedric of
 rotherwood, why this religious dress?—hast thou too despaired of
 saving thy country, and sought refuge from oppression in the shade of the
 convent?”
 “it matters not who i am,” said cedric; “proceed, unhappy woman, with thy
 tale of horror and guilt!—guilt there must be—there is guilt
 even in thy living to tell it.”
 “there is—there is,” answered the wretched woman, “deep, black,
 damning guilt,—guilt, that lies like a load at my breast—guilt,
 that all the penitential fires of hereafter cannot cleanse.—yes, in
 these halls, stained with the noble and pure blood of my father and my
 brethren—in these very halls, to have lived the paramour of their
 murderer, the slave at once and the partaker of his pleasures, was to
 render every breath which i drew of vital air, a crime and a curse.”
 “wretched woman!” exclaimed cedric. “and while the friends of thy father—while
 each true saxon heart, as it breathed a requiem for his soul, and those of
 his valiant sons, forgot not in their prayers the murdered ulrica—while
 all mourned and honoured the dead, thou hast lived to merit our hate and
 execration—lived to unite thyself with the vile tyrant who murdered
 thy nearest and dearest—who shed the blood of infancy, rather than a
 male of the noble house of torquil wolfganger should survive—with
 him hast thou lived to unite thyself, and in the hands of lawless love!”
 “in lawless hands, indeed, but not in those of love!” answered the hag;
 “love will sooner visit the regions of eternal doom, than those unhallowed
 vaults.—no, with that at least i cannot reproach myself—hatred
 to front-de-boeuf and his race governed my soul most deeply, even in the
 hour of his guilty endearments.”
 “you hated him, and yet you lived,” replied cedric; “wretch! was there no
 poniard—no knife—no bodkin!—well was it for thee, since
 thou didst prize such an existence, that the secrets of a norman castle
 are like those of the grave. for had i but dreamed of the daughter of
 torquil living in foul communion with the murderer of her father, the
 sword of a true saxon had found thee out even in the arms of thy
 paramour!”
 “wouldst thou indeed have done this justice to the name of torquil?” said
 ulrica, for we may now lay aside her assumed name of urfried; “thou art
 then the true saxon report speaks thee! for even within these accursed
 walls, where, as thou well sayest, guilt shrouds itself in inscrutable
 mystery, even there has the name of cedric been sounded—and i,
 wretched and degraded, have rejoiced to think that there yet breathed an
 avenger of our unhappy nation.—i also have had my hours of vengeance—i
 have fomented the quarrels of our foes, and heated drunken revelry into
 murderous broil—i have seen their blood flow—i have heard
 their dying groans!—look on me, cedric—are there not still
 left on this foul and faded face some traces of the features of torquil?”
 “ask me not of them, ulrica,” replied cedric, in a tone of grief mixed
 with abhorrence; “these traces form such a resemblance as arises from the
 graves of the dead, when a fiend has animated the lifeless corpse.”
 “be it so,” answered ulrica; “yet wore these fiendish features the mask of
 a spirit of light when they were able to set at variance the elder
 front-de-boeuf and his son reginald! the darkness of hell should hide what
 followed, but revenge must lift the veil, and darkly intimate what it
 would raise the dead to speak aloud. long had the smouldering fire of
 discord glowed between the tyrant father and his savage son—long had
 i nursed, in secret, the unnatural hatred—it blazed forth in an hour
 of drunken wassail, and at his own board fell my oppressor by the hand of
 his own son—such are the secrets these vaults conceal!—rend
 asunder, ye accursed arches,” she added, looking up towards the roof, “and
 bury in your fall all who are conscious of the hideous mystery!”
 “and thou, creature of guilt and misery,” said cedric, “what became thy
 lot on the death of thy ravisher?”
 “guess it, but ask it not.—here—here i dwelt, till age,
 premature age, has stamped its ghastly features on my countenance—scorned
 and insulted where i was once obeyed, and compelled to bound the revenge
 which had once such ample scope, to the efforts of petty malice of a
 discontented menial, or the vain or unheeded curses of an impotent hag—condemned
 to hear from my lonely turret the sounds of revelry in which i once
 partook, or the shrieks and groans of new victims of oppression.”
 “ulrica,” said cedric, “with a heart which still, i fear, regrets the lost
 reward of thy crimes, as much as the deeds by which thou didst acquire
 that meed, how didst thou dare to address thee to one who wears this robe?
 consider, unhappy woman, what could the sainted edward himself do for
 thee, were he here in bodily presence? the royal confessor was endowed by
 heaven with power to cleanse the ulcers of the body, but only god himself
 can cure the leprosy of the soul.”
 “yet, turn not from me, stern prophet of wrath,” she exclaimed, “but tell
 me, if thou canst, in what shall terminate these new and awful feelings
 that burst on my solitude—why do deeds, long since done, rise before
 me in new and irresistible horrors? what fate is prepared beyond the grave
 for her, to whom god has assigned on earth a lot of such unspeakable
 wretchedness? better had i turn to woden, hertha, and zernebock—to
 mista, and to skogula, the gods of our yet unbaptized ancestors, than
 endure the dreadful anticipations which have of late haunted my waking and
 my sleeping hours!”
 “i am no priest,” said cedric, turning with disgust from this miserable
 picture of guilt, wretchedness, and despair; “i am no priest, though i
 wear a priest's garment.”
 “priest or layman,” answered ulrica, “thou art the first i have seen for
 twenty years, by whom god was feared or man regarded; and dost thou bid me
 despair?”
 “i bid thee repent,” said cedric. “seek to prayer and penance, and mayest
 thou find acceptance! but i cannot, i will not, longer abide with thee.”
 “stay yet a moment!” said ulrica; “leave me not now, son of my father's
 friend, lest the demon who has governed my life should tempt me to avenge
 myself of thy hard-hearted scorn—thinkest thou, if front-de-boeuf
 found cedric the saxon in his castle, in such a disguise, that thy life
 would be a long one?—already his eye has been upon thee like a
 falcon on his prey.”
 “and be it so,” said cedric; “and let him tear me with beak and talons,
 ere my tongue say one word which my heart doth not warrant. i will die a
 saxon—true in word, open in deed—i bid thee avaunt!—touch
 me not, stay me not!—the sight of front-de-boeuf himself is less
 odious to me than thou, degraded and degenerate as thou art.”
 “be it so,” said ulrica, no longer interrupting him; “go thy way, and
 forget, in the insolence of thy superority, that the wretch before thee is
 the daughter of thy father's friend.—go thy way—if i am
 separated from mankind by my sufferings—separated from those whose
 aid i might most justly expect—not less will i be separated from
 them in my revenge!—no man shall aid me, but the ears of all men
 shall tingle to hear of the deed which i shall dare to do!—farewell!—thy
 scorn has burst the last tie which seemed yet to unite me to my kind—a
 thought that my woes might claim the compassion of my people.”
 “ulrica,” said cedric, softened by this appeal, “hast thou borne up and
 endured to live through so much guilt and so much misery, and wilt thou
 now yield to despair when thine eyes are opened to thy crimes, and when
 repentance were thy fitter occupation?”
 “cedric,” answered ulrica, “thou little knowest the human heart. to act as
 i have acted, to think as i have thought, requires the maddening love of
 pleasure, mingled with the keen appetite of revenge, the proud
 consciousness of power; droughts too intoxicating for the human heart to
 bear, and yet retain the power to prevent. their force has long passed
 away—age has no pleasures, wrinkles have no influence, revenge
 itself dies away in impotent curses. then comes remorse, with all its
 vipers, mixed with vain regrets for the past, and despair for the future!—then,
 when all other strong impulses have ceased, we become like the fiends in
 hell, who may feel remorse, but never repentance.—but thy words have
 awakened a new soul within me—well hast thou said, all is possible
 for those who dare to die!—thou hast shown me the means of revenge,
 and be assured i will embrace them. it has hitherto shared this wasted
 bosom with other and with rival passions—henceforward it shall
 possess me wholly, and thou thyself shalt say, that, whatever was the life
 of ulrica, her death well became the daughter of the noble torquil. there
 is a force without beleaguering this accursed castle—hasten to lead
 them to the attack, and when thou shalt see a red flag wave from the
 turret on the eastern angle of the donjon, press the normans hard—they
 will then have enough to do within, and you may win the wall in spite both
 of bow and mangonel.—begone, i pray thee—follow thine own
 fate, and leave me to mine.”
 cedric would have enquired farther into the purpose which she thus darkly
 announced, but the stern voice of front-de-boeuf was heard, exclaiming,
 “where tarries this loitering priest? by the scallop-shell of compostella,
 i will make a martyr of him, if he loiters here to hatch treason among my
 domestics!”
 “what a true prophet,” said ulrica, “is an evil conscience! but heed him
 not—out and to thy people—cry your saxon onslaught, and let
 them sing their war-song of rollo, if they will; vengeance shall bear a
 burden to it.”
 as she thus spoke, she vanished through a private door, and reginald
 front-de-boeuf entered the apartment. cedric, with some difficulty,
 compelled himself to make obeisance to the haughty baron, who returned his
 courtesy with a slight inclination of the head.
 “thy penitents, father, have made a long shrift—it is the better for
 them, since it is the last they shall ever make. hast thou prepared them
 for death?”
 “i found them,” said cedric, in such french as he could command,
 “expecting the worst, from the moment they knew into whose power they had
 fallen.”
 “how now, sir friar,” replied front-de-boeuf, “thy speech, methinks,
 smacks of a saxon tongue?”
 “i was bred in the convent of st withold of burton,” answered cedric.
 “ay?” said the baron; “it had been better for thee to have been a norman,
 and better for my purpose too; but need has no choice of messengers. that
 st withold's of burton is an owlet's nest worth the harrying. the day will
 soon come that the frock shall protect the saxon as little as the
 mail-coat.”
 “god's will be done,” said cedric, in a voice tremulous with passion,
 which front-de-boeuf imputed to fear.
 “i see,” said he, “thou dreamest already that our men-at-arms are in thy
 refectory and thy ale-vaults. but do me one cast of thy holy office, and,
 come what list of others, thou shalt sleep as safe in thy cell as a snail
 within his shell of proof.”
 “speak your commands,” said cedric, with suppressed emotion.
 “follow me through this passage, then, that i may dismiss thee by the
 postern.”
 and as he strode on his way before the supposed friar, front-de-boeuf thus
 schooled him in the part which he desired he should act.
 “thou seest, sir friar, yon herd of saxon swine, who have dared to environ
 this castle of torquilstone—tell them whatever thou hast a mind of
 the weakness of this fortalice, or aught else that can detain them before
 it for twenty-four hours. meantime bear thou this scroll—but soft—canst
 read, sir priest?”
 “not a jot i,” answered cedric, “save on my breviary; and then i know the
 characters, because i have the holy service by heart, praised be our lady
 and st withold!”
 “the fitter messenger for my purpose.—carry thou this scroll to the
 castle of philip de malvoisin; say it cometh from me, and is written by
 the templar brian de bois-guilbert, and that i pray him to send it to york
 with all the speed man and horse can make. meanwhile, tell him to doubt
 nothing, he shall find us whole and sound behind our battlement—shame
 on it, that we should be compelled to hide thus by a pack of runagates,
 who are wont to fly even at the flash of our pennons and the tramp of our
 horses! i say to thee, priest, contrive some cast of thine art to keep the
 knaves where they are, until our friends bring up their lances. my
 vengeance is awake, and she is a falcon that slumbers not till she has
 been gorged.”
 “by my patron saint,” said cedric, with deeper energy than became his
 character, “and by every saint who has lived and died in england, your
 commands shall be obeyed! not a saxon shall stir from before these walls,
 if i have art and influence to detain them there.”
 “ha!” said front-de-boeuf, “thou changest thy tone, sir priest, and
 speakest brief and bold, as if thy heart were in the slaughter of the
 saxon herd; and yet thou art thyself of kindred to the swine?”
 cedric was no ready practiser of the art of dissimulation, and would at
 this moment have been much the better of a hint from wamba's more fertile
 brain. but necessity, according to the ancient proverb, sharpens
 invention, and he muttered something under his cowl concerning the men in
 question being excommunicated outlaws both to church and to kingdom.
 “'despardieux',” answered front-de-boeuf, “thou hast spoken the very truth—i
 forgot that the knaves can strip a fat abbot, as well as if they had been
 born south of yonder salt channel. was it not he of st ives whom they tied
 to an oak-tree, and compelled to sing a mass while they were rifling his
 mails and his wallets?—no, by our lady—that jest was played by
 gualtier of middleton, one of our own companions-at-arms. but they were
 saxons who robbed the chapel at st bees of cup, candlestick and chalice,
 were they not?”
 “they were godless men,” answered cedric.
 “ay, and they drank out all the good wine and ale that lay in store for
 many a secret carousal, when ye pretend ye are but busied with vigils and
 primes!—priest, thou art bound to revenge such sacrilege.”
 “i am indeed bound to vengeance,” murmured cedric; “saint withold knows my
 heart.”
 front-de-boeuf, in the meanwhile, led the way to a postern, where, passing
 the moat on a single plank, they reached a small barbican, or exterior
 defence, which communicated with the open field by a well-fortified
 sallyport.
 “begone, then; and if thou wilt do mine errand, and if thou return hither
 when it is done, thou shalt see saxon flesh cheap as ever was hog's in the
 shambles of sheffield. and, hark thee, thou seemest to be a jolly
 confessor—come hither after the onslaught, and thou shalt have as
 much malvoisie as would drench thy whole convent.”
 “assuredly we shall meet again,” answered cedric.
 “something in hand the whilst,” continued the norman; and, as they parted
 at the postern door, he thrust into cedric's reluctant hand a gold byzant,
 adding, “remember, i will fly off both cowl and skin, if thou failest in
 thy purpose.”
 “and full leave will i give thee to do both,” answered cedric, leaving the
 postern, and striding forth over the free field with a joyful step, “if,
 when we meet next, i deserve not better at thine hand.”—turning then
 back towards the castle, he threw the piece of gold towards the donor,
 exclaiming at the same time, “false norman, thy money perish with thee!”
 front-de-boeuf heard the words imperfectly, but the action was suspicious—“archers,”
 he called to the warders on the outward battlements, “send me an arrow
 through yon monk's frock!—yet stay,” he said, as his retainers were
 bending their bows, “it avails not—we must thus far trust him since
 we have no better shift. i think he dares not betray me—at the worst
 i can but treat with these saxon dogs whom i have safe in kennel.—ho!
 giles jailor, let them bring cedric of rotherwood before me, and the other
 churl, his companion—him i mean of coningsburgh—athelstane
 there, or what call they him? their very names are an encumbrance to a
 norman knight's mouth, and have, as it were, a flavour of bacon—give
 me a stoup of wine, as jolly prince john said, that i may wash away the
 relish—place it in the armoury, and thither lead the prisoners.”
 his commands were obeyed; and, upon entering that gothic apartment, hung
 with many spoils won by his own valour and that of his father, he found a
 flagon of wine on the massive oaken table, and the two saxon captives
 under the guard of four of his dependants. front-de-boeuf took a long
 drought of wine, and then addressed his prisoners;—for the manner in
 which wamba drew the cap over his face, the change of dress, the gloomy
 and broken light, and the baron's imperfect acquaintance with the features
 of cedric, (who avoided his norman neighbours, and seldom stirred beyond
 his own domains,) prevented him from discovering that the most important
 of his captives had made his escape.
 “gallants of england,” said front-de-boeuf, “how relish ye your
 entertainment at torquilstone?—are ye yet aware what your 'surquedy'
 and 'outrecuidance'  merit, for scoffing at the
 entertainment of a prince of the house of anjou?—have ye forgotten
 how ye requited the unmerited hospitality of the royal john? by god and st
 dennis, an ye pay not the richer ransom, i will hang ye up by the feet
 from the iron bars of these windows, till the kites and hooded crows have
 made skeletons of you!—speak out, ye saxon dogs—what bid ye
 for your worthless lives?—how say you, you of rotherwood?”
 “not a doit i,” answered poor wamba—“and for hanging up by the feet,
 my brain has been topsy-turvy, they say, ever since the biggin was bound
 first round my head; so turning me upside down may peradventure restore it
 again.”
 “saint genevieve!” said front-de-boeuf, “what have we got here?”
 and with the back of his hand he struck cedric's cap from the head of the
 jester, and throwing open his collar, discovered the fatal badge of
 servitude, the silver collar round his neck.
 “giles—clement—dogs and varlets!” exclaimed the furious
 norman, “what have you brought me here?”
 “i think i can tell you,” said de bracy, who just entered the apartment.
 “this is cedric's clown, who fought so manful a skirmish with isaac of
 york about a question of precedence.”
 “i shall settle it for them both,” replied front-de-boeuf; “they shall
 hang on the same gallows, unless his master and this boar of coningsburgh
 will pay well for their lives. their wealth is the least they can
 surrender; they must also carry off with them the swarms that are
 besetting the castle, subscribe a surrender of their pretended immunities,
 and live under us as serfs and vassals; too happy if, in the new world
 that is about to begin, we leave them the breath of their nostrils.—go,”
 said he to two of his attendants, “fetch me the right cedric hither, and i
 pardon your error for once; the rather that you but mistook a fool for a
 saxon franklin.”
 “ay, but,” said wamba, “your chivalrous excellency will find there are
 more fools than franklins among us.”
 “what means the knave?” said front-de-boeuf, looking towards his
 followers, who, lingering and loath, faltered forth their belief, that if
 this were not cedric who was there in presence, they knew not what was
 become of him.
 “saints of heaven!” exclaimed de bracy, “he must have escaped in the
 monk's garments!”
 “fiends of hell!” echoed front-de-boeuf, “it was then the boar of
 rotherwood whom i ushered to the postern, and dismissed with my own hands!—and
 thou,” he said to wamba, “whose folly could overreach the wisdom of idiots
 yet more gross than thyself—i will give thee holy orders—i
 will shave thy crown for thee!—here, let them tear the scalp from
 his head, and then pitch him headlong from the battlements—thy trade
 is to jest, canst thou jest now?”
 “you deal with me better than your word, noble knight,” whimpered forth
 poor wamba, whose habits of buffoonery were not to be overcome even by the
 immediate prospect of death; “if you give me the red cap you propose, out
 of a simple monk you will make a cardinal.”
 “the poor wretch,” said de bracy, “is resolved to die in his vocation.—front-de-boeuf,
 you shall not slay him. give him to me to make sport for my free
 companions.—how sayst thou, knave? wilt thou take heart of grace,
 and go to the wars with me?”
 “ay, with my master's leave,” said wamba; “for, look you, i must not slip
 collar” (and he touched that which he wore) “without his permission.”
 “oh, a norman saw will soon cut a saxon collar.” said de bracy.
 “ay, noble sir,” said wamba, “and thence goes the proverb—
 'norman saw on english oak,
 on english neck a norman yoke;
 norman spoon in english dish,
 and england ruled as normans wish;
 blithe world to england never will be more,
 till england's rid of all the four.'”
 “thou dost well, de bracy,” said front-de-boeuf, “to stand there listening
 to a fool's jargon, when destruction is gaping for us! seest thou not we
 are overreached, and that our proposed mode of communicating with our
 friends without has been disconcerted by this same motley gentleman thou
 art so fond to brother? what views have we to expect but instant storm?”
 “to the battlements then,” said de bracy; “when didst thou ever see me the
 graver for the thoughts of battle? call the templar yonder, and let him
 fight but half so well for his life as he has done for his order—make
 thou to the walls thyself with thy huge body—let me do my poor
 endeavour in my own way, and i tell thee the saxon outlaws may as well
 attempt to scale the clouds, as the castle of torquilstone; or, if you
 will treat with the banditti, why not employ the mediation of this worthy
 franklin, who seems in such deep contemplation of the wine-flagon?—here,
 saxon,” he continued, addressing athelstane, and handing the cup to him,
 “rinse thy throat with that noble liquor, and rouse up thy soul to say
 what thou wilt do for thy liberty.”
 “what a man of mould may,” answered athelstane, “providing it be what a
 man of manhood ought.—dismiss me free, with my companions, and i
 will pay a ransom of a thousand marks.”
 “and wilt moreover assure us the retreat of that scum of mankind who are
 swarming around the castle, contrary to god's peace and the king's?” said
 front-de-boeuf.
 “in so far as i can,” answered athelstane, “i will withdraw them; and i
 fear not but that my father cedric will do his best to assist me.”
 “we are agreed then,” said front-de-boeuf—“thou and they are to be
 set at freedom, and peace is to be on both sides, for payment of a
 thousand marks. it is a trifling ransom, saxon, and thou wilt owe
 gratitude to the moderation which accepts of it in exchange of your
 persons. but mark, this extends not to the jew isaac.”
 “nor to the jew isaac's daughter,” said the templar, who had now joined
 them.
 “neither,” said front-de-boeuf, “belong to this saxon's company.”
 “i were unworthy to be called christian, if they did,” replied athelstane:
 “deal with the unbelievers as ye list.”
 “neither does the ransom include the lady rowena,” said de bracy. “it
 shall never be said i was scared out of a fair prize without striking a
 blow for it.”
 “neither,” said front-de-boeuf, “does our treaty refer to this wretched
 jester, whom i retain, that i may make him an example to every knave who
 turns jest into earnest.”
 “the lady rowena,” answered athelstane, with the most steady countenance,
 “is my affianced bride. i will be drawn by wild horses before i consent to
 part with her. the slave wamba has this day saved the life of my father
 cedric—i will lose mine ere a hair of his head be injured.”
 “thy affianced bride?—the lady rowena the affianced bride of a
 vassal like thee?” said de bracy; “saxon, thou dreamest that the days of
 thy seven kingdoms are returned again. i tell thee, the princes of the
 house of anjou confer not their wards on men of such lineage as thine.”
 “my lineage, proud norman,” replied athelstane, “is drawn from a source
 more pure and ancient than that of a beggarly frenchman, whose living is
 won by selling the blood of the thieves whom he assembles under his paltry
 standard. kings were my ancestors, strong in war and wise in council, who
 every day feasted in their hall more hundreds than thou canst number
 individual followers; whose names have been sung by minstrels, and their
 laws recorded by wittenagemotes; whose bones were interred amid the
 prayers of saints, and over whose tombs minsters have been builded.”
 “thou hast it, de bracy,” said front-de-boeuf, well pleased with the
 rebuff which his companion had received; “the saxon hath hit thee fairly.”
 “as fairly as a captive can strike,” said de bracy, with apparent
 carelessness; “for he whose hands are tied should have his tongue at
 freedom.—but thy glibness of reply, comrade,” rejoined he, speaking
 to athelstane, “will not win the freedom of the lady rowena.”
 to this athelstane, who had already made a longer speech than was his
 custom to do on any topic, however interesting, returned no answer. the
 conversation was interrupted by the arrival of a menial, who announced
 that a monk demanded admittance at the postern gate.
 “in the name of saint bennet, the prince of these bull-beggars,” said
 front-de-boeuf, “have we a real monk this time, or another impostor?
 search him, slaves—for an ye suffer a second impostor to be palmed
 upon you, i will have your eyes torn out, and hot coals put into the
 sockets.”
 “let me endure the extremity of your anger, my lord,” said giles, “if this
 be not a real shaveling. your squire jocelyn knows him well, and will
 vouch him to be brother ambrose, a monk in attendance upon the prior of
 jorvaulx.”
 “admit him,” said front-de-boeuf; “most likely he brings us news from his
 jovial master. surely the devil keeps holiday, and the priests are
 relieved from duty, that they are strolling thus wildly through the
 country. remove these prisoners; and, saxon, think on what thou hast
 heard.”
 “i claim,” said athelstane, “an honourable imprisonment, with due care of
 my board and of my couch, as becomes my rank, and as is due to one who is
 in treaty for ransom. moreover, i hold him that deems himself the best of
 you, bound to answer to me with his body for this aggression on my
 freedom. this defiance hath already been sent to thee by thy sewer; thou
 underliest it, and art bound to answer me—there lies my glove.”
 “i answer not the challenge of my prisoner,” said front-de-boeuf; “nor
 shalt thou, maurice de bracy.—giles,” he continued, “hang the
 franklin's glove upon the tine of yonder branched antlers: there shall it
 remain until he is a free man. should he then presume to demand it, or to
 affirm he was unlawfully made my prisoner, by the belt of saint
 christopher, he will speak to one who hath never refused to meet a foe on
 foot or on horseback, alone or with his vassals at his back!”
 the saxon prisoners were accordingly removed, just as they introduced the
 monk ambrose, who appeared to be in great perturbation.
 “this is the real 'deus vobiscum',” said wamba, as he passed the reverend
 brother; “the others were but counterfeits.”
 “holy mother,” said the monk, as he addressed the assembled knights, “i am
 at last safe and in christian keeping!”
 “safe thou art,” replied de bracy; “and for christianity, here is the
 stout baron reginald front-de-boeuf, whose utter abomination is a jew; and
 the good knight templar, brian de bois-guilbert, whose trade is to slay
 saracens—if these are not good marks of christianity, i know no
 other which they bear about them.”
 “ye are friends and allies of our reverend father in god, aymer, prior of
 jorvaulx,” said the monk, without noticing the tone of de bracy's reply;
 “ye owe him aid both by knightly faith and holy charity; for what saith
 the blessed saint augustin, in his treatise 'de civitate dei'—-”
 “what saith the devil!” interrupted front-de-boeuf; “or rather what dost
 thou say, sir priest? we have little time to hear texts from the holy
 fathers.”
 “'sancta maria!'” ejaculated father ambrose, “how prompt to ire are these
 unhallowed laymen!—but be it known to you, brave knights, that
 certain murderous caitiffs, casting behind them fear of god, and reverence
 of his church, and not regarding the bull of the holy see, 'si quis,
 suadende diabolo'—-”
 “brother priest,” said the templar, “all this we know or guess at—tell
 us plainly, is thy master, the prior, made prisoner, and to whom?”
 “surely,” said ambrose, “he is in the hands of the men of belial,
 infesters of these woods, and contemners of the holy text, 'touch not mine
 anointed, and do my prophets naught of evil.'”
 “here is a new argument for our swords, sirs,” said front-de-boeuf,
 turning to his companions; “and so, instead of reaching us any assistance,
 the prior of jorvaulx requests aid at our hands? a man is well helped of
 these lazy churchmen when he hath most to do!—but speak out, priest,
 and say at once, what doth thy master expect from us?”
 “so please you,” said ambrose, “violent hands having been imposed on my
 reverend superior, contrary to the holy ordinance which i did already
 quote, and the men of belial having rifled his mails and budgets, and
 stripped him of two hundred marks of pure refined gold, they do yet demand
 of him a large sum beside, ere they will suffer him to depart from their
 uncircumcised hands. wherefore the reverend father in god prays you, as
 his dear friends, to rescue him, either by paying down the ransom at which
 they hold him, or by force of arms, at your best discretion.”
 “the foul fiend quell the prior!” said front-de-boeuf; “his morning's
 drought has been a deep one. when did thy master hear of a norman baron
 unbuckling his purse to relieve a churchman, whose bags are ten times as
 weighty as ours?—and how can we do aught by valour to free him, that
 are cooped up here by ten times our number, and expect an assault every
 moment?”
 “and that was what i was about to tell you,” said the monk, “had your
 hastiness allowed me time. but, god help me, i am old, and these foul
 onslaughts distract an aged man's brain. nevertheless, it is of verity
 that they assemble a camp, and raise a bank against the walls of this
 castle.”
 “to the battlements!” cried de bracy, “and let us mark what these knaves
 do without;” and so saying, he opened a latticed window which led to a
 sort of bartisan or projecting balcony, and immediately called from thence
 to those in the apartment—“saint dennis, but the old monk hath
 brought true tidings!—they bring forward mantelets and pavisses, 
 and the archers muster on the skirts of the wood like a dark cloud before
 a hailstorm.”
 reginald front-de-boeuf also looked out upon the field, and immediately
 snatched his bugle; and, after winding a long and loud blast, commanded
 his men to their posts on the walls.
 “de bracy, look to the eastern side, where the walls are lowest—noble
 bois-guilbert, thy trade hath well taught thee how to attack and defend,
 look thou to the western side—i myself will take post at the
 barbican. yet, do not confine your exertions to any one spot, noble
 friends!—we must this day be everywhere, and multiply ourselves,
 were it possible, so as to carry by our presence succour and relief
 wherever the attack is hottest. our numbers are few, but activity and
 courage may supply that defect, since we have only to do with rascal
 clowns.”
 “but, noble knights,” exclaimed father ambrose, amidst the bustle and
 confusion occasioned by the preparations for defence, “will none of ye
 hear the message of the reverend father in god aymer, prior of jorvaulx?—i
 beseech thee to hear me, noble sir reginald!”
 “go patter thy petitions to heaven,” said the fierce norman, “for we on
 earth have no time to listen to them.—ho! there, anselm i see that
 seething pitch and oil are ready to pour on the heads of these audacious
 traitors—look that the cross-bowmen lack not bolts. —fling
 abroad my banner with the old bull's head—the knaves shall soon find
 with whom they have to do this day!”
 “but, noble sir,” continued the monk, persevering in his endeavours to
 draw attention, “consider my vow of obedience, and let me discharge myself
 of my superior's errand.”
 “away with this prating dotard,” said front-de boeuf, “lock him up in the
 chapel, to tell his beads till the broil be over. it will be a new thing
 to the saints in torquilstone to hear aves and paters; they have not been
 so honoured, i trow, since they were cut out of stone.”
 “blaspheme not the holy saints, sir reginald,” said de bracy, “we shall
 have need of their aid to-day before yon rascal rout disband.”
 “i expect little aid from their hand,” said front-de-boeuf, “unless we
 were to hurl them from the battlements on the heads of the villains. there
 is a huge lumbering saint christopher yonder, sufficient to bear a whole
 company to the earth.”
 the templar had in the meantime been looking out on the proceedings of the
 besiegers, with rather more attention than the brutal front-de-boeuf or
 his giddy companion.
 “by the faith of mine order,” he said, “these men approach with more touch
 of discipline than could have been judged, however they come by it. see ye
 how dexterously they avail themselves of every cover which a tree or bush
 affords, and shun exposing themselves to the shot of our cross-bows? i spy
 neither banner nor pennon among them, and yet will i gage my golden chain,
 that they are led on by some noble knight or gentleman, skilful in the
 practice of wars.”
 “i espy him,” said de bracy; “i see the waving of a knight's crest, and
 the gleam of his armour. see yon tall man in the black mail, who is busied
 marshalling the farther troop of the rascaille yeomen—by saint
 dennis, i hold him to be the same whom we called 'le noir faineant', who
 overthrew thee, front-de-boeuf, in the lists at ashby.”
 “so much the better,” said front-de-boeuf, “that he comes here to give me
 my revenge. some hilding fellow he must be, who dared not stay to assert
 his claim to the tourney prize which chance had assigned him. i should in
 vain have sought for him where knights and nobles seek their foes, and
 right glad am i he hath here shown himself among yon villain yeomanry.”
 the demonstrations of the enemy's immediate approach cut off all farther
 discourse. each knight repaired to his post, and at the head of the few
 followers whom they were able to muster, and who were in numbers
 inadequate to defend the whole extent of the walls, they awaited with calm
 determination the threatened assault.
 this wandering race, sever'd from other men,
 boast yet their intercourse with human arts;
 the seas, the woods, the deserts, which they haunt,
 find them acquainted with their secret treasures:
 and unregarded herbs, and flowers, and blossoms,
 display undreamt-of powers when gather'd by them.
 —the jew
 our history must needs retrograde for the space of a few pages, to inform
 the reader of certain passages material to his understanding the rest of
 this important narrative. his own intelligence may indeed have easily
 anticipated that, when ivanhoe sunk down, and seemed abandoned by all the
 world, it was the importunity of rebecca which prevailed on her father to
 have the gallant young warrior transported from the lists to the house
 which for the time the jews inhabited in the suburbs of ashby.
 it would not have been difficult to have persuaded isaac to this step in
 any other circumstances, for his disposition was kind and grateful. but he
 had also the prejudices and scrupulous timidity of his persecuted people,
 and those were to be conquered.
 “holy abraham!” he exclaimed, “he is a good youth, and my heart bleeds to
 see the gore trickle down his rich embroidered hacqueton, and his corslet
 of goodly price—but to carry him to our house!—damsel, hast
 thou well considered?—he is a christian, and by our law we may not
 deal with the stranger and gentile, save for the advantage of our
 commerce.”
 “speak not so, my dear father,” replied rebecca; “we may not indeed mix
 with them in banquet and in jollity; but in wounds and in misery, the
 gentile becometh the jew's brother.”
 “i would i knew what the rabbi jacob ben tudela would opine on it,”
 replied isaac;—“nevertheless, the good youth must not bleed to
 death. let seth and reuben bear him to ashby.”
 “nay, let them place him in my litter,” said rebecca; “i will mount one of
 the palfreys.”
 “that were to expose thee to the gaze of those dogs of ishmael and of
 edom,” whispered isaac, with a suspicious glance towards the crowd of
 knights and squires. but rebecca was already busied in carrying her
 charitable purpose into effect, and listed not what he said, until isaac,
 seizing the sleeve of her mantle, again exclaimed, in a hurried voice—“beard
 of aaron!—what if the youth perish!—if he die in our custody,
 shall we not be held guilty of his blood, and be torn to pieces by the
 multitude?”
 “he will not die, my father,” said rebecca, gently extricating herself
 from the grasp of isaac “he will not die unless we abandon him; and if so,
 we are indeed answerable for his blood to god and to man.”
 “nay,” said isaac, releasing his hold, “it grieveth me as much to see the
 drops of his blood, as if they were so many golden byzants from mine own
 purse; and i well know, that the lessons of miriam, daughter of the rabbi
 manasses of byzantium whose soul is in paradise, have made thee skilful in
 the art of healing, and that thou knowest the craft of herbs, and the
 force of elixirs. therefore, do as thy mind giveth thee—thou art a
 good damsel, a blessing, and a crown, and a song of rejoicing unto me and
 unto my house, and unto the people of my fathers.”
 the apprehensions of isaac, however, were not ill founded; and the
 generous and grateful benevolence of his daughter exposed her, on her
 return to ashby, to the unhallowed gaze of brian de bois-guilbert. the
 templar twice passed and repassed them on the road, fixing his bold and
 ardent look on the beautiful jewess; and we have already seen the
 consequences of the admiration which her charms excited when accident
 threw her into the power of that unprincipled voluptuary.
 rebecca lost no time in causing the patient to be transported to their
 temporary dwelling, and proceeded with her own hands to examine and to
 bind up his wounds. the youngest reader of romances and romantic ballads,
 must recollect how often the females, during the dark ages, as they are
 called, were initiated into the mysteries of surgery, and how frequently
 the gallant knight submitted the wounds of his person to her cure, whose
 eyes had yet more deeply penetrated his heart.
 but the jews, both male and female, possessed and practised the medical
 science in all its branches, and the monarchs and powerful barons of the
 time frequently committed themselves to the charge of some experienced
 sage among this despised people, when wounded or in sickness. the aid of
 the jewish physicians was not the less eagerly sought after, though a
 general belief prevailed among the christians, that the jewish rabbins
 were deeply acquainted with the occult sciences, and particularly with the
 cabalistical art, which had its name and origin in the studies of the
 sages of israel. neither did the rabbins disown such acquaintance with
 supernatural arts, which added nothing (for what could add aught?) to the
 hatred with which their nation was regarded, while it diminished the
 contempt with which that malevolence was mingled. a jewish magician might
 be the subject of equal abhorrence with a jewish usurer, but he could not
 be equally despised. it is besides probable, considering the wonderful
 cures they are said to have performed, that the jews possessed some
 secrets of the healing art peculiar to themselves, and which, with the
 exclusive spirit arising out of their condition, they took great care to
 conceal from the christians amongst whom they dwelt.
 the beautiful rebecca had been heedfully brought up in all the knowledge
 proper to her nation, which her apt and powerful mind had retained,
 arranged, and enlarged, in the course of a progress beyond her years, her
 sex, and even the age in which she lived. her knowledge of medicine and of
 the healing art had been acquired under an aged jewess, the daughter of
 one of their most celebrated doctors, who loved rebecca as her own child,
 and was believed to have communicated to her secrets, which had been left
 to herself by her sage father at the same time, and under the same
 circumstances. the fate of miriam had indeed been to fall a sacrifice to
 the fanaticism of the times; but her secrets had survived in her apt
 pupil.
 rebecca, thus endowed with knowledge as with beauty, was universally
 revered and admired by her own tribe, who almost regarded her as one of
 those gifted women mentioned in the sacred history. her father himself,
 out of reverence for her talents, which involuntarily mingled itself with
 his unbounded affection, permitted the maiden a greater liberty than was
 usually indulged to those of her sex by the habits of her people, and was,
 as we have just seen, frequently guided by her opinion, even in preference
 to his own.
 when ivanhoe reached the habitation of isaac, he was still in a state of
 unconsciousness, owing to the profuse loss of blood which had taken place
 during his exertions in the lists. rebecca examined the wound, and having
 applied to it such vulnerary remedies as her art prescribed, informed her
 father that if fever could be averted, of which the great bleeding
 rendered her little apprehensive, and if the healing balsam of miriam
 retained its virtue, there was nothing to fear for his guest's life, and
 that he might with safety travel to york with them on the ensuing day.
 isaac looked a little blank at this annunciation. his charity would
 willingly have stopped short at ashby, or at most would have left the
 wounded christian to be tended in the house where he was residing at
 present, with an assurance to the hebrew to whom it belonged, that all
 expenses should be duly discharged. to this, however, rebecca opposed many
 reasons, of which we shall only mention two that had peculiar weight with
 isaac. the one was, that she would on no account put the phial of precious
 balsam into the hands of another physician even of her own tribe, lest
 that valuable mystery should be discovered; the other, that this wounded
 knight, wilfred of ivanhoe, was an intimate favourite of richard
 coeur-de-lion, and that, in case the monarch should return, isaac, who had
 supplied his brother john with treasure to prosecute his rebellious
 purposes, would stand in no small need of a powerful protector who enjoyed
 richard's favour.
 “thou art speaking but sooth, rebecca,” said isaac, giving way to these
 weighty arguments—“it were an offending of heaven to betray the
 secrets of the blessed miriam; for the good which heaven giveth, is not
 rashly to be squandered upon others, whether it be talents of gold and
 shekels of silver, or whether it be the secret mysteries of a wise
 physician—assuredly they should be preserved to those to whom
 providence hath vouchsafed them. and him whom the nazarenes of england
 call the lion's heart, assuredly it were better for me to fall into the
 hands of a strong lion of idumea than into his, if he shall have got
 assurance of my dealing with his brother. wherefore i will lend ear to thy
 counsel, and this youth shall journey with us unto york, and our house
 shall be as a home to him until his wounds shall be healed. and if he of
 the lion heart shall return to the land, as is now noised abroad, then
 shall this wilfred of ivanhoe be unto me as a wall of defence, when the
 king's displeasure shall burn high against thy father. and if he doth not
 return, this wilfred may natheless repay us our charges when he shall gain
 treasure by the strength of his spear and of his sword, even as he did
 yesterday and this day also. for the youth is a good youth, and keepeth
 the day which he appointeth, and restoreth that which he borroweth, and
 succoureth the israelite, even the child of my father's house, when he is
 encompassed by strong thieves and sons of belial.”
 it was not until evening was nearly closed that ivanhoe was restored to
 consciousness of his situation. he awoke from a broken slumber, under the
 confused impressions which are naturally attendant on the recovery from a
 state of insensibility. he was unable for some time to recall exactly to
 memory the circumstances which had preceded his fall in the lists, or to
 make out any connected chain of the events in which he had been engaged
 upon the yesterday. a sense of wounds and injury, joined to great weakness
 and exhaustion, was mingled with the recollection of blows dealt and
 received, of steeds rushing upon each other, overthrowing and overthrown—of
 shouts and clashing of arms, and all the heady tumult of a confused fight.
 an effort to draw aside the curtain of his couch was in some degree
 successful, although rendered difficult by the pain of his wound.
 to his great surprise he found himself in a room magnificently furnished,
 but having cushions instead of chairs to rest upon, and in other respects
 partaking so much of oriental costume, that he began to doubt whether he
 had not, during his sleep, been transported back again to the land of
 palestine. the impression was increased, when, the tapestry being drawn
 aside, a female form, dressed in a rich habit, which partook more of the
 eastern taste than that of europe, glided through the door which it
 concealed, and was followed by a swarthy domestic.
 as the wounded knight was about to address this fair apparition, she
 imposed silence by placing her slender finger upon her ruby lips, while
 the attendant, approaching him, proceeded to uncover ivanhoe's side, and
 the lovely jewess satisfied herself that the bandage was in its place, and
 the wound doing well. she performed her task with a graceful and dignified
 simplicity and modesty, which might, even in more civilized days, have
 served to redeem it from whatever might seem repugnant to female delicacy.
 the idea of so young and beautiful a person engaged in attendance on a
 sick-bed, or in dressing the wound of one of a different sex, was melted
 away and lost in that of a beneficent being contributing her effectual aid
 to relieve pain, and to avert the stroke of death. rebecca's few and brief
 directions were given in the hebrew language to the old domestic; and he,
 who had been frequently her assistant in similar cases, obeyed them
 without reply.
 the accents of an unknown tongue, however harsh they might have sounded
 when uttered by another, had, coming from the beautiful rebecca, the
 romantic and pleasing effect which fancy ascribes to the charms pronounced
 by some beneficent fairy, unintelligible, indeed, to the ear, but, from
 the sweetness of utterance, and benignity of aspect, which accompanied
 them, touching and affecting to the heart. without making an attempt at
 further question, ivanhoe suffered them in silence to take the measures
 they thought most proper for his recovery; and it was not until those were
 completed, and this kind physician about to retire, that his curiosity
 could no longer be suppressed.—“gentle maiden,” he began in the
 arabian tongue, with which his eastern travels had rendered him familiar,
 and which he thought most likely to be understood by the turban'd and
 caftan'd damsel who stood before him—“i pray you, gentle maiden, of
 your courtesy—-”
 but here he was interrupted by his fair physician, a smile which she could
 scarce suppress dimpling for an instant a face, whose general expression
 was that of contemplative melancholy. “i am of england, sir knight, and
 speak the english tongue, although my dress and my lineage belong to
 another climate.”
 “noble damsel,”—again the knight of ivanhoe began; and again rebecca
 hastened to interrupt him.
 “bestow not on me, sir knight,” she said, “the epithet of noble. it is
 well you should speedily know that your handmaiden is a poor jewess, the
 daughter of that isaac of york, to whom you were so lately a good and kind
 lord. it well becomes him, and those of his household, to render to you
 such careful tendance as your present state necessarily demands.”
 i know not whether the fair rowena would have been altogether satisfied
 with the species of emotion with which her devoted knight had hitherto
 gazed on the beautiful features, and fair form, and lustrous eyes, of the
 lovely rebecca; eyes whose brilliancy was shaded, and, as it were,
 mellowed, by the fringe of her long silken eyelashes, and which a minstrel
 would have compared to the evening star darting its rays through a bower
 of jessamine. but ivanhoe was too good a catholic to retain the same class
 of feelings towards a jewess. this rebecca had foreseen, and for this very
 purpose she had hastened to mention her father's name and lineage; yet—for
 the fair and wise daughter of isaac was not without a touch of female
 weakness—she could not but sigh internally when the glance of
 respectful admiration, not altogether unmixed with tenderness, with which
 ivanhoe had hitherto regarded his unknown benefactress, was exchanged at
 once for a manner cold, composed, and collected, and fraught with no
 deeper feeling than that which expressed a grateful sense of courtesy
 received from an unexpected quarter, and from one of an inferior race. it
 was not that ivanhoe's former carriage expressed more than that general
 devotional homage which youth always pays to beauty; yet it was mortifying
 that one word should operate as a spell to remove poor rebecca, who could
 not be supposed altogether ignorant of her title to such homage, into a
 degraded class, to whom it could not be honourably rendered.
 but the gentleness and candour of rebecca's nature imputed no fault to
 ivanhoe for sharing in the universal prejudices of his age and religion.
 on the contrary the fair jewess, though sensible her patient now regarded
 her as one of a race of reprobation, with whom it was disgraceful to hold
 any beyond the most necessary intercourse, ceased not to pay the same
 patient and devoted attention to his safety and convalescence. she
 informed him of the necessity they were under of removing to york, and of
 her father's resolution to transport him thither, and tend him in his own
 house until his health should be restored. ivanhoe expressed great
 repugnance to this plan, which he grounded on unwillingness to give
 farther trouble to his benefactors.
 “was there not,” he said, “in ashby, or near it, some saxon franklin, or
 even some wealthy peasant, who would endure the burden of a wounded
 countryman's residence with him until he should be again able to bear his
 armour?—was there no convent of saxon endowment, where he could be
 received?—or could he not be transported as far as burton, where he
 was sure to find hospitality with waltheoff, the abbot of st withold's, to
 whom he was related?”
 “any, the worst of these harbourages,” said rebecca, with a melancholy
 smile, “would unquestionably be more fitting for your residence than the
 abode of a despised jew; yet, sir knight, unless you would dismiss your
 physician, you cannot change your lodging. our nation, as you well know,
 can cure wounds, though we deal not in inflicting them; and in our own
 family, in particular, are secrets which have been handed down since the
 days of solomon, and of which you have already experienced the advantages.
 no nazarene—i crave your forgiveness, sir knight—no christian
 leech, within the four seas of britain, could enable you to bear your
 corslet within a month.”
 “and how soon wilt thou enable me to brook it?” said ivanhoe, impatiently.
 “within eight days, if thou wilt be patient and conformable to my
 directions,” replied rebecca.
 “by our blessed lady,” said wilfred, “if it be not a sin to name her here,
 it is no time for me or any true knight to be bedridden; and if thou
 accomplish thy promise, maiden, i will pay thee with my casque full of
 crowns, come by them as i may.”
 “i will accomplish my promise,” said rebecca, “and thou shalt bear thine
 armour on the eighth day from hence, if thou will grant me but one boon in
 the stead of the silver thou dost promise me.”
 “if it be within my power, and such as a true christian knight may yield
 to one of thy people,” replied ivanhoe, “i will grant thy boon blithely
 and thankfully.”
 “nay,” answered rebecca, “i will but pray of thee to believe henceforward
 that a jew may do good service to a christian, without desiring other
 guerdon than the blessing of the great father who made both jew and
 gentile.”
 “it were sin to doubt it, maiden,” replied ivanhoe; “and i repose myself
 on thy skill without further scruple or question, well trusting you will
 enable me to bear my corslet on the eighth day. and now, my kind leech,
 let me enquire of the news abroad. what of the noble saxon cedric and his
 household?—what of the lovely lady—” he stopt, as if unwilling
 to speak rowena's name in the house of a jew—“of her, i mean, who
 was named queen of the tournament?”
 “and who was selected by you, sir knight, to hold that dignity, with
 judgment which was admired as much as your valour,” replied rebecca.
 the blood which ivanhoe had lost did not prevent a flush from crossing his
 cheek, feeling that he had incautiously betrayed a deep interest in rowena
 by the awkward attempt he had made to conceal it.
 “it was less of her i would speak,” said he, “than of prince john; and i
 would fain know somewhat of a faithful squire, and why he now attends me
 not?”
 “let me use my authority as a leech,” answered rebecca, “and enjoin you to
 keep silence, and avoid agitating reflections, whilst i apprize you of
 what you desire to know. prince john hath broken off the tournament, and
 set forward in all haste towards york, with the nobles, knights, and
 churchmen of his party, after collecting such sums as they could wring, by
 fair means or foul, from those who are esteemed the wealthy of the land.
 it is said he designs to assume his brother's crown.”
 “not without a blow struck in its defence,” said ivanhoe, raising himself
 upon the couch, “if there were but one true subject in england i will
 fight for richard's title with the best of them—ay, one or two, in
 his just quarrel!”
 “but that you may be able to do so,” said rebecca touching his shoulder
 with her hand, “you must now observe my directions, and remain quiet.”
 “true, maiden,” said ivanhoe, “as quiet as these disquieted times will
 permit—and of cedric and his household?”
 “his steward came but brief while since,” said the jewess, “panting with
 haste, to ask my father for certain monies, the price of wool the growth
 of cedric's flocks, and from him i learned that cedric and athelstane of
 coningsburgh had left prince john's lodging in high displeasure, and were
 about to set forth on their return homeward.”
 “went any lady with them to the banquet?” said wilfred.
 “the lady rowena,” said rebecca, answering the question with more
 precision than it had been asked—“the lady rowena went not to the
 prince's feast, and, as the steward reported to us, she is now on her
 journey back to rotherwood, with her guardian cedric. and touching your
 faithful squire gurth—-”
 “ha!” exclaimed the knight, “knowest thou his name?—but thou dost,”
 he immediately added, “and well thou mayst, for it was from thy hand, and,
 as i am now convinced, from thine own generosity of spirit, that he
 received but yesterday a hundred zecchins.”
 “speak not of that,” said rebecca, blushing deeply; “i see how easy it is
 for the tongue to betray what the heart would gladly conceal.”
 “but this sum of gold,” said ivanhoe, gravely, “my honour is concerned in
 repaying it to your father.”
 “let it be as thou wilt,” said rebecca, “when eight days have passed away;
 but think not, and speak not now, of aught that may retard thy recovery.”
 “be it so, kind maiden,” said ivanhoe; “i were most ungrateful to dispute
 thy commands. but one word of the fate of poor gurth, and i have done with
 questioning thee.”
 “i grieve to tell thee, sir knight,” answered the jewess, “that he is in
 custody by the order of cedric.”—and then observing the distress
 which her communication gave to wilfred, she instantly added, “but the
 steward oswald said, that if nothing occurred to renew his master's
 displeasure against him, he was sure that cedric would pardon gurth, a
 faithful serf, and one who stood high in favour, and who had but committed
 this error out of the love which he bore to cedric's son. and he said,
 moreover, that he and his comrades, and especially wamba the jester, were
 resolved to warn gurth to make his escape by the way, in case cedric's ire
 against him could not be mitigated.”
 “would to god they may keep their purpose!” said ivanhoe; “but it seems as
 if i were destined to bring ruin on whomsoever hath shown kindness to me.
 my king, by whom i was honoured and distinguished, thou seest that the
 brother most indebted to him is raising his arms to grasp his crown;—my
 regard hath brought restraint and trouble on the fairest of her sex;—and
 now my father in his mood may slay this poor bondsman but for his love and
 loyal service to me!—thou seest, maiden, what an ill-fated wretch
 thou dost labour to assist; be wise, and let me go, ere the misfortunes
 which track my footsteps like slot-hounds, shall involve thee also in
 their pursuit.”
 “nay,” said rebecca, “thy weakness and thy grief, sir knight, make thee
 miscalculate the purposes of heaven. thou hast been restored to thy
 country when it most needed the assistance of a strong hand and a true
 heart, and thou hast humbled the pride of thine enemies and those of thy
 king, when their horn was most highly exalted, and for the evil which thou
 hast sustained, seest thou not that heaven has raised thee a helper and a
 physician, even among the most despised of the land?—therefore, be
 of good courage, and trust that thou art preserved for some marvel which
 thine arm shall work before this people. adieu—and having taken the
 medicine which i shall send thee by the hand of reuben, compose thyself
 again to rest, that thou mayest be the more able to endure the journey on
 the succeeding day.”
 ivanhoe was convinced by the reasoning, and obeyed the directions, of
 rebecca. the drought which reuben administered was of a sedative and
 narcotic quality, and secured the patient sound and undisturbed slumbers.
 in the morning his kind physician found him entirely free from feverish
 symptoms, and fit to undergo the fatigue of a journey.
 he was deposited in the horse-litter which had brought him from the lists,
 and every precaution taken for his travelling with ease. in one
 circumstance only even the entreaties of rebecca were unable to secure
 sufficient attention to the accommodation of the wounded knight. isaac,
 like the enriched traveller of juvenal's tenth satire, had ever the fear
 of robbery before his eyes, conscious that he would be alike accounted
 fair game by the marauding norman noble, and by the saxon outlaw. he
 therefore journeyed at a great rate, and made short halts, and shorter
 repasts, so that he passed by cedric and athelstane who had several hours
 the start of him, but who had been delayed by their protracted feasting at
 the convent of saint withold's. yet such was the virtue of miriam's
 balsam, or such the strength of ivanhoe's constitution, that he did not
 sustain from the hurried journey that inconvenience which his kind
 physician had apprehended.
 in another point of view, however, the jew's haste proved somewhat more
 than good speed. the rapidity with which he insisted on travelling, bred
 several disputes between him and the party whom he had hired to attend him
 as a guard. these men were saxons, and not free by any means from the
 national love of ease and good living which the normans stigmatized as
 laziness and gluttony. reversing shylock's position, they had accepted the
 employment in hopes of feeding upon the wealthy jew, and were very much
 displeased when they found themselves disappointed, by the rapidity with
 which he insisted on their proceeding. they remonstrated also upon the
 risk of damage to their horses by these forced marches. finally, there
 arose betwixt isaac and his satellites a deadly feud, concerning the
 quantity of wine and ale to be allowed for consumption at each meal. and
 thus it happened, that when the alarm of danger approached, and that which
 isaac feared was likely to come upon him, he was deserted by the
 discontented mercenaries on whose protection he had relied, without using
 the means necessary to secure their attachment.
 in this deplorable condition the jew, with his daughter and her wounded
 patient, were found by cedric, as has already been noticed, and soon
 afterwards fell into the power of de bracy and his confederates. little
 notice was at first taken of the horse-litter, and it might have remained
 behind but for the curiosity of de bracy, who looked into it under the
 impression that it might contain the object of his enterprise, for rowena
 had not unveiled herself. but de bracy's astonishment was considerable,
 when he discovered that the litter contained a wounded man, who,
 conceiving himself to have fallen into the power of saxon outlaws, with
 whom his name might be a protection for himself and his friends, frankly
 avowed himself to be wilfred of ivanhoe.
 the ideas of chivalrous honour, which, amidst his wildness and levity,
 never utterly abandoned de bracy, prohibited him from doing the knight any
 injury in his defenceless condition, and equally interdicted his betraying
 him to front-de-boeuf, who would have had no scruples to put to death,
 under any circumstances, the rival claimant of the fief of ivanhoe. on the
 other hand, to liberate a suitor preferred by the lady rowena, as the
 events of the tournament, and indeed wilfred's previous banishment from
 his father's house, had made matter of notoriety, was a pitch far above
 the flight of de bracy's generosity. a middle course betwixt good and evil
 was all which he found himself capable of adopting, and he commanded two
 of his own squires to keep close by the litter, and to suffer no one to
 approach it. if questioned, they were directed by their master to say,
 that the empty litter of the lady rowena was employed to transport one of
 their comrades who had been wounded in the scuffle. on arriving at
 torquilstone, while the knight templar and the lord of that castle were
 each intent upon their own schemes, the one on the jew's treasure, and the
 other on his daughter, de bracy's squires conveyed ivanhoe, still under
 the name of a wounded comrade, to a distant apartment. this explanation
 was accordingly returned by these men to front-de-boeuf, when he
 questioned them why they did not make for the battlements upon the alarm.
 “a wounded companion!” he replied in great wrath and astonishment. “no
 wonder that churls and yeomen wax so presumptuous as even to lay leaguer
 before castles, and that clowns and swineherds send defiances to nobles,
 since men-at-arms have turned sick men's nurses, and free companions are
 grown keepers of dying folk's curtains, when the castle is about to be
 assailed.—to the battlements, ye loitering villains!” he exclaimed,
 raising his stentorian voice till the arches around rung again, “to the
 battlements, or i will splinter your bones with this truncheon!”
 the men sulkily replied, “that they desired nothing better than to go to
 the battlements, providing front-de-boeuf would bear them out with their
 master, who had commanded them to tend the dying man.”
 “the dying man, knaves!” rejoined the baron; “i promise thee we shall all
 be dying men an we stand not to it the more stoutly. but i will relieve
 the guard upon this caitiff companion of yours.—here, urfried—hag—fiend
 of a saxon witch—hearest me not?—tend me this bedridden fellow
 since he must needs be tended, whilst these knaves use their weapons.—here
 be two arblasts, comrades, with windlaces and quarrells —to
 the barbican with you, and see you drive each bolt through a saxon brain.”
 the men, who, like most of their description, were fond of enterprise and
 detested inaction, went joyfully to the scene of danger as they were
 commanded, and thus the charge of ivanhoe was transferred to urfried, or
 ulrica. but she, whose brain was burning with remembrance of injuries and
 with hopes of vengeance, was readily induced to devolve upon rebecca the
 care of her patient.
 ascend the watch-tower yonder, valiant soldier,
 look on the field, and say how goes the battle.
 —schiller's maid of orleans
 a moment of peril is often also a moment of open-hearted kindness and
 affection. we are thrown off our guard by the general agitation of our
 feelings, and betray the intensity of those, which, at more tranquil
 periods, our prudence at least conceals, if it cannot altogether suppress
 them. in finding herself once more by the side of ivanhoe, rebecca was
 astonished at the keen sensation of pleasure which she experienced, even
 at a time when all around them both was danger, if not despair. as she
 felt his pulse, and enquired after his health, there was a softness in her
 touch and in her accents implying a kinder interest than she would herself
 have been pleased to have voluntarily expressed. her voice faltered and
 her hand trembled, and it was only the cold question of ivanhoe, “is it
 you, gentle maiden?” which recalled her to herself, and reminded her the
 sensations which she felt were not and could not be mutual. a sigh
 escaped, but it was scarce audible; and the questions which she asked the
 knight concerning his state of health were put in the tone of calm
 friendship. ivanhoe answered her hastily that he was, in point of health,
 as well, and better than he could have expected—“thanks,” he said,
 “dear rebecca, to thy helpful skill.”
 “he calls me dear rebecca,” said the maiden to herself, “but it is in the
 cold and careless tone which ill suits the word. his war-horse—his
 hunting hound, are dearer to him than the despised jewess!”
 “my mind, gentle maiden,” continued ivanhoe, “is more disturbed by
 anxiety, than my body with pain. from the speeches of those men who were
 my warders just now, i learn that i am a prisoner, and, if i judge aright
 of the loud hoarse voice which even now dispatched them hence on some
 military duty, i am in the castle of front-de-boeuf—if so, how will
 this end, or how can i protect rowena and my father?”
 “he names not the jew or jewess,” said rebecca internally; “yet what is
 our portion in him, and how justly am i punished by heaven for letting my
 thoughts dwell upon him!” she hastened after this brief self-accusation to
 give ivanhoe what information she could; but it amounted only to this,
 that the templar bois-guilbert, and the baron front-de-boeuf, were
 commanders within the castle; that it was beleaguered from without, but by
 whom she knew not. she added, that there was a christian priest within the
 castle who might be possessed of more information.
 “a christian priest!” said the knight, joyfully; “fetch him hither,
 rebecca, if thou canst—say a sick man desires his ghostly counsel—say
 what thou wilt, but bring him—something i must do or attempt, but
 how can i determine until i know how matters stand without?”
 rebecca in compliance with the wishes of ivanhoe, made that attempt to
 bring cedric into the wounded knight's chamber, which was defeated as we
 have already seen by the interference of urfried, who had also been on the
 watch to intercept the supposed monk. rebecca retired to communicate to
 ivanhoe the result of her errand.
 they had not much leisure to regret the failure of this source of
 intelligence, or to contrive by what means it might be supplied; for the
 noise within the castle, occasioned by the defensive preparations which
 had been considerable for some time, now increased into tenfold bustle and
 clamour. the heavy, yet hasty step of the men-at-arms, traversed the
 battlements or resounded on the narrow and winding passages and stairs
 which led to the various bartisans and points of defence. the voices of
 the knights were heard, animating their followers, or directing means of
 defence, while their commands were often drowned in the clashing of
 armour, or the clamorous shouts of those whom they addressed. tremendous
 as these sounds were, and yet more terrible from the awful event which
 they presaged, there was a sublimity mixed with them, which rebecca's
 high-toned mind could feel even in that moment of terror. her eye kindled,
 although the blood fled from her cheeks; and there was a strong mixture of
 fear, and of a thrilling sense of the sublime, as she repeated, half
 whispering to herself, half speaking to her companion, the sacred text,—“the
 quiver rattleth—the glittering spear and the shield—the noise
 of the captains and the shouting!”
 but ivanhoe was like the war-horse of that sublime passage, glowing with
 impatience at his inactivity, and with his ardent desire to mingle in the
 affray of which these sounds were the introduction. “if i could but drag
 myself,” he said, “to yonder window, that i might see how this brave game
 is like to go—if i had but bow to shoot a shaft, or battle-axe to
 strike were it but a single blow for our deliverance!—it is in vain—it
 is in vain—i am alike nerveless and weaponless!”
 “fret not thyself, noble knight,” answered rebecca, “the sounds have
 ceased of a sudden—it may be they join not battle.”
 “thou knowest nought of it,” said wilfred, impatiently; “this dead pause
 only shows that the men are at their posts on the walls, and expecting an
 instant attack; what we have heard was but the instant muttering of the
 storm—it will burst anon in all its fury.—could i but reach
 yonder window!”
 “thou wilt but injure thyself by the attempt, noble knight,” replied his
 attendant. observing his extreme solicitude, she firmly added, “i myself
 will stand at the lattice, and describe to you as i can what passes
 without.”
 “you must not—you shall not!” exclaimed ivanhoe; “each lattice, each
 aperture, will be soon a mark for the archers; some random shaft—”
 “it shall be welcome!” murmured rebecca, as with firm pace she ascended
 two or three steps, which led to the window of which they spoke.
 “rebecca, dear rebecca!” exclaimed ivanhoe, “this is no maiden's pastime—do
 not expose thyself to wounds and death, and render me for ever miserable
 for having given the occasion; at least, cover thyself with yonder ancient
 buckler, and show as little of your person at the lattice as may be.”
 following with wonderful promptitude the directions of ivanhoe, and
 availing herself of the protection of the large ancient shield, which she
 placed against the lower part of the window, rebecca, with tolerable
 security to herself, could witness part of what was passing without the
 castle, and report to ivanhoe the preparations which the assailants were
 making for the storm. indeed the situation which she thus obtained was
 peculiarly favourable for this purpose, because, being placed on an angle
 of the main building, rebecca could not only see what passed beyond the
 precincts of the castle, but also commanded a view of the outwork likely
 to be the first object of the meditated assault. it was an exterior
 fortification of no great height or strength, intended to protect the
 postern-gate, through which cedric had been recently dismissed by
 front-de-boeuf. the castle moat divided this species of barbican from the
 rest of the fortress, so that, in case of its being taken, it was easy to
 cut off the communication with the main building, by withdrawing the
 temporary bridge. in the outwork was a sallyport corresponding to the
 postern of the castle, and the whole was surrounded by a strong palisade.
 rebecca could observe, from the number of men placed for the defence of
 this post, that the besieged entertained apprehensions for its safety; and
 from the mustering of the assailants in a direction nearly opposite to the
 outwork, it seemed no less plain that it had been selected as a vulnerable
 point of attack.
 these appearances she hastily communicated to ivanhoe, and added, “the
 skirts of the wood seem lined with archers, although only a few are
 advanced from its dark shadow.”
 “under what banner?” asked ivanhoe.
 “under no ensign of war which i can observe,” answered rebecca.
 “a singular novelty,” muttered the knight, “to advance to storm such a
 castle without pennon or banner displayed!—seest thou who they be
 that act as leaders?”
 “a knight, clad in sable armour, is the most conspicuous,” said the
 jewess; “he alone is armed from head to heel, and seems to assume the
 direction of all around him.”
 “what device does he bear on his shield?” replied ivanhoe.
 “something resembling a bar of iron, and a padlock painted blue on the
 black shield.” 
 “a fetterlock and shacklebolt azure,” said ivanhoe; “i know not who may
 bear the device, but well i ween it might now be mine own. canst thou not
 see the motto?”
 “scarce the device itself at this distance,” replied rebecca; “but when
 the sun glances fair upon his shield, it shows as i tell you.”
 “seem there no other leaders?” exclaimed the anxious enquirer.
 “none of mark and distinction that i can behold from this station,” said
 rebecca; “but, doubtless, the other side of the castle is also assailed.
 they appear even now preparing to advance—god of zion, protect us!—what
 a dreadful sight!—those who advance first bear huge shields and
 defences made of plank; the others follow, bending their bows as they come
 on.—they raise their bows!—god of moses, forgive the creatures
 thou hast made!”
 her description was here suddenly interrupted by the signal for assault,
 which was given by the blast of a shrill bugle, and at once answered by a
 flourish of the norman trumpets from the battlements, which, mingled with
 the deep and hollow clang of the nakers, (a species of kettle-drum,)
 retorted in notes of defiance the challenge of the enemy. the shouts of
 both parties augmented the fearful din, the assailants crying, “saint
 george for merry england!” and the normans answering them with loud cries
 of “en avant de bracy!—beau-seant! beau-seant!—front-de-boeuf
 a la rescousse!” according to the war-cries of their different commanders.
 it was not, however, by clamour that the contest was to be decided, and
 the desperate efforts of the assailants were met by an equally vigorous
 defence on the part of the besieged. the archers, trained by their
 woodland pastimes to the most effective use of the long-bow, shot, to use
 the appropriate phrase of the time, so “wholly together,” that no point at
 which a defender could show the least part of his person, escaped their
 cloth-yard shafts. by this heavy discharge, which continued as thick and
 sharp as hail, while, notwithstanding, every arrow had its individual aim,
 and flew by scores together against each embrasure and opening in the
 parapets, as well as at every window where a defender either occasionally
 had post, or might be suspected to be stationed,—by this sustained
 discharge, two or three of the garrison were slain, and several others
 wounded. but, confident in their armour of proof, and in the cover which
 their situation afforded, the followers of front-de-boeuf, and his allies,
 showed an obstinacy in defence proportioned to the fury of the attack and
 replied with the discharge of their large cross-bows, as well as with
 their long-bows, slings, and other missile weapons, to the close and
 continued shower of arrows; and, as the assailants were necessarily but
 indifferently protected, did considerably more damage than they received
 at their hand. the whizzing of shafts and of missiles, on both sides, was
 only interrupted by the shouts which arose when either side inflicted or
 sustained some notable loss.
 “and i must lie here like a bedridden monk,” exclaimed ivanhoe, “while the
 game that gives me freedom or death is played out by the hand of others!—look
 from the window once again, kind maiden, but beware that you are not
 marked by the archers beneath—look out once more, and tell me if
 they yet advance to the storm.”
 with patient courage, strengthened by the interval which she had employed
 in mental devotion, rebecca again took post at the lattice, sheltering
 herself, however, so as not to be visible from beneath.
 “what dost thou see, rebecca?” again demanded the wounded knight.
 “nothing but the cloud of arrows flying so thick as to dazzle mine eyes,
 and to hide the bowmen who shoot them.”
 “that cannot endure,” said ivanhoe; “if they press not right on to carry
 the castle by pure force of arms, the archery may avail but little against
 stone walls and bulwarks. look for the knight of the fetterlock, fair
 rebecca, and see how he bears himself; for as the leader is, so will his
 followers be.”
 “i see him not,” said rebecca.
 “foul craven!” exclaimed ivanhoe; “does he blench from the helm when the
 wind blows highest?”
 “he blenches not! he blenches not!” said rebecca, “i see him now; he leads
 a body of men close under the outer barrier of the barbican. 
 —they pull down the piles and palisades; they hew down the barriers
 with axes.—his high black plume floats abroad over the throng, like
 a raven over the field of the slain.—they have made a breach in the
 barriers—they rush in—they are thrust back!—front-de-boeuf
 heads the defenders; i see his gigantic form above the press. they throng
 again to the breach, and the pass is disputed hand to hand, and man to
 man. god of jacob! it is the meeting of two fierce tides—the
 conflict of two oceans moved by adverse winds!”
 she turned her head from the lattice, as if unable longer to endure a
 sight so terrible.
 “look forth again, rebecca,” said ivanhoe, mistaking the cause of her
 retiring; “the archery must in some degree have ceased, since they are now
 fighting hand to hand.—look again, there is now less danger.”
 rebecca again looked forth, and almost immediately exclaimed, “holy
 prophets of the law! front-de-boeuf and the black knight fight hand to
 hand on the breach, amid the roar of their followers, who watch the
 progress of the strife—heaven strike with the cause of the oppressed
 and of the captive!” she then uttered a loud shriek, and exclaimed, “he is
 down!—he is down!”
 “who is down?” cried ivanhoe; “for our dear lady's sake, tell me which has
 fallen?”
 “the black knight,” answered rebecca, faintly; then instantly again
 shouted with joyful eagerness—“but no—but no!—the name
 of the lord of hosts be blessed!—he is on foot again, and fights as
 if there were twenty men's strength in his single arm—his sword is
 broken—he snatches an axe from a yeoman—he presses
 front-de-boeuf with blow on blow—the giant stoops and totters like
 an oak under the steel of the woodman—he falls—he falls!”
 “front-de-boeuf?” exclaimed ivanhoe.
 “front-de-boeuf!” answered the jewess; “his men rush to the rescue, headed
 by the haughty templar—their united force compels the champion to
 pause—they drag front-de-boeuf within the walls.”
 “the assailants have won the barriers, have they not?” said ivanhoe.
 “they have—they have!” exclaimed rebecca—“and they press the
 besieged hard upon the outer wall; some plant ladders, some swarm like
 bees, and endeavour to ascend upon the shoulders of each other—down
 go stones, beams, and trunks of trees upon their heads, and as fast as
 they bear the wounded to the rear, fresh men supply their places in the
 assault—great god! hast thou given men thine own image, that it
 should be thus cruelly defaced by the hands of their brethren!”
 “think not of that,” said ivanhoe; “this is no time for such thoughts—who
 yield?—who push their way?”
 “the ladders are thrown down,” replied rebecca, shuddering; “the soldiers
 lie grovelling under them like crushed reptiles—the besieged have
 the better.”
 “saint george strike for us!” exclaimed the knight; “do the false yeomen
 give way?”
 “no!” exclaimed rebecca, “they bear themselves right yeomanly—the
 black knight approaches the postern with his huge axe—the thundering
 blows which he deals, you may hear them above all the din and shouts of
 the battle—stones and beams are hailed down on the bold champion—he
 regards them no more than if they were thistle-down or feathers!”
 “by saint john of acre,” said ivanhoe, raising himself joyfully on his
 couch, “methought there was but one man in england that might do such a
 deed!”
 “the postern gate shakes,” continued rebecca; “it crashes—it is
 splintered by his blows—they rush in—the outwork is won—oh,
 god!—they hurl the defenders from the battlements—they throw
 them into the moat—o men, if ye be indeed men, spare them that can
 resist no longer!”
 “the bridge—the bridge which communicates with the castle—have
 they won that pass?” exclaimed ivanhoe.
 “no,” replied rebecca, “the templar has destroyed the plank on which they
 crossed—few of the defenders escaped with him into the castle—the
 shrieks and cries which you hear tell the fate of the others—alas!—i
 see it is still more difficult to look upon victory than upon battle.”
 “what do they now, maiden?” said ivanhoe; “look forth yet again—this
 is no time to faint at bloodshed.”
 “it is over for the time,” answered rebecca; “our friends strengthen
 themselves within the outwork which they have mastered, and it affords
 them so good a shelter from the foemen's shot, that the garrison only
 bestow a few bolts on it from interval to interval, as if rather to
 disquiet than effectually to injure them.”
 “our friends,” said wilfred, “will surely not abandon an enterprise so
 gloriously begun and so happily attained.—o no! i will put my faith
 in the good knight whose axe hath rent heart-of-oak and bars of iron.—singular,”
 he again muttered to himself, “if there be two who can do a deed of such
 derring-do! —a fetterlock, and a
 shacklebolt on a field sable—what may that mean?—seest thou
 nought else, rebecca, by which the black knight may be distinguished?”
 “nothing,” said the jewess; “all about him is black as the wing of the
 night raven. nothing can i spy that can mark him further—but having
 once seen him put forth his strength in battle, methinks i could know him
 again among a thousand warriors. he rushes to the fray as if he were
 summoned to a banquet. there is more than mere strength, there seems as if
 the whole soul and spirit of the champion were given to every blow which
 he deals upon his enemies. god assoilize him of the sin of bloodshed!—it
 is fearful, yet magnificent, to behold how the arm and heart of one man
 can triumph over hundreds.”
 “rebecca,” said ivanhoe, “thou hast painted a hero; surely they rest but
 to refresh their force, or to provide the means of crossing the moat—under
 such a leader as thou hast spoken this knight to be, there are no craven
 fears, no cold-blooded delays, no yielding up a gallant emprize; since the
 difficulties which render it arduous render it also glorious. i swear by
 the honour of my house—i vow by the name of my bright lady-love, i
 would endure ten years' captivity to fight one day by that good knight's
 side in such a quarrel as this!”
 “alas,” said rebecca, leaving her station at the window, and approaching
 the couch of the wounded knight, “this impatient yearning after action—this
 struggling with and repining at your present weakness, will not fail to
 injure your returning health—how couldst thou hope to inflict wounds
 on others, ere that be healed which thou thyself hast received?”
 “rebecca,” he replied, “thou knowest not how impossible it is for one
 trained to actions of chivalry to remain passive as a priest, or a woman,
 when they are acting deeds of honour around him. the love of battle is the
 food upon which we live—the dust of the 'melee' is the breath of our
 nostrils! we live not—we wish not to live—longer than while we
 are victorious and renowned—such, maiden, are the laws of chivalry
 to which we are sworn, and to which we offer all that we hold dear.”
 “alas!” said the fair jewess, “and what is it, valiant knight, save an
 offering of sacrifice to a demon of vain glory, and a passing through the
 fire to moloch?—what remains to you as the prize of all the blood
 you have spilled—of all the travail and pain you have endured—of
 all the tears which your deeds have caused, when death hath broken the
 strong man's spear, and overtaken the speed of his war-horse?”
 “what remains?” cried ivanhoe; “glory, maiden, glory! which gilds our
 sepulchre and embalms our name.”
 “glory?” continued rebecca; “alas, is the rusted mail which hangs as a
 hatchment over the champion's dim and mouldering tomb—is the defaced
 sculpture of the inscription which the ignorant monk can hardly read to
 the enquiring pilgrim—are these sufficient rewards for the sacrifice
 of every kindly affection, for a life spent miserably that ye may make
 others miserable? or is there such virtue in the rude rhymes of a
 wandering bard, that domestic love, kindly affection, peace and happiness,
 are so wildly bartered, to become the hero of those ballads which vagabond
 minstrels sing to drunken churls over their evening ale?”
 “by the soul of hereward!” replied the knight impatiently, “thou speakest,
 maiden, of thou knowest not what. thou wouldst quench the pure light of
 chivalry, which alone distinguishes the noble from the base, the gentle
 knight from the churl and the savage; which rates our life far, far
 beneath the pitch of our honour; raises us victorious over pain, toil, and
 suffering, and teaches us to fear no evil but disgrace. thou art no
 christian, rebecca; and to thee are unknown those high feelings which
 swell the bosom of a noble maiden when her lover hath done some deed of
 emprize which sanctions his flame. chivalry!—why, maiden, she is the
 nurse of pure and high affection—the stay of the oppressed, the
 redresser of grievances, the curb of the power of the tyrant—nobility
 were but an empty name without her, and liberty finds the best protection
 in her lance and her sword.”
 “i am, indeed,” said rebecca, “sprung from a race whose courage was
 distinguished in the defence of their own land, but who warred not, even
 while yet a nation, save at the command of the deity, or in defending
 their country from oppression. the sound of the trumpet wakes judah no
 longer, and her despised children are now but the unresisting victims of
 hostile and military oppression. well hast thou spoken, sir knight,—until
 the god of jacob shall raise up for his chosen people a second gideon, or
 a new maccabeus, it ill beseemeth the jewish damsel to speak of battle or
 of war.”
 the high-minded maiden concluded the argument in a tone of sorrow, which
 deeply expressed her sense of the degradation of her people, embittered
 perhaps by the idea that ivanhoe considered her as one not entitled to
 interfere in a case of honour, and incapable of entertaining or expressing
 sentiments of honour and generosity.
 “how little he knows this bosom,” she said, “to imagine that cowardice or
 meanness of soul must needs be its guests, because i have censured the
 fantastic chivalry of the nazarenes! would to heaven that the shedding of
 mine own blood, drop by drop, could redeem the captivity of judah! nay,
 would to god it could avail to set free my father, and this his
 benefactor, from the chains of the oppressor! the proud christian should
 then see whether the daughter of god's chosen people dared not to die as
 bravely as the vainest nazarene maiden, that boasts her descent from some
 petty chieftain of the rude and frozen north!”
 she then looked towards the couch of the wounded knight.
 “he sleeps,” she said; “nature exhausted by sufferance and the waste of
 spirits, his wearied frame embraces the first moment of temporary
 relaxation to sink into slumber. alas! is it a crime that i should look
 upon him, when it may be for the last time?—when yet but a short
 space, and those fair features will be no longer animated by the bold and
 buoyant spirit which forsakes them not even in sleep!—when the
 nostril shall be distended, the mouth agape, the eyes fixed and bloodshot;
 and when the proud and noble knight may be trodden on by the lowest
 caitiff of this accursed castle, yet stir not when the heel is lifted up
 against him!—and my father!—oh, my father! evil is it with his
 daughter, when his grey hairs are not remembered because of the golden
 locks of youth!—what know i but that these evils are the messengers
 of jehovah's wrath to the unnatural child, who thinks of a stranger's
 captivity before a parent's? who forgets the desolation of judah, and
 looks upon the comeliness of a gentile and a stranger?—but i will
 tear this folly from my heart, though every fibre bleed as i rend it
 away!”
 she wrapped herself closely in her veil, and sat down at a distance from
 the couch of the wounded knight, with her back turned towards it,
 fortifying, or endeavouring to fortify her mind, not only against the
 impending evils from without, but also against those treacherous feelings
 which assailed her from within.
 approach the chamber, look upon his bed.
 his is the passing of no peaceful ghost,
 which, as the lark arises to the sky,
 'mid morning's sweetest breeze and softest dew,
 is wing'd to heaven by good men's sighs and tears!—
 anselm parts otherwise.
 —old play
 during the interval of quiet which followed the first success of the
 besiegers, while the one party was preparing to pursue their advantage,
 and the other to strengthen their means of defence, the templar and de
 bracy held brief council together in the hall of the castle.
 “where is front-de-boeuf?” said the latter, who had superintended the
 defence of the fortress on the other side; “men say he hath been slain.”
 “he lives,” said the templar, coolly, “lives as yet; but had he worn the
 bull's head of which he bears the name, and ten plates of iron to fence it
 withal, he must have gone down before yonder fatal axe. yet a few hours,
 and front-de-boeuf is with his fathers—a powerful limb lopped off
 prince john's enterprise.”
 “and a brave addition to the kingdom of satan,” said de bracy; “this comes
 of reviling saints and angels, and ordering images of holy things and holy
 men to be flung down on the heads of these rascaille yeomen.”
 “go to—thou art a fool,” said the templar; “thy superstition is upon
 a level with front-de-boeuf's want of faith; neither of you can render a
 reason for your belief or unbelief.”
 “benedicite, sir templar,” replied de bracy, “pray you to keep better rule
 with your tongue when i am the theme of it. by the mother of heaven, i am
 a better christian man than thou and thy fellowship; for the 'bruit' goeth
 shrewdly out, that the most holy order of the temple of zion nurseth not a
 few heretics within its bosom, and that sir brian de bois-guilbert is of
 the number.”
 “care not thou for such reports,” said the templar; “but let us think of
 making good the castle.—how fought these villain yeomen on thy
 side?”
 “like fiends incarnate,” said de bracy. “they swarmed close up to the
 walls, headed, as i think, by the knave who won the prize at the archery,
 for i knew his horn and baldric. and this is old fitzurse's boasted
 policy, encouraging these malapert knaves to rebel against us! had i not
 been armed in proof, the villain had marked me down seven times with as
 little remorse as if i had been a buck in season. he told every rivet on
 my armour with a cloth-yard shaft, that rapped against my ribs with as
 little compunction as if my bones had been of iron—but that i wore a
 shirt of spanish mail under my plate-coat, i had been fairly sped.”
 “but you maintained your post?” said the templar. “we lost the outwork on
 our part.”
 “that is a shrewd loss,” said de bracy; “the knaves will find cover there
 to assault the castle more closely, and may, if not well watched, gain
 some unguarded corner of a tower, or some forgotten window, and so break
 in upon us. our numbers are too few for the defence of every point, and
 the men complain that they can nowhere show themselves, but they are the
 mark for as many arrows as a parish-butt on a holyday even. front-de-boeuf
 is dying too, so we shall receive no more aid from his bull's head and
 brutal strength. how think you, sir brian, were we not better make a
 virtue of necessity, and compound with the rogues by delivering up our
 prisoners?”
 “how?” exclaimed the templar; “deliver up our prisoners, and stand an
 object alike of ridicule and execration, as the doughty warriors who dared
 by a night-attack to possess themselves of the persons of a party of
 defenceless travellers, yet could not make good a strong castle against a
 vagabond troop of outlaws, led by swineherds, jesters, and the very refuse
 of mankind?—shame on thy counsel, maurice de bracy!—the ruins
 of this castle shall bury both my body and my shame, ere i consent to such
 base and dishonourable composition.”
 “let us to the walls, then,” said de bracy, carelessly; “that man never
 breathed, be he turk or templar, who held life at lighter rate than i do.
 but i trust there is no dishonour in wishing i had here some two scores of
 my gallant troop of free companions?—oh, my brave lances! if ye knew
 but how hard your captain were this day bested, how soon should i see my
 banner at the head of your clump of spears! and how short while would
 these rabble villains stand to endure your encounter!”
 “wish for whom thou wilt,” said the templar, “but let us make what defence
 we can with the soldiers who remain—they are chiefly
 front-de-boeuf's followers, hated by the english for a thousand acts of
 insolence and oppression.”
 “the better,” said de bracy; “the rugged slaves will defend themselves to
 the last drop of their blood, ere they encounter the revenge of the
 peasants without. let us up and be doing, then, brian de bois-guilbert;
 and, live or die, thou shalt see maurice de bracy bear himself this day as
 a gentleman of blood and lineage.”
 “to the walls!” answered the templar; and they both ascended the
 battlements to do all that skill could dictate, and manhood accomplish, in
 defence of the place. they readily agreed that the point of greatest
 danger was that opposite to the outwork of which the assailants had
 possessed themselves. the castle, indeed, was divided from that barbican
 by the moat, and it was impossible that the besiegers could assail the
 postern-door, with which the outwork corresponded, without surmounting
 that obstacle; but it was the opinion both of the templar and de bracy,
 that the besiegers, if governed by the same policy their leader had
 already displayed, would endeavour, by a formidable assault, to draw the
 chief part of the defenders' observation to this point, and take measures
 to avail themselves of every negligence which might take place in the
 defence elsewhere. to guard against such an evil, their numbers only
 permitted the knights to place sentinels from space to space along the
 walls in communication with each other, who might give the alarm whenever
 danger was threatened. meanwhile, they agreed that de bracy should command
 the defence at the postern, and the templar should keep with him a score
 of men or thereabouts as a body of reserve, ready to hasten to any other
 point which might be suddenly threatened. the loss of the barbican had
 also this unfortunate effect, that, notwithstanding the superior height of
 the castle walls, the besieged could not see from them, with the same
 precision as before, the operations of the enemy; for some straggling
 underwood approached so near the sallyport of the outwork, that the
 assailants might introduce into it whatever force they thought proper, not
 only under cover, but even without the knowledge of the defenders. utterly
 uncertain, therefore, upon what point the storm was to burst, de bracy and
 his companion were under the necessity of providing against every possible
 contingency, and their followers, however brave, experienced the anxious
 dejection of mind incident to men enclosed by enemies, who possessed the
 power of choosing their time and mode of attack.
 meanwhile, the lord of the beleaguered and endangered castle lay upon a
 bed of bodily pain and mental agony. he had not the usual resource of
 bigots in that superstitious period, most of whom were wont to atone for
 the crimes they were guilty of by liberality to the church, stupefying by
 this means their terrors by the idea of atonement and forgiveness; and
 although the refuge which success thus purchased, was no more like to the
 peace of mind which follows on sincere repentance, than the turbid
 stupefaction procured by opium resembles healthy and natural slumbers, it
 was still a state of mind preferable to the agonies of awakened remorse.
 but among the vices of front-de-boeuf, a hard and griping man, avarice was
 predominant; and he preferred setting church and churchmen at defiance, to
 purchasing from them pardon and absolution at the price of treasure and of
 manors. nor did the templar, an infidel of another stamp, justly
 characterise his associate, when he said front-de-boeuf could assign no
 cause for his unbelief and contempt for the established faith; for the
 baron would have alleged that the church sold her wares too dear, that the
 spiritual freedom which she put up to sale was only to be bought like that
 of the chief captain of jerusalem, “with a great sum,” and front-de-boeuf
 preferred denying the virtue of the medicine, to paying the expense of the
 physician.
 but the moment had now arrived when earth and all his treasures were
 gliding from before his eyes, and when the savage baron's heart, though
 hard as a nether millstone, became appalled as he gazed forward into the
 waste darkness of futurity. the fever of his body aided the impatience and
 agony of his mind, and his death-bed exhibited a mixture of the newly
 awakened feelings of horror, combating with the fixed and inveterate
 obstinacy of his disposition;—a fearful state of mind, only to be
 equalled in those tremendous regions, where there are complaints without
 hope, remorse without repentance, a dreadful sense of present agony, and a
 presentiment that it cannot cease or be diminished!
 “where be these dog-priests now,” growled the baron, “who set such price
 on their ghostly mummery?—where be all those unshod carmelites, for
 whom old front-de-boeuf founded the convent of st anne, robbing his heir
 of many a fair rood of meadow, and many a fat field and close—where
 be the greedy hounds now?—swilling, i warrant me, at the ale, or
 playing their juggling tricks at the bedside of some miserly churl.—me,
 the heir of their founder—me, whom their foundation binds them to
 pray for—me—ungrateful villains as they are!—they suffer
 to die like the houseless dog on yonder common, unshriven and unhouseled!—tell
 the templar to come hither—he is a priest, and may do something—but
 no!—as well confess myself to the devil as to brian de
 bois-guilbert, who recks neither of heaven nor of hell.—i have heard
 old men talk of prayer—prayer by their own voice—such need not
 to court or to bribe the false priest—but i—i dare not!”
 “lives reginald front-de-boeuf,” said a broken and shrill voice close by
 his bedside, “to say there is that which he dares not!”
 the evil conscience and the shaken nerves of front-de-boeuf heard, in this
 strange interruption to his soliloquy, the voice of one of those demons,
 who, as the superstition of the times believed, beset the beds of dying
 men to distract their thoughts, and turn them from the meditations which
 concerned their eternal welfare. he shuddered and drew himself together;
 but, instantly summoning up his wonted resolution, he exclaimed, “who is
 there?—what art thou, that darest to echo my words in a tone like
 that of the night-raven?—come before my couch that i may see thee.”
 “i am thine evil angel, reginald front-de-boeuf,” replied the voice.
 “let me behold thee then in thy bodily shape, if thou be'st indeed a
 fiend,” replied the dying knight; “think not that i will blench from thee.—by
 the eternal dungeon, could i but grapple with these horrors that hover
 round me, as i have done with mortal dangers, heaven or hell should never
 say that i shrunk from the conflict!”
 “think on thy sins, reginald front-de-boeuf,” said the almost unearthly
 voice, “on rebellion, on rapine, on murder!—who stirred up the
 licentious john to war against his grey-headed father—against his
 generous brother?”
 “be thou fiend, priest, or devil,” replied front-de-boeuf, “thou liest in
 thy throat!—not i stirred john to rebellion—not i alone—there
 were fifty knights and barons, the flower of the midland counties—better
 men never laid lance in rest—and must i answer for the fault done by
 fifty?—false fiend, i defy thee! depart, and haunt my couch no more—let
 me die in peace if thou be mortal—if thou be a demon, thy time is
 not yet come.”
 “in peace thou shalt not die,” repeated the voice; “even in death shalt
 thou think on thy murders—on the groans which this castle has echoed—on
 the blood that is engrained in its floors!”
 “thou canst not shake me by thy petty malice,” answered front-de-boeuf,
 with a ghastly and constrained laugh. “the infidel jew—it was merit
 with heaven to deal with him as i did, else wherefore are men canonized
 who dip their hands in the blood of saracens?—the saxon porkers,
 whom i have slain, they were the foes of my country, and of my lineage,
 and of my liege lord.—ho! ho! thou seest there is no crevice in my
 coat of plate—art thou fled?—art thou silenced?”
 “no, foul parricide!” replied the voice; “think of thy father!—think
 of his death!—think of his banquet-room flooded with his gore, and
 that poured forth by the hand of a son!”
 “ha!” answered the baron, after a long pause, “an thou knowest that, thou
 art indeed the author of evil, and as omniscient as the monks call thee!—that
 secret i deemed locked in my own breast, and in that of one besides—the
 temptress, the partaker of my guilt.—go, leave me, fiend! and seek
 the saxon witch ulrica, who alone could tell thee what she and i alone
 witnessed.—go, i say, to her, who washed the wounds, and straighted
 the corpse, and gave to the slain man the outward show of one parted in
 time and in the course of nature—go to her, she was my temptress,
 the foul provoker, the more foul rewarder, of the deed—let her, as
 well as i, taste of the tortures which anticipate hell!”
 “she already tastes them,” said ulrica, stepping before the couch of
 front-de-boeuf; “she hath long drunken of this cup, and its bitterness is
 now sweetened to see that thou dost partake it.—grind not thy teeth,
 front-de-boeuf—roll not thine eyes—clench not thine hand, nor
 shake it at me with that gesture of menace!—the hand which, like
 that of thy renowned ancestor who gained thy name, could have broken with
 one stroke the skull of a mountain-bull, is now unnerved and powerless as
 mine own!”
 “vile murderous hag!” replied front-de-boeuf; “detestable screech-owl! it
 is then thou who art come to exult over the ruins thou hast assisted to
 lay low?”
 “ay, reginald front-de-boeuf,” answered she, “it is ulrica!—it is
 the daughter of the murdered torquil wolfganger!—it is the sister of
 his slaughtered sons!—it is she who demands of thee, and of thy
 father's house, father and kindred, name and fame—all that she has
 lost by the name of front-de-boeuf!—think of my wrongs,
 front-de-boeuf, and answer me if i speak not truth. thou hast been my evil
 angel, and i will be thine—i will dog thee till the very instant of
 dissolution!”
 “detestable fury!” exclaimed front-de-boeuf, “that moment shalt thou never
 witness—ho! giles, clement, and eustace! saint maur, and stephen!
 seize this damned witch, and hurl her from the battlements headlong—she
 has betrayed us to the saxon!—ho! saint maur! clement!
 false-hearted, knaves, where tarry ye?”
 “call on them again, valiant baron,” said the hag, with a smile of grisly
 mockery; “summon thy vassals around thee, doom them that loiter to the
 scourge and the dungeon—but know, mighty chief,” she continued,
 suddenly changing her tone, “thou shalt have neither answer, nor aid, nor
 obedience at their hands.—listen to these horrid sounds,” for the
 din of the recommenced assault and defence now rung fearfully loud from
 the battlements of the castle; “in that war-cry is the downfall of thy
 house—the blood-cemented fabric of front-de-boeuf's power totters to
 the foundation, and before the foes he most despised!—the saxon,
 reginald!—the scorned saxon assails thy walls!—why liest thou
 here, like a worn-out hind, when the saxon storms thy place of strength?”
 “gods and fiends!” exclaimed the wounded knight; “o, for one moment's
 strength, to drag myself to the 'melee', and perish as becomes my name!”
 “think not of it, valiant warrior!” replied she; “thou shalt die no
 soldier's death, but perish like the fox in his den, when the peasants
 have set fire to the cover around it.”
 “hateful hag! thou liest!” exclaimed front-de-boeuf; “my followers bear
 them bravely—my walls are strong and high—my comrades in arms
 fear not a whole host of saxons, were they headed by hengist and horsa!—the
 war-cry of the templar and of the free companions rises high over the
 conflict! and by mine honour, when we kindle the blazing beacon, for joy
 of our defence, it shall consume thee, body and bones; and i shall live to
 hear thou art gone from earthly fires to those of that hell, which never
 sent forth an incarnate fiend more utterly diabolical!”
 “hold thy belief,” replied ulrica, “till the proof reach thee—but,
 no!” she said, interrupting herself, “thou shalt know, even now, the doom,
 which all thy power, strength, and courage, is unable to avoid, though it
 is prepared for thee by this feeble band. markest thou the smouldering and
 suffocating vapour which already eddies in sable folds through the
 chamber?—didst thou think it was but the darkening of thy bursting
 eyes—the difficulty of thy cumbered breathing?—no!
 front-de-boeuf, there is another cause—rememberest thou the magazine
 of fuel that is stored beneath these apartments?”
 “woman!” he exclaimed with fury, “thou hast not set fire to it?—by
 heaven, thou hast, and the castle is in flames!”
 “they are fast rising at least,” said ulrica, with frightful composure;
 “and a signal shall soon wave to warn the besiegers to press hard upon
 those who would extinguish them.—farewell, front-de-boeuf!—may
 mista, skogula, and zernebock, gods of the ancient saxons—fiends, as
 the priests now call them—supply the place of comforters at your
 dying bed, which ulrica now relinquishes!—but know, if it will give
 thee comfort to know it, that ulrica is bound to the same dark coast with
 thyself, the companion of thy punishment as the companion of thy guilt.—and
 now, parricide, farewell for ever!—may each stone of this vaulted
 roof find a tongue to echo that title into thine ear!”
 so saying, she left the apartment; and front-de-boeuf could hear the crash
 of the ponderous key, as she locked and double-locked the door behind her,
 thus cutting off the most slender chance of escape. in the extremity of
 agony he shouted upon his servants and allies—“stephen and saint
 maur!—clement and giles!—i burn here unaided!—to the
 rescue—to the rescue, brave bois-guilbert, valiant de bracy!—it
 is front-de-boeuf who calls!—it is your master, ye traitor squires!—your
 ally—your brother in arms, ye perjured and faithless knights!—all
 the curses due to traitors upon your recreant heads, do you abandon me to
 perish thus miserably!—they hear me not—they cannot hear me—my
 voice is lost in the din of battle.—the smoke rolls thicker and
 thicker—the fire has caught upon the floor below—o, for one
 drought of the air of heaven, were it to be purchased by instant
 annihilation!” and in the mad frenzy of despair, the wretch now shouted
 with the shouts of the fighters, now muttered curses on himself, on
 mankind, and on heaven itself.—“the red fire flashes through the
 thick smoke!” he exclaimed; “the demon marches against me under the banner
 of his own element—foul spirit, avoid!—i go not with thee
 without my comrades—all, all are thine, that garrison these walls—thinkest
 thou front-de-boeuf will be singled out to go alone?—no—the
 infidel templar—the licentious de bracy—ulrica, the foul
 murdering strumpet—the men who aided my enterprises—the dog
 saxons and accursed jews, who are my prisoners—all, all shall attend
 me—a goodly fellowship as ever took the downward road—ha, ha,
 ha!” and he laughed in his frenzy till the vaulted roof rang again. “who
 laughed there?” exclaimed front-de-boeuf, in altered mood, for the noise
 of the conflict did not prevent the echoes of his own mad laughter from
 returning upon his ear—“who laughed there?—ulrica, was it
 thou?—speak, witch, and i forgive thee—for, only thou or the
 fiend of hell himself could have laughed at such a moment. avaunt—avaunt!—-”
 but it were impious to trace any farther the picture of the blasphemer and
 parricide's deathbed.
 once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more,
 or, close the wall up with our english dead.
 ———-and you, good yeomen,
 whose limbs were made in england, show us here
 the mettle of your pasture—let us swear
 that you are worth your breeding.
 king henry v
 cedric, although not greatly confident in ulrica's message, omitted not to
 communicate her promise to the black knight and locksley. they were well
 pleased to find they had a friend within the place, who might, in the
 moment of need, be able to facilitate their entrance, and readily agreed
 with the saxon that a storm, under whatever disadvantages, ought to be
 attempted, as the only means of liberating the prisoners now in the hands
 of the cruel front-de-boeuf.
 “the royal blood of alfred is endangered,” said cedric.
 “the honour of a noble lady is in peril,” said the black knight.
 “and, by the saint christopher at my baldric,” said the good yeoman, “were
 there no other cause than the safety of that poor faithful knave, wamba, i
 would jeopard a joint ere a hair of his head were hurt.”
 “and so would i,” said the friar; “what, sirs! i trust well that a fool—i
 mean, d'ye see me, sirs, a fool that is free of his guild and master of
 his craft, and can give as much relish and flavour to a cup of wine as
 ever a flitch of bacon can—i say, brethren, such a fool shall never
 want a wise clerk to pray for or fight for him at a strait, while i can
 say a mass or flourish a partisan.” and with that he made his heavy
 halberd to play around his head as a shepherd boy flourishes his light
 crook.
 “true, holy clerk,” said the black knight, “true as if saint dunstan
 himself had said it.—and now, good locksley, were it not well that
 noble cedric should assume the direction of this assault?”
 “not a jot i,” returned cedric; “i have never been wont to study either
 how to take or how to hold out those abodes of tyrannic power, which the
 normans have erected in this groaning land. i will fight among the
 foremost; but my honest neighbours well know i am not a trained soldier in
 the discipline of wars, or the attack of strongholds.”
 “since it stands thus with noble cedric,” said locksley, “i am most
 willing to take on me the direction of the archery; and ye shall hang me
 up on my own trysting-tree, an the defenders be permitted to show
 themselves over the walls without being stuck with as many shafts as there
 are cloves in a gammon of bacon at christmas.”
 “well said, stout yeoman,” answered the black knight; “and if i be thought
 worthy to have a charge in these matters, and can find among these brave
 men as many as are willing to follow a true english knight, for so i may
 surely call myself, i am ready, with such skill as my experience has
 taught me, to lead them to the attack of these walls.”
 the parts being thus distributed to the leaders, they commenced the first
 assault, of which the reader has already heard the issue.
 when the barbican was carried, the sable knight sent notice of the happy
 event to locksley, requesting him at the same time, to keep such a strict
 observation on the castle as might prevent the defenders from combining
 their force for a sudden sally, and recovering the outwork which they had
 lost. this the knight was chiefly desirous of avoiding, conscious that the
 men whom he led, being hasty and untrained volunteers, imperfectly armed
 and unaccustomed to discipline, must, upon any sudden attack, fight at
 great disadvantage with the veteran soldiers of the norman knights, who
 were well provided with arms both defensive and offensive; and who, to
 match the zeal and high spirit of the besiegers, had all the confidence
 which arises from perfect discipline and the habitual use of weapons.
 the knight employed the interval in causing to be constructed a sort of
 floating bridge, or long raft, by means of which he hoped to cross the
 moat in despite of the resistance of the enemy. this was a work of some
 time, which the leaders the less regretted, as it gave ulrica leisure to
 execute her plan of diversion in their favour, whatever that might be.
 when the raft was completed, the black knight addressed the besiegers:—“it
 avails not waiting here longer, my friends; the sun is descending to the
 west—and i have that upon my hands which will not permit me to tarry
 with you another day. besides, it will be a marvel if the horsemen come
 not upon us from york, unless we speedily accomplish our purpose.
 wherefore, one of ye go to locksley, and bid him commence a discharge of
 arrows on the opposite side of the castle, and move forward as if about to
 assault it; and you, true english hearts, stand by me, and be ready to
 thrust the raft endlong over the moat whenever the postern on our side is
 thrown open. follow me boldly across, and aid me to burst yon sallyport in
 the main wall of the castle. as many of you as like not this service, or
 are but ill armed to meet it, do you man the top of the outwork, draw your
 bow-strings to your ears, and mind you quell with your shot whatever shall
 appear to man the rampart—noble cedric, wilt thou take the direction
 of those which remain?”
 “not so, by the soul of hereward!” said the saxon; “lead i cannot; but may
 posterity curse me in my grave, if i follow not with the foremost wherever
 thou shalt point the way—the quarrel is mine, and well it becomes me
 to be in the van of the battle.”
 “yet, bethink thee, noble saxon,” said the knight, “thou hast neither
 hauberk, nor corslet, nor aught but that light helmet, target, and sword.”
 “the better!” answered cedric; “i shall be the lighter to climb these
 walls. and,—forgive the boast, sir knight,—thou shalt this day
 see the naked breast of a saxon as boldly presented to the battle as ever
 ye beheld the steel corslet of a norman.”
 “in the name of god, then,” said the knight, “fling open the door, and
 launch the floating bridge.”
 the portal, which led from the inner-wall of the barbican to the moat, and
 which corresponded with a sallyport in the main wall of the castle, was
 now suddenly opened; the temporary bridge was then thrust forward, and
 soon flashed in the waters, extending its length between the castle and
 outwork, and forming a slippery and precarious passage for two men abreast
 to cross the moat. well aware of the importance of taking the foe by
 surprise, the black knight, closely followed by cedric, threw himself upon
 the bridge, and reached the opposite side. here he began to thunder with
 his axe upon the gate of the castle, protected in part from the shot and
 stones cast by the defenders by the ruins of the former drawbridge, which
 the templar had demolished in his retreat from the barbican, leaving the
 counterpoise still attached to the upper part of the portal. the followers
 of the knight had no such shelter; two were instantly shot with cross-bow
 bolts, and two more fell into the moat; the others retreated back into the
 barbican.
 the situation of cedric and of the black knight was now truly dangerous,
 and would have been still more so, but for the constancy of the archers in
 the barbican, who ceased not to shower their arrows upon the battlements,
 distracting the attention of those by whom they were manned, and thus
 affording a respite to their two chiefs from the storm of missiles which
 must otherwise have overwhelmed them. but their situation was eminently
 perilous, and was becoming more so with every moment.
 “shame on ye all!” cried de bracy to the soldiers around him; “do ye call
 yourselves cross-bowmen, and let these two dogs keep their station under
 the walls of the castle?—heave over the coping stones from the
 battlements, an better may not be—get pick-axe and levers, and down
 with that huge pinnacle!” pointing to a heavy piece of stone carved-work
 that projected from the parapet.
 at this moment the besiegers caught sight of the red flag upon the angle
 of the tower which ulrica had described to cedric. the stout yeoman
 locksley was the first who was aware of it, as he was hasting to the
 outwork, impatient to see the progress of the assault.
 “saint george!” he cried, “merry saint george for england!—to the
 charge, bold yeomen!—why leave ye the good knight and noble cedric
 to storm the pass alone?—make in, mad priest, show thou canst fight
 for thy rosary,—make in, brave yeomen!—the castle is ours, we
 have friends within—see yonder flag, it is the appointed signal—torquilstone
 is ours!—think of honour, think of spoil—one effort, and the
 place is ours!”
 with that he bent his good bow, and sent a shaft right through the breast
 of one of the men-at-arms, who, under de bracy's direction, was loosening
 a fragment from one of the battlements to precipitate on the heads of
 cedric and the black knight. a second soldier caught from the hands of the
 dying man the iron crow, with which he heaved at and had loosened the
 stone pinnacle, when, receiving an arrow through his head-piece, he
 dropped from the battlements into the moat a dead man. the men-at-arms
 were daunted, for no armour seemed proof against the shot of this
 tremendous archer.
 “do you give ground, base knaves!” said de bracy; “'mount joye saint
 dennis!'—give me the lever!”
 and, snatching it up, he again assailed the loosened pinnacle, which was
 of weight enough, if thrown down, not only to have destroyed the remnant
 of the drawbridge, which sheltered the two foremost assailants, but also
 to have sunk the rude float of planks over which they had crossed. all saw
 the danger, and the boldest, even the stout friar himself, avoided setting
 foot on the raft. thrice did locksley bend his shaft against de bracy, and
 thrice did his arrow bound back from the knight's armour of proof.
 “curse on thy spanish steel-coat!” said locksley, “had english smith
 forged it, these arrows had gone through, an as if it had been silk or
 sendal.” he then began to call out, “comrades! friends! noble cedric! bear
 back, and let the ruin fall.”
 his warning voice was unheard, for the din which the knight himself
 occasioned by his strokes upon the postern would have drowned twenty
 war-trumpets. the faithful gurth indeed sprung forward on the planked
 bridge, to warn cedric of his impending fate, or to share it with him. but
 his warning would have come too late; the massive pinnacle already
 tottered, and de bracy, who still heaved at his task, would have
 accomplished it, had not the voice of the templar sounded close in his
 ears:—
 “all is lost, de bracy, the castle burns.”
 “thou art mad to say so!” replied the knight.
 “it is all in a light flame on the western side. i have striven in vain to
 extinguish it.”
 with the stern coolness which formed the basis of his character, brian de
 bois-guilbert communicated this hideous intelligence, which was not so
 calmly received by his astonished comrade.
 “saints of paradise!” said de bracy; “what is to be done? i vow to saint
 nicholas of limoges a candlestick of pure gold—”
 “spare thy vow,” said the templar, “and mark me. lead thy men down, as if
 to a sally; throw the postern-gate open—there are but two men who
 occupy the float, fling them into the moat, and push across for the
 barbican. i will charge from the main gate, and attack the barbican on the
 outside; and if we can regain that post, be assured we shall defend
 ourselves until we are relieved, or at least till they grant us fair
 quarter.”
 “it is well thought upon,” said de bracy; “i will play my part—templar,
 thou wilt not fail me?”
 “hand and glove, i will not!” said bois-guilbert. “but haste thee, in the
 name of god!”
 de bracy hastily drew his men together, and rushed down to the
 postern-gate, which he caused instantly to be thrown open. but scarce was
 this done ere the portentous strength of the black knight forced his way
 inward in despite of de bracy and his followers. two of the foremost
 instantly fell, and the rest gave way notwithstanding all their leader's
 efforts to stop them.
 “dogs!” said de bracy, “will ye let two men win our only pass for safety?”
 “he is the devil!” said a veteran man-at-arms, bearing back from the blows
 of their sable antagonist.
 “and if he be the devil,” replied de bracy, “would you fly from him into
 the mouth of hell?—the castle burns behind us, villains!—let
 despair give you courage, or let me forward! i will cope with this
 champion myself.”
 and well and chivalrous did de bracy that day maintain the fame he had
 acquired in the civil wars of that dreadful period. the vaulted passage to
 which the postern gave entrance, and in which these two redoubted
 champions were now fighting hand to hand, rung with the furious blows
 which they dealt each other, de bracy with his sword, the black knight
 with his ponderous axe. at length the norman received a blow, which,
 though its force was partly parried by his shield, for otherwise never
 more would de bracy have again moved limb, descended yet with such
 violence on his crest, that he measured his length on the paved floor.
 “yield thee, de bracy,” said the black champion, stooping over him, and
 holding against the bars of his helmet the fatal poniard with which the
 knights dispatched their enemies, (and which was called the dagger of
 mercy,)—“yield thee, maurice de bracy, rescue or no rescue, or thou
 art but a dead man.”
 “i will not yield,” replied de bracy faintly, “to an unknown conqueror.
 tell me thy name, or work thy pleasure on me—it shall never be said
 that maurice de bracy was prisoner to a nameless churl.”
 the black knight whispered something into the ear of the vanquished.
 “i yield me to be true prisoner, rescue or no rescue,” answered the
 norman, exchanging his tone of stern and determined obstinacy for one of
 deep though sullen submission.
 “go to the barbican,” said the victor, in a tone of authority, “and there
 wait my further orders.”
 “yet first, let me say,” said de bracy, “what it imports thee to know.
 wilfred of ivanhoe is wounded and a prisoner, and will perish in the
 burning castle without present help.”
 “wilfred of ivanhoe!” exclaimed the black knight—“prisoner, and
 perish!—the life of every man in the castle shall answer it if a
 hair of his head be singed—show me his chamber!”
 “ascend yonder winding stair,” said de bracy; “it leads to his apartment—wilt
 thou not accept my guidance?” he added, in a submissive voice.
 “no. to the barbican, and there wait my orders. i trust thee not, de
 bracy.”
 during this combat and the brief conversation which ensued, cedric, at the
 head of a body of men, among whom the friar was conspicuous, had pushed
 across the bridge as soon as they saw the postern open, and drove back the
 dispirited and despairing followers of de bracy, of whom some asked
 quarter, some offered vain resistance, and the greater part fled towards
 the court-yard. de bracy himself arose from the ground, and cast a
 sorrowful glance after his conqueror. “he trusts me not!” he repeated;
 “but have i deserved his trust?” he then lifted his sword from the floor,
 took off his helmet in token of submission, and, going to the barbican,
 gave up his sword to locksley, whom he met by the way.
 as the fire augmented, symptoms of it became soon apparent in the chamber,
 where ivanhoe was watched and tended by the jewess rebecca. he had been
 awakened from his brief slumber by the noise of the battle; and his
 attendant, who had, at his anxious desire, again placed herself at the
 window to watch and report to him the fate of the attack, was for some
 time prevented from observing either, by the increase of the smouldering
 and stifling vapour. at length the volumes of smoke which rolled into the
 apartment—the cries for water, which were heard even above the din
 of the battle made them sensible of the progress of this new danger.
 “the castle burns,” said rebecca; “it burns!—what can we do to save
 ourselves?”
 “fly, rebecca, and save thine own life,” said ivanhoe, “for no human aid
 can avail me.”
 “i will not fly,” answered rebecca; “we will be saved or perish together—and
 yet, great god!—my father, my father—what will be his fate!”
 at this moment the door of the apartment flew open, and the templar
 presented himself,—a ghastly figure, for his gilded armour was
 broken and bloody, and the plume was partly shorn away, partly burnt from
 his casque. “i have found thee,” said he to rebecca; “thou shalt prove i
 will keep my word to share weal and woe with thee—there is but one
 path to safety, i have cut my way through fifty dangers to point it to
 thee—up, and instantly follow me!” 
 “alone,” answered rebecca, “i will not follow thee. if thou wert born of
 woman—if thou hast but a touch of human charity in thee—if thy
 heart be not hard as thy breastplate—save my aged father—save
 this wounded knight!”
 “a knight,” answered the templar, with his characteristic calmness, “a
 knight, rebecca, must encounter his fate, whether it meet him in the shape
 of sword or flame—and who recks how or where a jew meets with his?”
 “savage warrior,” said rebecca, “rather will i perish in the flames than
 accept safety from thee!”
 “thou shalt not choose, rebecca—once didst thou foil me, but never
 mortal did so twice.”
 so saying, he seized on the terrified maiden, who filled the air with her
 shrieks, and bore her out of the room in his arms in spite of her cries,
 and without regarding the menaces and defiance which ivanhoe thundered
 against him. “hound of the temple—stain to thine order—set
 free the damsel! traitor of bois-guilbert, it is ivanhoe commands thee!—villain,
 i will have thy heart's blood!”
original
 “i had not found thee, wilfred,” said the black knight, who at that
 instant entered the apartment, “but for thy shouts.”
 “if thou be'st true knight,” said wilfred, “think not of me—pursue
 yon ravisher—save the lady rowena—look to the noble cedric!”
 “in their turn,” answered he of the fetterlock, “but thine is first.”
 and seizing upon ivanhoe, he bore him off with as much ease as the templar
 had carried off rebecca, rushed with him to the postern, and having there
 delivered his burden to the care of two yeomen, he again entered the
 castle to assist in the rescue of the other prisoners.
 one turret was now in bright flames, which flashed out furiously from
 window and shot-hole. but in other parts, the great thickness of the walls
 and the vaulted roofs of the apartments, resisted the progress of the
 flames, and there the rage of man still triumphed, as the scarce more
 dreadful element held mastery elsewhere; for the besiegers pursued the
 defenders of the castle from chamber to chamber, and satiated in their
 blood the vengeance which had long animated them against the soldiers of
 the tyrant front-de-boeuf. most of the garrison resisted to the uttermost—few
 of them asked quarter—none received it. the air was filled with
 groans and clashing of arms—the floors were slippery with the blood
 of despairing and expiring wretches.
 through this scene of confusion, cedric rushed in quest of rowena, while
 the faithful gurth, following him closely through the “melee”, neglected
 his own safety while he strove to avert the blows that were aimed at his
 master. the noble saxon was so fortunate as to reach his ward's apartment
 just as she had abandoned all hope of safety, and, with a crucifix clasped
 in agony to her bosom, sat in expectation of instant death. he committed
 her to the charge of gurth, to be conducted in safety to the barbican, the
 road to which was now cleared of the enemy, and not yet interrupted by the
 flames. this accomplished, the loyal cedric hastened in quest of his
 friend athelstane, determined, at every risk to himself, to save that last
 scion of saxon royalty. but ere cedric penetrated as far as the old hall
 in which he had himself been a prisoner, the inventive genius of wamba had
 procured liberation for himself and his companion in adversity.
 when the noise of the conflict announced that it was at the hottest, the
 jester began to shout, with the utmost power of his lungs, “saint george
 and the dragon!—bonny saint george for merry england!—the
 castle is won!” and these sounds he rendered yet more fearful, by banging
 against each other two or three pieces of rusty armour which lay scattered
 around the hall.
 a guard, which had been stationed in the outer, or anteroom, and whose
 spirits were already in a state of alarm, took fright at wamba's clamour,
 and, leaving the door open behind them, ran to tell the templar that
 foemen had entered the old hall. meantime the prisoners found no
 difficulty in making their escape into the anteroom, and from thence into
 the court of the castle, which was now the last scene of contest. here sat
 the fierce templar, mounted on horseback, surrounded by several of the
 garrison both on horse and foot, who had united their strength to that of
 this renowned leader, in order to secure the last chance of safety and
 retreat which remained to them. the drawbridge had been lowered by his
 orders, but the passage was beset; for the archers, who had hitherto only
 annoyed the castle on that side by their missiles, no sooner saw the
 flames breaking out, and the bridge lowered, than they thronged to the
 entrance, as well to prevent the escape of the garrison, as to secure
 their own share of booty ere the castle should be burnt down. on the other
 hand, a party of the besiegers who had entered by the postern were now
 issuing out into the court-yard, and attacking with fury the remnant of
 the defenders who were thus assaulted on both sides at once.
 animated, however, by despair, and supported by the example of their
 indomitable leader, the remaining soldiers of the castle fought with the
 utmost valour; and, being well-armed, succeeded more than once in driving
 back the assailants, though much inferior in numbers. rebecca, placed on
 horseback before one of the templar's saracen slaves, was in the midst of
 the little party; and bois-guilbert, notwithstanding the confusion of the
 bloody fray, showed every attention to her safety. repeatedly he was by
 her side, and, neglecting his own defence, held before her the fence of
 his triangular steel-plated shield; and anon starting from his position by
 her, he cried his war-cry, dashed forward, struck to earth the most
 forward of the assailants, and was on the same instant once more at her
 bridle rein.
 athelstane, who, as the reader knows, was slothful, but not cowardly,
 beheld the female form whom the templar protected thus sedulously, and
 doubted not that it was rowena whom the knight was carrying off, in
 despite of all resistance which could be offered.
 “by the soul of saint edward,” he said, “i will rescue her from yonder
 over-proud knight, and he shall die by my hand!”
 “think what you do!” cried wamba; “hasty hand catches frog for fish—by
 my bauble, yonder is none of my lady rowena—see but her long dark
 locks!—nay, an ye will not know black from white, ye may be leader,
 but i will be no follower—no bones of mine shall be broken unless i
 know for whom.—and you without armour too!—bethink you, silk
 bonnet never kept out steel blade.—nay, then, if wilful will to
 water, wilful must drench.—'deus vobiscum', most doughty
 athelstane!”—he concluded, loosening the hold which he had hitherto
 kept upon the saxon's tunic.
 to snatch a mace from the pavement, on which it lay beside one whose dying
 grasp had just relinquished it—to rush on the templar's band, and to
 strike in quick succession to the right and left, levelling a warrior at
 each blow, was, for athelstane's great strength, now animated with unusual
 fury, but the work of a single moment; he was soon within two yards of
 bois-guilbert, whom he defied in his loudest tone.
 “turn, false-hearted templar! let go her whom thou art unworthy to touch—turn,
 limb of a hand of murdering and hypocritical robbers!”
 “dog!” said the templar, grinding his teeth, “i will teach thee to
 blaspheme the holy order of the temple of zion;” and with these words,
 half-wheeling his steed, he made a demi-courbette towards the saxon, and
 rising in the stirrups, so as to take full advantage of the descent of the
 horse, he discharged a fearful blow upon the head of athelstane.
 well said wamba, that silken bonnet keeps out no steel blade. so trenchant
 was the templar's weapon, that it shore asunder, as it had been a willow
 twig, the tough and plaited handle of the mace, which the ill-fated saxon
 reared to parry the blow, and, descending on his head, levelled him with
 the earth.
 “'ha! beau-seant!'” exclaimed bois-guilbert, “thus be it to the maligners
 of the temple-knights!” taking advantage of the dismay which was spread by
 the fall of athelstane, and calling aloud, “those who would save
 themselves, follow me!” he pushed across the drawbridge, dispersing the
 archers who would have intercepted them. he was followed by his saracens,
 and some five or six men-at-arms, who had mounted their horses. the
 templar's retreat was rendered perilous by the numbers of arrows shot off
 at him and his party; but this did not prevent him from galloping round to
 the barbican, of which, according to his previous plan, he supposed it
 possible de bracy might have been in possession.
 “de bracy! de bracy!” he shouted, “art thou there?”
 “i am here,” replied de bracy, “but i am a prisoner.”
 “can i rescue thee?” cried bois-guilbert.
 “no,” replied de bracy; “i have rendered me, rescue or no rescue. i will
 be true prisoner. save thyself—there are hawks abroad—put the
 seas betwixt you and england—i dare not say more.”
 “well,” answered the templar, “an thou wilt tarry there, remember i have
 redeemed word and glove. be the hawks where they will, methinks the walls
 of the preceptory of templestowe will be cover sufficient, and thither
 will i, like heron to her haunt.”
 having thus spoken, he galloped off with his followers.
 those of the castle who had not gotten to horse, still continued to fight
 desperately with the besiegers, after the departure of the templar, but
 rather in despair of quarter than that they entertained any hope of
 escape. the fire was spreading rapidly through all parts of the castle,
 when ulrica, who had first kindled it, appeared on a turret, in the guise
 of one of the ancient furies, yelling forth a war-song, such as was of
 yore raised on the field of battle by the scalds of the yet heathen
 saxons. her long dishevelled grey hair flew back from her uncovered head;
 the inebriating delight of gratified vengeance contended in her eyes with
 the fire of insanity; and she brandished the distaff which she held in her
 hand, as if she had been one of the fatal sisters, who spin and abridge
 the thread of human life. tradition has preserved some wild strophes of
 the barbarous hymn which she chanted wildly amid that scene of fire and of
 slaughter:—
 whet the bright steel,
 sons of the white dragon!
 kindle the torch,
 daughter of hengist!
 the steel glimmers not for the carving of the banquet,
 it is hard, broad, and sharply pointed;
 the torch goeth not to the bridal chamber,
 it steams and glitters blue with sulphur.
 whet the steel, the raven croaks!
 light the torch, zernebock is yelling!
 whet the steel, sons of the dragon!
 kindle the torch, daughter of hengist!
 the black cloud is low over the thane's castle
 the eagle screams—he rides on its bosom.
 scream not, grey rider of the sable cloud,
 thy banquet is prepared!
 the maidens of valhalla look forth,
 the race of hengist will send them guests.
 shake your black tresses, maidens of valhalla!
 and strike your loud timbrels for joy!
 many a haughty step bends to your halls,
 many a helmed head.
 dark sits the evening upon the thanes castle,
 the black clouds gather round;
 soon shall they be red as the blood of the valiant!
 the destroyer of forests shall shake his red crest against
 them.
 he, the bright consumer of palaces,
 broad waves he his blazing banner,
 red, wide and dusky,
 over the strife of the valiant:
 his joy is in the clashing swords and broken bucklers;
 he loves to lick the hissing blood as it bursts warm from the
 wound!
 all must perish!
 the sword cleaveth the helmet;
 the strong armour is pierced by the lance;
 fire devoureth the dwelling of princes,
 engines break down the fences of the battle.
 all must perish!
 the race of hengist is gone—
 the name of horsa is no more!
 shrink not then from your doom, sons of the sword!
 let your blades drink blood like wine;
 feast ye in the banquet of slaughter,
 by the light of the blazing halls!
 strong be your swords while your blood is warm,
 and spare neither for pity nor fear,
 for vengeance hath but an hour;
 strong hate itself shall expire
 i also must perish! 
 the towering flames had now surmounted every obstruction, and rose to the
 evening skies one huge and burning beacon, seen far and wide through the
 adjacent country. tower after tower crashed down, with blazing roof and
 rafter; and the combatants were driven from the court-yard. the
 vanquished, of whom very few remained, scattered and escaped into the
 neighbouring wood. the victors, assembling in large bands, gazed with
 wonder, not unmixed with fear, upon the flames, in which their own ranks
 and arms glanced dusky red. the maniac figure of the saxon ulrica was for
 a long time visible on the lofty stand she had chosen, tossing her arms
 abroad with wild exultation, as if she reined empress of the conflagration
 which she had raised. at length, with a terrific crash, the whole turret
 gave way, and she perished in the flames which had consumed her tyrant. an
 awful pause of horror silenced each murmur of the armed spectators, who,
 for the space of several minutes, stirred not a finger, save to sign the
 cross. the voice of locksley was then heard, “shout, yeomen!—the den
 of tyrants is no more! let each bring his spoil to our chosen place of
 rendezvous at the trysting-tree in the harthill-walk; for there at break
 of day will we make just partition among our own bands, together with our
 worthy allies in this great deed of vengeance.”
 trust me each state must have its policies:
 kingdoms have edicts, cities have their charters;
 even the wild outlaw, in his forest-walk,
 keeps yet some touch of civil discipline;
 for not since adam wore his verdant apron,
 hath man with man in social union dwelt,
 but laws were made to draw that union closer.
 —old play
 the daylight had dawned upon the glades of the oak forest. the green
 boughs glittered with all their pearls of dew. the hind led her fawn from
 the covert of high fern to the more open walks of the greenwood, and no
 huntsman was there to watch or intercept the stately hart, as he paced at
 the head of the antler'd herd.
 the outlaws were all assembled around the trysting-tree in the
 harthill-walk, where they had spent the night in refreshing themselves
 after the fatigues of the siege, some with wine, some with slumber, many
 with hearing and recounting the events of the day, and computing the heaps
 of plunder which their success had placed at the disposal of their chief.
 the spoils were indeed very large; for, notwithstanding that much was
 consumed, a great deal of plate, rich armour, and splendid clothing, had
 been secured by the exertions of the dauntless outlaws, who could be
 appalled by no danger when such rewards were in view. yet so strict were
 the laws of their society, that no one ventured to appropriate any part of
 the booty, which was brought into one common mass, to be at the disposal
 of their leader.
 the place of rendezvous was an aged oak; not however the same to which
 locksley had conducted gurth and wamba in the earlier part of the story,
 but one which was the centre of a silvan amphitheatre, within half a mile
 of the demolished castle of torquilstone. here locksley assumed his seat—a
 throne of turf erected under the twisted branches of the huge oak, and the
 silvan followers were gathered around him. he assigned to the black knight
 a seat at his right hand, and to cedric a place upon his left.
 “pardon my freedom, noble sirs,” he said, “but in these glades i am
 monarch—they are my kingdom; and these my wild subjects would reck
 but little of my power, were i, within my own dominions, to yield place to
 mortal man.—now, sirs, who hath seen our chaplain? where is our
 curtal friar? a mass amongst christian men best begins a busy morning.”—no
 one had seen the clerk of copmanhurst. “over gods forbode!” said the
 outlaw chief, “i trust the jolly priest hath but abidden by the wine-pot a
 thought too late. who saw him since the castle was ta'en?”
 “i,” quoth the miller, “marked him busy about the door of a cellar,
 swearing by each saint in the calendar he would taste the smack of
 front-de-boeuf's gascoigne wine.”
 “now, the saints, as many as there be of them,” said the captain,
 “forefend, lest he has drunk too deep of the wine-butts, and perished by
 the fall of the castle!—away, miller!—take with you enow of
 men, seek the place where you last saw him—throw water from the moat
 on the scorching ruins—i will have them removed stone by stone ere i
 lose my curtal friar.”
 the numbers who hastened to execute this duty, considering that an
 interesting division of spoil was about to take place, showed how much the
 troop had at heart the safety of their spiritual father.
 “meanwhile, let us proceed,” said locksley; “for when this bold deed shall
 be sounded abroad, the bands of de bracy, of malvoisin, and other allies
 of front-de-boeuf, will be in motion against us, and it were well for our
 safety that we retreat from the vicinity.—noble cedric,” he said,
 turning to the saxon, “that spoil is divided into two portions; do thou
 make choice of that which best suits thee, to recompense thy people who
 were partakers with us in this adventure.”
 “good yeoman,” said cedric, “my heart is oppressed with sadness. the noble
 athelstane of coningsburgh is no more—the last sprout of the sainted
 confessor! hopes have perished with him which can never return!—a
 sparkle hath been quenched by his blood, which no human breath can again
 rekindle! my people, save the few who are now with me, do but tarry my
 presence to transport his honoured remains to their last mansion. the lady
 rowena is desirous to return to rotherwood, and must be escorted by a
 sufficient force. i should, therefore, ere now, have left this place; and
 i waited—not to share the booty, for, so help me god and saint
 withold! as neither i nor any of mine will touch the value of a liard,—i
 waited but to render my thanks to thee and to thy bold yeomen, for the
 life and honour ye have saved.”
 “nay, but,” said the chief outlaw, “we did but half the work at most—take
 of the spoil what may reward your own neighbours and followers.”
 “i am rich enough to reward them from mine own wealth,” answered cedric.
 “and some,” said wamba, “have been wise enough to reward themselves; they
 do not march off empty-handed altogether. we do not all wear motley.”
 “they are welcome,” said locksley; “our laws bind none but ourselves.”
 “but, thou, my poor knave,” said cedric, turning about and embracing his
 jester, “how shall i reward thee, who feared not to give thy body to
 chains and death instead of mine!—all forsook me, when the poor fool
 was faithful!”
 a tear stood in the eye of the rough thane as he spoke—a mark of
 feeling which even the death of athelstane had not extracted; but there
 was something in the half-instinctive attachment of his clown, that waked
 his nature more keenly than even grief itself.
 “nay,” said the jester, extricating himself from master's caress, “if you
 pay my service with the water of your eye, the jester must weep for
 company, and then what becomes of his vocation?—but, uncle, if you
 would indeed pleasure me, i pray you to pardon my playfellow gurth, who
 stole a week from your service to bestow it on your son.”
 “pardon him!” exclaimed cedric; “i will both pardon and reward him.—kneel
 down, gurth.”—the swineherd was in an instant at his master's feet—“theow
 and esne 
 art thou no longer,” said cedric touching him with a wand; “folkfree and
 art thou in town and from town, in the forest as in the field. a hide of
 land i give to thee in my steads of walbrugham, from me and mine to thee
 and thine aye and for ever; and god's malison on his head who this
 gainsays!”
 no longer a serf, but a freeman and a landholder, gurth sprung upon his
 feet, and twice bounded aloft to almost his own height from the ground. “a
 smith and a file,” he cried, “to do away the collar from the neck of a
 freeman!—noble master! doubled is my strength by your gift, and
 doubly will i fight for you!—there is a free spirit in my breast—i
 am a man changed to myself and all around.—ha, fangs!” he continued,—for
 that faithful cur, seeing his master thus transported, began to jump upon
 him, to express his sympathy,—“knowest thou thy master still?”
 “ay,” said wamba, “fangs and i still know thee, gurth, though we must
 needs abide by the collar; it is only thou art likely to forget both us
 and thyself.”
 “i shall forget myself indeed ere i forget thee, true comrade,” said
 gurth; “and were freedom fit for thee, wamba, the master would not let
 thee want it.”
 “nay,” said wamba, “never think i envy thee, brother gurth; the serf sits
 by the hall-fire when the freeman must forth to the field of battle—and
 what saith oldhelm of malmsbury—better a fool at a feast than a wise
 man at a fray.”
 the tramp of horses was now heard, and the lady rowena appeared,
 surrounded by several riders, and a much stronger party of footmen, who
 joyfully shook their pikes and clashed their brown-bills for joy of her
 freedom. she herself, richly attired, and mounted on a dark chestnut
 palfrey, had recovered all the dignity of her manner, and only an unwonted
 degree of paleness showed the sufferings she had undergone. her lovely
 brow, though sorrowful, bore on it a cast of reviving hope for the future,
 as well as of grateful thankfulness for the past deliverance—she
 knew that ivanhoe was safe, and she knew that athelstane was dead. the
 former assurance filled her with the most sincere delight; and if she did
 not absolutely rejoice at the latter, she might be pardoned for feeling
 the full advantage of being freed from further persecution on the only
 subject in which she had ever been contradicted by her guardian cedric.
 as rowena bent her steed towards locksley's seat, that bold yeoman, with
 all his followers, rose to receive her, as if by a general instinct of
 courtesy. the blood rose to her cheeks, as, courteously waving her hand,
 and bending so low that her beautiful and loose tresses were for an
 instant mixed with the flowing mane of her palfrey, she expressed in few
 but apt words her obligations and her gratitude to locksley and her other
 deliverers.—“god bless you, brave men,” she concluded, “god and our
 lady bless you and requite you for gallantly perilling yourselves in the
 cause of the oppressed!—if any of you should hunger, remember rowena
 has food—if you should thirst, she has many a butt of wine and brown
 ale—and if the normans drive ye from these walks, rowena has forests
 of her own, where her gallant deliverers may range at full freedom, and
 never ranger ask whose arrow hath struck down the deer.”
 “thanks, gentle lady,” said locksley; “thanks from my company and myself.
 but, to have saved you requites itself. we who walk the greenwood do many
 a wild deed, and the lady rowena's deliverance may be received as an
 atonement.”
 again bowing from her palfrey, rowena turned to depart; but pausing a
 moment, while cedric, who was to attend her, was also taking his leave,
 she found herself unexpectedly close by the prisoner de bracy. he stood
 under a tree in deep meditation, his arms crossed upon his breast, and
 rowena was in hopes she might pass him unobserved. he looked up, however,
 and, when aware of her presence, a deep flush of shame suffused his
 handsome countenance. he stood a moment most irresolute; then, stepping
 forward, took her palfrey by the rein, and bent his knee before her.
 “will the lady rowena deign to cast an eye—on a captive knight—on
 a dishonoured soldier?”
 “sir knight,” answered rowena, “in enterprises such as yours, the real
 dishonour lies not in failure, but in success.”
 “conquest, lady, should soften the heart,” answered de bracy; “let me but
 know that the lady rowena forgives the violence occasioned by an ill-fated
 passion, and she shall soon learn that de bracy knows how to serve her in
 nobler ways.”
 “i forgive you, sir knight,” said rowena, “as a christian.”
 “that means,” said wamba, “that she does not forgive him at all.”
 “but i can never forgive the misery and desolation your madness has
 occasioned,” continued rowena.
 “unloose your hold on the lady's rein,” said cedric, coming up. “by the
 bright sun above us, but it were shame, i would pin thee to the earth with
 my javelin—but be well assured, thou shalt smart, maurice de bracy,
 for thy share in this foul deed.”
 “he threatens safely who threatens a prisoner,” said de bracy; “but when
 had a saxon any touch of courtesy?”
 then retiring two steps backward, he permitted the lady to move on.
 cedric, ere they departed, expressed his peculiar gratitude to the black
 champion, and earnestly entreated him to accompany him to rotherwood.
 “i know,” he said, “that ye errant knights desire to carry your fortunes
 on the point of your lance, and reck not of land or goods; but war is a
 changeful mistress, and a home is sometimes desirable even to the champion
 whose trade is wandering. thou hast earned one in the halls of rotherwood,
 noble knight. cedric has wealth enough to repair the injuries of fortune,
 and all he has is his deliverer's—come, therefore, to rotherwood,
 not as a guest, but as a son or brother.”
 “cedric has already made me rich,” said the knight,—“he has taught
 me the value of saxon virtue. to rotherwood will i come, brave saxon, and
 that speedily; but, as now, pressing matters of moment detain me from your
 halls. peradventure when i come hither, i will ask such a boon as will put
 even thy generosity to the test.”
 “it is granted ere spoken out,” said cedric, striking his ready hand into
 the gauntleted palm of the black knight,—“it is granted already,
 were it to affect half my fortune.”
 “gage not thy promise so lightly,” said the knight of the fetterlock; “yet
 well i hope to gain the boon i shall ask. meanwhile, adieu.”
 “i have but to say,” added the saxon, “that, during the funeral rites of
 the noble athelstane, i shall be an inhabitant of the halls of his castle
 of coningsburgh—they will be open to all who choose to partake of
 the funeral banqueting; and, i speak in name of the noble edith, mother of
 the fallen prince, they will never be shut against him who laboured so
 bravely, though unsuccessfully, to save athelstane from norman chains and
 norman steel.”
 “ay, ay,” said wamba, who had resumed his attendance on his master, “rare
 feeding there will be—pity that the noble athelstane cannot banquet
 at his own funeral.—but he,” continued the jester, lifting up his
 eyes gravely, “is supping in paradise, and doubtless does honour to the
 cheer.”
 “peace, and move on,” said cedric, his anger at this untimely jest being
 checked by the recollection of wamba's recent services. rowena waved a
 graceful adieu to him of the fetterlock—the saxon bade god speed
 him, and on they moved through a wide glade of the forest.
 they had scarce departed, ere a sudden procession moved from under the
 greenwood branches, swept slowly round the silvan amphitheatre, and took
 the same direction with rowena and her followers. the priests of a
 neighbouring convent, in expectation of the ample donation, or
 “soul-scat”, which cedric had propined, attended upon the car in which the
 body of athelstane was laid, and sang hymns as it was sadly and slowly
 borne on the shoulders of his vassals to his castle of coningsburgh, to be
 there deposited in the grave of hengist, from whom the deceased derived
 his long descent. many of his vassals had assembled at the news of his
 death, and followed the bier with all the external marks, at least, of
 dejection and sorrow. again the outlaws arose, and paid the same rude and
 spontaneous homage to death, which they had so lately rendered to beauty—the
 slow chant and mournful step of the priests brought back to their
 remembrance such of their comrades as had fallen in the yesterday's array.
 but such recollections dwell not long with those who lead a life of danger
 and enterprise, and ere the sound of the death-hymn had died on the wind,
 the outlaws were again busied in the distribution of their spoil.
 “valiant knight,” said locksley to the black champion, “without whose good
 heart and mighty arm our enterprise must altogether have failed, will it
 please you to take from that mass of spoil whatever may best serve to
 pleasure you, and to remind you of this my trysting-tree?”
 “i accept the offer,” said the knight, “as frankly as it is given; and i
 ask permission to dispose of sir maurice de bracy at my own pleasure.”
 “he is thine already,” said locksley, “and well for him! else the tyrant
 had graced the highest bough of this oak, with as many of his
 free-companions as we could gather, hanging thick as acorns around him.—but
 he is thy prisoner, and he is safe, though he had slain my father.”
 “de bracy,” said the knight, “thou art free—depart. he whose
 prisoner thou art scorns to take mean revenge for what is past. but beware
 of the future, lest a worse thing befall thee.—maurice de bracy, i
 say beware!”
 de bracy bowed low and in silence, and was about to withdraw, when the
 yeomen burst at once into a shout of execration and derision. the proud
 knight instantly stopped, turned back, folded his arms, drew up his form
 to its full height, and exclaimed, “peace, ye yelping curs! who open upon
 a cry which ye followed not when the stag was at bay—de bracy scorns
 your censure as he would disdain your applause. to your brakes and caves,
 ye outlawed thieves! and be silent when aught knightly or noble is but
 spoken within a league of your fox-earths.”
 this ill-timed defiance might have procured for de bracy a volley of
 arrows, but for the hasty and imperative interference of the outlaw chief.
 meanwhile the knight caught a horse by the rein, for several which had
 been taken in the stables of front-de-boeuf stood accoutred around, and
 were a valuable part of the booty. he threw himself upon the saddle, and
 galloped off through the wood.
 when the bustle occasioned by this incident was somewhat composed, the
 chief outlaw took from his neck the rich horn and baldric which he had
 recently gained at the strife of archery near ashby.
 “noble knight.” he said to him of the fetterlock, “if you disdain not to
 grace by your acceptance a bugle which an english yeoman has once worn,
 this i will pray you to keep as a memorial of your gallant bearing—and
 if ye have aught to do, and, as happeneth oft to a gallant knight, ye
 chance to be hard bested in any forest between trent and tees, wind three
 mots 
 upon the horn thus, 'wa-sa-hoa!' and it may well chance ye shall find
 helpers and rescue.”
 he then gave breath to the bugle, and winded once and again the call which
 he described, until the knight had caught the notes.
 “gramercy for the gift, bold yeoman,” said the knight; “and better help
 than thine and thy rangers would i never seek, were it at my utmost need.”
 and then in his turn he winded the call till all the greenwood rang.
 “well blown and clearly,” said the yeoman; “beshrew me an thou knowest not
 as much of woodcraft as of war!—thou hast been a striker of deer in
 thy day, i warrant.—comrades, mark these three mots—it is the
 call of the knight of the fetterlock; and he who hears it, and hastens not
 to serve him at his need, i will have him scourged out of our band with
 his own bowstring.”
 “long live our leader!” shouted the yeomen, “and long live the black
 knight of the fetterlock!—may he soon use our service, to prove how
 readily it will be paid.”
 locksley now proceeded to the distribution of the spoil, which he
 performed with the most laudable impartiality. a tenth part of the whole
 was set apart for the church, and for pious uses; a portion was next
 allotted to a sort of public treasury; a part was assigned to the widows
 and children of those who had fallen, or to be expended in masses for the
 souls of such as had left no surviving family. the rest was divided
 amongst the outlaws, according to their rank and merit, and the judgment
 of the chief, on all such doubtful questions as occurred, was delivered
 with great shrewdness, and received with absolute submission. the black
 knight was not a little surprised to find that men, in a state so lawless,
 were nevertheless among themselves so regularly and equitably governed,
 and all that he observed added to his opinion of the justice and judgment
 of their leader.
 when each had taken his own proportion of the booty, and while the
 treasurer, accompanied by four tall yeomen, was transporting that
 belonging to the state to some place of concealment or of security, the
 portion devoted to the church still remained unappropriated.
 “i would,” said the leader, “we could hear tidings of our joyous chaplain—he
 was never wont to be absent when meat was to be blessed, or spoil to be
 parted; and it is his duty to take care of these the tithes of our
 successful enterprise. it may be the office has helped to cover some of
 his canonical irregularities. also, i have a holy brother of his a
 prisoner at no great distance, and i would fain have the friar to help me
 to deal with him in due sort—i greatly misdoubt the safety of the
 bluff priest.”
 “i were right sorry for that,” said the knight of the fetterlock, “for i
 stand indebted to him for the joyous hospitality of a merry night in his
 cell. let us to the ruins of the castle; it may be we shall there learn
 some tidings of him.”
 while they thus spoke, a loud shout among the yeomen announced the arrival
 of him for whom they feared, as they learned from the stentorian voice of
 the friar himself, long before they saw his burly person.
 “make room, my merry-men!” he exclaimed; “room for your godly father and
 his prisoner—cry welcome once more.—i come, noble leader, like
 an eagle with my prey in my clutch.”—and making his way through the
 ring, amidst the laughter of all around, he appeared in majestic triumph,
 his huge partisan in one hand, and in the other a halter, one end of which
 was fastened to the neck of the unfortunate isaac of york, who, bent down
 by sorrow and terror, was dragged on by the victorious priest, who shouted
 aloud, “where is allan-a-dale, to chronicle me in a ballad, or if it were
 but a lay?—by saint hermangild, the jingling crowder is ever out of
 the way where there is an apt theme for exalting valour!”
 “curtal priest,” said the captain, “thou hast been at a wet mass this
 morning, as early as it is. in the name of saint nicholas, whom hast thou
 got here?”
 “a captive to my sword and to my lance, noble captain,” replied the clerk
 of copmanhurst; “to my bow and to my halberd, i should rather say; and yet
 i have redeemed him by my divinity from a worse captivity. speak, jew—have
 i not ransomed thee from sathanas?—have i not taught thee thy
 'credo', thy 'pater', and thine 'ave maria'?—did i not spend the
 whole night in drinking to thee, and in expounding of mysteries?”
 “for the love of god!” ejaculated the poor jew, “will no one take me out
 of the keeping of this mad—i mean this holy man?”
 “how's this, jew?” said the friar, with a menacing aspect; “dost thou
 recant, jew?—bethink thee, if thou dost relapse into thine
 infidelity, though thou are not so tender as a suckling pig—i would
 i had one to break my fast upon—thou art not too tough to be
 roasted! be conformable, isaac, and repeat the words after me. 'ave
 maria'!—”
 “nay, we will have no profanation, mad priest,” said locksley; “let us
 rather hear where you found this prisoner of thine.”
 “by saint dunstan,” said the friar, “i found him where i sought for better
 ware! i did step into the cellarage to see what might be rescued there;
 for though a cup of burnt wine, with spice, be an evening's drought for an
 emperor, it were waste, methought, to let so much good liquor be mulled at
 once; and i had caught up one runlet of sack, and was coming to call more
 aid among these lazy knaves, who are ever to seek when a good deed is to
 be done, when i was avised of a strong door—aha! thought i, here is
 the choicest juice of all in this secret crypt; and the knave butler,
 being disturbed in his vocation, hath left the key in the door—in
 therefore i went, and found just nought besides a commodity of rusted
 chains and this dog of a jew, who presently rendered himself my prisoner,
 rescue or no rescue. i did but refresh myself after the fatigue of the
 action, with the unbeliever, with one humming cup of sack, and was
 proceeding to lead forth my captive, when, crash after crash, as with wild
 thunder-dint and levin-fire, down toppled the masonry of an outer tower,
 (marry beshrew their hands that built it not the firmer!) and blocked up
 the passage. the roar of one falling tower followed another—i gave
 up thought of life; and deeming it a dishonour to one of my profession to
 pass out of this world in company with a jew, i heaved up my halberd to
 beat his brains out; but i took pity on his grey hairs, and judged it
 better to lay down the partisan, and take up my spiritual weapon for his
 conversion. and truly, by the blessing of saint dunstan, the seed has been
 sown in good soil; only that, with speaking to him of mysteries through
 the whole night, and being in a manner fasting, (for the few droughts of
 sack which i sharpened my wits with were not worth marking,) my head is
 well-nigh dizzied, i trow.—but i was clean exhausted.—gilbert
 and wibbald know in what state they found me—quite and clean
 exhausted.”
 “we can bear witness,” said gilbert; “for when we had cleared away the
 ruin, and by saint dunstan's help lighted upon the dungeon stair, we found
 the runlet of sack half empty, the jew half dead, and the friar more than
 half—exhausted, as he calls it.”
 “ye be knaves! ye lie!” retorted the offended friar; “it was you and your
 gormandizing companions that drank up the sack, and called it your morning
 draught—i am a pagan, an i kept it not for the captain's own throat.
 but what recks it? the jew is converted, and understands all i have told
 him, very nearly, if not altogether, as well as myself.”
 “jew,” said the captain, “is this true? hast thou renounced thine
 unbelief?”
 “may i so find mercy in your eyes,” said the jew, “as i know not one word
 which the reverend prelate spake to me all this fearful night. alas! i was
 so distraught with agony, and fear, and grief, that had our holy father
 abraham come to preach to me, he had found but a deaf listener.”
 “thou liest, jew, and thou knowest thou dost.” said the friar; “i will
 remind thee of but one word of our conference—thou didst promise to
 give all thy substance to our holy order.”
 “so help me the promise, fair sirs,” said isaac, even more alarmed than
 before, “as no such sounds ever crossed my lips! alas! i am an aged
 beggar'd man—i fear me a childless—have ruth on me, and let me
 go!”
 “nay,” said the friar, “if thou dost retract vows made in favour of holy
 church, thou must do penance.”
 accordingly, he raised his halberd, and would have laid the staff of it
 lustily on the jew's shoulders, had not the black knight stopped the blow,
 and thereby transferred the holy clerk's resentment to himself.
 “by saint thomas of kent,” said he, “an i buckle to my gear, i will teach
 thee, sir lazy lover, to mell with thine own matters, maugre thine iron
 case there!”
 “nay, be not wroth with me,” said the knight; “thou knowest i am thy sworn
 friend and comrade.”
 “i know no such thing,” answered the friar; “and defy thee for a meddling
 coxcomb!”
 “nay, but,” said the knight, who seemed to take a pleasure in provoking
 his quondam host, “hast thou forgotten how, that for my sake (for i say
 nothing of the temptation of the flagon and the pasty) thou didst break
 thy vow of fast and vigil?”
 “truly, friend,” said the friar, clenching his huge fist, “i will bestow a
 buffet on thee.”
 “i accept of no such presents,” said the knight; “i am content to take thy
 cuff 
 as a loan, but i will repay thee with usury as deep as ever thy prisoner
 there exacted in his traffic.”
 “i will prove that presently,” said the friar.
 “hola!” cried the captain, “what art thou after, mad friar? brawling
 beneath our trysting-tree?”
 “no brawling,” said the knight, “it is but a friendly interchange of
 courtesy.—friar, strike an thou darest—i will stand thy blow,
 if thou wilt stand mine.”
 “thou hast the advantage with that iron pot on thy head,” said the
 churchman; “but have at thee—down thou goest, an thou wert goliath
 of gath in his brazen helmet.”
 the friar bared his brawny arm up to the elbow, and putting his full
 strength to the blow, gave the knight a buffet that might have felled an
 ox. but his adversary stood firm as a rock. a loud shout was uttered by
 all the yeomen around; for the clerk's cuff was proverbial amongst them,
 and there were few who, in jest or earnest, had not had the occasion to
 know its vigour.
 “now, priest,” said, the knight, pulling off his gauntlet, “if i had
 vantage on my head, i will have none on my hand—stand fast as a true
 man.”
 “'genam meam dedi vapulatori'—i have given my cheek to the smiter,”
 said the priest; “an thou canst stir me from the spot, fellow, i will
 freely bestow on thee the jew's ransom.”
 so spoke the burly priest, assuming, on his part, high defiance. but who
 may resist his fate? the buffet of the knight was given with such strength
 and good-will, that the friar rolled head over heels upon the plain, to
 the great amazement of all the spectators. but he arose neither angry nor
 crestfallen.
 “brother,” said he to the knight, “thou shouldst have used thy strength
 with more discretion. i had mumbled but a lame mass an thou hadst broken
 my jaw, for the piper plays ill that wants the nether chops. nevertheless,
 there is my hand, in friendly witness, that i will exchange no more cuffs
 with thee, having been a loser by the barter. end now all unkindness. let
 us put the jew to ransom, since the leopard will not change his spots, and
 a jew he will continue to be.”
 “the priest,” said clement, “is not half so confident of the jew's
 conversion, since he received that buffet on the ear.”
 “go to, knave, what pratest thou of conversions?—what, is there no
 respect?—all masters and no men?—i tell thee, fellow, i was
 somewhat totty when i received the good knight's blow, or i had kept my
 ground under it. but an thou gibest more of it, thou shalt learn i can
 give as well as take.”
 “peace all!” said the captain. “and thou, jew, think of thy ransom; thou
 needest not to be told that thy race are held to be accursed in all
 christian communities, and trust me that we cannot endure thy presence
 among us. think, therefore, of an offer, while i examine a prisoner of
 another cast.”
 “were many of front-de-boeuf's men taken?” demanded the black knight.
 “none of note enough to be put to ransom,” answered the captain; “a set of
 hilding fellows there were, whom we dismissed to find them a new master—enough
 had been done for revenge and profit; the bunch of them were not worth a
 cardecu. the prisoner i speak of is better booty—a jolly monk riding
 to visit his leman, an i may judge by his horse-gear and wearing apparel.—here
 cometh the worthy prelate, as pert as a pyet.” and, between two yeomen,
 was brought before the silvan throne of the outlaw chief, our old friend,
 prior aymer of jorvaulx.
 —-flower of warriors,
 how is't with titus lartius?
 marcius.—as with a man busied about decrees,
 condemning some to death and some to exile,
 ransoming him or pitying, threatening the other.
 —coriolanus
 the captive abbot's features and manners exhibited a whimsical mixture of
 offended pride, and deranged foppery and bodily terror.
 “why, how now, my masters?” said he, with a voice in which all three
 emotions were blended. “what order is this among ye? be ye turks or
 christians, that handle a churchman?—know ye what it is, 'manus
 imponere in servos domini'? ye have plundered my mails—torn my cope
 of curious cut lace, which might have served a cardinal!—another in
 my place would have been at his 'excommunicabo vos'; but i am placible,
 and if ye order forth my palfreys, release my brethren, and restore my
 mails, tell down with all speed an hundred crowns to be expended in masses
 at the high altar of jorvaulx abbey, and make your vow to eat no venison
 until next pentecost, it may be you shall hear little more of this mad
 frolic.”
 “holy father,” said the chief outlaw, “it grieves me to think that you
 have met with such usage from any of my followers, as calls for your
 fatherly reprehension.”
 “usage!” echoed the priest, encouraged by the mild tone of the silvan
 leader; “it were usage fit for no hound of good race—much less for a
 christian—far less for a priest—and least of all for the prior
 of the holy community of jorvaulx. here is a profane and drunken minstrel,
 called allan-a-dale—'nebulo quidam'—who has menaced me with
 corporal punishment—nay, with death itself, an i pay not down four
 hundred crowns of ransom, to the boot of all the treasure he hath already
 robbed me of—gold chains and gymmal rings to an unknown value;
 besides what is broken and spoiled among their rude hands, such as my
 pouncer-box and silver crisping-tongs.”
 “it is impossible that allan-a-dale can have thus treated a man of your
 reverend bearing,” replied the captain.
 “it is true as the gospel of saint nicodemus,” said the prior; “he swore,
 with many a cruel north-country oath, that he would hang me up on the
 highest tree in the greenwood.”
 “did he so in very deed? nay, then, reverend father, i think you had
 better comply with his demands—for allan-a-dale is the very man to
 abide by his word when he has so pledged it.” 
 “you do but jest with me,” said the astounded prior, with a forced laugh;
 “and i love a good jest with all my heart. but, ha! ha! ha! when the mirth
 has lasted the livelong night, it is time to be grave in the morning.”
 “and i am as grave as a father confessor,” replied the outlaw; “you must
 pay a round ransom, sir prior, or your convent is likely to be called to a
 new election; for your place will know you no more.”
 “are ye christians,” said the prior, “and hold this language to a
 churchman?”
 “christians! ay, marry are we, and have divinity among us to boot,”
 answered the outlaw. “let our buxom chaplain stand forth, and expound to
 this reverend father the texts which concern this matter.”
 the friar, half-drunk, half-sober, had huddled a friar's frock over his
 green cassock, and now summoning together whatever scraps of learning he
 had acquired by rote in former days, “holy father,” said he, “'deus faciat
 salvam benignitatem vestram'—you are welcome to the greenwood.”
 “what profane mummery is this?” said the prior. “friend, if thou be'st
 indeed of the church, it were a better deed to show me how i may escape
 from these men's hands, than to stand ducking and grinning here like a
 morris-dancer.”
 “truly, reverend father,” said the friar, “i know but one mode in which
 thou mayst escape. this is saint andrew's day with us, we are taking our
 tithes.”
 “but not of the church, then, i trust, my good brother?” said the prior.
 “of church and lay,” said the friar; “and therefore, sir prior 'facite
 vobis amicos de mammone iniquitatis'—make yourselves friends of the
 mammon of unrighteousness, for no other friendship is like to serve your
 turn.”
 “i love a jolly woodsman at heart,” said the prior, softening his tone;
 “come, ye must not deal too hard with me—i can well of woodcraft,
 and can wind a horn clear and lustily, and hollo till every oak rings
 again—come, ye must not deal too hard with me.”
 “give him a horn,” said the outlaw; “we will prove the skill he boasts
 of.”
 the prior aymer winded a blast accordingly. the captain shook his head.
 “sir prior,” he said, “thou blowest a merry note, but it may not ransom
 thee—we cannot afford, as the legend on a good knight's shield hath
 it, to set thee free for a blast. moreover, i have found thee—thou
 art one of those, who, with new french graces and tra-li-ras, disturb the
 ancient english bugle notes.—prior, that last flourish on the
 recheat hath added fifty crowns to thy ransom, for corrupting the true old
 manly blasts of venerie.”
 “well, friend,” said the abbot, peevishly, “thou art ill to please with
 thy woodcraft. i pray thee be more conformable in this matter of my
 ransom. at a word—since i must needs, for once, hold a candle to the
 devil—what ransom am i to pay for walking on watling-street, without
 having fifty men at my back?”
 “were it not well,” said the lieutenant of the gang apart to the captain,
 “that the prior should name the jew's ransom, and the jew name the
 prior's?”
 “thou art a mad knave,” said the captain, “but thy plan transcends!—here,
 jew, step forth—look at that holy father aymer, prior of the rich
 abbey of jorvaulx, and tell us at what ransom we should hold him?—thou
 knowest the income of his convent, i warrant thee.”
 “o, assuredly,” said isaac. “i have trafficked with the good fathers, and
 bought wheat and barley, and fruits of the earth, and also much wool. o,
 it is a rich abbey-stede, and they do live upon the fat, and drink the
 sweet wines upon the lees, these good fathers of jorvaulx. ah, if an
 outcast like me had such a home to go to, and such incomings by the year
 and by the month, i would pay much gold and silver to redeem my
 captivity.”
 “hound of a jew!” exclaimed the prior, “no one knows better than thy own
 cursed self, that our holy house of god is indebted for the finishing of
 our chancel—”
 “and for the storing of your cellars in the last season with the due
 allowance of gascon wine,” interrupted the jew; “but that—that is
 small matters.”
 “hear the infidel dog!” said the churchman; “he jangles as if our holy
 community did come under debts for the wines we have a license to drink,
 'propter necessitatem, et ad frigus depellendum'. the circumcised villain
 blasphemeth the holy church, and christian men listen and rebuke him not!”
 “all this helps nothing,” said the leader.—“isaac, pronounce what he
 may pay, without flaying both hide and hair.”
 “an six hundred crowns,” said isaac, “the good prior might well pay to
 your honoured valours, and never sit less soft in his stall.”
 “six hundred crowns,” said the leader, gravely; “i am contented—thou
 hast well spoken, isaac—six hundred crowns.—it is a sentence,
 sir prior.”
 “a sentence!—a sentence!” exclaimed the band; “solomon had not done
 it better.”
 “thou hearest thy doom, prior,” said the leader.
 “ye are mad, my masters,” said the prior; “where am i to find such a sum?
 if i sell the very pyx and candlesticks on the altar at jorvaulx, i shall
 scarce raise the half; and it will be necessary for that purpose that i go
 to jorvaulx myself; ye may retain as borrows  my two
 priests.”
 “that will be but blind trust,” said the outlaw; “we will retain thee,
 prior, and send them to fetch thy ransom. thou shalt not want a cup of
 wine and a collop of venison the while; and if thou lovest woodcraft, thou
 shalt see such as your north country never witnessed.”
 “or, if so please you,” said isaac, willing to curry favour with the
 outlaws, “i can send to york for the six hundred crowns, out of certain
 monies in my hands, if so be that the most reverend prior present will
 grant me a quittance.”
 “he shall grant thee whatever thou dost list, isaac,” said the captain;
 “and thou shalt lay down the redemption money for prior aymer as well as
 for thyself.”
 “for myself! ah, courageous sirs,” said the jew, “i am a broken and
 impoverished man; a beggar's staff must be my portion through life,
 supposing i were to pay you fifty crowns.”
 “the prior shall judge of that matter,” replied the captain.—“how
 say you, father aymer? can the jew afford a good ransom?”
 “can he afford a ransom?” answered the prior “is he not isaac of york,
 rich enough to redeem the captivity of the ten tribes of israel, who were
 led into assyrian bondage?—i have seen but little of him myself, but
 our cellarer and treasurer have dealt largely with him, and report says
 that his house at york is so full of gold and silver as is a shame in any
 christian land. marvel it is to all living christian hearts that such
 gnawing adders should be suffered to eat into the bowels of the state, and
 even of the holy church herself, with foul usuries and extortions.”
 “hold, father,” said the jew, “mitigate and assuage your choler. i pray of
 your reverence to remember that i force my monies upon no one. but when
 churchman and layman, prince and prior, knight and priest, come knocking
 to isaac's door, they borrow not his shekels with these uncivil terms. it
 is then, friend isaac, will you pleasure us in this matter, and our day
 shall be truly kept, so god sa' me?—and kind isaac, if ever you
 served man, show yourself a friend in this need! and when the day comes,
 and i ask my own, then what hear i but damned jew, and the curse of egypt
 on your tribe, and all that may stir up the rude and uncivil populace
 against poor strangers!”
 “prior,” said the captain, “jew though he be, he hath in this spoken well.
 do thou, therefore, name his ransom, as he named thine, without farther
 rude terms.”
 “none but 'latro famosus'—the interpretation whereof,” said the
 prior, “will i give at some other time and tide—would place a
 christian prelate and an unbaptized jew upon the same bench. but since ye
 require me to put a price upon this caitiff, i tell you openly that ye
 will wrong yourselves if you take from him a penny under a thousand
 crowns.”
 “a sentence!—a sentence!” exclaimed the chief outlaw.
 “a sentence!—a sentence!” shouted his assessors; “the christian has
 shown his good nurture, and dealt with us more generously than the jew.”
 “the god of my fathers help me!” said the jew; “will ye bear to the ground
 an impoverished creature?—i am this day childless, and will ye
 deprive me of the means of livelihood?”
 “thou wilt have the less to provide for, jew, if thou art childless,” said
 aymer.
 “alas! my lord,” said isaac, “your law permits you not to know how the
 child of our bosom is entwined with the strings of our heart—o
 rebecca! laughter of my beloved rachel! were each leaf on that tree a
 zecchin, and each zecchin mine own, all that mass of wealth would i give
 to know whether thou art alive, and escaped the hands of the nazarene!”
 “was not thy daughter dark-haired?” said one of the outlaws; “and wore she
 not a veil of twisted sendal, broidered with silver?”
 “she did!—she did!” said the old man, trembling with eagerness, as
 formerly with fear. “the blessing of jacob be upon thee! canst thou tell
 me aught of her safety?”
 “it was she, then,” said the yeoman, “who was carried off by the proud
 templar, when he broke through our ranks on yester-even. i had drawn my
 bow to send a shaft after him, but spared him even for the sake of the
 damsel, who i feared might take harm from the arrow.”
 “oh!” answered the jew, “i would to god thou hadst shot, though the arrow
 had pierced her bosom!—better the tomb of her fathers than the
 dishonourable couch of the licentious and savage templar. ichabod!
 ichabod! the glory hath departed from my house!”
 “friends,” said the chief, looking round, “the old man is but a jew,
 natheless his grief touches me.—deal uprightly with us, isaac—will
 paying this ransom of a thousand crowns leave thee altogether penniless?”
 isaac, recalled to think of his worldly goods, the love of which, by dint
 of inveterate habit, contended even with his parental affection, grew
 pale, stammered, and could not deny there might be some small surplus.
 “well—go to—what though there be,” said the outlaw, “we will
 not reckon with thee too closely. without treasure thou mayst as well hope
 to redeem thy child from the clutches of sir brian de bois-guilbert, as to
 shoot a stag-royal with a headless shaft.—we will take thee at the
 same ransom with prior aymer, or rather at one hundred crowns lower, which
 hundred crowns shall be mine own peculiar loss, and not light upon this
 worshipful community; and so we shall avoid the heinous offence of rating
 a jew merchant as high as a christian prelate, and thou wilt have six
 hundred crowns remaining to treat for thy daughter's ransom. templars love
 the glitter of silver shekels as well as the sparkle of black eyes.—hasten
 to make thy crowns chink in the ear of de bois-guilbert, ere worse comes
 of it. thou wilt find him, as our scouts have brought notice, at the next
 preceptory house of his order.—said i well, my merry mates?”
 the yeomen expressed their wonted acquiescence in their leader's opinion;
 and isaac, relieved of one half of his apprehensions, by learning that his
 daughter lived, and might possibly be ransomed, threw himself at the feet
 of the generous outlaw, and, rubbing his beard against his buskins, sought
 to kiss the hem of his green cassock. the captain drew himself back, and
 extricated himself from the jew's grasp, not without some marks of
 contempt.
 “nay, beshrew thee, man, up with thee! i am english born, and love no such
 eastern prostrations—kneel to god, and not to a poor sinner, like
 me.”
 “ay, jew,” said prior aymer; “kneel to god, as represented in the servant
 of his altar, and who knows, with thy sincere repentance and due gifts to
 the shrine of saint robert, what grace thou mayst acquire for thyself and
 thy daughter rebecca? i grieve for the maiden, for she is of fair and
 comely countenance,—i beheld her in the lists of ashby. also brian
 de bois-guilbert is one with whom i may do much—bethink thee how
 thou mayst deserve my good word with him.”
 “alas! alas!” said the jew, “on every hand the spoilers arise against me—i
 am given as a prey unto the assyrian, and a prey unto him of egypt.”
 “and what else should be the lot of thy accursed race?” answered the
 prior; “for what saith holy writ, 'verbum domini projecerunt, et sapientia
 est nulla in eis'—they have cast forth the word of the lord, and
 there is no wisdom in them; 'propterea dabo mulieres eorum exteris'—i
 will give their women to strangers, that is to the templar, as in the
 present matter; 'et thesauros eorum haeredibus alienis', and their
 treasures to others—as in the present case to these honest
 gentlemen.”
 isaac groaned deeply, and began to wring his hands, and to relapse into
 his state of desolation and despair. but the leader of the yeomen led him
 aside.
 “advise thee well, isaac,” said locksley, “what thou wilt do in this
 matter; my counsel to thee is to make a friend of this churchman. he is
 vain, isaac, and he is covetous; at least he needs money to supply his
 profusion. thou canst easily gratify his greed; for think not that i am
 blinded by thy pretexts of poverty. i am intimately acquainted, isaac,
 with the very iron chest in which thou dost keep thy money-bags—what!
 know i not the great stone beneath the apple-tree, that leads into the
 vaulted chamber under thy garden at york?” the jew grew as pale as death—“but
 fear nothing from me,” continued the yeoman, “for we are of old
 acquainted. dost thou not remember the sick yeoman whom thy fair daughter
 rebecca redeemed from the gyves at york, and kept him in thy house till
 his health was restored, when thou didst dismiss him recovered, and with a
 piece of money?—usurer as thou art, thou didst never place coin at
 better interest than that poor silver mark, for it has this day saved thee
 five hundred crowns.”
 “and thou art he whom we called diccon bend-the-bow?” said isaac; “i
 thought ever i knew the accent of thy voice.”
 “i am bend-the-bow,” said the captain, “and locksley, and have a good name
 besides all these.”
 “but thou art mistaken, good bend-the-bow, concerning that same vaulted
 apartment. so help me heaven, as there is nought in it but some
 merchandises which i will gladly part with to you—one hundred yards
 of lincoln green to make doublets to thy men, and a hundred staves of
 spanish yew to make bows, and a hundred silken bowstrings, tough, round,
 and sound—these will i send thee for thy good-will, honest diccon,
 an thou wilt keep silence about the vault, my good diccon.”
 “silent as a dormouse,” said the outlaw; “and never trust me but i am
 grieved for thy daughter. but i may not help it—the templars lances
 are too strong for my archery in the open field—they would scatter
 us like dust. had i but known it was rebecca when she was borne off,
 something might have been done; but now thou must needs proceed by policy.
 come, shall i treat for thee with the prior?”
 “in god's name, diccon, an thou canst, aid me to recover the child of my
 bosom!”
 “do not thou interrupt me with thine ill-timed avarice,” said the outlaw,
 “and i will deal with him in thy behalf.”
 he then turned from the jew, who followed him, however, as closely as his
 shadow.
 “prior aymer,” said the captain, “come apart with me under this tree. men
 say thou dost love wine, and a lady's smile, better than beseems thy
 order, sir priest; but with that i have nought to do. i have heard, too,
 thou dost love a brace of good dogs and a fleet horse, and it may well be
 that, loving things which are costly to come by, thou hatest not a purse
 of gold. but i have never heard that thou didst love oppression or
 cruelty.—now, here is isaac willing to give thee the means of
 pleasure and pastime in a bag containing one hundred marks of silver, if
 thy intercession with thine ally the templar shall avail to procure the
 freedom of his daughter.”
 “in safety and honour, as when taken from me,” said the jew, “otherwise it
 is no bargain.”
 “peace, isaac,” said the outlaw, “or i give up thine interest.—what
 say you to this my purpose, prior aymer?”
 “the matter,” quoth the prior, “is of a mixed condition; for, if i do a
 good deal on the one hand, yet, on the other, it goeth to the vantage of a
 jew, and in so much is against my conscience. yet, if the israelite will
 advantage the church by giving me somewhat over to the building of our
 dortour, 
 i will take it on my conscience to aid him in the matter of his daughter.”
 “for a score of marks to the dortour,” said the outlaw,—“be still, i
 say, isaac!—or for a brace of silver candlesticks to the altar, we
 will not stand with you.”
 “nay, but, good diccon bend-the-bow”—said isaac, endeavouring to
 interpose.
 “good jew—good beast—good earthworm!” said the yeoman, losing
 patience; “an thou dost go on to put thy filthy lucre in the balance with
 thy daughter's life and honour, by heaven, i will strip thee of every
 maravedi thou hast in the world, before three days are out!”
 isaac shrunk together, and was silent.
 “and what pledge am i to have for all this?” said the prior.
 “when isaac returns successful through your mediation,” said the outlaw,
 “i swear by saint hubert, i will see that he pays thee the money in good
 silver, or i will reckon with him for it in such sort, he had better have
 paid twenty such sums.”
 “well then, jew,” said aymer, “since i must needs meddle in this matter,
 let me have the use of thy writing-tablets—though, hold—rather
 than use thy pen, i would fast for twenty-four hours, and where shall i
 find one?”
 “if your holy scruples can dispense with using the jew's tablets, for the
 pen i can find a remedy,” said the yeoman; and, bending his bow, he aimed
 his shaft at a wild-goose which was soaring over their heads, the
 advanced-guard of a phalanx of his tribe, which were winging their way to
 the distant and solitary fens of holderness. the bird came fluttering
 down, transfixed with the arrow.
 “there, prior,” said the captain, “are quills enow to supply all the monks
 of jorvaulx for the next hundred years, an they take not to writing
 chronicles.”
 the prior sat down, and at great leisure indited an epistle to brian de
 bois-guilbert, and having carefully sealed up the tablets, delivered them
 to the jew, saying, “this will be thy safe-conduct to the preceptory of
 templestowe, and, as i think, is most likely to accomplish the delivery of
 thy daughter, if it be well backed with proffers of advantage and
 commodity at thine own hand; for, trust me well, the good knight
 bois-guilbert is of their confraternity that do nought for nought.”
 “well, prior,” said the outlaw, “i will detain thee no longer here than to
 give the jew a quittance for the six hundred crowns at which thy ransom is
 fixed—i accept of him for my pay-master; and if i hear that ye
 boggle at allowing him in his accompts the sum so paid by him, saint mary
 refuse me, an i burn not the abbey over thine head, though i hang ten
 years the sooner!”
 with a much worse grace than that wherewith he had penned the letter to
 bois-guilbert, the prior wrote an acquittance, discharging isaac of york
 of six hundred crowns, advanced to him in his need for acquittal of his
 ransom, and faithfully promising to hold true compt with him for that sum.
 “and now,” said prior aymer, “i will pray you of restitution of my mules
 and palfreys, and the freedom of the reverend brethren attending upon me,
 and also of the gymmal rings, jewels, and fair vestures, of which i have
 been despoiled, having now satisfied you for my ransom as a true
 prisoner.”
 “touching your brethren, sir prior,” said locksley, “they shall have
 present freedom, it were unjust to detain them; touching your horses and
 mules, they shall also be restored, with such spending-money as may enable
 you to reach york, for it were cruel to deprive you of the means of
 journeying.—but as concerning rings, jewels, chains, and what else,
 you must understand that we are men of tender consciences, and will not
 yield to a venerable man like yourself, who should be dead to the vanities
 of this life, the strong temptation to break the rule of his foundation,
 by wearing rings, chains, or other vain gauds.”
 “think what you do, my masters,” said the prior, “ere you put your hand on
 the church's patrimony—these things are 'inter res sacras', and i
 wot not what judgment might ensue were they to be handled by laical
 hands.”
 “i will take care of that, reverend prior,” said the hermit of
 copmanhurst; “for i will wear them myself.”
 “friend, or brother,” said the prior, in answer to this solution of his
 doubts, “if thou hast really taken religious orders, i pray thee to look
 how thou wilt answer to thine official for the share thou hast taken in
 this day's work.”
 “friend prior,” returned the hermit, “you are to know that i belong to a
 little diocese, where i am my own diocesan, and care as little for the
 bishop of york as i do for the abbot of jorvaulx, the prior, and all the
 convent.”
 “thou art utterly irregular,” said the prior; “one of those disorderly
 men, who, taking on them the sacred character without due cause, profane
 the holy rites, and endanger the souls of those who take counsel at their
 hands; 'lapides pro pane condonantes iis', giving them stones instead of
 bread as the vulgate hath it.”
 “nay,” said the friar, “an my brain-pan could have been broken by latin,
 it had not held so long together.—i say, that easing a world of such
 misproud priests as thou art of their jewels and their gimcracks, is a
 lawful spoiling of the egyptians.”
 “thou be'st a hedge-priest,”  said the prior, in great wrath,
 “'excommunicabo vos'.”
 “thou be'st thyself more like a thief and a heretic,” said the friar,
 equally indignant; “i will pouch up no such affront before my
 parishioners, as thou thinkest it not shame to put upon me, although i be
 a reverend brother to thee. 'ossa ejus perfringam', i will break your
 bones, as the vulgate hath it.”
 “hola!” cried the captain, “come the reverend brethren to such terms?—keep
 thine assurance of peace, friar.—prior, an thou hast not made thy
 peace perfect with god, provoke the friar no further.—hermit, let
 the reverend father depart in peace, as a ransomed man.”
 the yeomen separated the incensed priests, who continued to raise their
 voices, vituperating each other in bad latin, which the prior delivered
 the more fluently, and the hermit with the greater vehemence. the prior at
 length recollected himself sufficiently to be aware that he was
 compromising his dignity, by squabbling with such a hedge-priest as the
 outlaw's chaplain, and being joined by his attendants, rode off with
 considerably less pomp, and in a much more apostolical condition, so far
 as worldly matters were concerned, than he had exhibited before this
 rencounter.
 it remained that the jew should produce some security for the ransom which
 he was to pay on the prior's account, as well as upon his own. he gave,
 accordingly, an order sealed with his signet, to a brother of his tribe at
 york, requiring him to pay to the bearer the sum of a thousand crowns, and
 to deliver certain merchandises specified in the note.
 “my brother sheva,” he said, groaning deeply, “hath the key of my
 warehouses.”
 “and of the vaulted chamber,” whispered locksley.
 “no, no—may heaven forefend!” said isaac; “evil is the hour that let
 any one whomsoever into that secret!”
 “it is safe with me,” said the outlaw, “so be that this thy scroll produce
 the sum therein nominated and set down.—but what now, isaac? art
 dead? art stupefied? hath the payment of a thousand crowns put thy
 daughter's peril out of thy mind?”
 the jew started to his feet—“no, diccon, no—i will presently
 set forth.—farewell, thou whom i may not call good, and dare not and
 will not call evil.”
 yet ere isaac departed, the outlaw chief bestowed on him this parting
 advice:—“be liberal of thine offers, isaac, and spare not thy purse
 for thy daughter's safety. credit me, that the gold thou shalt spare in
 her cause, will hereafter give thee as much agony as if it were poured
 molten down thy throat.”
 isaac acquiesced with a deep groan, and set forth on his journey,
 accompanied by two tall foresters, who were to be his guides, and at the
 same time his guards, through the wood.
 the black knight, who had seen with no small interest these various
 proceedings, now took his leave of the outlaw in turn; nor could he avoid
 expressing his surprise at having witnessed so much of civil policy
 amongst persons cast out from all the ordinary protection and influence of
 the laws.
 “good fruit, sir knight,” said the yeoman, “will sometimes grow on a sorry
 tree; and evil times are not always productive of evil alone and unmixed.
 amongst those who are drawn into this lawless state, there are, doubtless,
 numbers who wish to exercise its license with some moderation, and some
 who regret, it may be, that they are obliged to follow such a trade at
 all.”
 “and to one of those,” said the knight, “i am now, i presume, speaking?”
 “sir knight,” said the outlaw, “we have each our secret. you are welcome
 to form your judgment of me, and i may use my conjectures touching you,
 though neither of our shafts may hit the mark they are shot at. but as i
 do not pray to be admitted into your mystery, be not offended that i
 preserve my own.”
 “i crave pardon, brave outlaw,” said the knight, “your reproof is just.
 but it may be we shall meet hereafter with less of concealment on either
 side.—meanwhile we part friends, do we not?”
 “there is my hand upon it,” said locksley; “and i will call it the hand of
 a true englishman, though an outlaw for the present.”
 “and there is mine in return,” said the knight, “and i hold it honoured by
 being clasped with yours. for he that does good, having the unlimited
 power to do evil, deserves praise not only for the good which he performs,
 but for the evil which he forbears. fare thee well, gallant outlaw!” thus
 parted that fair fellowship; and he of the fetterlock, mounting upon his
 strong war-horse, rode off through the forest.
 king john.—i'll tell thee what, my friend,
 he is a very serpent in my way;
 and wheresoe'er this foot of mine doth tread,
 he lies before me.—dost thou understand me?
 —king john
 there was brave feasting in the castle of york, to which prince john had
 invited those nobles, prelates, and leaders, by whose assistance he hoped
 to carry through his ambitious projects upon his brother's throne.
 waldemar fitzurse, his able and politic agent, was at secret work among
 them, tempering all to that pitch of courage which was necessary in making
 an open declaration of their purpose. but their enterprise was delayed by
 the absence of more than one main limb of the confederacy. the stubborn
 and daring, though brutal courage of front-de-boeuf; the buoyant spirits
 and bold bearing of de bracy; the sagacity, martial experience, and
 renowned valour of brian de bois-guilbert, were important to the success
 of their conspiracy; and, while cursing in secret their unnecessary and
 unmeaning absence, neither john nor his adviser dared to proceed without
 them. isaac the jew also seemed to have vanished, and with him the hope of
 certain sums of money, making up the subsidy for which prince john had
 contracted with that israelite and his brethren. this deficiency was
 likely to prove perilous in an emergency so critical.
 it was on the morning after the fall of torquilstone, that a confused
 report began to spread abroad in the city of york, that de bracy and
 bois-guilbert, with their confederate front-de-boeuf, had been taken or
 slain. waldemar brought the rumour to prince john, announcing, that he
 feared its truth the more that they had set out with a small attendance,
 for the purpose of committing an assault on the saxon cedric and his
 attendants. at another time the prince would have treated this deed of
 violence as a good jest; but now, that it interfered with and impeded his
 own plans, he exclaimed against the perpetrators, and spoke of the broken
 laws, and the infringement of public order and of private property, in a
 tone which might have become king alfred.
 “the unprincipled marauders,” he said—“were i ever to become monarch
 of england, i would hang such transgressors over the drawbridges of their
 own castles.”
 “but to become monarch of england,” said his ahithophel coolly, “it is
 necessary not only that your grace should endure the transgressions of
 these unprincipled marauders, but that you should afford them your
 protection, notwithstanding your laudable zeal for the laws they are in
 the habit of infringing. we shall be finely helped, if the churl saxons
 should have realized your grace's vision, of converting feudal drawbridges
 into gibbets; and yonder bold-spirited cedric seemeth one to whom such an
 imagination might occur. your grace is well aware, it will be dangerous to
 stir without front-de-boeuf, de bracy, and the templar; and yet we have
 gone too far to recede with safety.”
 prince john struck his forehead with impatience, and then began to stride
 up and down the apartment.
 “the villains,” he said, “the base treacherous villains, to desert me at
 this pinch!”
 “nay, say rather the feather-pated giddy madmen,” said waldemar, “who must
 be toying with follies when such business was in hand.”
 “what is to be done?” said the prince, stopping short before waldemar.
 “i know nothing which can be done,” answered his counsellor, “save that
 which i have already taken order for.—i came not to bewail this evil
 chance with your grace, until i had done my best to remedy it.”
 “thou art ever my better angel, waldemar,” said the prince; “and when i
 have such a chancellor to advise withal, the reign of john will be
 renowned in our annals.—what hast thou commanded?”
 “i have ordered louis winkelbrand, de bracy's lieutenant, to cause his
 trumpet sound to horse, and to display his banner, and to set presently
 forth towards the castle of front-de-boeuf, to do what yet may be done for
 the succour of our friends.”
 prince john's face flushed with the pride of a spoilt child, who has
 undergone what it conceives to be an insult. “by the face of god!” he
 said, “waldemar fitzurse, much hast thou taken upon thee! and over
 malapert thou wert to cause trumpet to blow, or banner to be raised, in a
 town where ourselves were in presence, without our express command.”
 “i crave your grace's pardon,” said fitzurse, internally cursing the idle
 vanity of his patron; “but when time pressed, and even the loss of minutes
 might be fatal, i judged it best to take this much burden upon me, in a
 matter of such importance to your grace's interest.”
 “thou art pardoned, fitzurse,” said the prince, gravely; “thy purpose hath
 atoned for thy hasty rashness.—but whom have we here?—de bracy
 himself, by the rood!—and in strange guise doth he come before us.”
 it was indeed de bracy—“bloody with spurring, fiery red with speed.”
 his armour bore all the marks of the late obstinate fray, being broken,
 defaced, and stained with blood in many places, and covered with clay and
 dust from the crest to the spur. undoing his helmet, he placed it on the
 table, and stood a moment as if to collect himself before he told his
 news.
 “de bracy,” said prince john, “what means this?—speak, i charge
 thee!—are the saxons in rebellion?”
 “speak, de bracy,” said fitzurse, almost in the same moment with his
 master, “thou wert wont to be a man—where is the templar?—where
 front-de-boeuf?”
 “the templar is fled,” said de bracy; “front-de-boeuf you will never see
 more. he has found a red grave among the blazing rafters of his own castle
 and i alone am escaped to tell you.”
 “cold news,” said waldemar, “to us, though you speak of fire and
 conflagration.”
 “the worst news is not yet said,” answered de bracy; and, coming up to
 prince john, he uttered in a low and emphatic tone—“richard is in
 england—i have seen and spoken with him.”
 prince john turned pale, tottered, and caught at the back of an oaken
 bench to support himself—much like to a man who receives an arrow in
 his bosom.
 “thou ravest, de bracy,” said fitzurse, “it cannot be.”
 “it is as true as truth itself,” said de bracy; “i was his prisoner, and
 spoke with him.”
 “with richard plantagenet, sayest thou?” continued fitzurse.
 “with richard plantagenet,” replied de bracy, “with richard coeur-de-lion—with
 richard of england.”
 “and thou wert his prisoner?” said waldemar; “he is then at the head of a
 power?”
 “no—only a few outlawed yeomen were around him, and to these his
 person is unknown. i heard him say he was about to depart from them. he
 joined them only to assist at the storming of torquilstone.”
 “ay,” said fitzurse, “such is indeed the fashion of richard—a true
 knight-errant he, and will wander in wild adventure, trusting the prowess
 of his single arm, like any sir guy or sir bevis, while the weighty
 affairs of his kingdom slumber, and his own safety is endangered.—what
 dost thou propose to do de bracy?”
 “i?—i offered richard the service of my free lances, and he refused
 them—i will lead them to hull, seize on shipping, and embark for
 flanders; thanks to the bustling times, a man of action will always find
 employment. and thou, waldemar, wilt thou take lance and shield, and lay
 down thy policies, and wend along with me, and share the fate which god
 sends us?”
 “i am too old, maurice, and i have a daughter,” answered waldemar.
 “give her to me, fitzurse, and i will maintain her as fits her rank, with
 the help of lance and stirrup,” said de bracy.
 “not so,” answered fitzurse; “i will take sanctuary in this church of
 saint peter—the archbishop is my sworn brother.”
 during this discourse, prince john had gradually awakened from the stupor
 into which he had been thrown by the unexpected intelligence, and had been
 attentive to the conversation which passed betwixt his followers. “they
 fall off from me,” he said to himself, “they hold no more by me than a
 withered leaf by the bough when a breeze blows on it!—hell and
 fiends! can i shape no means for myself when i am deserted by these
 cravens?”—he paused, and there was an expression of diabolical
 passion in the constrained laugh with which he at length broke in on their
 conversation.
 “ha, ha, ha! my good lords, by the light of our lady's brow, i held ye
 sage men, bold men, ready-witted men; yet ye throw down wealth, honour,
 pleasure, all that our noble game promised you, at the moment it might be
 won by one bold cast!”
 “i understand you not,” said de bracy. “as soon as richard's return is
 blown abroad, he will be at the head of an army, and all is then over with
 us. i would counsel you, my lord, either to fly to france or take the
 protection of the queen mother.”
 “i seek no safety for myself,” said prince john, haughtily; “that i could
 secure by a word spoken to my brother. but although you, de bracy, and
 you, waldemar fitzurse, are so ready to abandon me, i should not greatly
 delight to see your heads blackening on clifford's gate yonder. thinkest
 thou, waldemar, that the wily archbishop will not suffer thee to be taken
 from the very horns of the altar, would it make his peace with king
 richard? and forgettest thou, de bracy, that robert estoteville lies
 betwixt thee and hull with all his forces, and that the earl of essex is
 gathering his followers? if we had reason to fear these levies even before
 richard's return, trowest thou there is any doubt now which party their
 leaders will take? trust me, estoteville alone has strength enough to
 drive all thy free lances into the humber.”—waldemar fitzurse and de
 bracy looked in each other's faces with blank dismay.—“there is but
 one road to safety,” continued the prince, and his brow grew black as
 midnight; “this object of our terror journeys alone—he must be met
 withal.”
 “not by me,” said de bracy, hastily; “i was his prisoner, and he took me
 to mercy. i will not harm a feather in his crest.”
 “who spoke of harming him?” said prince john, with a hardened laugh; “the
 knave will say next that i meant he should slay him!—no—a
 prison were better; and whether in britain or austria, what matters it?—things
 will be but as they were when we commenced our enterprise—it was
 founded on the hope that richard would remain a captive in germany—our
 uncle robert lived and died in the castle of cardiffe.”
 “ay, but,” said waldemar, “your sire henry sate more firm in his seat than
 your grace can. i say the best prison is that which is made by the sexton—no
 dungeon like a church-vault! i have said my say.”
 “prison or tomb,” said de bracy, “i wash my hands of the whole matter.”
 “villain!” said prince john, “thou wouldst not bewray our counsel?”
 “counsel was never bewrayed by me,” said de bracy, haughtily, “nor must
 the name of villain be coupled with mine!”
 “peace, sir knight!” said waldemar; “and you, good my lord, forgive the
 scruples of valiant de bracy; i trust i shall soon remove them.”
 “that passes your eloquence, fitzurse,” replied the knight.
 “why, good sir maurice,” rejoined the wily politician, “start not aside
 like a scared steed, without, at least, considering the object of your
 terror.—this richard—but a day since, and it would have been
 thy dearest wish to have met him hand to hand in the ranks of battle—a
 hundred times i have heard thee wish it.”
 “ay,” said de bracy, “but that was as thou sayest, hand to hand, and in
 the ranks of battle! thou never heardest me breathe a thought of
 assaulting him alone, and in a forest.”
 “thou art no good knight if thou dost scruple at it,” said waldemar. “was
 it in battle that lancelot de lac and sir tristram won renown? or was it
 not by encountering gigantic knights under the shade of deep and unknown
 forests?”
 “ay, but i promise you,” said de bracy, “that neither tristram nor
 lancelot would have been match, hand to hand, for richard plantagenet, and
 i think it was not their wont to take odds against a single man.”
 “thou art mad, de bracy—what is it we propose to thee, a hired and
 retained captain of free companions, whose swords are purchased for prince
 john's service? thou art apprized of our enemy, and then thou scruplest,
 though thy patron's fortunes, those of thy comrades, thine own, and the
 life and honour of every one amongst us, be at stake!”
 “i tell you,” said de bracy, sullenly, “that he gave me my life. true, he
 sent me from his presence, and refused my homage—so far i owe him
 neither favour nor allegiance—but i will not lift hand against him.”
 “it needs not—send louis winkelbrand and a score of thy lances.”
 “ye have sufficient ruffians of your own,” said de bracy; “not one of mine
 shall budge on such an errand.”
 “art thou so obstinate, de bracy?” said prince john; “and wilt thou
 forsake me, after so many protestations of zeal for my service?”
 “i mean it not,” said de bracy; “i will abide by you in aught that becomes
 a knight, whether in the lists or in the camp; but this highway practice
 comes not within my vow.”
 “come hither, waldemar,” said prince john. “an unhappy prince am i. my
 father, king henry, had faithful servants—he had but to say that he
 was plagued with a factious priest, and the blood of thomas-a-becket,
 saint though he was, stained the steps of his own altar.—tracy,
 morville, brito  loyal and daring subjects, your
 names, your spirit, are extinct! and although reginald fitzurse hath left
 a son, he hath fallen off from his father's fidelity and courage.”
 “he has fallen off from neither,” said waldemar fitzurse; “and since it
 may not better be, i will take on me the conduct of this perilous
 enterprise. dearly, however, did my father purchase the praise of a
 zealous friend; and yet did his proof of loyalty to henry fall far short
 of what i am about to afford; for rather would i assail a whole calendar
 of saints, than put spear in rest against coeur-de-lion.—de bracy,
 to thee i must trust to keep up the spirits of the doubtful, and to guard
 prince john's person. if you receive such news as i trust to send you, our
 enterprise will no longer wear a doubtful aspect.—page,” he said,
 “hie to my lodgings, and tell my armourer to be there in readiness; and
 bid stephen wetheral, broad thoresby, and the three spears of spyinghow,
 come to me instantly; and let the scout-master, hugh bardon, attend me
 also.—adieu, my prince, till better times.” thus speaking, he left
 the apartment. “he goes to make my brother prisoner,” said prince john to
 de bracy, “with as little touch of compunction, as if it but concerned the
 liberty of a saxon franklin. i trust he will observe our orders, and use
 our dear richard's person with all due respect.”
 de bracy only answered by a smile.
 “by the light of our lady's brow,” said prince john, “our orders to him
 were most precise—though it may be you heard them not, as we stood
 together in the oriel window—most clear and positive was our charge
 that richard's safety should be cared for, and woe to waldemar's head if
 he transgress it!”
 “i had better pass to his lodgings,” said de bracy, “and make him fully
 aware of your grace's pleasure; for, as it quite escaped my ear, it may
 not perchance have reached that of waldemar.”
 “nay, nay,” said prince john, impatiently, “i promise thee he heard me;
 and, besides, i have farther occupation for thee. maurice, come hither;
 let me lean on thy shoulder.”
 they walked a turn through the hall in this familiar posture, and prince
 john, with an air of the most confidential intimacy, proceeded to say,
 “what thinkest thou of this waldemar fitzurse, my de bracy?—he
 trusts to be our chancellor. surely we will pause ere we give an office so
 high to one who shows evidently how little he reverences our blood, by his
 so readily undertaking this enterprise against richard. thou dost think, i
 warrant, that thou hast lost somewhat of our regard, by thy boldly
 declining this unpleasing task—but no, maurice! i rather honour thee
 for thy virtuous constancy. there are things most necessary to be done,
 the perpetrator of which we neither love nor honour; and there may be
 refusals to serve us, which shall rather exalt in our estimation those who
 deny our request. the arrest of my unfortunate brother forms no such good
 title to the high office of chancellor, as thy chivalrous and courageous
 denial establishes in thee to the truncheon of high marshal. think of
 this, de bracy, and begone to thy charge.”
 “fickle tyrant!” muttered de bracy, as he left the presence of the prince;
 “evil luck have they who trust thee. thy chancellor, indeed!—he who
 hath the keeping of thy conscience shall have an easy charge, i trow. but
 high marshal of england! that,” he said, extending his arm, as if to grasp
 the baton of office, and assuming a loftier stride along the antechamber,
 “that is indeed a prize worth playing for!”
 de bracy had no sooner left the apartment than prince john summoned an
 attendant.
 “bid hugh bardon, our scout-master, come hither, as soon as he shall have
 spoken with waldemar fitzurse.”
 the scout-master arrived after a brief delay, during which john traversed
 the apartment with, unequal and disordered steps.
 “bardon,” said he, “what did waldemar desire of thee?”
 “two resolute men, well acquainted with these northern wilds, and skilful
 in tracking the tread of man and horse.”
 “and thou hast fitted him?”
 “let your grace never trust me else,” answered the master of the spies.
 “one is from hexamshire; he is wont to trace the tynedale and teviotdale
 thieves, as a bloodhound follows the slot of a hurt deer. the other is
 yorkshire bred, and has twanged his bowstring right oft in merry sherwood;
 he knows each glade and dingle, copse and high-wood, betwixt this and
 richmond.”
 “'tis well,” said the prince.—“goes waldemar forth with them?”
 “instantly,” said bardon.
 “with what attendance?” asked john, carelessly.
 “broad thoresby goes with him, and wetheral, whom they call, for his
 cruelty, stephen steel-heart; and three northern men-at-arms that belonged
 to ralph middleton's gang—they are called the spears of spyinghow.”
 “'tis well,” said prince john; then added, after a moment's pause,
 “bardon, it imports our service that thou keep a strict watch on maurice
 de bracy—so that he shall not observe it, however—and let us
 know of his motions from time to time—with whom he converses, what
 he proposeth. fail not in this, as thou wilt be answerable.”
 hugh bardon bowed, and retired.
 “if maurice betrays me,” said prince john—“if he betrays me, as his
 bearing leads me to fear, i will have his head, were richard thundering at
 the gates of york.”
 arouse the tiger of hyrcanian deserts,
 strive with the half-starved lion for his prey;
 lesser the risk, than rouse the slumbering fire
 of wild fanaticism.
 —anonymus
 our tale now returns to isaac of york.—mounted upon a mule, the gift
 of the outlaw, with two tall yeomen to act as his guard and guides, the
 jew had set out for the preceptory of templestowe, for the purpose of
 negotiating his daughter's redemption. the preceptory was but a day's
 journey from the demolished castle of torquilstone, and the jew had hoped
 to reach it before nightfall; accordingly, having dismissed his guides at
 the verge of the forest, and rewarded them with a piece of silver, he
 began to press on with such speed as his weariness permitted him to exert.
 but his strength failed him totally ere he had reached within four miles
 of the temple-court; racking pains shot along his back and through his
 limbs, and the excessive anguish which he felt at heart being now
 augmented by bodily suffering, he was rendered altogether incapable of
 proceeding farther than a small market-town, were dwelt a jewish rabbi of
 his tribe, eminent in the medical profession, and to whom isaac was well
 known. nathan ben israel received his suffering countryman with that
 kindness which the law prescribed, and which the jews practised to each
 other. he insisted on his betaking himself to repose, and used such
 remedies as were then in most repute to check the progress of the fever,
 which terror, fatigue, ill usage, and sorrow, had brought upon the poor
 old jew.
 on the morrow, when isaac proposed to arise and pursue his journey, nathan
 remonstrated against his purpose, both as his host and as his physician.
 it might cost him, he said, his life. but isaac replied, that more than
 life and death depended upon his going that morning to templestowe.
 “to templestowe!” said his host with surprise again felt his pulse, and
 then muttered to himself, “his fever is abated, yet seems his mind
 somewhat alienated and disturbed.”
 “and why not to templestowe?” answered his patient. “i grant thee, nathan,
 that it is a dwelling of those to whom the despised children of the
 promise are a stumbling-block and an abomination; yet thou knowest that
 pressing affairs of traffic sometimes carry us among these bloodthirsty
 nazarene soldiers, and that we visit the preceptories of the templars, as
 well as the commanderies of the knights hospitallers, as they are called.”
 “i know it well,” said nathan; “but wottest thou that lucas de beaumanoir,
 the chief of their order, and whom they term grand master, is now himself
 at templestowe?”
 “i know it not,” said isaac; “our last letters from our brethren at paris
 advised us that he was at that city, beseeching philip for aid against the
 sultan saladine.”
 “he hath since come to england, unexpected by his brethren,” said ben
 israel; “and he cometh among them with a strong and outstretched arm to
 correct and to punish. his countenance is kindled in anger against those
 who have departed from the vow which they have made, and great is the fear
 of those sons of belial. thou must have heard of his name?”
 “it is well known unto me,” said isaac; “the gentiles deliver this lucas
 beaumanoir as a man zealous to slaying for every point of the nazarene
 law; and our brethren have termed him a fierce destroyer of the saracens,
 and a cruel tyrant to the children of the promise.”
 “and truly have they termed him,” said nathan the physician. “other
 templars may be moved from the purpose of their heart by pleasure, or
 bribed by promise of gold and silver; but beaumanoir is of a different
 stamp—hating sensuality, despising treasure, and pressing forward to
 that which they call the crown of martyrdom—the god of jacob
 speedily send it unto him, and unto them all! specially hath this proud
 man extended his glove over the children of judah, as holy david over
 edom, holding the murder of a jew to be an offering of as sweet savour as
 the death of a saracen. impious and false things has he said even of the
 virtues of our medicines, as if they were the devices of satan—the
 lord rebuke him!”
 “nevertheless,” said isaac, “i must present myself at templestowe, though
 he hath made his face like unto a fiery furnace seven times heated.”
 he then explained to nathan the pressing cause of his journey. the rabbi
 listened with interest, and testified his sympathy after the fashion of
 his people, rending his clothes, and saying, “ah, my daughter!—ah,
 my daughter!—alas! for the beauty of zion!—alas! for the
 captivity of israel!”
 “thou seest,” said isaac, “how it stands with me, and that i may not
 tarry. peradventure, the presence of this lucas beaumanoir, being the
 chief man over them, may turn brian de bois-guilbert from the ill which he
 doth meditate, and that he may deliver to me my beloved daughter rebecca.”
 “go thou,” said nathan ben israel, “and be wise, for wisdom availed daniel
 in the den of lions into which he was cast; and may it go well with thee,
 even as thine heart wisheth. yet, if thou canst, keep thee from the
 presence of the grand master, for to do foul scorn to our people is his
 morning and evening delight. it may be if thou couldst speak with
 bois-guilbert in private, thou shalt the better prevail with him; for men
 say that these accursed nazarenes are not of one mind in the preceptory—may
 their counsels be confounded and brought to shame! but do thou, brother,
 return to me as if it were to the house of thy father, and bring me word
 how it has sped with thee; and well do i hope thou wilt bring with thee
 rebecca, even the scholar of the wise miriam, whose cures the gentiles
 slandered as if they had been wrought by necromancy.”
 isaac accordingly bade his friend farewell, and about an hour's riding
 brought him before the preceptory of templestowe.
 this establishment of the templars was seated amidst fair meadows and
 pastures, which the devotion of the former preceptor had bestowed upon
 their order. it was strong and well fortified, a point never neglected by
 these knights, and which the disordered state of england rendered
 peculiarly necessary. two halberdiers, clad in black, guarded the
 drawbridge, and others, in the same sad livery, glided to and fro upon the
 walls with a funereal pace, resembling spectres more than soldiers. the
 inferior officers of the order were thus dressed, ever since their use of
 white garments, similar to those of the knights and esquires, had given
 rise to a combination of certain false brethren in the mountains of
 palestine, terming themselves templars, and bringing great dishonour on
 the order. a knight was now and then seen to cross the court in his long
 white cloak, his head depressed on his breast, and his arms folded. they
 passed each other, if they chanced to meet, with a slow, solemn, and mute
 greeting; for such was the rule of their order, quoting thereupon the holy
 texts, “in many words thou shalt not avoid sin,” and “life and death are
 in the power of the tongue.” in a word, the stern ascetic rigour of the
 temple discipline, which had been so long exchanged for prodigal and
 licentious indulgence, seemed at once to have revived at templestowe under
 the severe eye of lucas beaumanoir.
 isaac paused at the gate, to consider how he might seek entrance in the
 manner most likely to bespeak favour; for he was well aware, that to his
 unhappy race the reviving fanaticism of the order was not less dangerous
 than their unprincipled licentiousness; and that his religion would be the
 object of hate and persecution in the one case, as his wealth would have
 exposed him in the other to the extortions of unrelenting oppression.
 meantime lucas beaumanoir walked in a small garden belonging to the
 preceptory, included within the precincts of its exterior fortification,
 and held sad and confidential communication with a brother of his order,
 who had come in his company from palestine.
 the grand master was a man advanced in age, as was testified by his long
 grey beard, and the shaggy grey eyebrows overhanging eyes, of which,
 however, years had been unable to quench the fire. a formidable warrior,
 his thin and severe features retained the soldier's fierceness of
 expression; an ascetic bigot, they were no less marked by the emaciation
 of abstinence, and the spiritual pride of the self-satisfied devotee. yet
 with these severer traits of physiognomy, there was mixed somewhat
 striking and noble, arising, doubtless, from the great part which his high
 office called upon him to act among monarchs and princes, and from the
 habitual exercise of supreme authority over the valiant and high-born
 knights, who were united by the rules of the order. his stature was tall,
 and his gait, undepressed by age and toil, was erect and stately. his
 white mantle was shaped with severe regularity, according to the rule of
 saint bernard himself, being composed of what was then called burrel
 cloth, exactly fitted to the size of the wearer, and bearing on the left
 shoulder the octangular cross peculiar to the order, formed of red cloth.
 no vair or ermine decked this garment; but in respect of his age, the
 grand master, as permitted by the rules, wore his doublet lined and
 trimmed with the softest lambskin, dressed with the wool outwards, which
 was the nearest approach he could regularly make to the use of fur, then
 the greatest luxury of dress. in his hand he bore that singular “abacus”,
 or staff of office, with which templars are usually represented, having at
 the upper end a round plate, on which was engraved the cross of the order,
 inscribed within a circle or orle, as heralds term it. his companion, who
 attended on this great personage, had nearly the same dress in all
 respects, but his extreme deference towards his superior showed that no
 other equality subsisted between them. the preceptor, for such he was in
 rank, walked not in a line with the grand master, but just so far behind
 that beaumanoir could speak to him without turning round his head.
 “conrade,” said the grand master, “dear companion of my battles and my
 toils, to thy faithful bosom alone i can confide my sorrows. to thee alone
 can i tell how oft, since i came to this kingdom, i have desired to be
 dissolved and to be with the just. not one object in england hath met mine
 eye which it could rest upon with pleasure, save the tombs of our
 brethren, beneath the massive roof of our temple church in yonder proud
 capital. o, valiant robert de ros! did i exclaim internally, as i gazed
 upon these good soldiers of the cross, where they lie sculptured on their
 sepulchres,—o, worthy william de mareschal! open your marble cells,
 and take to your repose a weary brother, who would rather strive with a
 hundred thousand pagans than witness the decay of our holy order!”
 “it is but true,” answered conrade mont-fitchet; “it is but too true; and
 the irregularities of our brethren in england are even more gross than
 those in france.”
 “because they are more wealthy,” answered the grand master. “bear with me,
 brother, although i should something vaunt myself. thou knowest the life i
 have led, keeping each point of my order, striving with devils embodied
 and disembodied, striking down the roaring lion, who goeth about seeking
 whom he may devour, like a good knight and devout priest, wheresoever i
 met with him—even as blessed saint bernard hath prescribed to us in
 the forty-fifth capital of our rule, 'ut leo semper feriatur'. 
 “but by the holy temple! the zeal which hath devoured my substance and my
 life, yea, the very nerves and marrow of my bones; by that very holy
 temple i swear to thee, that save thyself and some few that still retain
 the ancient severity of our order, i look upon no brethren whom i can
 bring my soul to embrace under that holy name. what say our statutes, and
 how do our brethren observe them? they should wear no vain or worldly
 ornament, no crest upon their helmet, no gold upon stirrup or bridle-bit;
 yet who now go pranked out so proudly and so gaily as the poor soldiers of
 the temple? they are forbidden by our statutes to take one bird by means
 of another, to shoot beasts with bow or arblast, to halloo to a
 hunting-horn, or to spur the horse after game. but now, at hunting and
 hawking, and each idle sport of wood and river, who so prompt as the
 templars in all these fond vanities? they are forbidden to read, save what
 their superior permitted, or listen to what is read, save such holy things
 as may be recited aloud during the hours of refaction; but lo! their ears
 are at the command of idle minstrels, and their eyes study empty romaunts.
 they were commanded to extirpate magic and heresy. lo! they are charged
 with studying the accursed cabalistical secrets of the jews, and the magic
 of the paynim saracens. simpleness of diet was prescribed to them, roots,
 pottage, gruels, eating flesh but thrice a-week, because the accustomed
 feeding on flesh is a dishonourable corruption of the body; and behold,
 their tables groan under delicate fare! their drink was to be water, and
 now, to drink like a templar, is the boast of each jolly boon companion!
 this very garden, filled as it is with curious herbs and trees sent from
 the eastern climes, better becomes the harem of an unbelieving emir, than
 the plot which christian monks should devote to raise their homely
 pot-herbs.—and o, conrade! well it were that the relaxation of
 discipline stopped even here!—well thou knowest that we were
 forbidden to receive those devout women, who at the beginning were
 associated as sisters of our order, because, saith the forty-sixth
 chapter, the ancient enemy hath, by female society, withdrawn many from
 the right path to paradise. nay, in the last capital, being, as it were,
 the cope-stone which our blessed founder placed on the pure and undefiled
 doctrine which he had enjoined, we are prohibited from offering, even to
 our sisters and our mothers, the kiss of affection—'ut omnium
 mulierum fugiantur oscula'.—i shame to speak—i shame to think—of
 the corruptions which have rushed in upon us even like a flood. the souls
 of our pure founders, the spirits of hugh de payen and godfrey de saint
 omer, and of the blessed seven who first joined in dedicating their lives
 to the service of the temple, are disturbed even in the enjoyment of
 paradise itself. i have seen them, conrade, in the visions of the night—their
 sainted eyes shed tears for the sins and follies of their brethren, and
 for the foul and shameful luxury in which they wallow. beaumanoir, they
 say, thou slumberest—awake! there is a stain in the fabric of the
 temple, deep and foul as that left by the streaks of leprosy on the walls
 of the infected houses of old. 
 “the soldiers of the cross, who should shun the glance of a woman as the
 eye of a basilisk, live in open sin, not with the females of their own
 race only, but with the daughters of the accursed heathen, and more
 accursed jew. beaumanoir, thou sleepest; up, and avenge our cause!—slay
 the sinners, male and female!—take to thee the brand of phineas!—the
 vision fled, conrade, but as i awaked i could still hear the clank of
 their mail, and see the waving of their white mantles.—and i will do
 according to their word, i will purify the fabric of the temple! and the
 unclean stones in which the plague is, i will remove and cast out of the
 building.”
 “yet bethink thee, reverend father,” said mont-fitchet, “the stain hath
 become engrained by time and consuetude; let thy reformation be cautious,
 as it is just and wise.”
 “no, mont-fitchet,” answered the stern old man—“it must be sharp and
 sudden—the order is on the crisis of its fate. the sobriety,
 self-devotion, and piety of our predecessors, made us powerful friends—our
 presumption, our wealth, our luxury, have raised up against us mighty
 enemies.—we must cast away these riches, which are a temptation to
 princes—we must lay down that presumption, which is an offence to
 them—we must reform that license of manners, which is a scandal to
 the whole christian world! or—mark my words—the order of the
 temple will be utterly demolished—and the place thereof shall no
 more be known among the nations.”
 “now may god avert such a calamity!” said the preceptor.
 “amen,” said the grand master, with solemnity, “but we must deserve his
 aid. i tell thee, conrade, that neither the powers in heaven, nor the
 powers on earth, will longer endure the wickedness of this generation—my
 intelligence is sure—the ground on which our fabric is reared is
 already undermined, and each addition we make to the structure of our
 greatness will only sink it the sooner in the abyss. we must retrace our
 steps, and show ourselves the faithful champions of the cross, sacrificing
 to our calling, not alone our blood and our lives—not alone our
 lusts and our vices—but our ease, our comforts, and our natural
 affections, and act as men convinced that many a pleasure which may be
 lawful to others, is forbidden to the vowed soldier of the temple.”
 at this moment a squire, clothed in a threadbare vestment, (for the
 aspirants after this holy order wore during their noviciate the cast-off
 garments of the knights,) entered the garden, and, bowing profoundly
 before the grand master, stood silent, awaiting his permission ere he
 presumed to tell his errand.
 “is it not more seemly,” said the grand master, “to see this damian,
 clothed in the garments of christian humility, thus appear with reverend
 silence before his superior, than but two days since, when the fond fool
 was decked in a painted coat, and jangling as pert and as proud as any
 popinjay?—speak, damian, we permit thee—what is thine errand?”
 “a jew stands without the gate, noble and reverend father,” said the
 squire, “who prays to speak with brother brian de bois-guilbert.”
 “thou wert right to give me knowledge of it,” said the grand master; “in
 our presence a preceptor is but as a common compeer of our order, who may
 not walk according to his own will, but to that of his master—even
 according to the text, 'in the hearing of the ear he hath obeyed me.'—it
 imports us especially to know of this bois-guilbert's proceedings,” said
 he, turning to his companion.
 “report speaks him brave and valiant,” said conrade.
 “and truly is he so spoken of,” said the grand master; “in our valour only
 we are not degenerated from our predecessors, the heroes of the cross. but
 brother brian came into our order a moody and disappointed man, stirred, i
 doubt me, to take our vows and to renounce the world, not in sincerity of
 soul, but as one whom some touch of light discontent had driven into
 penitence. since then, he hath become an active and earnest agitator, a
 murmurer, and a machinator, and a leader amongst those who impugn our
 authority; not considering that the rule is given to the master even by
 the symbol of the staff and the rod—the staff to support the
 infirmities of the weak—the rod to correct the faults of
 delinquents.—damian,” he continued, “lead the jew to our presence.”
 the squire departed with a profound reverence, and in a few minutes
 returned, marshalling in isaac of york. no naked slave, ushered into the
 presence of some mighty prince, could approach his judgment-seat with more
 profound reverence and terror than that with which the jew drew near to
 the presence of the grand master. when he had approached within the
 distance of three yards, beaumanoir made a sign with his staff that he
 should come no farther. the jew kneeled down on the earth which he kissed
 in token of reverence; then rising, stood before the templars, his hands
 folded on his bosom, his head bowed on his breast, in all the submission
 of oriental slavery.
 “damian,” said the grand master, “retire, and have a guard ready to await
 our sudden call; and suffer no one to enter the garden until we shall
 leave it.”—the squire bowed and retreated.—“jew,” continued
 the haughty old man, “mark me. it suits not our condition to hold with
 thee long communication, nor do we waste words or time upon any one.
 wherefore be brief in thy answers to what questions i shall ask thee, and
 let thy words be of truth; for if thy tongue doubles with me, i will have
 it torn from thy misbelieving jaws.”
 the jew was about to reply, but the grand master went on.
 “peace, unbeliever!—not a word in our presence, save in answer to
 our questions.—what is thy business with our brother brian de
 bois-guilbert?”
 isaac gasped with terror and uncertainty. to tell his tale might be
 interpreted into scandalizing the order; yet, unless he told it, what hope
 could he have of achieving his daughter's deliverance? beaumanoir saw his
 mortal apprehension, and condescended to give him some assurance.
 “fear nothing,” he said, “for thy wretched person, jew, so thou dealest
 uprightly in this matter. i demand again to know from thee thy business
 with brian de bois-guilbert?”
 “i am bearer of a letter,” stammered out the jew, “so please your reverend
 valour, to that good knight, from prior aymer of the abbey of jorvaulx.”
 “said i not these were evil times, conrade?” said the master. “a
 cistertian prior sends a letter to a soldier of the temple, and can find
 no more fitting messenger than an unbelieving jew.—give me the
 letter.”
 the jew, with trembling hands, undid the folds of his armenian cap, in
 which he had deposited the prior's tablets for the greater security, and
 was about to approach, with hand extended and body crouched, to place it
 within the reach of his grim interrogator.
 “back, dog!” said the grand master; “i touch not misbelievers, save with
 the sword.—conrade, take thou the letter from the jew, and give it
 to me.”
 beaumanoir, being thus possessed of the tablets, inspected the outside
 carefully, and then proceeded to undo the packthread which secured its
 folds. “reverend father,” said conrade, interposing, though with much
 deference, “wilt thou break the seal?”
 “and will i not?” said beaumanoir, with a frown. “is it not written in the
 forty-second capital, 'de lectione literarum' that a templar shall not
 receive a letter, no not from his father, without communicating the same
 to the grand master, and reading it in his presence?”
 he then perused the letter in haste, with an expression of surprise and
 horror; read it over again more slowly; then holding it out to conrade
 with one hand, and slightly striking it with the other, exclaimed—“here
 is goodly stuff for one christian man to write to another, and both
 members, and no inconsiderable members, of religious professions! when,”
 said he solemnly, and looking upward, “wilt thou come with thy fanners to
 purge the thrashing-floor?”
 mont-fitchet took the letter from his superior, and was about to peruse
 it.
 “read it aloud, conrade,” said the grand master,—“and do thou” (to
 isaac) “attend to the purport of it, for we will question thee concerning
 it.”
 conrade read the letter, which was in these words: “aymer, by divine
 grace, prior of the cistertian house of saint mary's of jorvaulx, to sir
 brian de bois-guilbert, a knight of the holy order of the temple, wisheth
 health, with the bounties of king bacchus and of my lady venus. touching
 our present condition, dear brother, we are a captive in the hands of
 certain lawless and godless men, who have not feared to detain our person,
 and put us to ransom; whereby we have also learned of front-de-boeuf's
 misfortune, and that thou hast escaped with that fair jewish sorceress,
 whose black eyes have bewitched thee. we are heartily rejoiced of thy
 safety; nevertheless, we pray thee to be on thy guard in the matter of
 this second witch of endor; for we are privately assured that your great
 master, who careth not a bean for cherry cheeks and black eyes, comes from
 normandy to diminish your mirth, and amend your misdoings. wherefore we
 pray you heartily to beware, and to be found watching, even as the holy
 text hath it, 'invenientur vigilantes'. and the wealthy jew her father,
 isaac of york, having prayed of me letters in his behalf, i gave him
 these, earnestly advising, and in a sort entreating, that you do hold the
 damsel to ransom, seeing he will pay you from his bags as much as may find
 fifty damsels upon safer terms, whereof i trust to have my part when we
 make merry together, as true brothers, not forgetting the wine-cup. for
 what saith the text, 'vinum laetificat cor hominis'; and again, 'rex
 delectabitur pulchritudine tua'.
 “till which merry meeting, we wish you farewell. given from this den of
 thieves, about the hour of matins,
 “aymer pr. s. m. jorvolciencis.
 “'postscriptum.' truly your golden chain hath not long abidden with me,
 and will now sustain, around the neck of an outlaw deer-stealer, the
 whistle wherewith he calleth on his hounds.”
 “what sayest thou to this, conrade?” said the grand master—“den of
 thieves! and a fit residence is a den of thieves for such a prior. no
 wonder that the hand of god is upon us, and that in the holy land we lose
 place by place, foot by foot, before the infidels, when we have such
 churchmen as this aymer.—and what meaneth he, i trow, by this second
 witch of endor?” said he to his confident, something apart. conrade was
 better acquainted (perhaps by practice) with the jargon of gallantry, than
 was his superior; and he expounded the passage which embarrassed the grand
 master, to be a sort of language used by worldly men towards those whom
 they loved 'par amours'; but the explanation did not satisfy the bigoted
 beaumanoir.
 “there is more in it than thou dost guess, conrade; thy simplicity is no
 match for this deep abyss of wickedness. this rebecca of york was a pupil
 of that miriam of whom thou hast heard. thou shalt hear the jew own it
 even now.” then turning to isaac, he said aloud, “thy daughter, then, is
 prisoner with brian de bois-guilbert?”
 “ay, reverend valorous sir,” stammered poor isaac, “and whatsoever ransom
 a poor man may pay for her deliverance—-”
 “peace!” said the grand master. “this thy daughter hath practised the art
 of healing, hath she not?”
 “ay, gracious sir,” answered the jew, with more confidence; “and knight
 and yeoman, squire and vassal, may bless the goodly gift which heaven hath
 assigned to her. many a one can testify that she hath recovered them by
 her art, when every other human aid hath proved vain; but the blessing of
 the god of jacob was upon her.”
 beaumanoir turned to mont-fitchet with a grim smile. “see, brother,” he
 said, “the deceptions of the devouring enemy! behold the baits with which
 he fishes for souls, giving a poor space of earthly life in exchange for
 eternal happiness hereafter. well said our blessed rule, 'semper
 percutiatur leo vorans'.—up on the lion! down with the destroyer!”
 said he, shaking aloft his mystic abacus, as if in defiance of the powers
 of darkness—“thy daughter worketh the cures, i doubt not,” thus he
 went on to address the jew, “by words and sighs, and periapts, and other
 cabalistical mysteries.”
 “nay, reverend and brave knight,” answered isaac, “but in chief measure by
 a balsam of marvellous virtue.”
 “where had she that secret?” said beaumanoir.
 “it was delivered to her,” answered isaac, reluctantly, “by miriam, a sage
 matron of our tribe.”
 “ah, false jew!” said the grand master; “was it not from that same witch
 miriam, the abomination of whose enchantments have been heard of
 throughout every christian land?” exclaimed the grand master, crossing
 himself. “her body was burnt at a stake, and her ashes were scattered to
 the four winds; and so be it with me and mine order, if i do not as much
 to her pupil, and more also! i will teach her to throw spell and
 incantation over the soldiers of the blessed temple.—there, damian,
 spurn this jew from the gate—shoot him dead if he oppose or turn
 again. with his daughter we will deal as the christian law and our own
 high office warrant.”
 poor isaac was hurried off accordingly, and expelled from the preceptory;
 all his entreaties, and even his offers, unheard and disregarded. he could
 do not better than return to the house of the rabbi, and endeavour,
 through his means, to learn how his daughter was to be disposed of. he had
 hitherto feared for her honour, he was now to tremble for her life.
 meanwhile, the grand master ordered to his presence the preceptor of
 templestowe.
 say not my art is fraud—all live by seeming.
 the beggar begs with it, and the gay courtier
 gains land and title, rank and rule, by seeming;
 the clergy scorn it not, and the bold soldier
 will eke with it his service.—all admit it,
 all practise it; and he who is content
 with showing what he is, shall have small credit
 in church, or camp, or state—so wags the world.
 —old play
 albert malvoisin, president, or, in the language of the order, preceptor
 of the establishment of templestowe, was brother to that philip malvoisin
 who has been already occasionally mentioned in this history, and was, like
 that baron, in close league with brian de bois-guilbert.
 amongst dissolute and unprincipled men, of whom the temple order included
 but too many, albert of templestowe might be distinguished; but with this
 difference from the audacious bois-guilbert, that he knew how to throw
 over his vices and his ambition the veil of hypocrisy, and to assume in
 his exterior the fanaticism which he internally despised. had not the
 arrival of the grand master been so unexpectedly sudden, he would have
 seen nothing at templestowe which might have appeared to argue any
 relaxation of discipline. and, even although surprised, and, to a certain
 extent, detected, albert malvoisin listened with such respect and apparent
 contrition to the rebuke of his superior, and made such haste to reform
 the particulars he censured,—succeeded, in fine, so well in giving
 an air of ascetic devotion to a family which had been lately devoted to
 license and pleasure, that lucas beaumanoir began to entertain a higher
 opinion of the preceptor's morals, than the first appearance of the
 establishment had inclined him to adopt.
 but these favourable sentiments on the part of the grand master were
 greatly shaken by the intelligence that albert had received within a house
 of religion the jewish captive, and, as was to be feared, the paramour of
 a brother of the order; and when albert appeared before him, he was
 regarded with unwonted sternness.
 “there is in this mansion, dedicated to the purposes of the holy order of
 the temple,” said the grand master, in a severe tone, “a jewish woman,
 brought hither by a brother of religion, by your connivance, sir
 preceptor.”
 albert malvoisin was overwhelmed with confusion; for the unfortunate
 rebecca had been confined in a remote and secret part of the building, and
 every precaution used to prevent her residence there from being known. he
 read in the looks of beaumanoir ruin to bois-guilbert and to himself,
 unless he should be able to avert the impending storm.
 “why are you mute?” continued the grand master.
 “is it permitted to me to reply?” answered the preceptor, in a tone of the
 deepest humility, although by the question he only meant to gain an
 instant's space for arranging his ideas.
 “speak, you are permitted,” said the grand master—“speak, and say,
 knowest thou the capital of our holy rule,—'de commilitonibus templi
 in sancta civitate, qui cum miserrimis mulieribus versantur, propter
 oblectationem carnis?'” 
 “surely, most reverend father,” answered the preceptor, “i have not risen
 to this office in the order, being ignorant of one of its most important
 prohibitions.”
 “how comes it, then, i demand of thee once more, that thou hast suffered a
 brother to bring a paramour, and that paramour a jewish sorceress, into
 this holy place, to the stain and pollution thereof?”
 “a jewish sorceress!” echoed albert malvoisin; “good angels guard us!”
 “ay, brother, a jewish sorceress!” said the grand master, sternly. “i have
 said it. darest thou deny that this rebecca, the daughter of that wretched
 usurer isaac of york, and the pupil of the foul witch miriam, is now—shame
 to be thought or spoken!—lodged within this thy preceptory?”
 “your wisdom, reverend father,” answered the preceptor, “hath rolled away
 the darkness from my understanding. much did i wonder that so good a
 knight as brian de bois-guilbert seemed so fondly besotted on the charms
 of this female, whom i received into this house merely to place a bar
 betwixt their growing intimacy, which else might have been cemented at the
 expense of the fall of our valiant and religious brother.”
 “hath nothing, then, as yet passed betwixt them in breach of his vow?”
 demanded the grand master.
 “what! under this roof?” said the preceptor, crossing himself; “saint
 magdalene and the ten thousand virgins forbid!—no! if i have sinned
 in receiving her here, it was in the erring thought that i might thus
 break off our brother's besotted devotion to this jewess, which seemed to
 me so wild and unnatural, that i could not but ascribe it to some touch of
 insanity, more to be cured by pity than reproof. but since your reverend
 wisdom hath discovered this jewish queen to be a sorceress, perchance it
 may account fully for his enamoured folly.”
 “it doth!—it doth!” said beaumanoir. “see, brother conrade, the
 peril of yielding to the first devices and blandishments of satan! we look
 upon woman only to gratify the lust of the eye, and to take pleasure in
 what men call her beauty; and the ancient enemy, the devouring lion,
 obtains power over us, to complete, by talisman and spell, a work which
 was begun by idleness and folly. it may be that our brother bois-guilbert
 does in this matter deserve rather pity than severe chastisement; rather
 the support of the staff, than the strokes of the rod; and that our
 admonitions and prayers may turn him from his folly, and restore him to
 his brethren.”
 “it were deep pity,” said conrade mont-fitchet, “to lose to the order one
 of its best lances, when the holy community most requires the aid of its
 sons. three hundred saracens hath this brian de bois-guilbert slain with
 his own hand.”
 “the blood of these accursed dogs,” said the grand master, “shall be a
 sweet and acceptable offering to the saints and angels whom they despise
 and blaspheme; and with their aid will we counteract the spells and charms
 with which our brother is entwined as in a net. he shall burst the bands
 of this delilah, as sampson burst the two new cords with which the
 philistines had bound him, and shall slaughter the infidels, even heaps
 upon heaps. but concerning this foul witch, who hath flung her
 enchantments over a brother of the holy temple, assuredly she shall die
 the death.”
 “but the laws of england,”—said the preceptor, who, though delighted
 that the grand master's resentment, thus fortunately averted from himself
 and bois-guilbert, had taken another direction, began now to fear he was
 carrying it too far.
 “the laws of england,” interrupted beaumanoir, “permit and enjoin each
 judge to execute justice within his own jurisdiction. the most petty baron
 may arrest, try, and condemn a witch found within his own domain. and
 shall that power be denied to the grand master of the temple within a
 preceptory of his order?—no!—we will judge and condemn. the
 witch shall be taken out of the land, and the wickedness thereof shall be
 forgiven. prepare the castle-hall for the trial of the sorceress.”
 albert malvoisin bowed and retired,—not to give directions for
 preparing the hall, but to seek out brian de bois-guilbert, and
 communicate to him how matters were likely to terminate. it was not long
 ere he found him, foaming with indignation at a repulse he had anew
 sustained from the fair jewess. “the unthinking,” he said, “the
 ungrateful, to scorn him who, amidst blood and flames, would have saved
 her life at the risk of his own! by heaven, malvoisin! i abode until roof
 and rafters crackled and crashed around me. i was the butt of a hundred
 arrows; they rattled on mine armour like hailstones against a latticed
 casement, and the only use i made of my shield was for her protection.
 this did i endure for her; and now the self-willed girl upbraids me that i
 did not leave her to perish, and refuses me not only the slightest proof
 of gratitude, but even the most distant hope that ever she will be brought
 to grant any. the devil, that possessed her race with obstinacy, has
 concentrated its full force in her single person!”
 “the devil,” said the preceptor, “i think, possessed you both. how oft
 have i preached to you caution, if not continence? did i not tell you that
 there were enough willing christian damsels to be met with, who would
 think it sin to refuse so brave a knight 'le don d'amoureux merci', and
 you must needs anchor your affection on a wilful, obstinate jewess! by the
 mass, i think old lucas beaumanoir guesses right, when he maintains she
 hath cast a spell over you.”
 “lucas beaumanoir!”—said bois-guilbert reproachfully—“are
 these your precautions, malvoisin? hast thou suffered the dotard to learn
 that rebecca is in the preceptory?”
 “how could i help it?” said the preceptor. “i neglected nothing that could
 keep secret your mystery; but it is betrayed, and whether by the devil or
 no, the devil only can tell. but i have turned the matter as i could; you
 are safe if you renounce rebecca. you are pitied—the victim of
 magical delusion. she is a sorceress, and must suffer as such.”
 “she shall not, by heaven!” said bois-guilbert.
 “by heaven, she must and will!” said malvoisin. “neither you nor any one
 else can save her. lucas beaumanoir hath settled that the death of a
 jewess will be a sin-offering sufficient to atone for all the amorous
 indulgences of the knights templars; and thou knowest he hath both the
 power and will to execute so reasonable and pious a purpose.”
 “will future ages believe that such stupid bigotry ever existed!” said
 bois-guilbert, striding up and down the apartment.
 “what they may believe, i know not,” said malvoisin, calmly; “but i know
 well, that in this our day, clergy and laymen, take ninety-nine to the
 hundred, will cry 'amen' to the grand master's sentence.”
 “i have it,” said bois-guilbert. “albert, thou art my friend. thou must
 connive at her escape, malvoisin, and i will transport her to some place
 of greater security and secrecy.”
 “i cannot, if i would,” replied the preceptor; “the mansion is filled with
 the attendants of the grand master, and others who are devoted to him.
 and, to be frank with you, brother, i would not embark with you in this
 matter, even if i could hope to bring my bark to haven. i have risked
 enough already for your sake. i have no mind to encounter a sentence of
 degradation, or even to lose my preceptory, for the sake of a painted
 piece of jewish flesh and blood. and you, if you will be guided by my
 counsel, will give up this wild-goose chase, and fly your hawk at some
 other game. think, bois-guilbert,—thy present rank, thy future
 honours, all depend on thy place in the order. shouldst thou adhere
 perversely to thy passion for this rebecca, thou wilt give beaumanoir the
 power of expelling thee, and he will not neglect it. he is jealous of the
 truncheon which he holds in his trembling gripe, and he knows thou
 stretchest thy bold hand towards it. doubt not he will ruin thee, if thou
 affordest him a pretext so fair as thy protection of a jewish sorceress.
 give him his scope in this matter, for thou canst not control him. when
 the staff is in thine own firm grasp, thou mayest caress the daughters of
 judah, or burn them, as may best suit thine own humour.”
 “malvoisin,” said bois-guilbert, “thou art a cold-blooded—”
 “friend,” said the preceptor, hastening to fill up the blank, in which
 bois-guilbert would probably have placed a worse word,—“a
 cold-blooded friend i am, and therefore more fit to give thee advice. i
 tell thee once more, that thou canst not save rebecca. i tell thee once
 more, thou canst but perish with her. go hie thee to the grand master—throw
 thyself at his feet and tell him—”
 “not at his feet, by heaven! but to the dotard's very beard will i say—”
 “say to him, then, to his beard,” continued malvoisin, coolly, “that you
 love this captive jewess to distraction; and the more thou dost enlarge on
 thy passion, the greater will be his haste to end it by the death of the
 fair enchantress; while thou, taken in flagrant delict by the avowal of a
 crime contrary to thine oath, canst hope no aid of thy brethren, and must
 exchange all thy brilliant visions of ambition and power, to lift perhaps
 a mercenary spear in some of the petty quarrels between flanders and
 burgundy.”
 “thou speakest the truth, malvoisin,” said brian de bois-guilbert, after a
 moment's reflection. “i will give the hoary bigot no advantage over me;
 and for rebecca, she hath not merited at my hand that i should expose rank
 and honour for her sake. i will cast her off—yes, i will leave her
 to her fate, unless—”
 “qualify not thy wise and necessary resolution,” said malvoisin; “women
 are but the toys which amuse our lighter hours—ambition is the
 serious business of life. perish a thousand such frail baubles as this
 jewess, before thy manly step pause in the brilliant career that lies
 stretched before thee! for the present we part, nor must we be seen to
 hold close conversation—i must order the hall for his
 judgment-seat.”
 “what!” said bois-guilbert, “so soon?”
 “ay,” replied the preceptor, “trial moves rapidly on when the judge has
 determined the sentence beforehand.”
 “rebecca,” said bois-guilbert, when he was left alone, “thou art like to
 cost me dear—why cannot i abandon thee to thy fate, as this calm
 hypocrite recommends?—one effort will i make to save thee—but
 beware of ingratitude! for if i am again repulsed, my vengeance shall
 equal my love. the life and honour of bois-guilbert must not be hazarded,
 where contempt and reproaches are his only reward.”
 the preceptor had hardly given the necessary orders, when he was joined by
 conrade mont-fitchet, who acquainted him with the grand master's
 resolution to bring the jewess to instant trial for sorcery.
 “it is surely a dream,” said the preceptor; “we have many jewish
 physicians, and we call them not wizards though they work wonderful
 cures.”
 “the grand master thinks otherwise,” said mont-fitchet; “and, albert, i
 will be upright with thee—wizard or not, it were better that this
 miserable damsel die, than that brian de bois-guilbert should be lost to
 the order, or the order divided by internal dissension. thou knowest his
 high rank, his fame in arms—thou knowest the zeal with which many of
 our brethren regard him—but all this will not avail him with our
 grand master, should he consider brian as the accomplice, not the victim,
 of this jewess. were the souls of the twelve tribes in her single body, it
 were better she suffered alone, than that bois-guilbert were partner in
 her destruction.”
 “i have been working him even now to abandon her,” said malvoisin; “but
 still, are there grounds enough to condemn this rebecca for sorcery?—will
 not the grand master change his mind when he sees that the proofs are so
 weak?”
 “they must be strengthened, albert,” replied mont-fitchet, “they must be
 strengthened. dost thou understand me?”
 “i do,” said the preceptor, “nor do i scruple to do aught for advancement
 of the order—but there is little time to find engines fitting.”
 “malvoisin, they must be found,” said conrade; “well will it advantage
 both the order and thee. this templestowe is a poor preceptory—that
 of maison-dieu is worth double its value—thou knowest my interest
 with our old chief—find those who can carry this matter through, and
 thou art preceptor of maison-dieu in the fertile kent—how sayst
 thou?”
 “there is,” replied malvoisin, “among those who came hither with
 bois-guilbert, two fellows whom i well know; servants they were to my
 brother philip de malvoisin, and passed from his service to that of
 front-de-boeuf—it may be they know something of the witcheries of
 this woman.”
 “away, seek them out instantly—and hark thee, if a byzant or two
 will sharpen their memory, let them not be wanting.”
 “they would swear the mother that bore them a sorceress for a zecchin,”
 said the preceptor.
 “away, then,” said mont-fitchet; “at noon the affair will proceed. i have
 not seen our senior in such earnest preparation since he condemned to the
 stake hamet alfagi, a convert who relapsed to the moslem faith.”
 the ponderous castle-bell had tolled the point of noon, when rebecca heard
 a trampling of feet upon the private stair which led to her place of
 confinement. the noise announced the arrival of several persons, and the
 circumstance rather gave her joy; for she was more afraid of the solitary
 visits of the fierce and passionate bois-guilbert than of any evil that
 could befall her besides. the door of the chamber was unlocked, and
 conrade and the preceptor malvoisin entered, attended by four warders
 clothed in black, and bearing halberds.
 “daughter of an accursed race!” said the preceptor, “arise and follow us.”
 “whither,” said rebecca, “and for what purpose?”
 “damsel,” answered conrade, “it is not for thee to question, but to obey.
 nevertheless, be it known to thee, that thou art to be brought before the
 tribunal of the grand master of our holy order, there to answer for thine
 offences.”
 “may the god of abraham be praised!” said rebecca, folding her hands
 devoutly; “the name of a judge, though an enemy to my people, is to me as
 the name of a protector. most willingly do i follow thee—permit me
 only to wrap my veil around my head.”
 they descended the stair with slow and solemn step, traversed a long
 gallery, and, by a pair of folding doors placed at the end, entered the
 great hall in which the grand master had for the time established his
 court of justice.
 the lower part of this ample apartment was filled with squires and yeomen,
 who made way not without some difficulty for rebecca, attended by the
 preceptor and mont-fitchet, and followed by the guard of halberdiers, to
 move forward to the seat appointed for her. as she passed through the
 crowd, her arms folded and her head depressed, a scrap of paper was thrust
 into her hand, which she received almost unconsciously, and continued to
 hold without examining its contents. the assurance that she possessed some
 friend in this awful assembly gave her courage to look around, and to mark
 into whose presence she had been conducted. she gazed, accordingly, upon
 the scene, which we shall endeavour to describe in the next chapter.
 stern was the law which bade its vot'ries leave
 at human woes with human hearts to grieve;
 stern was the law, which at the winning wile
 of frank and harmless mirth forbade to smile;
 but sterner still, when high the iron-rod
 of tyrant power she shook, and call'd that power of god.
 —the middle ages
 the tribunal, erected for the trial of the innocent and unhappy rebecca,
 occupied the dais or elevated part of the upper end of the great hall—a
 platform, which we have already described as the place of honour, destined
 to be occupied by the most distinguished inhabitants or guests of an
 ancient mansion.
 on an elevated seat, directly before the accused, sat the grand master of
 the temple, in full and ample robes of flowing white, holding in his hand
 the mystic staff, which bore the symbol of the order. at his feet was
 placed a table, occupied by two scribes, chaplains of the order, whose
 duty it was to reduce to formal record the proceedings of the day. the
 black dresses, bare scalps, and demure looks of these church-men, formed a
 strong contrast to the warlike appearance of the knights who attended,
 either as residing in the preceptory, or as come thither to attend upon
 their grand master. the preceptors, of whom there were four present,
 occupied seats lower in height, and somewhat drawn back behind that of
 their superior; and the knights, who enjoyed no such rank in the order,
 were placed on benches still lower, and preserving the same distance from
 the preceptors as these from the grand master. behind them, but still upon
 the dais or elevated portion of the hall, stood the esquires of the order,
 in white dresses of an inferior quality.
 the whole assembly wore an aspect of the most profound gravity; and in the
 faces of the knights might be perceived traces of military daring, united
 with the solemn carriage becoming men of a religious profession, and
 which, in the presence of their grand master, failed not to sit upon every
 brow.
 the remaining and lower part of the hall was filled with guards, holding
 partisans, and with other attendants whom curiosity had drawn thither, to
 see at once a grand master and a jewish sorceress. by far the greater part
 of those inferior persons were, in one rank or other, connected with the
 order, and were accordingly distinguished by their black dresses. but
 peasants from the neighbouring country were not refused admittance; for it
 was the pride of beaumanoir to render the edifying spectacle of the
 justice which he administered as public as possible. his large blue eyes
 seemed to expand as he gazed around the assembly, and his countenance
 appeared elated by the conscious dignity, and imaginary merit, of the part
 which he was about to perform. a psalm, which he himself accompanied with
 a deep mellow voice, which age had not deprived of its powers, commenced
 the proceedings of the day; and the solemn sounds, “venite exultemus
 domino”, so often sung by the templars before engaging with earthly
 adversaries, was judged by lucas most appropriate to introduce the
 approaching triumph, for such he deemed it, over the powers of darkness.
 the deep prolonged notes, raised by a hundred masculine voices accustomed
 to combine in the choral chant, arose to the vaulted roof of the hall, and
 rolled on amongst its arches with the pleasing yet solemn sound of the
 rushing of mighty waters.
 when the sounds ceased, the grand master glanced his eye slowly around the
 circle, and observed that the seat of one of the preceptors was vacant.
 brian de bois-guilbert, by whom it had been occupied, had left his place,
 and was now standing near the extreme corner of one of the benches
 occupied by the knights companions of the temple, one hand extending his
 long mantle, so as in some degree to hide his face; while the other held
 his cross-handled sword, with the point of which, sheathed as it was, he
 was slowly drawing lines upon the oaken floor.
 “unhappy man!” said the grand master, after favouring him with a glance of
 compassion. “thou seest, conrade, how this holy work distresses him. to
 this can the light look of woman, aided by the prince of the powers of
 this world, bring a valiant and worthy knight!—seest thou he cannot
 look upon us; he cannot look upon her; and who knows by what impulse from
 his tormentor his hand forms these cabalistic lines upon the floor?—it
 may be our life and safety are thus aimed at; but we spit at and defy the
 foul enemy. 'semper leo percutiatur!'”
 this was communicated apart to his confidential follower, conrade
 mont-fitchet. the grand master then raised his voice, and addressed the
 assembly.
 “reverend and valiant men, knights, preceptors, and companions of this
 holy order, my brethren and my children!—you also, well-born and
 pious esquires, who aspire to wear this holy cross!—and you also,
 christian brethren, of every degree!—be it known to you, that it is
 not defect of power in us which hath occasioned the assembling of this
 congregation; for, however unworthy in our person, yet to us is committed,
 with this batoon, full power to judge and to try all that regards the weal
 of this our holy order. holy saint bernard, in the rule of our knightly
 and religious profession, hath said, in the fifty-ninth capital, 
 that he would not that brethren be called together in council, save at the
 will and command of the master; leaving it free to us, as to those more
 worthy fathers who have preceded us in this our office, to judge, as well
 of the occasion as of the time and place in which a chapter of the whole
 order, or of any part thereof, may be convoked. also, in all such
 chapters, it is our duty to hear the advice of our brethren, and to
 proceed according to our own pleasure. but when the raging wolf hath made
 an inroad upon the flock, and carried off one member thereof, it is the
 duty of the kind shepherd to call his comrades together, that with bows
 and slings they may quell the invader, according to our well-known rule,
 that the lion is ever to be beaten down. we have therefore summoned to our
 presence a jewish woman, by name rebecca, daughter of isaac of york—a
 woman infamous for sortileges and for witcheries; whereby she hath
 maddened the blood, and besotted the brain, not of a churl, but of a
 knight—not of a secular knight, but of one devoted to the service of
 the holy temple—not of a knight companion, but of a preceptor of our
 order, first in honour as in place. our brother, brian de bois-guilbert,
 is well known to ourselves, and to all degrees who now hear me, as a true
 and zealous champion of the cross, by whose arm many deeds of valour have
 been wrought in the holy land, and the holy places purified from pollution
 by the blood of those infidels who defiled them. neither have our
 brother's sagacity and prudence been less in repute among his brethren
 than his valour and discipline; in so much, that knights, both in eastern
 and western lands, have named de bois-guilbert as one who may well be put
 in nomination as successor to this batoon, when it shall please heaven to
 release us from the toil of bearing it. if we were told that such a man,
 so honoured, and so honourable, suddenly casting away regard for his
 character, his vows, his brethren, and his prospects, had associated to
 himself a jewish damsel, wandered in this lewd company, through solitary
 places, defended her person in preference to his own, and, finally, was so
 utterly blinded and besotted by his folly, as to bring her even to one of
 our own preceptories, what should we say but that the noble knight was
 possessed by some evil demon, or influenced by some wicked spell?—if
 we could suppose it otherwise, think not rank, valour, high repute, or any
 earthly consideration, should prevent us from visiting him with
 punishment, that the evil thing might be removed, even according to the
 text, 'auferte malum ex vobis'. for various and heinous are the acts of
 transgression against the rule of our blessed order in this lamentable
 history.—st, he hath walked according to his proper will, contrary
 to capital , 'quod nullus juxta propriam voluntatem incedat'.—d,
 he hath held communication with an excommunicated person, capital , 'ut
 fratres non participent cum excommunicatis', and therefore hath a portion
 in 'anathema maranatha'.—d, he hath conversed with strange women,
 contrary to the capital, 'ut fratres non conversantur cum extraneis
 mulieribus'.—th, he hath not avoided, nay, he hath, it is to be
 feared, solicited the kiss of woman; by which, saith the last rule of our
 renowned order, 'ut fugiantur oscula', the soldiers of the cross are
 brought into a snare. for which heinous and multiplied guilt, brian de
 bois-guilbert should be cut off and cast out from our congregation, were
 he the right hand and right eye thereof.”
 he paused. a low murmur went through the assembly. some of the younger
 part, who had been inclined to smile at the statute 'de osculis
 fugiendis', became now grave enough, and anxiously waited what the grand
 master was next to propose.
 “such,” he said, “and so great should indeed be the punishment of a knight
 templar, who wilfully offended against the rules of his order in such
 weighty points. but if, by means of charms and of spells, satan had
 obtained dominion over the knight, perchance because he cast his eyes too
 lightly upon a damsel's beauty, we are then rather to lament than chastise
 his backsliding; and, imposing on him only such penance as may purify him
 from his iniquity, we are to turn the full edge of our indignation upon
 the accursed instrument, which had so well-nigh occasioned his utter
 falling away.—stand forth, therefore, and bear witness, ye who have
 witnessed these unhappy doings, that we may judge of the sum and bearing
 thereof; and judge whether our justice may be satisfied with the
 punishment of this infidel woman, or if we must go on, with a bleeding
 heart, to the further proceeding against our brother.”
 several witnesses were called upon to prove the risks to which
 bois-guilbert exposed himself in endeavouring to save rebecca from the
 blazing castle, and his neglect of his personal defence in attending to
 her safety. the men gave these details with the exaggerations common to
 vulgar minds which have been strongly excited by any remarkable event, and
 their natural disposition to the marvellous was greatly increased by the
 satisfaction which their evidence seemed to afford to the eminent person
 for whose information it had been delivered. thus the dangers which
 bois-guilbert surmounted, in themselves sufficiently great, became
 portentous in their narrative. the devotion of the knight to rebecca's
 defence was exaggerated beyond the bounds, not only of discretion, but
 even of the most frantic excess of chivalrous zeal; and his deference to
 what she said, even although her language was often severe and upbraiding,
 was painted as carried to an excess, which, in a man of his haughty
 temper, seemed almost preternatural.
 the preceptor of templestowe was then called on to describe the manner in
 which bois-guilbert and the jewess arrived at the preceptory. the evidence
 of malvoisin was skilfully guarded. but while he apparently studied to
 spare the feelings of bois-guilbert, he threw in, from time to time, such
 hints, as seemed to infer that he laboured under some temporary alienation
 of mind, so deeply did he appear to be enamoured of the damsel whom he
 brought along with him. with sighs of penitence, the preceptor avowed his
 own contrition for having admitted rebecca and her lover within the walls
 of the preceptory—“but my defence,” he concluded, “has been made in
 my confession to our most reverend father the grand master; he knows my
 motives were not evil, though my conduct may have been irregular. joyfully
 will i submit to any penance he shall assign me.”
 “thou hast spoken well, brother albert,” said beaumanoir; “thy motives
 were good, since thou didst judge it right to arrest thine erring brother
 in his career of precipitate folly. but thy conduct was wrong; as he that
 would stop a runaway steed, and seizing by the stirrup instead of the
 bridle, receiveth injury himself, instead of accomplishing his purpose.
 thirteen paternosters are assigned by our pious founder for matins, and
 nine for vespers; be those services doubled by thee. thrice a-week are
 templars permitted the use of flesh; but do thou keep fast for all the
 seven days. this do for six weeks to come, and thy penance is
 accomplished.”
 with a hypocritical look of the deepest submission, the preceptor of
 templestowe bowed to the ground before his superior, and resumed his seat.
 “were it not well, brethren,” said the grand master, “that we examine
 something into the former life and conversation of this woman, specially
 that we may discover whether she be one likely to use magical charms and
 spells, since the truths which we have heard may well incline us to
 suppose, that in this unhappy course our erring brother has been acted
 upon by some infernal enticement and delusion?”
 herman of goodalricke was the fourth preceptor present; the other three
 were conrade, malvoisin, and bois-guilbert himself. herman was an ancient
 warrior, whose face was marked with scars inflicted by the sabre of the
 moslemah, and had great rank and consideration among his brethren. he
 arose and bowed to the grand master, who instantly granted him license of
 speech. “i would crave to know, most reverend father, of our valiant
 brother, brian de bois-guilbert, what he says to these wondrous
 accusations, and with what eye he himself now regards his unhappy
 intercourse with this jewish maiden?”
 “brian de bois-guilbert,” said the grand master, “thou hearest the
 question which our brother of goodalricke desirest thou shouldst answer. i
 command thee to reply to him.”
 bois-guilbert turned his head towards the grand master when thus
 addressed, and remained silent.
 “he is possessed by a dumb devil,” said the grand master. “avoid thee,
 sathanus!—speak, brian de bois-guilbert, i conjure thee, by this
 symbol of our holy order.”
 bois-guilbert made an effort to suppress his rising scorn and indignation,
 the expression of which, he was well aware, would have little availed him.
 “brian de bois-guilbert,” he answered, “replies not, most reverend father,
 to such wild and vague charges. if his honour be impeached, he will defend
 it with his body, and with that sword which has often fought for
 christendom.”
 “we forgive thee, brother brian,” said the grand master; “though that thou
 hast boasted thy warlike achievements before us, is a glorifying of thine
 own deeds, and cometh of the enemy, who tempteth us to exalt our own
 worship. but thou hast our pardon, judging thou speakest less of thine own
 suggestion than from the impulse of him whom by heaven's leave, we will
 quell and drive forth from our assembly.” a glance of disdain flashed from
 the dark fierce eyes of bois-guilbert, but he made no reply.—“and
 now,” pursued the grand master, “since our brother of goodalricke's
 question has been thus imperfectly answered, pursue we our quest,
 brethren, and with our patron's assistance, we will search to the bottom
 this mystery of iniquity.—let those who have aught to witness of the
 life and conversation of this jewish woman, stand forth before us.” there
 was a bustle in the lower part of the hall, and when the grand master
 enquired the reason, it was replied, there was in the crowd a bedridden
 man, whom the prisoner had restored to the perfect use of his limbs, by a
 miraculous balsam.
 the poor peasant, a saxon by birth, was dragged forward to the bar,
 terrified at the penal consequences which he might have incurred by the
 guilt of having been cured of the palsy by a jewish damsel. perfectly
 cured he certainly was not, for he supported himself forward on crutches
 to give evidence. most unwilling was his testimony, and given with many
 tears; but he admitted that two years since, when residing at york, he was
 suddenly afflicted with a sore disease, while labouring for isaac the rich
 jew, in his vocation of a joiner; that he had been unable to stir from his
 bed until the remedies applied by rebecca's directions, and especially a
 warming and spicy-smelling balsam, had in some degree restored him to the
 use of his limbs. moreover, he said, she had given him a pot of that
 precious ointment, and furnished him with a piece of money withal, to
 return to the house of his father, near to templestowe. “and may it please
 your gracious reverence,” said the man, “i cannot think the damsel meant
 harm by me, though she hath the ill hap to be a jewess; for even when i
 used her remedy, i said the pater and the creed, and it never operated a
 whit less kindly—”
 “peace, slave,” said the grand master, “and begone! it well suits brutes
 like thee to be tampering and trinketing with hellish cures, and to be
 giving your labour to the sons of mischief. i tell thee, the fiend can
 impose diseases for the very purpose of removing them, in order to bring
 into credit some diabolical fashion of cure. hast thou that unguent of
 which thou speakest?”
 the peasant, fumbling in his bosom with a trembling hand, produced a small
 box, bearing some hebrew characters on the lid, which was, with most of
 the audience, a sure proof that the devil had stood apothecary.
 beaumanoir, after crossing himself, took the box into his hand, and,
 learned in most of the eastern tongues, read with ease the motto on the
 lid,—“the lion of the tribe of judah hath conquered.”
 “strange powers of sathanas.” said he, “which can convert scripture into
 blasphemy, mingling poison with our necessary food!—is there no
 leech here who can tell us the ingredients of this mystic unguent?”
 two mediciners, as they called themselves, the one a monk, the other a
 barber, appeared, and avouched they knew nothing of the materials,
 excepting that they savoured of myrrh and camphire, which they took to be
 oriental herbs. but with the true professional hatred to a successful
 practitioner of their art, they insinuated that, since the medicine was
 beyond their own knowledge, it must necessarily have been compounded from
 an unlawful and magical pharmacopeia; since they themselves, though no
 conjurors, fully understood every branch of their art, so far as it might
 be exercised with the good faith of a christian. when this medical
 research was ended, the saxon peasant desired humbly to have back the
 medicine which he had found so salutary; but the grand master frowned
 severely at the request. “what is thy name, fellow?” said he to the
 cripple.
 “higg, the son of snell,” answered the peasant.
 “then higg, son of snell,” said the grand master, “i tell thee it is
 better to be bedridden, than to accept the benefit of unbelievers'
 medicine that thou mayest arise and walk; better to despoil infidels of
 their treasure by the strong hand, than to accept of them benevolent
 gifts, or do them service for wages. go thou, and do as i have said.”
 “alack,” said the peasant, “an it shall not displease your reverence, the
 lesson comes too late for me, for i am but a maimed man; but i will tell
 my two brethren, who serve the rich rabbi nathan ben samuel, that your
 mastership says it is more lawful to rob him than to render him faithful
 service.”
 “out with the prating villain!” said beaumanoir, who was not prepared to
 refute this practical application of his general maxim.
 higg, the son of snell, withdrew into the crowd, but, interested in the
 fate of his benefactress, lingered until he should learn her doom, even at
 the risk of again encountering the frown of that severe judge, the terror
 of which withered his very heart within him.
 at this period of the trial, the grand master commanded rebecca to unveil
 herself. opening her lips for the first time, she replied patiently, but
 with dignity,—“that it was not the wont of the daughters of her
 people to uncover their faces when alone in an assembly of strangers.” the
 sweet tones of her voice, and the softness of her reply, impressed on the
 audience a sentiment of pity and sympathy. but beaumanoir, in whose mind
 the suppression of each feeling of humanity which could interfere with his
 imagined duty, was a virtue of itself, repeated his commands that his
 victim should be unveiled. the guards were about to remove her veil
 accordingly, when she stood up before the grand master and said, “nay, but
 for the love of your own daughters—alas,” she said, recollecting
 herself, “ye have no daughters!—yet for the remembrance of your
 mothers—for the love of your sisters, and of female decency, let me
 not be thus handled in your presence; it suits not a maiden to be disrobed
 by such rude grooms. i will obey you,” she added, with an expression of
 patient sorrow in her voice, which had almost melted the heart of
 beaumanoir himself; “ye are elders among your people, and at your command
 i will show the features of an ill-fated maiden.”
 she withdrew her veil, and looked on them with a countenance in which
 bashfulness contended with dignity. her exceeding beauty excited a murmur
 of surprise, and the younger knights told each other with their eyes, in
 silent correspondence, that brian's best apology was in the power of her
 real charms, rather than of her imaginary witchcraft. but higg, the son of
 snell, felt most deeply the effect produced by the sight of the
 countenance of his benefactress.
 “let me go forth,” he said to the warders at the door of the hall,—“let
 me go forth!—to look at her again will kill me, for i have had a
 share in murdering her.”
 “peace, poor man,” said rebecca, when she heard his exclamation; “thou
 hast done me no harm by speaking the truth—thou canst not aid me by
 thy complaints or lamentations. peace, i pray thee—go home and save
 thyself.”
 higg was about to be thrust out by the compassion of the warders, who were
 apprehensive lest his clamorous grief should draw upon them reprehension,
 and upon himself punishment. but he promised to be silent, and was
 permitted to remain. the two men-at-arms, with whom albert malvoisin had
 not failed to communicate upon the import of their testimony, were now
 called forward. though both were hardened and inflexible villains, the
 sight of the captive maiden, as well as her excelling beauty, at first
 appeared to stagger them; but an expressive glance from the preceptor of
 templestowe restored them to their dogged composure; and they delivered,
 with a precision which would have seemed suspicious to more impartial
 judges, circumstances either altogether fictitious or trivial, and natural
 in themselves, but rendered pregnant with suspicion by the exaggerated
 manner in which they were told, and the sinister commentary which the
 witnesses added to the facts. the circumstances of their evidence would
 have been, in modern days, divided into two classes—those which were
 immaterial, and those which were actually and physically impossible. but
 both were, in those ignorant and superstitions times, easily credited as
 proofs of guilt.—the first class set forth, that rebecca was heard
 to mutter to herself in an unknown tongue—that the songs she sung by
 fits were of a strangely sweet sound, which made the ears of the hearer
 tingle, and his heart throb—that she spoke at times to herself, and
 seemed to look upward for a reply—that her garments were of a
 strange and mystic form, unlike those of women of good repute—that
 she had rings impressed with cabalistical devices, and that strange
 characters were broidered on her veil.
 all these circumstances, so natural and so trivial, were gravely listened
 to as proofs, or, at least, as affording strong suspicions that rebecca
 had unlawful correspondence with mystical powers.
 but there was less equivocal testimony, which the credulity of the
 assembly, or of the greater part, greedily swallowed, however incredible.
 one of the soldiers had seen her work a cure upon a wounded man, brought
 with them to the castle of torquilstone. she did, he said, make certain
 signs upon the wound, and repeated certain mysterious words, which he
 blessed god he understood not, when the iron head of a square cross-bow
 bolt disengaged itself from the wound, the bleeding was stanched, the
 wound was closed, and the dying man was, within a quarter of an hour,
 walking upon the ramparts, and assisting the witness in managing a
 mangonel, or machine for hurling stones. this legend was probably founded
 upon the fact, that rebecca had attended on the wounded ivanhoe when in
 the castle of torquilstone. but it was the more difficult to dispute the
 accuracy of the witness, as, in order to produce real evidence in support
 of his verbal testimony, he drew from his pouch the very bolt-head, which,
 according to his story, had been miraculously extracted from the wound;
 and as the iron weighed a full ounce, it completely confirmed the tale,
 however marvellous.
 his comrade had been a witness from a neighbouring battlement of the scene
 betwixt rebecca and bois-guilbert, when she was upon the point of
 precipitating herself from the top of the tower. not to be behind his
 companion, this fellow stated, that he had seen rebecca perch herself upon
 the parapet of the turret, and there take the form of a milk-white swan,
 under which appearance she flitted three times round the castle of
 torquilstone; then again settle on the turret, and once more assume the
 female form.
 less than one half of this weighty evidence would have been sufficient to
 convict any old woman, poor and ugly, even though she had not been a
 jewess. united with that fatal circumstance, the body of proof was too
 weighty for rebecca's youth, though combined with the most exquisite
 beauty.
 the grand master had collected the suffrages, and now in a solemn tone
 demanded of rebecca what she had to say against the sentence of
 condemnation, which he was about to pronounce.
 “to invoke your pity,” said the lovely jewess, with a voice somewhat
 tremulous with emotion, “would, i am aware, be as useless as i should hold
 it mean. to state that to relieve the sick and wounded of another
 religion, cannot be displeasing to the acknowledged founder of both our
 faiths, were also unavailing; to plead that many things which these men
 (whom may heaven pardon!) have spoken against me are impossible, would
 avail me but little, since you believe in their possibility; and still
 less would it advantage me to explain, that the peculiarities of my dress,
 language, and manners, are those of my people—i had well-nigh said
 of my country, but alas! we have no country. nor will i even vindicate
 myself at the expense of my oppressor, who stands there listening to the
 fictions and surmises which seem to convert the tyrant into the victim.—god
 be judge between him and me! but rather would i submit to ten such deaths
 as your pleasure may denounce against me, than listen to the suit which
 that man of belial has urged upon me—friendless, defenceless, and
 his prisoner. but he is of your own faith, and his lightest affirmance
 would weigh down the most solemn protestations of the distressed jewess. i
 will not therefore return to himself the charge brought against me—but
 to himself—yes, brian de bois-guilbert, to thyself i appeal, whether
 these accusations are not false? as monstrous and calumnious as they are
 deadly?”
 there was a pause; all eyes turned to brain de bois-guilbert. he was
 silent.
 “speak,” she said, “if thou art a man—if thou art a christian,
 speak!—i conjure thee, by the habit which thou dost wear, by the
 name thou dost inherit—by the knighthood thou dost vaunt—by
 the honour of thy mother—by the tomb and the bones of thy father—i
 conjure thee to say, are these things true?”
 “answer her, brother,” said the grand master, “if the enemy with whom thou
 dost wrestle will give thee power.”
 in fact, bois-guilbert seemed agitated by contending passions, which
 almost convulsed his features, and it was with a constrained voice that at
 last he replied, looking to rebecca,—“the scroll!—the scroll!”
 “ay,” said beaumanoir, “this is indeed testimony! the victim of her
 witcheries can only name the fatal scroll, the spell inscribed on which
 is, doubtless, the cause of his silence.”
 but rebecca put another interpretation on the words extorted as it were
 from bois-guilbert, and glancing her eye upon the slip of parchment which
 she continued to hold in her hand, she read written thereupon in the
 arabian character, “demand a champion!” the murmuring commentary which ran
 through the assembly at the strange reply of bois-guilbert, gave rebecca
 leisure to examine and instantly to destroy the scroll unobserved. when
 the whisper had ceased, the grand master spoke.
 “rebecca, thou canst derive no benefit from the evidence of this unhappy
 knight, for whom, as we well perceive, the enemy is yet too powerful. hast
 thou aught else to say?”
 “there is yet one chance of life left to me,” said rebecca, “even by your
 own fierce laws. life has been miserable—miserable, at least, of
 late—but i will not cast away the gift of god, while he affords me
 the means of defending it. i deny this charge—i maintain my
 innocence, and i declare the falsehood of this accusation—i
 challenge the privilege of trial by combat, and will appear by my
 champion.”
 “and who, rebecca,” replied the grand master, “will lay lance in rest for
 a sorceress? who will be the champion of a jewess?”
 “god will raise me up a champion,” said rebecca—“it cannot be that
 in merry england—the hospitable, the generous, the free, where so
 many are ready to peril their lives for honour, there will not be found
 one to fight for justice. but it is enough that i challenge the trial by
 combat—there lies my gage.”
 she took her embroidered glove from her hand, and flung it down before the
 grand master with an air of mingled simplicity and dignity, which excited
 universal surprise and admiration.
 —-there i throw my gage,
 to prove it on thee to the extremest point
 of martial daring.
 —richard ii
 even lucas beaumanoir himself was affected by the mien and appearance of
 rebecca. he was not originally a cruel or even a severe man; but with
 passions by nature cold, and with a high, though mistaken, sense of duty,
 his heart had been gradually hardened by the ascetic life which he
 pursued, the supreme power which he enjoyed, and the supposed necessity of
 subduing infidelity and eradicating heresy, which he conceived peculiarly
 incumbent on him. his features relaxed in their usual severity as he gazed
 upon the beautiful creature before him, alone, unfriended, and defending
 herself with so much spirit and courage. he crossed himself twice, as
 doubting whence arose the unwonted softening of a heart, which on such
 occasions used to resemble in hardness the steel of his sword. at length
 he spoke.
 “damsel,” he said, “if the pity i feel for thee arise from any practice
 thine evil arts have made on me, great is thy guilt. but i rather judge it
 the kinder feelings of nature, which grieves that so goodly a form should
 be a vessel of perdition. repent, my daughter—confess thy
 witchcrafts—turn thee from thine evil faith—embrace this holy
 emblem, and all shall yet be well with thee here and hereafter. in some
 sisterhood of the strictest order, shalt thou have time for prayer and
 fitting penance, and that repentance not to be repented of. this do and
 live—what has the law of moses done for thee that thou shouldest die
 for it?”
 “it was the law of my fathers,” said rebecca; “it was delivered in
 thunders and in storms upon the mountain of sinai, in cloud and in fire.
 this, if ye are christians, ye believe—it is, you say, recalled; but
 so my teachers have not taught me.”
 “let our chaplain,” said beaumanoir, “stand forth, and tell this obstinate
 infidel—”
 “forgive the interruption,” said rebecca, meekly; “i am a maiden,
 unskilled to dispute for my religion, but i can die for it, if it be god's
 will.—let me pray your answer to my demand of a champion.”
 “give me her glove,” said beaumanoir. “this is indeed,” he continued, as
 he looked at the flimsy texture and slender fingers, “a slight and frail
 gage for a purpose so deadly!—seest thou, rebecca, as this thin and
 light glove of thine is to one of our heavy steel gauntlets, so is thy
 cause to that of the temple, for it is our order which thou hast defied.”
 “cast my innocence into the scale,” answered rebecca, “and the glove of
 silk shall outweigh the glove of iron.”
 “then thou dost persist in thy refusal to confess thy guilt, and in that
 bold challenge which thou hast made?”
 “i do persist, noble sir,” answered rebecca.
 “so be it then, in the name of heaven,” said the grand master; “and may
 god show the right!”
 “amen,” replied the preceptors around him, and the word was deeply echoed
 by the whole assembly.
 “brethren,” said beaumanoir, “you are aware that we might well have
 refused to this woman the benefit of the trial by combat—but though
 a jewess and an unbeliever, she is also a stranger and defenceless, and
 god forbid that she should ask the benefit of our mild laws, and that it
 should be refused to her. moreover, we are knights and soldiers as well as
 men of religion, and shame it were to us upon any pretence, to refuse
 proffered combat. thus, therefore, stands the case. rebecca, the daughter
 of isaac of york, is, by many frequent and suspicious circumstances,
 defamed of sorcery practised on the person of a noble knight of our holy
 order, and hath challenged the combat in proof of her innocence. to whom,
 reverend brethren, is it your opinion that we should deliver the gage of
 battle, naming him, at the same time, to be our champion on the field?”
 “to brian de bois-guilbert, whom it chiefly concerns,” said the preceptor
 of goodalricke, “and who, moreover, best knows how the truth stands in
 this matter.”
 “but if,” said the grand master, “our brother brian be under the influence
 of a charm or a spell—we speak but for the sake of precaution, for
 to the arm of none of our holy order would we more willingly confide this
 or a more weighty cause.”
 “reverend father,” answered the preceptor of goodalricke, “no spell can
 effect the champion who comes forward to fight for the judgment of god.”
 “thou sayest right, brother,” said the grand master. “albert malvoisin,
 give this gage of battle to brian de bois-guilbert.—it is our charge
 to thee, brother,” he continued, addressing himself to bois-guilbert,
 “that thou do thy battle manfully, nothing doubting that the good cause
 shall triumph.—and do thou, rebecca, attend, that we assign thee the
 third day from the present to find a champion.”
 “that is but brief space,” answered rebecca, “for a stranger, who is also
 of another faith, to find one who will do battle, wagering life and honour
 for her cause, against a knight who is called an approved soldier.”
 “we may not extend it,” answered the grand master; “the field must be
 foughten in our own presence, and divers weighty causes call us on the
 fourth day from hence.”
 “god's will be done!” said rebecca; “i put my trust in him, to whom an
 instant is as effectual to save as a whole age.”
 “thou hast spoken well, damsel,” said the grand master; “but well know we
 who can array himself like an angel of light. it remains but to name a
 fitting place of combat, and, if it so hap, also of execution.—where
 is the preceptor of this house?”
 albert malvoisin, still holding rebecca's glove in his hand, was speaking
 to bois-guilbert very earnestly, but in a low voice.
 “how!” said the grand master, “will he not receive the gage?”
 “he will—he doth, most reverend father,” said malvoisin, slipping
 the glove under his own mantle. “and for the place of combat, i hold the
 fittest to be the lists of saint george belonging to this preceptory, and
 used by us for military exercise.”
 “it is well,” said the grand master.—“rebecca, in those lists shalt
 thou produce thy champion; and if thou failest to do so, or if thy
 champion shall be discomfited by the judgment of god, thou shalt then die
 the death of a sorceress, according to doom.—let this our judgment
 be recorded, and the record read aloud, that no one may pretend
 ignorance.”
 one of the chaplains, who acted as clerks to the chapter, immediately
 engrossed the order in a huge volume, which contained the proceedings of
 the templar knights when solemnly assembled on such occasions; and when he
 had finished writing, the other read aloud the sentence of the grand
 master, which, when translated from the norman-french in which it was
 couched, was expressed as follows.—
 “rebecca, a jewess, daughter of isaac of york, being attainted of sorcery,
 seduction, and other damnable practices, practised on a knight of the most
 holy order of the temple of zion, doth deny the same; and saith, that the
 testimony delivered against her this day is false, wicked, and disloyal;
 and that by lawful 'essoine'  of her body as being unable to
 combat in her own behalf, she doth offer, by a champion instead thereof,
 to avouch her case, he performing his loyal 'devoir' in all knightly sort,
 with such arms as to gage of battle do fully appertain, and that at her
 peril and cost. and therewith she proffered her gage. and the gage having
 been delivered to the noble lord and knight, brian de bois-guilbert, of
 the holy order of the temple of zion, he was appointed to do this battle,
 in behalf of his order and himself, as injured and impaired by the
 practices of the appellant. wherefore the most reverend father and
 puissant lord, lucas marquis of beaumanoir, did allow of the said
 challenge, and of the said 'essoine' of the appellant's body, and assigned
 the third day for the said combat, the place being the enclosure called
 the lists of saint george, near to the preceptory of templestowe. and the
 grand master appoints the appellant to appear there by her champion, on
 pain of doom, as a person convicted of sorcery or seduction; and also the
 defendant so to appear, under the penalty of being held and adjudged
 recreant in case of default; and the noble lord and most reverend father
 aforesaid appointed the battle to be done in his own presence, and
 according to all that is commendable and profitable in such a case. and
 may god aid the just cause!”
 “amen!” said the grand master; and the word was echoed by all around.
 rebecca spoke not, but she looked up to heaven, and, folding her hands,
 remained for a minute without change of attitude. she then modestly
 reminded the grand master, that she ought to be permitted some opportunity
 of free communication with her friends, for the purpose of making her
 condition known to them, and procuring, if possible, some champion to
 fight in her behalf.
 “it is just and lawful,” said the grand master; “choose what messenger
 thou shalt trust, and he shall have free communication with thee in thy
 prison-chamber.”
 “is there,” said rebecca, “any one here, who, either for love of a good
 cause, or for ample hire, will do the errand of a distressed being?”
 all were silent; for none thought it safe, in the presence of the grand
 master, to avow any interest in the calumniated prisoner, lest he should
 be suspected of leaning towards judaism. not even the prospect of reward,
 far less any feelings of compassion alone, could surmount this
 apprehension.
 rebecca stood for a few moments in indescribable anxiety, and then
 exclaimed, “is it really thus?—and, in english land, am i to be
 deprived of the poor chance of safety which remains to me, for want of an
 act of charity which would not be refused to the worst criminal?”
 higg, the son of snell, at length replied, “i am but a maimed man, but
 that i can at all stir or move was owing to her charitable assistance.—i
 will do thine errand,” he added, addressing rebecca, “as well as a
 crippled object can, and happy were my limbs fleet enough to repair the
 mischief done by my tongue. alas! when i boasted of thy charity, i little
 thought i was leading thee into danger!”
 “god,” said rebecca, “is the disposer of all. he can turn back the
 captivity of judah, even by the weakest instrument. to execute his message
 the snail is as sure a messenger as the falcon. seek out isaac of york—here
 is that will pay for horse and man—let him have this scroll.—i
 know not if it be of heaven the spirit which inspires me, but most truly
 do i judge that i am not to die this death, and that a champion will be
 raised up for me. farewell!—life and death are in thy haste.”
 the peasant took the scroll, which contained only a few lines in hebrew.
 many of the crowd would have dissuaded him from touching a document so
 suspicious; but higg was resolute in the service of his benefactress. she
 had saved his body, he said, and he was confident she did not mean to
 peril his soul.
 “i will get me,” he said, “my neighbour buthan's good capul, 
 and i will be at york within as brief space as man and beast may.”
 but as it fortuned, he had no occasion to go so far, for within a quarter
 of a mile from the gate of the preceptory he met with two riders, whom, by
 their dress and their huge yellow caps, he knew to be jews; and, on
 approaching more nearly, discovered that one of them was his ancient
 employer, isaac of york. the other was the rabbi ben samuel; and both had
 approached as near to the preceptory as they dared, on hearing that the
 grand master had summoned a chapter for the trial of a sorceress.
 “brother ben samuel,” said isaac, “my soul is disquieted, and i wot not
 why. this charge of necromancy is right often used for cloaking evil
 practices on our people.”
 “be of good comfort, brother,” said the physician; “thou canst deal with
 the nazarenes as one possessing the mammon of unrighteousness, and canst
 therefore purchase immunity at their hands—it rules the savage minds
 of those ungodly men, even as the signet of the mighty solomon was said to
 command the evil genii.—but what poor wretch comes hither upon his
 crutches, desiring, as i think, some speech of me?—friend,”
 continued the physician, addressing higg, the son of snell, “i refuse thee
 not the aid of mine art, but i relieve not with one asper those who beg
 for alms upon the highway. out upon thee!—hast thou the palsy in thy
 legs? then let thy hands work for thy livelihood; for, albeit thou be'st
 unfit for a speedy post, or for a careful shepherd, or for the warfare, or
 for the service of a hasty master, yet there be occupations—how now,
 brother?” said he, interrupting his harangue to look towards isaac, who
 had but glanced at the scroll which higg offered, when, uttering a deep
 groan, he fell from his mule like a dying man, and lay for a minute
 insensible.
 the rabbi now dismounted in great alarm, and hastily applied the remedies
 which his art suggested for the recovery of his companion. he had even
 taken from his pocket a cupping apparatus, and was about to proceed to
 phlebotomy, when the object of his anxious solicitude suddenly revived;
 but it was to dash his cap from his head, and to throw dust on his grey
 hairs. the physician was at first inclined to ascribe this sudden and
 violent emotion to the effects of insanity; and, adhering to his original
 purpose, began once again to handle his implements. but isaac soon
 convinced him of his error.
 “child of my sorrow,” he said, “well shouldst thou be called benoni,
 instead of rebecca! why should thy death bring down my grey hairs to the
 grave, till, in the bitterness of my heart, i curse god and die!”
 “brother,” said the rabbi, in great surprise, “art thou a father in
 israel, and dost thou utter words like unto these?—i trust that the
 child of thy house yet liveth?”
 “she liveth,” answered isaac; “but it is as daniel, who was called
 beltheshazzar, even when within the den of the lions. she is captive unto
 those men of belial, and they will wreak their cruelty upon her, sparing
 neither for her youth nor her comely favour. o! she was as a crown of
 green palms to my grey locks; and she must wither in a night, like the
 gourd of jonah!—child of my love!—child of my old age!—oh,
 rebecca, daughter of rachel! the darkness of the shadow of death hath
 encompassed thee.”
 “yet read the scroll,” said the rabbi; “peradventure it may be that we may
 yet find out a way of deliverance.”
 “do thou read, brother,” answered isaac, “for mine eyes are as a fountain
 of water.”
 the physician read, but in their native language, the following words:—
 “to isaac, the son of adonikam, whom the gentiles call isaac of york,
 peace and the blessing of the promise be multiplied unto thee!—my
 father, i am as one doomed to die for that which my soul knoweth not—even
 for the crime of witchcraft. my father, if a strong man can be found to do
 battle for my cause with sword and spear, according to the custom of the
 nazarenes, and that within the lists of templestowe, on the third day from
 this time, peradventure our fathers' god will give him strength to defend
 the innocent, and her who hath none to help her. but if this may not be,
 let the virgins of our people mourn for me as for one cast off, and for
 the hart that is stricken by the hunter, and for the flower which is cut
 down by the scythe of the mower. wherefore look now what thou doest, and
 whether there be any rescue. one nazarene warrior might indeed bear arms
 in my behalf, even wilfred, son of cedric, whom the gentiles call ivanhoe.
 but he may not yet endure the weight of his armour. nevertheless, send the
 tidings unto him, my father; for he hath favour among the strong men of
 his people, and as he was our companion in the house of bondage, he may
 find some one to do battle for my sake. and say unto him, even unto him,
 even unto wilfred, the son of cedric, that if rebecca live, or if rebecca
 die, she liveth or dieth wholly free of the guilt she is charged withal.
 and if it be the will of god that thou shalt be deprived of thy daughter,
 do not thou tarry, old man, in this land of bloodshed and cruelty; but
 betake thyself to cordova, where thy brother liveth in safety, under the
 shadow of the throne, even of the throne of boabdil the saracen; for less
 cruel are the cruelties of the moors unto the race of jacob, than the
 cruelties of the nazarenes of england.”
 isaac listened with tolerable composure while ben samuel read the letter,
 and then again resumed the gestures and exclamations of oriental sorrow,
 tearing his garments, besprinkling his head with dust, and ejaculating,
 “my daughter! my daughter! flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone!”
 “yet,” said the rabbi, “take courage, for this grief availeth nothing.
 gird up thy loins, and seek out this wilfred, the son of cedric. it may be
 he will help thee with counsel or with strength; for the youth hath favour
 in the eyes of richard, called of the nazarenes coeur-de-lion, and the
 tidings that he hath returned are constant in the land. it may be that he
 may obtain his letter, and his signet, commanding these men of blood, who
 take their name from the temple to the dishonour thereof, that they
 proceed not in their purposed wickedness.”
 “i will seek him out,” said isaac, “for he is a good youth, and hath
 compassion for the exile of jacob. but he cannot bear his armour, and what
 other christian shall do battle for the oppressed of zion?”
 “nay, but,” said the rabbi, “thou speakest as one that knoweth not the
 gentiles. with gold shalt thou buy their valour, even as with gold thou
 buyest thine own safety. be of good courage, and do thou set forward to
 find out this wilfred of ivanhoe. i will also up and be doing, for great
 sin it were to leave thee in thy calamity. i will hie me to the city of
 york, where many warriors and strong men are assembled, and doubt not i
 will find among them some one who will do battle for thy daughter; for
 gold is their god, and for riches will they pawn their lives as well as
 their lands.—thou wilt fulfil, my brother, such promise as i may
 make unto them in thy name?”
 “assuredly, brother,” said isaac, “and heaven be praised that raised me up
 a comforter in my misery. howbeit, grant them not their full demand at
 once, for thou shalt find it the quality of this accursed people that they
 will ask pounds, and peradventure accept of ounces—nevertheless, be
 it as thou willest, for i am distracted in this thing, and what would my
 gold avail me if the child of my love should perish!”
 “farewell,” said the physician, “and may it be to thee as thy heart
 desireth.”
 they embraced accordingly, and departed on their several roads. the
 crippled peasant remained for some time looking after them.
 “these dog-jews!” said he; “to take no more notice of a free
 guild-brother, than if i were a bond slave or a turk, or a circumcised hebrew
 like themselves! they might have flung me a mancus or two, however. i was
 not obliged to bring their unhallowed scrawls, and run the risk of being
 bewitched, as more folks than one told me. and what care i for the bit of
 gold that the wench gave me, if i am to come to harm from the priest next
 easter at confession, and be obliged to give him twice as much to make it
 up with him, and be called the jew's flying post all my life, as it may
 hap, into the bargain? i think i was bewitched in earnest when i was
 beside that girl!—but it was always so with jew or gentile,
 whosoever came near her—none could stay when she had an errand to go—and
 still, whenever i think of her, i would give shop and tools to save her
 life.”
 o maid, unrelenting and cold as thou art,
 my bosom is proud as thine own.
 —seward
 it was in the twilight of the day when her trial, if it could be called
 such, had taken place, that a low knock was heard at the door of rebecca's
 prison-chamber. it disturbed not the inmate, who was then engaged in the
 evening prayer recommended by her religion, and which concluded with a
 hymn we have ventured thus to translate into english.
 when israel, of the lord beloved,
 out of the land of bondage came,
 her father's god before her moved,
 an awful guide, in smoke and flame.
 by day, along the astonish'd lands
 the cloudy pillar glided slow;
 by night, arabia's crimson'd sands
 return'd the fiery column's glow.
 there rose the choral hymn of praise,
 and trump and timbrel answer'd keen,
 and zion's daughters pour'd their lays,
 with priest's and warrior's voice between.
 no portents now our foes amaze,
 forsaken israel wanders lone;
 our fathers would not know thy ways,
 and thou hast left them to their own.
 but, present still, though now unseen;
 when brightly shines the prosperous day,
 be thoughts of thee a cloudy screen
 to temper the deceitful ray.
 and oh, when stoops on judah's path
 in shade and storm the frequent night,
 be thou, long-suffering, slow to wrath,
 a burning, and a shining light!
 our harps we left by babel's streams,
 the tyrant's jest, the gentile's scorn;
 no censer round our altar beams,
 and mute our timbrel, trump, and horn.
 but thou hast said, the blood of goat,
 the flesh of rams, i will not prize;
 a contrite heart, and humble thought,
 are mine accepted sacrifice.
 when the sounds of rebecca's devotional hymn had died away in silence, the
 low knock at the door was again renewed. “enter,” she said, “if thou art a
 friend; and if a foe, i have not the means of refusing thy entrance.”
 “i am,” said brian de bois-guilbert, entering the apartment, “friend or
 foe, rebecca, as the event of this interview shall make me.”
 alarmed at the sight of this man, whose licentious passion she considered
 as the root of her misfortunes, rebecca drew backward with a cautious and
 alarmed, yet not a timorous demeanour, into the farthest corner of the
 apartment, as if determined to retreat as far as she could, but to stand
 her ground when retreat became no longer possible. she drew herself into
 an attitude not of defiance, but of resolution, as one that would avoid
 provoking assault, yet was resolute to repel it, being offered, to the
 utmost of her power.
 “you have no reason to fear me, rebecca,” said the templar; “or if i must
 so qualify my speech, you have at least now no reason to fear me.”
 “i fear you not, sir knight,” replied rebecca, although her short-drawn
 breath seemed to belie the heroism of her accents; “my trust is strong,
 and i fear thee not.”
 “you have no cause,” answered bois-guilbert, gravely; “my former frantic
 attempts you have not now to dread. within your call are guards, over whom
 i have no authority. they are designed to conduct you to death, rebecca,
 yet would not suffer you to be insulted by any one, even by me, were my
 frenzy—for frenzy it is—to urge me so far.”
 “may heaven be praised!” said the jewess; “death is the least of my
 apprehensions in this den of evil.”
 “ay,” replied the templar, “the idea of death is easily received by the
 courageous mind, when the road to it is sudden and open. a thrust with a
 lance, a stroke with a sword, were to me little—to you, a spring
 from a dizzy battlement, a stroke with a sharp poniard, has no terrors,
 compared with what either thinks disgrace. mark me—i say this—perhaps
 mine own sentiments of honour are not less fantastic, rebecca, than thine
 are; but we know alike how to die for them.”
 “unhappy man,” said the jewess; “and art thou condemned to expose thy life
 for principles, of which thy sober judgment does not acknowledge the
 solidity? surely this is a parting with your treasure for that which is
 not bread—but deem not so of me. thy resolution may fluctuate on the
 wild and changeful billows of human opinion, but mine is anchored on the
 rock of ages.”
 “silence, maiden,” answered the templar; “such discourse now avails but
 little. thou art condemned to die not a sudden and easy death, such as
 misery chooses, and despair welcomes, but a slow, wretched, protracted
 course of torture, suited to what the diabolical bigotry of these men
 calls thy crime.”
 “and to whom—if such my fate—to whom do i owe this?” said
 rebecca “surely only to him, who, for a most selfish and brutal cause,
 dragged me hither, and who now, for some unknown purpose of his own,
 strives to exaggerate the wretched fate to which he exposed me.”
 “think not,” said the templar, “that i have so exposed thee; i would have
 bucklered thee against such danger with my own bosom, as freely as ever i
 exposed it to the shafts which had otherwise reached thy life.”
 “had thy purpose been the honourable protection of the innocent,” said
 rebecca, “i had thanked thee for thy care—as it is, thou hast
 claimed merit for it so often, that i tell thee life is worth nothing to
 me, preserved at the price which thou wouldst exact for it.”
 “truce with thine upbraidings, rebecca,” said the templar; “i have my own
 cause of grief, and brook not that thy reproaches should add to it.”
 “what is thy purpose, then, sir knight?” said the jewess; “speak it
 briefly.—if thou hast aught to do, save to witness the misery thou
 hast caused, let me know it; and then, if so it please you, leave me to
 myself—the step between time and eternity is short but terrible, and
 i have few moments to prepare for it.”
 “i perceive, rebecca,” said bois-guilbert, “that thou dost continue to
 burden me with the charge of distresses, which most fain would i have
 prevented.”
 “sir knight,” said rebecca, “i would avoid reproaches—but what is
 more certain than that i owe my death to thine unbridled passion?”
 “you err—you err,”—said the templar, hastily, “if you impute
 what i could neither foresee nor prevent to my purpose or agency.—could
 i guess the unexpected arrival of yon dotard, whom some flashes of frantic
 valour, and the praises yielded by fools to the stupid self-torments of an
 ascetic, have raised for the present above his own merits, above common
 sense, above me, and above the hundreds of our order, who think and feel
 as men free from such silly and fantastic prejudices as are the grounds of
 his opinions and actions?”
 “yet,” said rebecca, “you sate a judge upon me, innocent—most
 innocent—as you knew me to be—you concurred in my
 condemnation, and, if i aright understood, are yourself to appear in arms
 to assert my guilt, and assure my punishment.”
 “thy patience, maiden,” replied the templar. “no race knows so well as
 thine own tribes how to submit to the time, and so to trim their bark as
 to make advantage even of an adverse wind.”
 “lamented be the hour,” said rebecca, “that has taught such art to the
 house of israel! but adversity bends the heart as fire bends the stubborn
 steel, and those who are no longer their own governors, and the denizens
 of their own free independent state, must crouch before strangers. it is
 our curse, sir knight, deserved, doubtless, by our own misdeeds and those
 of our fathers; but you—you who boast your freedom as your
 birthright, how much deeper is your disgrace when you stoop to soothe the
 prejudices of others, and that against your own conviction?”
 “your words are bitter, rebecca,” said bois-guilbert, pacing the apartment
 with impatience, “but i came not hither to bandy reproaches with you.—know
 that bois-guilbert yields not to created man, although circumstances may
 for a time induce him to alter his plan. his will is the mountain stream,
 which may indeed be turned for a little space aside by the rock, but fails
 not to find its course to the ocean. that scroll which warned thee to
 demand a champion, from whom couldst thou think it came, if not from
 bois-guilbert? in whom else couldst thou have excited such interest?”
 “a brief respite from instant death,” said rebecca, “which will little
 avail me—was this all thou couldst do for one, on whose head thou
 hast heaped sorrow, and whom thou hast brought near even to the verge of
 the tomb?”
 “no maiden,” said bois-guilbert, “this was not all that i purposed. had it
 not been for the accursed interference of yon fanatical dotard, and the
 fool of goodalricke, who, being a templar, affects to think and judge
 according to the ordinary rules of humanity, the office of the champion
 defender had devolved, not on a preceptor, but on a companion of the
 order. then i myself—such was my purpose—had, on the sounding
 of the trumpet, appeared in the lists as thy champion, disguised indeed in
 the fashion of a roving knight, who seeks adventures to prove his shield
 and spear; and then, let beaumanoir have chosen not one, but two or three
 of the brethren here assembled, i had not doubted to cast them out of the
 saddle with my single lance. thus, rebecca, should thine innocence have
 been avouched, and to thine own gratitude would i have trusted for the
 reward of my victory.”
 “this, sir knight,” said rebecca, “is but idle boasting—a brag of
 what you would have done had you not found it convenient to do otherwise.
 you received my glove, and my champion, if a creature so desolate can find
 one, must encounter your lance in the lists—yet you would assume the
 air of my friend and protector!”
 “thy friend and protector,” said the templar, gravely, “i will yet be—but
 mark at what risk, or rather at what certainty, of dishonour; and then
 blame me not if i make my stipulations, before i offer up all that i have
 hitherto held dear, to save the life of a jewish maiden.”
 “speak,” said rebecca; “i understand thee not.”
 “well, then,” said bois-guilbert, “i will speak as freely as ever did
 doting penitent to his ghostly father, when placed in the tricky
 confessional.—rebecca, if i appear not in these lists i lose fame
 and rank—lose that which is the breath of my nostrils, the esteem, i
 mean, in which i am held by my brethren, and the hopes i have of
 succeeding to that mighty authority, which is now wielded by the bigoted
 dotard lucas de beaumanoir, but of which i should make a different use.
 such is my certain doom, except i appear in arms against thy cause.
 accursed be he of goodalricke, who baited this trap for me! and doubly
 accursed albert de malvoisin, who withheld me from the resolution i had
 formed, of hurling back the glove at the face of the superstitious and
 superannuated fool, who listened to a charge so absurd, and against a
 creature so high in mind, and so lovely in form as thou art!”
 “and what now avails rant or flattery?” answered rebecca. “thou hast made
 thy choice between causing to be shed the blood of an innocent woman, or
 of endangering thine own earthly state and earthly hopes—what avails
 it to reckon together?—thy choice is made.”
 “no, rebecca,” said the knight, in a softer tone, and drawing nearer
 towards her; “my choice is not made—nay, mark, it is thine to make
 the election. if i appear in the lists, i must maintain my name in arms;
 and if i do so, championed or unchampioned, thou diest by the stake and
 faggot, for there lives not the knight who hath coped with me in arms on
 equal issue, or on terms of vantage, save richard coeur-de-lion, and his
 minion of ivanhoe. ivanhoe, as thou well knowest, is unable to bear his
 corslet, and richard is in a foreign prison. if i appear, then thou diest,
 even although thy charms should instigate some hot-headed youth to enter
 the lists in thy defence.”
 “and what avails repeating this so often?” said rebecca.
 “much,” replied the templar; “for thou must learn to look at thy fate on
 every side.”
 “well, then, turn the tapestry,” said the jewess, “and let me see the
 other side.”
 “if i appear,” said bois-guilbert, “in the fatal lists, thou diest by a
 slow and cruel death, in pain such as they say is destined to the guilty
 hereafter. but if i appear not, then am i a degraded and dishonoured
 knight, accused of witchcraft and of communion with infidels—the
 illustrious name which has grown yet more so under my wearing, becomes a
 hissing and a reproach. i lose fame, i lose honour, i lose the prospect of
 such greatness as scarce emperors attain to—i sacrifice mighty
 ambition, i destroy schemes built as high as the mountains with which
 heathens say their heaven was once nearly scaled—and yet, rebecca,”
 he added, throwing himself at her feet, “this greatness will i sacrifice,
 this fame will i renounce, this power will i forego, even now when it is
 half within my grasp, if thou wilt say, bois-guilbert, i receive thee for
 my lover.”
 “think not of such foolishness, sir knight,” answered rebecca, “but hasten
 to the regent, the queen mother, and to prince john—they cannot, in
 honour to the english crown, allow of the proceedings of your grand
 master. so shall you give me protection without sacrifice on your part, or
 the pretext of requiring any requital from me.”
 “with these i deal not,” he continued, holding the train of her robe—“it
 is thee only i address; and what can counterbalance thy choice? bethink
 thee, were i a fiend, yet death is a worse, and it is death who is my
 rival.”
 “i weigh not these evils,” said rebecca, afraid to provoke the wild
 knight, yet equally determined neither to endure his passion, nor even
 feign to endure it. “be a man, be a christian! if indeed thy faith
 recommends that mercy which rather your tongues than your actions pretend,
 save me from this dreadful death, without seeking a requital which would
 change thy magnanimity into base barter.”
 “no, damsel!” said the proud templar, springing up, “thou shalt not thus
 impose on me—if i renounce present fame and future ambition, i
 renounce it for thy sake, and we will escape in company. listen to me,
 rebecca,” he said, again softening his tone; “england,—europe,—is
 not the world. there are spheres in which we may act, ample enough even
 for my ambition. we will go to palestine, where conrade, marquis of
 montserrat, is my friend—a friend free as myself from the doting
 scruples which fetter our free-born reason—rather with saladin will
 we league ourselves, than endure the scorn of the bigots whom we contemn.—i
 will form new paths to greatness,” he continued, again traversing the room
 with hasty strides—“europe shall hear the loud step of him she has
 driven from her sons!—not the millions whom her crusaders send to
 slaughter, can do so much to defend palestine—not the sabres of the
 thousands and ten thousands of saracens can hew their way so deep into
 that land for which nations are striving, as the strength and policy of me
 and those brethren, who, in despite of yonder old bigot, will adhere to me
 in good and evil. thou shalt be a queen, rebecca—on mount carmel
 shall we pitch the throne which my valour will gain for you, and i will
 exchange my long-desired batoon for a sceptre!”
 “a dream,” said rebecca; “an empty vision of the night, which, were it a
 waking reality, affects me not. enough, that the power which thou mightest
 acquire, i will never share; nor hold i so light of country or religious
 faith, as to esteem him who is willing to barter these ties, and cast away
 the bonds of the order of which he is a sworn member, in order to gratify
 an unruly passion for the daughter of another people.—put not a
 price on my deliverance, sir knight—sell not a deed of generosity—protect
 the oppressed for the sake of charity, and not for a selfish advantage—go
 to the throne of england; richard will listen to my appeal from these
 cruel men.”
 “never, rebecca!” said the templar, fiercely. “if i renounce my order, for
 thee alone will i renounce it—ambition shall remain mine, if thou
 refuse my love; i will not be fooled on all hands.—stoop my crest to
 richard?—ask a boon of that heart of pride?—never, rebecca,
 will i place the order of the temple at his feet in my person. i may
 forsake the order, i never will degrade or betray it.”
 “now god be gracious to me,” said rebecca, “for the succour of man is
 well-nigh hopeless!”
 “it is indeed,” said the templar; “for, proud as thou art, thou hast in me
 found thy match. if i enter the lists with my spear in rest, think not any
 human consideration shall prevent my putting forth my strength; and think
 then upon thine own fate—to die the dreadful death of the worst of
 criminals—to be consumed upon a blazing pile—dispersed to the
 elements of which our strange forms are so mystically composed—not a
 relic left of that graceful frame, from which we could say this lived and
 moved!—rebecca, it is not in woman to sustain this prospect—thou
 wilt yield to my suit.”
 “bois-guilbert,” answered the jewess, “thou knowest not the heart of
 woman, or hast only conversed with those who are lost to her best
 feelings. i tell thee, proud templar, that not in thy fiercest battles
 hast thou displayed more of thy vaunted courage, than has been shown by
 woman when called upon to suffer by affection or duty. i am myself a
 woman, tenderly nurtured, naturally fearful of danger, and impatient of
 pain—yet, when we enter those fatal lists, thou to fight and i to
 suffer, i feel the strong assurance within me, that my courage shall mount
 higher than thine. farewell—i waste no more words on thee; the time
 that remains on earth to the daughter of jacob must be otherwise spent—she
 must seek the comforter, who may hide his face from his people, but who
 ever opens his ear to the cry of those who seek him in sincerity and in
 truth.”
 “we part then thus?” said the templar, after a short pause; “would to
 heaven that we had never met, or that thou hadst been noble in birth and
 christian in faith!—nay, by heaven! when i gaze on thee, and think
 when and how we are next to meet, i could even wish myself one of thine
 own degraded nation; my hand conversant with ingots and shekels, instead
 of spear and shield; my head bent down before each petty noble, and my
 look only terrible to the shivering and bankrupt debtor—this could i
 wish, rebecca, to be near to thee in life, and to escape the fearful share
 i must have in thy death.”
 “thou hast spoken the jew,” said rebecca, “as the persecution of such as
 thou art has made him. heaven in ire has driven him from his country, but
 industry has opened to him the only road to power and to influence, which
 oppression has left unbarred. read the ancient history of the people of
 god, and tell me if those, by whom jehovah wrought such marvels among the
 nations, were then a people of misers and of usurers!—and know,
 proud knight, we number names amongst us to which your boasted northern
 nobility is as the gourd compared with the cedar—names that ascend
 far back to those high times when the divine presence shook the mercy-seat
 between the cherubim, and which derive their splendour from no earthly
 prince, but from the awful voice, which bade their fathers be nearest of
 the congregation to the vision—such were the princes of the house of
 jacob.”
 rebecca's colour rose as she boasted the ancient glories of her race, but
 faded as she added, with at sigh, “such were the princes of judah, now
 such no more!—they are trampled down like the shorn grass, and mixed
 with the mire of the ways. yet are there those among them who shame not
 such high descent, and of such shall be the daughter of isaac the son of
 adonikam! farewell!—i envy not thy blood-won honours—i envy
 not thy barbarous descent from northern heathens—i envy thee not thy
 faith, which is ever in thy mouth, but never in thy heart nor in thy
 practice.”
 “there is a spell on me, by heaven!” said bois-guilbert. “i almost think
 yon besotted skeleton spoke truth, and that the reluctance with which i
 part from thee hath something in it more than is natural.—fair
 creature!” he said, approaching near her, but with great respect,—“so
 young, so beautiful, so fearless of death! and yet doomed to die, and with
 infamy and agony. who would not weep for thee?—the tear, that has
 been a stranger to these eyelids for twenty years, moistens them as i gaze
 on thee. but it must be—nothing may now save thy life. thou and i
 are but the blind instruments of some irresistible fatality, that hurries
 us along, like goodly vessels driving before the storm, which are dashed
 against each other, and so perish. forgive me, then, and let us part, at
 least, as friends part. i have assailed thy resolution in vain, and mine
 own is fixed as the adamantine decrees of fate.”
 “thus,” said rebecca, “do men throw on fate the issue of their own wild
 passions. but i do forgive thee, bois-guilbert, though the author of my
 early death. there are noble things which cross over thy powerful mind;
 but it is the garden of the sluggard, and the weeds have rushed up, and
 conspired to choke the fair and wholesome blossom.”
 “yes,” said the templar, “i am, rebecca, as thou hast spoken me, untaught,
 untamed—and proud, that, amidst a shoal of empty fools and crafty
 bigots, i have retained the preeminent fortitude that places me above
 them. i have been a child of battle from my youth upward, high in my
 views, steady and inflexible in pursuing them. such must i remain—proud,
 inflexible, and unchanging; and of this the world shall have proof.—but
 thou forgivest me, rebecca?”
 “as freely as ever victim forgave her executioner.”
 “farewell, then,” said the templar, and left the apartment.
 the preceptor albert waited impatiently in an adjacent chamber the return
 of bois-guilbert.
 “thou hast tarried long,” he said; “i have been as if stretched on red-hot
 iron with very impatience. what if the grand master, or his spy conrade,
 had come hither? i had paid dear for my complaisance.—but what ails
 thee, brother?—thy step totters, thy brow is as black as night. art
 thou well, bois-guilbert?”
 “ay,” answered the templar, “as well as the wretch who is doomed to die
 within an hour.—nay, by the rood, not half so well—for there
 be those in such state, who can lay down life like a cast-off garment. by
 heaven, malvoisin, yonder girl hath well-nigh unmanned me. i am half
 resolved to go to the grand master, abjure the order to his very teeth,
 and refuse to act the brutality which his tyranny has imposed on me.”
 “thou art mad,” answered malvoisin; “thou mayst thus indeed utterly ruin
 thyself, but canst not even find a chance thereby to save the life of this
 jewess, which seems so precious in thine eyes. beaumanoir will name
 another of the order to defend his judgment in thy place, and the accused
 will as assuredly perish as if thou hadst taken the duty imposed on thee.”
 “'tis false—i will myself take arms in her behalf,” answered the
 templar, haughtily; “and, should i do so, i think, malvoisin, that thou
 knowest not one of the order, who will keep his saddle before the point of
 my lance.”
 “ay, but thou forgettest,” said the wily adviser, “thou wilt have neither
 leisure nor opportunity to execute this mad project. go to lucas
 beaumanoir, and say thou hast renounced thy vow of obedience, and see how
 long the despotic old man will leave thee in personal freedom. the words
 shall scarce have left thy lips, ere thou wilt either be an hundred feet
 under ground, in the dungeon of the preceptory, to abide trial as a
 recreant knight; or, if his opinion holds concerning thy possession, thou
 wilt be enjoying straw, darkness, and chains, in some distant convent
 cell, stunned with exorcisms, and drenched with holy water, to expel the
 foul fiend which hath obtained dominion over thee. thou must to the lists,
 brian, or thou art a lost and dishonoured man.”
 “i will break forth and fly,” said bois-guilbert—“fly to some
 distant land, to which folly and fanaticism have not yet found their way.
 no drop of the blood of this most excellent creature shall be spilled by
 my sanction.”
 “thou canst not fly,” said the preceptor; “thy ravings have excited
 suspicion, and thou wilt not be permitted to leave the preceptory. go and
 make the essay—present thyself before the gate, and command the
 bridge to be lowered, and mark what answer thou shalt receive.—thou
 are surprised and offended; but is it not the better for thee? wert thou
 to fly, what would ensue but the reversal of thy arms, the dishonour of
 thine ancestry, the degradation of thy rank?—think on it. where
 shall thine old companions in arms hide their heads when brian de
 bois-guilbert, the best lance of the templars, is proclaimed recreant,
 amid the hisses of the assembled people? what grief will be at the court
 of france! with what joy will the haughty richard hear the news, that the
 knight that set him hard in palestine, and well-nigh darkened his renown,
 has lost fame and honour for a jewish girl, whom he could not even save by
 so costly a sacrifice!”
 “malvoisin,” said the knight, “i thank thee—thou hast touched the
 string at which my heart most readily thrills!—come of it what may,
 recreant shall never be added to the name of bois-guilbert. would to god,
 richard, or any of his vaunting minions of england, would appear in these
 lists! but they will be empty—no one will risk to break a lance for
 the innocent, the forlorn.”
 “the better for thee, if it prove so,” said the preceptor; “if no champion
 appears, it is not by thy means that this unlucky damsel shall die, but by
 the doom of the grand master, with whom rests all the blame, and who will
 count that blame for praise and commendation.”
 “true,” said bois-guilbert; “if no champion appears, i am but a part of
 the pageant, sitting indeed on horseback in the lists, but having no part
 in what is to follow.”
 “none whatever,” said malvoisin; “no more than the armed image of saint
 george when it makes part of a procession.”
 “well, i will resume my resolution,” replied the haughty templar. “she has
 despised me—repulsed me—reviled me—and wherefore should
 i offer up for her whatever of estimation i have in the opinion of others?
 malvoisin, i will appear in the lists.”
 he left the apartment hastily as he uttered these words, and the preceptor
 followed, to watch and confirm him in his resolution; for in
 bois-guilbert's fame he had himself a strong interest, expecting much
 advantage from his being one day at the head of the order, not to mention
 the preferment of which mont-fitchet had given him hopes, on condition he
 would forward the condemnation of the unfortunate rebecca. yet although,
 in combating his friend's better feelings, he possessed all the advantage
 which a wily, composed, selfish disposition has over a man agitated by
 strong and contending passions, it required all malvoisin's art to keep
 bois-guilbert steady to the purpose he had prevailed on him to adopt. he
 was obliged to watch him closely to prevent his resuming his purpose of
 flight, to intercept his communication with the grand master, lest he
 should come to an open rupture with his superior, and to renew, from time
 to time, the various arguments by which he endeavoured to show, that, in
 appearing as champion on this occasion, bois-guilbert, without either
 accelerating or ensuring the fate of rebecca, would follow the only course
 by which he could save himself from degradation and disgrace.
 shadows avaunt!—richard's himself again.
 richard iii
 when the black knight—for it becomes necessary to resume the train
 of his adventures—left the trysting-tree of the generous outlaw, he
 held his way straight to a neighbouring religious house, of small extent
 and revenue, called the priory of saint botolph, to which the wounded
 ivanhoe had been removed when the castle was taken, under the guidance of
 the faithful gurth, and the magnanimous wamba. it is unnecessary at
 present to mention what took place in the interim betwixt wilfred and his
 deliverer; suffice it to say, that after long and grave communication,
 messengers were dispatched by the prior in several directions, and that on
 the succeeding morning the black knight was about to set forth on his
 journey, accompanied by the jester wamba, who attended as his guide.
 “we will meet,” he said to ivanhoe, “at coningsburgh, the castle of the
 deceased athelstane, since there thy father cedric holds the funeral feast
 for his noble relation. i would see your saxon kindred together, sir
 wilfred, and become better acquainted with them than heretofore. thou also
 wilt meet me; and it shall be my task to reconcile thee to thy father.”
 so saying, he took an affectionate farewell of ivanhoe, who expressed an
 anxious desire to attend upon his deliverer. but the black knight would
 not listen to the proposal.
 “rest this day; thou wilt have scarce strength enough to travel on the
 next. i will have no guide with me but honest wamba, who can play priest
 or fool as i shall be most in the humour.”
 “and i,” said wamba, “will attend you with all my heart. i would fain see
 the feasting at the funeral of athelstane; for, if it be not full and
 frequent, he will rise from the dead to rebuke cook, sewer, and cupbearer;
 and that were a sight worth seeing. always, sir knight, i will trust your
 valour with making my excuse to my master cedric, in case mine own wit
 should fail.”
 “and how should my poor valour succeed, sir jester, when thy light wit
 halts?—resolve me that.”
 “wit, sir knight,” replied the jester, “may do much. he is a quick,
 apprehensive knave, who sees his neighbours blind side, and knows how to
 keep the lee-gage when his passions are blowing high. but valour is a
 sturdy fellow, that makes all split. he rows against both wind and tide,
 and makes way notwithstanding; and, therefore, good sir knight, while i
 take advantage of the fair weather in our noble master's temper, i will
 expect you to bestir yourself when it grows rough.”
 “sir knight of the fetterlock, since it is your pleasure so to be
 distinguished,” said ivanhoe, “i fear me you have chosen a talkative and a
 troublesome fool to be your guide. but he knows every path and alley in
 the woods as well as e'er a hunter who frequents them; and the poor knave,
 as thou hast partly seen, is as faithful as steel.”
 “nay,” said the knight, “an he have the gift of showing my road, i shall
 not grumble with him that he desires to make it pleasant.—fare thee
 well, kind wilfred—i charge thee not to attempt to travel till
 to-morrow at earliest.”
 so saying, he extended his hand to ivanhoe, who pressed it to his lips,
 took leave of the prior, mounted his horse, and departed, with wamba for
 his companion. ivanhoe followed them with his eyes, until they were lost
 in the shades of the surrounding forest, and then returned into the
 convent.
 but shortly after matin-song, he requested to see the prior. the old man
 came in haste, and enquired anxiously after the state of his health.
 “it is better,” he said, “than my fondest hope could have anticipated;
 either my wound has been slighter than the effusion of blood led me to
 suppose, or this balsam hath wrought a wonderful cure upon it. i feel
 already as if i could bear my corslet; and so much the better, for
 thoughts pass in my mind which render me unwilling to remain here longer
 in inactivity.”
 “now, the saints forbid,” said the prior, “that the son of the saxon
 cedric should leave our convent ere his wounds were healed! it were shame
 to our profession were we to suffer it.”
 “nor would i desire to leave your hospitable roof, venerable father,” said
 ivanhoe, “did i not feel myself able to endure the journey, and compelled
 to undertake it.”
 “and what can have urged you to so sudden a departure?” said the prior.
 “have you never, holy father,” answered the knight, “felt an apprehension
 of approaching evil, for which you in vain attempted to assign a cause?—have
 you never found your mind darkened, like the sunny landscape, by the
 sudden cloud, which augurs a coming tempest?—and thinkest thou not
 that such impulses are deserving of attention, as being the hints of our
 guardian spirits, that danger is impending?”
 “i may not deny,” said the prior, crossing himself, “that such things have
 been, and have been of heaven; but then such communications have had a
 visibly useful scope and tendency. but thou, wounded as thou art, what
 avails it thou shouldst follow the steps of him whom thou couldst not aid,
 were he to be assaulted?”
 “prior,” said ivanhoe, “thou dost mistake—i am stout enough to
 exchange buffets with any who will challenge me to such a traffic—but
 were it otherwise, may i not aid him were he in danger, by other means
 than by force of arms? it is but too well known that the saxons love not
 the norman race, and who knows what may be the issue, if he break in upon
 them when their hearts are irritated by the death of athelstane, and their
 heads heated by the carousal in which they will indulge themselves? i hold
 his entrance among them at such a moment most perilous, and i am resolved
 to share or avert the danger; which, that i may the better do, i would
 crave of thee the use of some palfrey whose pace may be softer than that
 of my 'destrier'.” 
 “surely,” said the worthy churchman; “you shall have mine own ambling
 jennet, and i would it ambled as easy for your sake as that of the abbot
 of saint albans. yet this will i say for malkin, for so i call her, that
 unless you were to borrow a ride on the juggler's steed that paces a
 hornpipe amongst the eggs, you could not go a journey on a creature so
 gentle and smooth-paced. i have composed many a homily on her back, to the
 edification of my brethren of the convent, and many poor christian souls.”
 “i pray you, reverend father,” said ivanhoe, “let malkin be got ready
 instantly, and bid gurth attend me with mine arms.”
 “nay, but fair sir,” said the prior, “i pray you to remember that malkin
 hath as little skill in arms as her master, and that i warrant not her
 enduring the sight or weight of your full panoply. o, malkin, i promise
 you, is a beast of judgment, and will contend against any undue weight—i
 did but borrow the 'fructus temporum' from the priest of saint bees, and i
 promise you she would not stir from the gate until i had exchanged the
 huge volume for my little breviary.”
 “trust me, holy father,” said ivanhoe, “i will not distress her with too
 much weight; and if she calls a combat with me, it is odds but she has the
 worst.”
 this reply was made while gurth was buckling on the knight's heels a pair
 of large gilded spurs, capable of convincing any restive horse that his
 best safety lay in being conformable to the will of his rider.
 the deep and sharp rowels with which ivanhoe's heels were now armed, began
 to make the worthy prior repent of his courtesy, and ejaculate,—“nay,
 but fair sir, now i bethink me, my malkin abideth not the spur—better
 it were that you tarry for the mare of our manciple down at the grange,
 which may be had in little more than an hour, and cannot but be tractable,
 in respect that she draweth much of our winter fire-wood, and eateth no
 corn.”
 “i thank you, reverend father, but will abide by your first offer, as i
 see malkin is already led forth to the gate. gurth shall carry mine
 armour; and for the rest, rely on it, that as i will not overload malkin's
 back, she shall not overcome my patience. and now, farewell!”
 ivanhoe now descended the stairs more hastily and easily than his wound
 promised, and threw himself upon the jennet, eager to escape the
 importunity of the prior, who stuck as closely to his side as his age and
 fatness would permit, now singing the praises of malkin, now recommending
 caution to the knight in managing her.
 “she is at the most dangerous period for maidens as well as mares,” said
 the old man, laughing at his own jest, “being barely in her fifteenth
 year.”
 ivanhoe, who had other web to weave than to stand canvassing a palfrey's
 paces with its owner, lent but a deaf ear to the prior's grave advices and
 facetious jests, and having leapt on his mare, and commanded his squire
 (for such gurth now called himself) to keep close by his side, he followed
 the track of the black knight into the forest, while the prior stood at
 the gate of the convent looking after him, and ejaculating,—“saint
 mary! how prompt and fiery be these men of war! i would i had not trusted
 malkin to his keeping, for, crippled as i am with the cold rheum, i am
 undone if aught but good befalls her. and yet,” said he, recollecting
 himself, “as i would not spare my own old and disabled limbs in the good
 cause of old england, so malkin must e'en run her hazard on the same
 venture; and it may be they will think our poor house worthy of some
 munificent guerdon—or, it may be, they will send the old prior a
 pacing nag. and if they do none of these, as great men will forget little
 men's service, truly i shall hold me well repaid in having done that which
 is right. and it is now well-nigh the fitting time to summon the brethren
 to breakfast in the refectory—ah! i doubt they obey that call more
 cheerily than the bells for primes and matins.”
 so the prior of saint botolph's hobbled back again into the refectory, to
 preside over the stockfish and ale, which was just serving out for the
 friars' breakfast. busy and important, he sat him down at the table, and
 many a dark word he threw out, of benefits to be expected to the convent,
 and high deeds of service done by himself, which, at another season, would
 have attracted observation. but as the stockfish was highly salted, and
 the ale reasonably powerful, the jaws of the brethren were too anxiously
 employed to admit of their making much use of their ears; nor do we read
 of any of the fraternity, who was tempted to speculate upon the mysterious
 hints of their superior, except father diggory, who was severely afflicted
 by the toothache, so that he could only eat on one side of his jaws.
 in the meantime, the black champion and his guide were pacing at their
 leisure through the recesses of the forest; the good knight whiles humming
 to himself the lay of some enamoured troubadour, sometimes encouraging by
 questions the prating disposition of his attendant, so that their dialogue
 formed a whimsical mixture of song and jest, of which we would fain give
 our readers some idea. you are then to imagine this knight, such as we
 have already described him, strong of person, tall, broad-shouldered, and
 large of bone, mounted on his mighty black charger, which seemed made on
 purpose to bear his weight, so easily he paced forward under it, having
 the visor of his helmet raised, in order to admit freedom of breath, yet
 keeping the beaver, or under part, closed, so that his features could be
 but imperfectly distinguished. but his ruddy embrowned cheek-bones could
 be plainly seen, and the large and bright blue eyes, that flashed from
 under the dark shade of the raised visor; and the whole gesture and look
 of the champion expressed careless gaiety and fearless confidence—a
 mind which was unapt to apprehend danger, and prompt to defy it when most
 imminent—yet with whom danger was a familiar thought, as with one
 whose trade was war and adventure.
 the jester wore his usual fantastic habit, but late accidents had led him
 to adopt a good cutting falchion, instead of his wooden sword, with a
 targe to match it; of both which weapons he had, notwithstanding his
 profession, shown himself a skilful master during the storming of
 torquilstone. indeed, the infirmity of wamba's brain consisted chiefly in
 a kind of impatient irritability, which suffered him not long to remain
 quiet in any posture, or adhere to any certain train of ideas, although he
 was for a few minutes alert enough in performing any immediate task, or in
 apprehending any immediate topic. on horseback, therefore, he was
 perpetually swinging himself backwards and forwards, now on the horse's
 ears, then anon on the very rump of the animal,—now hanging both his
 legs on one side, and now sitting with his face to the tail, moping,
 mowing, and making a thousand apish gestures, until his palfrey took his
 freaks so much to heart, as fairly to lay him at his length on the green
 grass—an incident which greatly amused the knight, but compelled his
 companion to ride more steadily thereafter.
 at the point of their journey at which we take them up, this joyous pair
 were engaged in singing a virelai, as it was called, in which the clown
 bore a mellow burden, to the better instructed knight of the fetterlock.
 and thus run the ditty:—
 anna-marie, love, up is the sun,
 anna-marie, love, morn is begun,
 mists are dispersing, love, birds singing free,
 up in the morning, love, anna-marie.
 anna-marie, love, up in the morn,
 the hunter is winding blithe sounds on his horn,
 the echo rings merry from rock and from tree,
 'tis time to arouse thee, love, anna-marie.
 wamba.
 o tybalt, love, tybalt, awake me not yet,
 around my soft pillow while softer dreams flit,
 for what are the joys that in waking we prove,
 compared with these visions, o, tybalt, my love?
 let the birds to the rise of the mist carol shrill,
 let the hunter blow out his loud horn on the hill,
 softer sounds, softer pleasures, in slumber i prove,—
 but think not i dreamt of thee, tybalt, my love.
 “a dainty song,” said wamba, when they had finished their carol, “and i
 swear by my bauble, a pretty moral!—i used to sing it with gurth,
 once my playfellow, and now, by the grace of god and his master, no less
 than a freemen; and we once came by the cudgel for being so entranced by
 the melody, that we lay in bed two hours after sunrise, singing the ditty
 betwixt sleeping and waking—my bones ache at thinking of the tune
 ever since. nevertheless, i have played the part of anna-marie, to please
 you, fair sir.”
 the jester next struck into another carol, a sort of comic ditty, to which
 the knight, catching up the tune, replied in the like manner.
 knight and wamba.
 there came three merry men from south, west, and north,
 ever more sing the roundelay;
 to win the widow of wycombe forth,
 and where was the widow might say them nay?
 the first was a knight, and from tynedale he came,
 ever more sing the roundelay;
 and his fathers, god save us, were men of great fame,
 and where was the widow might say him nay?
 of his father the laird, of his uncle the squire,
 he boasted in rhyme and in roundelay;
 she bade him go bask by his sea-coal fire,
 for she was the widow would say him nay.
 wamba.
 the next that came forth, swore by blood and by nails,
 merrily sing the roundelay;
 hur's a gentleman, god wot, and hur's lineage was of wales,
 and where was the widow might say him nay?
 sir david ap morgan ap griffith ap hugh
 ap tudor ap rhice, quoth his roundelay
 she said that one widow for so many was too few,
 and she bade the welshman wend his way.
 but then next came a yeoman, a yeoman of kent,
 jollily singing his roundelay;
 he spoke to the widow of living and rent,
 and where was the widow could say him nay?
 both.
 so the knight and the squire were both left in the mire,
 there for to sing their roundelay;
 for a yeoman of kent, with his yearly rent,
 there never was a widow could say him nay.
 “i would, wamba,” said the knight, “that our host of the trysting-tree, or
 the jolly friar, his chaplain, heard this thy ditty in praise of our bluff
 yeoman.”
 “so would not i,” said wamba—“but for the horn that hangs at your
 baldric.”
 “ay,” said the knight,—“this is a pledge of locksley's goodwill,
 though i am not like to need it. three mots on this bugle will, i am
 assured, bring round, at our need, a jolly band of yonder honest yeomen.”
 “i would say, heaven forefend,” said the jester, “were it not that that
 fair gift is a pledge they would let us pass peaceably.”
 “why, what meanest thou?” said the knight; “thinkest thou that but for
 this pledge of fellowship they would assault us?”
 “nay, for me i say nothing,” said wamba; “for green trees have ears as
 well as stone walls. but canst thou construe me this, sir knight—when
 is thy wine-pitcher and thy purse better empty than full?”
 “why, never, i think,” replied the knight.
 “thou never deservest to have a full one in thy hand, for so simple an
 answer! thou hadst best empty thy pitcher ere thou pass it to a saxon, and
 leave thy money at home ere thou walk in the greenwood.”
 “you hold our friends for robbers, then?” said the knight of the
 fetterlock.
 “you hear me not say so, fair sir,” said wamba; “it may relieve a man's
 steed to take of his mail when he hath a long journey to make; and,
 certes, it may do good to the rider's soul to ease him of that which is
 the root of evil; therefore will i give no hard names to those who do such
 services. only i would wish my mail at home, and my purse in my chamber,
 when i meet with these good fellows, because it might save them some
 trouble.”
 “we are bound to pray for them, my friend, notwithstanding the fair
 character thou dost afford them.”
 “pray for them with all my heart,” said wamba; “but in the town, not in
 the greenwood, like the abbot of saint bees, whom they caused to say mass
 with an old hollow oak-tree for his stall.”
 “say as thou list, wamba,” replied the knight, “these yeomen did thy
 master cedric yeomanly service at torquilstone.”
 “ay, truly,” answered wamba; “but that was in the fashion of their trade
 with heaven.”
 “their trade, wamba! how mean you by that?” replied his companion.
 “marry, thus,” said the jester. “they make up a balanced account with
 heaven, as our old cellarer used to call his ciphering, as fair as isaac
 the jew keeps with his debtors, and, like him, give out a very little, and
 take large credit for doing so; reckoning, doubtless, on their own behalf
 the seven-fold usury which the blessed text hath promised to charitable
 loans.”
 “give me an example of your meaning, wamba,—i know nothing of
 ciphers or rates of usage,” answered the knight.
 “why,” said wamba, “an your valour be so dull, you will please to learn
 that those honest fellows balance a good deed with one not quite so
 laudable; as a crown given to a begging friar with an hundred byzants
 taken from a fat abbot, or a wench kissed in the greenwood with the relief
 of a poor widow.”
 “which of these was the good deed, which was the felony?” interrupted the
 knight.
 “a good gibe! a good gibe!” said wamba; “keeping witty company sharpeneth
 the apprehension. you said nothing so well, sir knight, i will be sworn,
 when you held drunken vespers with the bluff hermit.—but to go on.
 the merry-men of the forest set off the building of a cottage with the
 burning of a castle,—the thatching of a choir against the robbing of
 a church,—the setting free a poor prisoner against the murder of a
 proud sheriff; or, to come nearer to our point, the deliverance of a saxon
 franklin against the burning alive of a norman baron. gentle thieves they
 are, in short, and courteous robbers; but it is ever the luckiest to meet
 with them when they are at the worst.”
 “how so, wamba?” said the knight.
 “why, then they have some compunction, and are for making up matters with
 heaven. but when they have struck an even balance, heaven help them with
 whom they next open the account! the travellers who first met them after
 their good service at torquilstone would have a woeful flaying.—and
 yet,” said wamba, coming close up to the knight's side, “there be
 companions who are far more dangerous for travellers to meet than yonder
 outlaws.”
 “and who may they be, for you have neither bears nor wolves, i trow?” said
 the knight.
 “marry, sir, but we have malvoisin's men-at-arms,” said wamba; “and let me
 tell you, that, in time of civil war, a halfscore of these is worth a band
 of wolves at any time. they are now expecting their harvest, and are
 reinforced with the soldiers that escaped from torquilstone. so that,
 should we meet with a band of them, we are like to pay for our feats of
 arms.—now, i pray you, sir knight, what would you do if we met two
 of them?”
 “pin the villains to the earth with my lance, wamba, if they offered us
 any impediment.”
 “but what if there were four of them?”
 “they should drink of the same cup,” answered the knight.
 “what if six,” continued wamba, “and we as we now are, barely two—would
 you not remember locksley's horn?”
 “what! sound for aid,” exclaimed the knight, “against a score of such
 'rascaille' as these, whom one good knight could drive before him, as the
 wind drives the withered leaves?”
 “nay, then,” said wamba, “i will pray you for a close sight of that same
 horn that hath so powerful a breath.”
 the knight undid the clasp of the baldric, and indulged his
 fellow-traveller, who immediately hung the bugle round his own neck.
 “tra-lira-la,” said he, whistling the notes; “nay, i know my gamut as well
 as another.”
 “how mean you, knave?” said the knight; “restore me the bugle.”
 “content you, sir knight, it is in safe keeping. when valour and folly
 travel, folly should bear the horn, because she can blow the best.”
 “nay but, rogue,” said the black knight, “this exceedeth thy license—beware
 ye tamper not with my patience.”
 “urge me not with violence, sir knight,” said the jester, keeping at a
 distance from the impatient champion, “or folly will show a clean pair of
 heels, and leave valour to find out his way through the wood as best he
 may.”
 “nay, thou hast hit me there,” said the knight; “and, sooth to say, i have
 little time to jangle with thee. keep the horn an thou wilt, but let us
 proceed on our journey.”
 “you will not harm me, then?” said wamba.
 “i tell thee no, thou knave!”
 “ay, but pledge me your knightly word for it,” continued wamba, as he
 approached with great caution.
 “my knightly word i pledge; only come on with thy foolish self.”
 “nay, then, valour and folly are once more boon companions,” said the
 jester, coming up frankly to the knight's side; “but, in truth, i love not
 such buffets as that you bestowed on the burly friar, when his holiness
 rolled on the green like a king of the nine-pins. and now that folly wears
 the horn, let valour rouse himself, and shake his mane; for, if i mistake
 not, there are company in yonder brake that are on the look-out for us.”
 “what makes thee judge so?” said the knight.
 “because i have twice or thrice noticed the glance of a motion from
 amongst the green leaves. had they been honest men, they had kept the
 path. but yonder thicket is a choice chapel for the clerks of saint
 nicholas.”
 “by my faith,” said the knight, closing his visor, “i think thou be'st in
 the right on't.”
 and in good time did he close it, for three arrows, flew at the same
 instant from the suspected spot against his head and breast, one of which
 would have penetrated to the brain, had it not been turned aside by the
 steel visor. the other two were averted by the gorget, and by the shield
 which hung around his neck.
 “thanks, trusty armourers,” said the knight.—“wamba, let us close
 with them,”—and he rode straight to the thicket. he was met by six
 or seven men-at-arms, who ran against him with their lances at full
 career. three of the weapons struck against him, and splintered with as
 little effect as if they had been driven against a tower of steel. the
 black knight's eyes seemed to flash fire even through the aperture of his
 visor. he raised himself in his stirrups with an air of inexpressible
 dignity, and exclaimed, “what means this, my masters!”—the men made
 no other reply than by drawing their swords and attacking him on every
 side, crying, “die, tyrant!”
 “ha! saint edward! ha! saint george!” said the black knight, striking down
 a man at every invocation; “have we traitors here?”
 his opponents, desperate as they were, bore back from an arm which carried
 death in every blow, and it seemed as if the terror of his single strength
 was about to gain the battle against such odds, when a knight, in blue
 armour, who had hitherto kept himself behind the other assailants, spurred
 forward with his lance, and taking aim, not at the rider but at the steed,
 wounded the noble animal mortally.
 “that was a felon stroke!” exclaimed the black knight, as the steed fell
 to the earth, bearing his rider along with him.
 and at this moment, wamba winded the bugle, for the whole had passed so
 speedily, that he had not time to do so sooner. the sudden sound made the
 murderers bear back once more, and wamba, though so imperfectly weaponed,
 did not hesitate to rush in and assist the black knight to rise.
 “shame on ye, false cowards!” exclaimed he in the blue harness, who seemed
 to lead the assailants, “do ye fly from the empty blast of a horn blown by
 a jester?”
 animated by his words, they attacked the black knight anew, whose best
 refuge was now to place his back against an oak, and defend himself with
 his sword. the felon knight, who had taken another spear, watching the
 moment when his formidable antagonist was most closely pressed, galloped
 against him in hopes to nail him with his lance against the tree, when his
 purpose was again intercepted by wamba. the jester, making up by agility
 the want of strength, and little noticed by the men-at-arms, who were
 busied in their more important object, hovered on the skirts of the fight,
 and effectually checked the fatal career of the blue knight, by
 hamstringing his horse with a stroke of his sword. horse and man went to
 the ground; yet the situation of the knight of the fetterlock continued
 very precarious, as he was pressed close by several men completely armed,
 and began to be fatigued by the violent exertions necessary to defend
 himself on so many points at nearly the same moment, when a grey-goose
 shaft suddenly stretched on the earth one of the most formidable of his
 assailants, and a band of yeomen broke forth from the glade, headed by
 locksley and the jovial friar, who, taking ready and effectual part in the
 fray, soon disposed of the ruffians, all of whom lay on the spot dead or
 mortally wounded. the black knight thanked his deliverers with a dignity
 they had not observed in his former bearing, which hitherto had seemed
 rather that of a blunt bold soldier, than of a person of exalted rank.
 “it concerns me much,” he said, “even before i express my full gratitude
 to my ready friends, to discover, if i may, who have been my unprovoked
 enemies.—open the visor of that blue knight, wamba, who seems the
 chief of these villains.”
 the jester instantly made up to the leader of the assassins, who, bruised
 by his fall, and entangled under the wounded steed, lay incapable either
 of flight or resistance.
 “come, valiant sir,” said wamba, “i must be your armourer as well as your
 equerry—i have dismounted you, and now i will unhelm you.”
 so saying, with no very gentle hand he undid the helmet of the blue
 knight, which, rolling to a distance on the grass, displayed to the knight
 of the fetterlock grizzled locks, and a countenance he did not expect to
 have seen under such circumstances.
 “waldemar fitzurse!” he said in astonishment; “what could urge one of thy
 rank and seeming worth to so foul an undertaking?”
 “richard,” said the captive knight, looking up to him, “thou knowest
 little of mankind, if thou knowest not to what ambition and revenge can
 lead every child of adam.”
 “revenge?” answered the black knight; “i never wronged thee—on me
 thou hast nought to revenge.”
 “my daughter, richard, whose alliance thou didst scorn—was that no
 injury to a norman, whose blood is noble as thine own?”
 “thy daughter?” replied the black knight; “a proper cause of enmity, and
 followed up to a bloody issue!—stand back, my masters, i would speak
 to him alone.—and now, waldemar fitzurse, say me the truth—confess
 who set thee on this traitorous deed.”
 “thy father's son,” answered waldemar, “who, in so doing, did but avenge
 on thee thy disobedience to thy father.”
 richard's eyes sparkled with indignation, but his better nature overcame
 it. he pressed his hand against his brow, and remained an instant gazing
 on the face of the humbled baron, in whose features pride was contending
 with shame.
 “thou dost not ask thy life, waldemar,” said the king.
 “he that is in the lion's clutch,” answered fitzurse, “knows it were
 needless.”
 “take it, then, unasked,” said richard; “the lion preys not on prostrate
 carcasses.—take thy life, but with this condition, that in three
 days thou shalt leave england, and go to hide thine infamy in thy norman
 castle, and that thou wilt never mention the name of john of anjou as
 connected with thy felony. if thou art found on english ground after the
 space i have allotted thee, thou diest—or if thou breathest aught
 that can attaint the honour of my house, by saint george! not the altar
 itself shall be a sanctuary. i will hang thee out to feed the ravens, from
 the very pinnacle of thine own castle.—let this knight have a steed,
 locksley, for i see your yeomen have caught those which were running
 loose, and let him depart unharmed.”
 “but that i judge i listen to a voice whose behests must not be disputed,”
 answered the yeoman, “i would send a shaft after the skulking villain that
 should spare him the labour of a long journey.”
 “thou bearest an english heart, locksley,” said the black knight, “and
 well dost judge thou art the more bound to obey my behest—i am
 richard of england!”
 at these words, pronounced in a tone of majesty suited to the high rank,
 and no less distinguished character of coeur-de-lion, the yeomen at once
 kneeled down before him, and at the same time tendered their allegiance,
 and implored pardon for their offences.
 “rise, my friends,” said richard, in a gracious tone, looking on them with
 a countenance in which his habitual good-humour had already conquered the
 blaze of hasty resentment, and whose features retained no mark of the late
 desperate conflict, excepting the flush arising from exertion,—“arise,”
 he said, “my friends!—your misdemeanours, whether in forest or
 field, have been atoned by the loyal services you rendered my distressed
 subjects before the walls of torquilstone, and the rescue you have this
 day afforded to your sovereign. arise, my liegemen, and be good subjects
 in future.—and thou, brave locksley—”
 “call me no longer locksley, my liege, but know me under the name, which,
 i fear, fame hath blown too widely not to have reached even your royal
 ears—i am robin hood of sherwood forest.” 
 “king of outlaws, and prince of good fellows!” said the king, “who hath
 not heard a name that has been borne as far as palestine? but be assured,
 brave outlaw, that no deed done in our absence, and in the turbulent times
 to which it hath given rise, shall be remembered to thy disadvantage.”
 “true says the proverb,” said wamba, interposing his word, but with some
 abatement of his usual petulance,—
 “'when the cat is away, the mice will play.'”
 “what, wamba, art thou there?” said richard; “i have been so long of
 hearing thy voice, i thought thou hadst taken flight.”
 “i take flight!” said wamba; “when do you ever find folly separated from
 valour? there lies the trophy of my sword, that good grey gelding, whom i
 heartily wish upon his legs again, conditioning his master lay there
 houghed in his place. it is true, i gave a little ground at first, for a
 motley jacket does not brook lance-heads, as a steel doublet will. but if
 i fought not at sword's point, you will grant me that i sounded the
 onset.”
 “and to good purpose, honest wamba,” replied the king. “thy good service
 shall not be forgotten.”
 “'confiteor! confiteor!'”—exclaimed, in a submissive tone, a voice
 near the king's side—“my latin will carry me no farther—but i
 confess my deadly treason, and pray leave to have absolution before i am
 led to execution!”
 richard looked around, and beheld the jovial friar on his knees, telling
 his rosary, while his quarter-staff, which had not been idle during the
 skirmish, lay on the grass beside him. his countenance was gathered so as
 he thought might best express the most profound contrition, his eyes being
 turned up, and the corners of his mouth drawn down, as wamba expressed it,
 like the tassels at the mouth of a purse. yet this demure affectation of
 extreme penitence was whimsically belied by a ludicrous meaning which
 lurked in his huge features, and seemed to pronounce his fear and
 repentance alike hypocritical.
 “for what art thou cast down, mad priest?” said richard; “art thou afraid
 thy diocesan should learn how truly thou dost serve our lady and saint
 dunstan?—tush, man! fear it not; richard of england betrays no
 secrets that pass over the flagon.”
 “nay, most gracious sovereign,” answered the hermit, (well known to the
 curious in penny-histories of robin hood, by the name of friar tuck,) “it
 is not the crosier i fear, but the sceptre.—alas! that my
 sacrilegious fist should ever have been applied to the ear of the lord's
 anointed!”
 “ha! ha!” said richard, “sits the wind there?—in truth i had
 forgotten the buffet, though mine ear sung after it for a whole day. but
 if the cuff was fairly given, i will be judged by the good men around, if
 it was not as well repaid—or, if thou thinkest i still owe thee
 aught, and will stand forth for another counterbuff—”
 “by no means,” replied friar tuck, “i had mine own returned, and with
 usury—may your majesty ever pay your debts as fully!”
 “if i could do so with cuffs,” said the king, “my creditors should have
 little reason to complain of an empty exchequer.”
 “and yet,” said the friar, resuming his demure hypocritical countenance,
 “i know not what penance i ought to perform for that most sacrilegious
 blow!—-”
 “speak no more of it, brother,” said the king; “after having stood so many
 cuffs from paynims and misbelievers, i were void of reason to quarrel with
 the buffet of a clerk so holy as he of copmanhurst. yet, mine honest
 friar, i think it would be best both for the church and thyself, that i
 should procure a license to unfrock thee, and retain thee as a yeoman of
 our guard, serving in care of our person, as formerly in attendance upon
 the altar of saint dunstan.”
 “my liege,” said the friar, “i humbly crave your pardon; and you would
 readily grant my excuse, did you but know how the sin of laziness has
 beset me. saint dunstan—may he be gracious to us!—stands quiet
 in his niche, though i should forget my orisons in killing a fat buck—i
 stay out of my cell sometimes a night, doing i wot not what—saint
 dunstan never complains—a quiet master he is, and a peaceful, as
 ever was made of wood.—but to be a yeoman in attendance on my
 sovereign the king—the honour is great, doubtless—yet, if i
 were but to step aside to comfort a widow in one corner, or to kill a deer
 in another, it would be, 'where is the dog priest?' says one. 'who has
 seen the accursed tuck?' says another. 'the unfrocked villain destroys
 more venison than half the country besides,' says one keeper; 'and is
 hunting after every shy doe in the country!' quoth a second.—in
 fine, good my liege, i pray you to leave me as you found me; or, if in
 aught you desire to extend your benevolence to me, that i may be
 considered as the poor clerk of saint dunstan's cell in copmanhurst, to
 whom any small donation will be most thankfully acceptable.”
 “i understand thee,” said the king, “and the holy clerk shall have a grant
 of vert and venison in my woods of warncliffe. mark, however, i will but
 assign thee three bucks every season; but if that do not prove an apology
 for thy slaying thirty, i am no christian knight nor true king.”
 “your grace may be well assured,” said the friar, “that, with the grace of
 saint dunstan, i shall find the way of multiplying your most bounteous
 gift.”
 “i nothing doubt it, good brother,” said the king; “and as venison is but
 dry food, our cellarer shall have orders to deliver to thee a butt of
 sack, a runlet of malvoisie, and three hogsheads of ale of the first
 strike, yearly—if that will not quench thy thirst, thou must come to
 court, and become acquainted with my butler.”
 “but for saint dunstan?” said the friar—
 “a cope, a stole, and an altar-cloth shalt thou also have,” continued the
 king, crossing himself—“but we may not turn our game into earnest,
 lest god punish us for thinking more on our follies than on his honour and
 worship.”
 “i will answer for my patron,” said the priest, joyously.
 “answer for thyself, friar,” said king richard, something sternly; but
 immediately stretching out his hand to the hermit, the latter, somewhat
 abashed, bent his knee, and saluted it. “thou dost less honour to my
 extended palm than to my clenched fist,” said the monarch; “thou didst
 only kneel to the one, and to the other didst prostrate thyself.”
 but the friar, afraid perhaps of again giving offence by continuing the
 conversation in too jocose a style—a false step to be particularly
 guarded against by those who converse with monarchs—bowed
 profoundly, and fell into the rear.
 at the same time, two additional personages appeared on the scene.
 all hail to the lordlings of high degree,
 who live not more happy, though greater than we!
 our pastimes to see,
 under every green tree,
 in all the gay woodland, right welcome ye be.
 macdonald
 the new comers were wilfred of ivanhoe, on the prior of botolph's palfrey,
 and gurth, who attended him, on the knight's own war-horse. the
 astonishment of ivanhoe was beyond bounds, when he saw his master
 besprinkled with blood, and six or seven dead bodies lying around in the
 little glade in which the battle had taken place. nor was he less
 surprised to see richard surrounded by so many silvan attendants, the
 outlaws, as they seemed to be, of the forest, and a perilous retinue
 therefore for a prince. he hesitated whether to address the king as the
 black knight-errant, or in what other manner to demean himself towards
 him. richard saw his embarrassment.
 “fear not, wilfred,” he said, “to address richard plantagenet as himself,
 since thou seest him in the company of true english hearts, although it
 may be they have been urged a few steps aside by warm english blood.”
 “sir wilfred of ivanhoe,” said the gallant outlaw, stepping forward, “my
 assurances can add nothing to those of our sovereign; yet, let me say
 somewhat proudly, that of men who have suffered much, he hath not truer
 subjects than those who now stand around him.”
 “i cannot doubt it, brave man,” said wilfred, “since thou art of the
 number—but what mean these marks of death and danger? these slain
 men, and the bloody armour of my prince?”
 “treason hath been with us, ivanhoe,” said the king; “but, thanks to these
 brave men, treason hath met its meed—but, now i bethink me, thou too
 art a traitor,” said richard, smiling; “a most disobedient traitor; for
 were not our orders positive, that thou shouldst repose thyself at saint
 botolph's until thy wound was healed?”
 “it is healed,” said ivanhoe; “it is not of more consequence than the
 scratch of a bodkin. but why, oh why, noble prince, will you thus vex the
 hearts of your faithful servants, and expose your life by lonely journeys
 and rash adventures, as if it were of no more value than that of a mere
 knight-errant, who has no interest on earth but what lance and sword may
 procure him?”
 “and richard plantagenet,” said the king, “desires no more fame than his
 good lance and sword may acquire him—and richard plantagenet is
 prouder of achieving an adventure, with only his good sword, and his good
 arm to speed, than if he led to battle a host of an hundred thousand armed
 men.”
 “but your kingdom, my liege,” said ivanhoe, “your kingdom is threatened
 with dissolution and civil war—your subjects menaced with every
 species of evil, if deprived of their sovereign in some of those dangers
 which it is your daily pleasure to incur, and from which you have but this
 moment narrowly escaped.”
 “ho! ho! my kingdom and my subjects?” answered richard, impatiently; “i
 tell thee, sir wilfred, the best of them are most willing to repay my
 follies in kind—for example, my very faithful servant, wilfred of
 ivanhoe, will not obey my positive commands, and yet reads his king a
 homily, because he does not walk exactly by his advice. which of us has
 most reason to upbraid the other?—yet forgive me, my faithful
 wilfred. the time i have spent, and am yet to spend in concealment, is, as
 i explained to thee at saint botolph's, necessary to give my friends and
 faithful nobles time to assemble their forces, that when richard's return
 is announced, he should be at the head of such a force as enemies shall
 tremble to face, and thus subdue the meditated treason, without even
 unsheathing a sword. estoteville and bohun will not be strong enough to
 move forward to york for twenty-four hours. i must have news of salisbury
 from the south; and of beauchamp, in warwickshire; and of multon and percy
 in the north. the chancellor must make sure of london. too sudden an
 appearance would subject me to dangers, other than my lance and sword,
 though backed by the bow of bold robin, or the quarter-staff of friar
 tuck, and the horn of the sage wamba, may be able to rescue me from.”
 wilfred bowed in submission, well knowing how vain it was to contend with
 the wild spirit of chivalry which so often impelled his master upon
 dangers which he might easily have avoided, or rather, which it was
 unpardonable in him to have sought out. the young knight sighed,
 therefore, and held his peace; while richard, rejoiced at having silenced
 his counsellor, though his heart acknowledged the justice of the charge he
 had brought against him, went on in conversation with robin hood.—“king
 of outlaws,” he said, “have you no refreshment to offer to your brother
 sovereign? for these dead knaves have found me both in exercise and
 appetite.”
 “in troth,” replied the outlaw, “for i scorn to lie to your grace, our
 larder is chiefly supplied with—” he stopped, and was somewhat
 embarrassed.
 “with venison, i suppose?” said richard, gaily; “better food at need there
 can be none—and truly, if a king will not remain at home and slay
 his own game, methinks he should not brawl too loud if he finds it killed
 to his hand.”
 “if your grace, then,” said robin, “will again honour with your presence
 one of robin hood's places of rendezvous, the venison shall not be
 lacking; and a stoup of ale, and it may be a cup of reasonably good wine,
 to relish it withal.”
 the outlaw accordingly led the way, followed by the buxom monarch, more
 happy, probably, in this chance meeting with robin hood and his foresters,
 than he would have been in again assuming his royal state, and presiding
 over a splendid circle of peers and nobles. novelty in society and
 adventure were the zest of life to richard coeur-de-lion, and it had its
 highest relish when enhanced by dangers encountered and surmounted. in the
 lion-hearted king, the brilliant, but useless character, of a knight of
 romance, was in a great measure realized and revived; and the personal
 glory which he acquired by his own deeds of arms, was far more dear to his
 excited imagination, than that which a course of policy and wisdom would
 have spread around his government. accordingly, his reign was like the
 course of a brilliant and rapid meteor, which shoots along the face of
 heaven, shedding around an unnecessary and portentous light, which is
 instantly swallowed up by universal darkness; his feats of chivalry
 furnishing themes for bards and minstrels, but affording none of those
 solid benefits to his country on which history loves to pause, and hold up
 as an example to posterity. but in his present company richard showed to
 the greatest imaginable advantage. he was gay, good-humoured, and fond of
 manhood in every rank of life.
 beneath a huge oak-tree the silvan repast was hastily prepared for the
 king of england, surrounded by men outlaws to his government, but who now
 formed his court and his guard. as the flagon went round, the rough
 foresters soon lost their awe for the presence of majesty. the song and
 the jest were exchanged—the stories of former deeds were told with
 advantage; and at length, and while boasting of their successful
 infraction of the laws, no one recollected they were speaking in presence
 of their natural guardian. the merry king, nothing heeding his dignity any
 more than his company, laughed, quaffed, and jested among the jolly band.
 the natural and rough sense of robin hood led him to be desirous that the
 scene should be closed ere any thing should occur to disturb its harmony,
 the more especially that he observed ivanhoe's brow clouded with anxiety.
 “we are honoured,” he said to ivanhoe, apart, “by the presence of our
 gallant sovereign; yet i would not that he dallied with time, which the
 circumstances of his kingdom may render precious.”
 “it is well and wisely spoken, brave robin hood,” said wilfred, apart;
 “and know, moreover, that they who jest with majesty even in its gayest
 mood are but toying with the lion's whelp, which, on slight provocation,
 uses both fangs and claws.”
 “you have touched the very cause of my fear,” said the outlaw; “my men are
 rough by practice and nature, the king is hasty as well as good-humoured;
 nor know i how soon cause of offence may arise, or how warmly it may be
 received—it is time this revel were broken off.”
 “it must be by your management then, gallant yeoman,” said ivanhoe; “for
 each hint i have essayed to give him serves only to induce him to prolong
 it.”
 “must i so soon risk the pardon and favour of my sovereign?” said robin
 hood, pausing for all instant; “but by saint christopher, it shall be so.
 i were undeserving his grace did i not peril it for his good.—here,
 scathlock, get thee behind yonder thicket, and wind me a norman blast on
 thy bugle, and without an instant's delay on peril of your life.”
 scathlock obeyed his captain, and in less than five minutes the revellers
 were startled by the sound of his horn.
 “it is the bugle of malvoisin,” said the miller, starting to his feet, and
 seizing his bow. the friar dropped the flagon, and grasped his
 quarter-staff. wamba stopt short in the midst of a jest, and betook
 himself to sword and target. all the others stood to their weapons.
 men of their precarious course of life change readily from the banquet to
 the battle; and, to richard, the exchange seemed but a succession of
 pleasure. he called for his helmet and the most cumbrous parts of his
 armour, which he had laid aside; and while gurth was putting them on, he
 laid his strict injunctions on wilfred, under pain of his highest
 displeasure, not to engage in the skirmish which he supposed was
 approaching.
 “thou hast fought for me an hundred times, wilfred,—and i have seen
 it. thou shalt this day look on, and see how richard will fight for his
 friend and liegeman.”
 in the meantime, robin hood had sent off several of his followers in
 different directions, as if to reconnoitre the enemy; and when he saw the
 company effectually broken up, he approached richard, who was now
 completely armed, and, kneeling down on one knee, craved pardon of his
 sovereign.
 “for what, good yeoman?” said richard, somewhat impatiently. “have we not
 already granted thee a full pardon for all transgressions? thinkest thou
 our word is a feather, to be blown backward and forward between us? thou
 canst not have had time to commit any new offence since that time?”
 “ay, but i have though,” answered the yeoman, “if it be an offence to
 deceive my prince for his own advantage. the bugle you have heard was none
 of malvoisin's, but blown by my direction, to break off the banquet, lest
 it trenched upon hours of dearer import than to be thus dallied with.”
 he then rose from his knee, folded his arm on his bosom, and in a manner
 rather respectful than submissive, awaited the answer of the king,—like
 one who is conscious he may have given offence, yet is confident in the
 rectitude of his motive. the blood rushed in anger to the countenance of
 richard; but it was the first transient emotion, and his sense of justice
 instantly subdued it.
 “the king of sherwood,” he said, “grudges his venison and his wine-flask
 to the king of england? it is well, bold robin!—but when you come to
 see me in merry london, i trust to be a less niggard host. thou art right,
 however, good fellow. let us therefore to horse and away—wilfred has
 been impatient this hour. tell me, bold robin, hast thou never a friend in
 thy band, who, not content with advising, will needs direct thy motions,
 and look miserable when thou dost presume to act for thyself?”
 “such a one,” said robin, “is my lieutenant, little john, who is even now
 absent on an expedition as far as the borders of scotland; and i will own
 to your majesty, that i am sometimes displeased by the freedom of his
 councils—but, when i think twice, i cannot be long angry with one
 who can have no motive for his anxiety save zeal for his master's
 service.”
 “thou art right, good yeoman,” answered richard; “and if i had ivanhoe, on
 the one hand, to give grave advice, and recommend it by the sad gravity of
 his brow, and thee, on the other, to trick me into what thou thinkest my
 own good, i should have as little the freedom of mine own will as any king
 in christendom or heathenesse.—but come, sirs, let us merrily on to
 coningsburgh, and think no more on't.”
 robin hood assured them that he had detached a party in the direction of
 the road they were to pass, who would not fail to discover and apprize
 them of any secret ambuscade; and that he had little doubt they would find
 the ways secure, or, if otherwise, would receive such timely notice of the
 danger as would enable them to fall back on a strong troop of archers,
 with which he himself proposed to follow on the same route.
 the wise and attentive precautions adopted for his safety touched
 richard's feelings, and removed any slight grudge which he might retain on
 account of the deception the outlaw captain had practised upon him. he
 once more extended his hand to robin hood, assured him of his full pardon
 and future favour, as well as his firm resolution to restrain the
 tyrannical exercise of the forest rights and other oppressive laws, by
 which so many english yeomen were driven into a state of rebellion. but
 richard's good intentions towards the bold outlaw were frustrated by the
 king's untimely death; and the charter of the forest was extorted from the
 unwilling hands of king john when he succeeded to his heroic brother. as
 for the rest of robin hood's career, as well as the tale of his
 treacherous death, they are to be found in those black-letter garlands,
 once sold at the low and easy rate of one halfpenny.
 “now cheaply purchased at their weight in gold.”
 the outlaw's opinion proved true; and the king, attended by ivanhoe,
 gurth, and wamba, arrived, without any interruption, within view of the
 castle of coningsburgh, while the sun was yet in the horizon.
 there are few more beautiful or striking scenes in england, than are
 presented by the vicinity of this ancient saxon fortress. the soft and
 gentle river don sweeps through an amphitheatre, in which cultivation is
 richly blended with woodland, and on a mount, ascending from the river,
 well defended by walls and ditches, rises this ancient edifice, which, as
 its saxon name implies, was, previous to the conquest, a royal residence
 of the kings of england. the outer walls have probably been added by the
 normans, but the inner keep bears token of very great antiquity. it is
 situated on a mount at one angle of the inner court, and forms a complete
 circle of perhaps twenty-five feet in diameter. the wall is of immense
 thickness, and is propped or defended by six huge external buttresses
 which project from the circle, and rise up against the sides of the tower
 as if to strengthen or to support it. these massive buttresses are solid
 when they arise from the foundation, and a good way higher up; but are
 hollowed out towards the top, and terminate in a sort of turrets
 communicating with the interior of the keep itself. the distant appearance
 of this huge building, with these singular accompaniments, is as
 interesting to the lovers of the picturesque, as the interior of the
 castle is to the eager antiquary, whose imagination it carries back to the
 days of the heptarchy. a barrow, in the vicinity of the castle, is pointed
 out as the tomb of the memorable hengist; and various monuments, of great
 antiquity and curiosity, are shown in the neighbouring churchyard. 
 when coeur-de-lion and his retinue approached this rude yet stately
 building, it was not, as at present, surrounded by external
 fortifications. the saxon architect had exhausted his art in rendering the
 main keep defensible, and there was no other circumvallation than a rude
 barrier of palisades.
 a huge black banner, which floated from the top of the tower, announced
 that the obsequies of the late owner were still in the act of being
 solemnized. it bore no emblem of the deceased's birth or quality, for
 armorial bearings were then a novelty among the norman chivalry themselves
 and, were totally unknown to the saxons. but above the gate was another
 banner, on which the figure of a white horse, rudely painted, indicated
 the nation and rank of the deceased, by the well-known symbol of hengist
 and his saxon warriors.
 all around the castle was a scene of busy commotion; for such funeral
 banquets were times of general and profuse hospitality, which not only
 every one who could claim the most distant connexion with the deceased,
 but all passengers whatsoever, were invited to partake. the wealth and
 consequence of the deceased athelstane, occasioned this custom to be
 observed in the fullest extent.
 numerous parties, therefore, were seen ascending and descending the hill
 on which the castle was situated; and when the king and his attendants
 entered the open and unguarded gates of the external barrier, the space
 within presented a scene not easily reconciled with the cause of the
 assemblage. in one place cooks were toiling to roast huge oxen, and fat
 sheep; in another, hogsheads of ale were set abroach, to be drained at the
 freedom of all comers. groups of every description were to be seen
 devouring the food and swallowing the liquor thus abandoned to their
 discretion. the naked saxon serf was drowning the sense of his half-year's
 hunger and thirst, in one day of gluttony and drunkenness—the more
 pampered burgess and guild-brother was eating his morsel with gust, or
 curiously criticising the quantity of the malt and the skill of the
 brewer. some few of the poorer norman gentry might also be seen,
 distinguished by their shaven chins and short cloaks, and not less so by
 their keeping together, and looking with great scorn on the whole
 solemnity, even while condescending to avail themselves of the good cheer
 which was so liberally supplied.
 mendicants were of course assembled by the score, together with strolling
 soldiers returned from palestine, (according to their own account at
 least,) pedlars were displaying their wares, travelling mechanics were
 enquiring after employment, and wandering palmers, hedge-priests, saxon
 minstrels, and welsh bards, were muttering prayers, and extracting
 mistuned dirges from their harps, crowds, and rotes. 
 one sent forth the praises of athelstane in a doleful panegyric; another,
 in a saxon genealogical poem, rehearsed the uncouth and harsh names of his
 noble ancestry. jesters and jugglers were not awanting, nor was the
 occasion of the assembly supposed to render the exercise of their
 profession indecorous or improper. indeed the ideas of the saxons on these
 occasions were as natural as they were rude. if sorrow was thirsty, there
 was drink—if hungry, there was food—if it sunk down upon and
 saddened the heart, here were the means supplied of mirth, or at least of
 amusement. nor did the assistants scorn to avail themselves of those means
 of consolation, although, every now and then, as if suddenly recollecting
 the cause which had brought them together, the men groaned in unison,
 while the females, of whom many were present, raised up their voices and
 shrieked for very woe.
 such was the scene in the castle-yard at coningsburgh when it was entered
 by richard and his followers. the seneschal or steward deigned not to take
 notice of the groups of inferior guests who were perpetually entering and
 withdrawing, unless so far as was necessary to preserve order;
 nevertheless he was struck by the good mien of the monarch and ivanhoe,
 more especially as he imagined the features of the latter were familiar to
 him. besides, the approach of two knights, for such their dress bespoke
 them, was a rare event at a saxon solemnity, and could not but be regarded
 as a sort of honour to the deceased and his family. and in his sable
 dress, and holding in his hand his white wand of office, this important
 personage made way through the miscellaneous assemblage of guests, thus
 conducting richard and ivanhoe to the entrance of the tower. gurth and
 wamba speedily found acquaintances in the court-yard, nor presumed to
 intrude themselves any farther until their presence should be required.
 i found them winding of marcello's corpse.
 and there was such a solemn melody,
 'twixt doleful songs, tears, and sad elegies,—
 such as old grandames, watching by the dead,
 are wont to outwear the night with.
 —old play
 the mode of entering the great tower of coningsburgh castle is very
 peculiar, and partakes of the rude simplicity of the early times in which
 it was erected. a flight of steps, so deep and narrow as to be almost
 precipitous, leads up to a low portal in the south side of the tower, by
 which the adventurous antiquary may still, or at least could a few years
 since, gain access to a small stair within the thickness of the main wall
 of the tower, which leads up to the third story of the building,—the
 two lower being dungeons or vaults, which neither receive air nor light,
 save by a square hole in the third story, with which they seem to have
 communicated by a ladder. the access to the upper apartments in the tower
 which consist in all of four stories, is given by stairs which are carried
 up through the external buttresses.
 by this difficult and complicated entrance, the good king richard,
 followed by his faithful ivanhoe, was ushered into the round apartment
 which occupies the whole of the third story from the ground. wilfred, by
 the difficulties of the ascent, gained time to muffle his face in his
 mantle, as it had been held expedient that he should not present himself
 to his father until the king should give him the signal.
 there were assembled in this apartment, around a large oaken table, about
 a dozen of the most distinguished representatives of the saxon families in
 the adjacent counties. they were all old, or, at least, elderly men; for
 the younger race, to the great displeasure of the seniors, had, like
 ivanhoe, broken down many of the barriers which separated for half a
 century the norman victors from the vanquished saxons. the downcast and
 sorrowful looks of these venerable men, their silence and their mournful
 posture, formed a strong contrast to the levity of the revellers on the
 outside of the castle. their grey locks and long full beards, together
 with their antique tunics and loose black mantles, suited well with the
 singular and rude apartment in which they were seated, and gave the
 appearance of a band of ancient worshippers of woden, recalled to life to
 mourn over the decay of their national glory.
 cedric, seated in equal rank among his countrymen, seemed yet, by common
 consent, to act as chief of the assembly. upon the entrance of richard
 (only known to him as the valorous knight of the fetterlock) he arose
 gravely, and gave him welcome by the ordinary salutation, “waes hael”,
 raising at the same time a goblet to his head. the king, no stranger to
 the customs of his english subjects, returned the greeting with the
 appropriate words, “drinc hael”, and partook of a cup which was handed to
 him by the sewer. the same courtesy was offered to ivanhoe, who pledged
 his father in silence, supplying the usual speech by an inclination of his
 head, lest his voice should have been recognised.
 when this introductory ceremony was performed, cedric arose, and,
 extending his hand to richard, conducted him into a small and very rude
 chapel, which was excavated, as it were, out of one of the external
 buttresses. as there was no opening, saving a little narrow loop-hole, the
 place would have been nearly quite dark but for two flambeaux or torches,
 which showed, by a red and smoky light, the arched roof and naked walls,
 the rude altar of stone, and the crucifix of the same material.
 before this altar was placed a bier, and on each side of this bier kneeled
 three priests, who told their beads, and muttered their prayers, with the
 greatest signs of external devotion. for this service a splendid
 “soul-scat” was paid to the convent of saint edmund's by the mother of the
 deceased; and, that it might be fully deserved, the whole brethren, saving
 the lame sacristan, had transferred themselves to coningsburgh, where,
 while six of their number were constantly on guard in the performance of
 divine rites by the bier of athelstane, the others failed not to take
 their share of the refreshments and amusements which went on at the
 castle. in maintaining this pious watch and ward, the good monks were
 particularly careful not to interrupt their hymns for an instant, lest
 zernebock, the ancient saxon apollyon, should lay his clutches on the
 departed athelstane. nor were they less careful to prevent any unhallowed
 layman from touching the pall, which, having been that used at the funeral
 of saint edmund, was liable to be desecrated, if handled by the profane.
 if, in truth, these attentions could be of any use to the deceased, he had
 some right to expect them at the hands of the brethren of saint edmund's,
 since, besides a hundred mancuses of gold paid down as the soul-ransom,
 the mother of athelstane had announced her intention of endowing that
 foundation with the better part of the lands of the deceased, in order to
 maintain perpetual prayers for his soul, and that of her departed husband.
 richard and wilfred followed the saxon cedric into the apartment of death,
 where, as their guide pointed with solemn air to the untimely bier of
 athelstane, they followed his example in devoutly crossing themselves, and
 muttering a brief prayer for the weal of the departed soul.
 this act of pious charity performed, cedric again motioned them to follow
 him, gliding over the stone floor with a noiseless tread; and, after
 ascending a few steps, opened with great caution the door of a small
 oratory, which adjoined to the chapel. it was about eight feet square,
 hollowed, like the chapel itself, out of the thickness of the wall; and
 the loop-hole, which enlightened it, being to the west, and widening
 considerably as it sloped inward, a beam of the setting sun found its way
 into its dark recess, and showed a female of a dignified mien, and whose
 countenance retained the marked remains of majestic beauty. her long
 mourning robes and her flowing wimple of black cypress, enhanced the
 whiteness of her skin, and the beauty of her light-coloured and flowing
 tresses, which time had neither thinned nor mingled with silver. her
 countenance expressed the deepest sorrow that is consistent with
 resignation. on the stone table before her stood a crucifix of ivory,
 beside which was laid a missal, having its pages richly illuminated, and
 its boards adorned with clasps of gold, and bosses of the same precious
 metal.
 “noble edith,” said cedric, after having stood a moment silent, as if to
 give richard and wilfred time to look upon the lady of the mansion, “these
 are worthy strangers, come to take a part in thy sorrows. and this, in
 especial, is the valiant knight who fought so bravely for the deliverance
 of him for whom we this day mourn.”
 “his bravery has my thanks,” returned the lady; “although it be the will
 of heaven that it should be displayed in vain. i thank, too, his courtesy,
 and that of his companion, which hath brought them hither to behold the
 widow of adeling, the mother of athelstane, in her deep hour of sorrow and
 lamentation. to your care, kind kinsman, i intrust them, satisfied that
 they will want no hospitality which these sad walls can yet afford.”
 the guests bowed deeply to the mourning parent, and withdrew from their
 hospitable guide.
 another winding stair conducted them to an apartment of the same size with
 that which they had first entered, occupying indeed the story immediately
 above. from this room, ere yet the door was opened, proceeded a low and
 melancholy strain of vocal music. when they entered, they found themselves
 in the presence of about twenty matrons and maidens of distinguished saxon
 lineage. four maidens, rowena leading the choir, raised a hymn for the
 soul of the deceased, of which we have only been able to decipher two or
 three stanzas:—
 dust unto dust,
 to this all must;
 the tenant hath resign'd
 the faded form
 to waste and worm—
 corruption claims her kind.
 through paths unknown
 thy soul hath flown,
 to seek the realms of woe,
 where fiery pain
 shall purge the stain
 of actions done below.
 in that sad place,
 by mary's grace,
 brief may thy dwelling be
 till prayers and alms,
 and holy psalms,
 shall set the captive free.
 while this dirge was sung, in a low and melancholy tone, by the female
 choristers, the others were divided into two bands, of which one was
 engaged in bedecking, with such embroidery as their skill and taste could
 compass, a large silken pall, destined to cover the bier of athelstane,
 while the others busied themselves in selecting, from baskets of flowers
 placed before them, garlands, which they intended for the same mournful
 purpose. the behaviour of the maidens was decorous, if not marked with
 deep affliction; but now and then a whisper or a smile called forth the
 rebuke of the severer matrons, and here and there might be seen a damsel
 more interested in endeavouring to find out how her mourning-robe became
 her, than in the dismal ceremony for which they were preparing. neither
 was this propensity (if we must needs confess the truth) at all diminished
 by the appearance of two strange knights, which occasioned some looking
 up, peeping, and whispering. rowena alone, too proud to be vain, paid her
 greeting to her deliverer with a graceful courtesy. her demeanour was
 serious, but not dejected; and it may be doubted whether thoughts of
 ivanhoe, and of the uncertainty of his fate, did not claim as great a
 share in her gravity as the death of her kinsman.
 to cedric, however, who, as we have observed, was not remarkably
 clear-sighted on such occasions, the sorrow of his ward seemed so much
 deeper than any of the other maidens, that he deemed it proper to whisper
 the explanation—“she was the affianced bride of the noble
 athelstane.”—it may be doubted whether this communication went a far
 way to increase wilfred's disposition to sympathize with the mourners of
 coningsburgh.
 having thus formally introduced the guests to the different chambers in
 which the obsequies of athelstane were celebrated under different forms,
 cedric conducted them into a small room, destined, as he informed them,
 for the exclusive accomodation of honourable guests, whose more slight
 connexion with the deceased might render them unwilling to join those who
 were immediately effected by the unhappy event. he assured them of every
 accommodation, and was about to withdraw when the black knight took his
 hand.
 “i crave to remind you, noble thane,” he said, “that when we last parted,
 you promised, for the service i had the fortune to render you, to grant me
 a boon.”
 “it is granted ere named, noble knight,” said cedric; “yet, at this sad
 moment—-”
 “of that also,” said the king, “i have bethought me—but my time is
 brief—neither does it seem to me unfit, that, when closing the grave
 on the noble athelstane, we should deposit therein certain prejudices and
 hasty opinions.”
 “sir knight of the fetterlock,” said cedric, colouring, and interrupting
 the king in his turn, “i trust your boon regards yourself and no other;
 for in that which concerns the honour of my house, it is scarce fitting
 that a stranger should mingle.”
 “nor do i wish to mingle,” said the king, mildly, “unless in so far as you
 will admit me to have an interest. as yet you have known me but as the
 black knight of the fetterlock—know me now as richard plantagenet.”
 “richard of anjou!” exclaimed cedric, stepping backward with the utmost
 astonishment.
 “no, noble cedric—richard of england!—whose deepest interest—whose
 deepest wish, is to see her sons united with each other.—and, how
 now, worthy thane! hast thou no knee for thy prince?”
 “to norman blood,” said cedric, “it hath never bended.”
 “reserve thine homage then,” said the monarch, “until i shall prove my
 right to it by my equal protection of normans and english.”
 “prince,” answered cedric, “i have ever done justice to thy bravery and
 thy worth—nor am i ignorant of thy claim to the crown through thy
 descent from matilda, niece to edgar atheling, and daughter to malcolm of
 scotland. but matilda, though of the royal saxon blood, was not the heir
 to the monarchy.”
 “i will not dispute my title with thee, noble thane,” said richard,
 calmly; “but i will bid thee look around thee, and see where thou wilt
 find another to be put into the scale against it.”
 “and hast thou wandered hither, prince, to tell me so?” said cedric—“to
 upbraid me with the ruin of my race, ere the grave has closed o'er the
 last scion of saxon royalty?”—his countenance darkened as he spoke.—“it
 was boldly—it was rashly done!”
 “not so, by the holy rood!” replied the king; “it was done in the frank
 confidence which one brave man may repose in another, without a shadow of
 danger.”
 “thou sayest well, sir king—for king i own thou art, and wilt be,
 despite of my feeble opposition.—i dare not take the only mode to
 prevent it, though thou hast placed the strong temptation within my
 reach!”
 “and now to my boon,” said the king, “which i ask not with one jot the
 less confidence, that thou hast refused to acknowledge my lawful
 sovereignty. i require of thee, as a man of thy word, on pain of being
 held faithless, man-sworn, and 'nidering',  to
 forgive and receive to thy paternal affection the good knight, wilfred of
 ivanhoe. in this reconciliation thou wilt own i have an interest—the
 happiness of my friend, and the quelling of dissension among my faithful
 people.”
 “and this is wilfred!” said cedric, pointing to his son.
 “my father!—my father!” said ivanhoe, prostrating himself at
 cedric's feet, “grant me thy forgiveness!”
 “thou hast it, my son,” said cedric, raising him up. “the son of hereward
 knows how to keep his word, even when it has been passed to a norman. but
 let me see thee use the dress and costume of thy english ancestry—no
 short cloaks, no gay bonnets, no fantastic plumage in my decent household.
 he that would be the son of cedric, must show himself of english ancestry.—thou
 art about to speak,” he added, sternly, “and i guess the topic. the lady
 rowena must complete two years' mourning, as for a betrothed husband—all
 our saxon ancestors would disown us were we to treat of a new union for
 her ere the grave of him she should have wedded—him, so much the
 most worthy of her hand by birth and ancestry—is yet closed. the
 ghost of athelstane himself would burst his bloody cerements and stand
 before us to forbid such dishonour to his memory.”
 it seemed as if cedric's words had raised a spectre; for, scarce had he
 uttered them ere the door flew open, and athelstane, arrayed in the
 garments of the grave, stood before them, pale, haggard, and like
 something arisen from the dead! 
 the effect of this apparition on the persons present was utterly
 appalling. cedric started back as far as the wall of the apartment would
 permit, and, leaning against it as one unable to support himself, gazed on
 the figure of his friend with eyes that seemed fixed, and a mouth which he
 appeared incapable of shutting. ivanhoe crossed himself, repeating prayers
 in saxon, latin, or norman-french, as they occurred to his memory, while
 richard alternately said, “benedicite”, and swore, “mort de ma vie!”
 in the meantime, a horrible noise was heard below stairs, some crying,
 “secure the treacherous monks!”—others, “down with them into the
 dungeon!”—others, “pitch them from the highest battlements!”
 “in the name of god!” said cedric, addressing what seemed the spectre of
 his departed friend, “if thou art mortal, speak!—if a departed
 spirit, say for what cause thou dost revisit us, or if i can do aught that
 can set thy spirit at repose.—living or dead, noble athelstane,
 speak to cedric!”
 “i will,” said the spectre, very composedly, “when i have collected
 breath, and when you give me time—alive, saidst thou?—i am as
 much alive as he can be who has fed on bread and water for three days,
 which seem three ages—yes, bread and water, father cedric! by
 heaven, and all saints in it, better food hath not passed my weasand for
 three livelong days, and by god's providence it is that i am now here to
 tell it.”
 “why, noble athelstane,” said the black knight, “i myself saw you struck
 down by the fierce templar towards the end of the storm at torquilstone,
 and as i thought, and wamba reported, your skull was cloven through the
 teeth.”
 “you thought amiss, sir knight,” said athelstane, “and wamba lied. my
 teeth are in good order, and that my supper shall presently find—no
 thanks to the templar though, whose sword turned in his hand, so that the
 blade struck me flatlings, being averted by the handle of the good mace
 with which i warded the blow; had my steel-cap been on, i had not valued
 it a rush, and had dealt him such a counter-buff as would have spoilt his
 retreat. but as it was, down i went, stunned, indeed, but unwounded.
 others, of both sides, were beaten down and slaughtered above me, so that
 i never recovered my senses until i found myself in a coffin—(an
 open one, by good luck)—placed before the altar of the church of
 saint edmund's. i sneezed repeatedly—groaned—awakened and
 would have arisen, when the sacristan and abbot, full of terror, came
 running at the noise, surprised, doubtless, and no way pleased to find the
 man alive, whose heirs they had proposed themselves to be. i asked for
 wine—they gave me some, but it must have been highly medicated, for
 i slept yet more deeply than before, and wakened not for many hours. i
 found my arms swathed down—my feet tied so fast that mine ankles
 ache at the very remembrance—the place was utterly dark—the
 oubliette, as i suppose, of their accursed convent, and from the close,
 stifled, damp smell, i conceive it is also used for a place of sepulture.
 i had strange thoughts of what had befallen me, when the door of my
 dungeon creaked, and two villain monks entered. they would have persuaded
 me i was in purgatory, but i knew too well the pursy short-breathed voice
 of the father abbot.—saint jeremy! how different from that tone with
 which he used to ask me for another slice of the haunch!—the dog has
 feasted with me from christmas to twelfth-night.”
 “have patience, noble athelstane,” said the king, “take breath—tell
 your story at leisure—beshrew me but such a tale is as well worth
 listening to as a romance.”
 “ay but, by the rood of bromeholm, there was no romance in the matter!”
 said athelstane.—“a barley loaf and a pitcher of water—that
 they gave me, the niggardly traitors, whom my father, and i myself, had
 enriched, when their best resources were the flitches of bacon and
 measures of corn, out of which they wheedled poor serfs and bondsmen, in
 exchange for their prayers—the nest of foul ungrateful vipers—barley
 bread and ditch water to such a patron as i had been! i will smoke them
 out of their nest, though i be excommunicated!”
 “but, in the name of our lady, noble athelstane,” said cedric, grasping
 the hand of his friend, “how didst thou escape this imminent danger—did
 their hearts relent?”
 “did their hearts relent!” echoed athelstane.—“do rocks melt with
 the sun? i should have been there still, had not some stir in the convent,
 which i find was their procession hitherward to eat my funeral feast, when
 they well knew how and where i had been buried alive, summoned the swarm
 out of their hive. i heard them droning out their death-psalms, little
 judging they were sung in respect for my soul by those who were thus
 famishing my body. they went, however, and i waited long for food—no
 wonder—the gouty sacristan was even too busy with his own provender
 to mind mine. at length down he came, with an unstable step and a strong
 flavour of wine and spices about his person. good cheer had opened his
 heart, for he left me a nook of pasty and a flask of wine, instead of my
 former fare. i ate, drank, and was invigorated; when, to add to my good
 luck, the sacristan, too totty to discharge his duty of turnkey fitly,
 locked the door beside the staple, so that it fell ajar. the light, the
 food, the wine, set my invention to work. the staple to which my chains
 were fixed, was more rusted than i or the villain abbot had supposed. even
 iron could not remain without consuming in the damps of that infernal
 dungeon.”
 “take breath, noble athelstane,” said richard, “and partake of some
 refreshment, ere you proceed with a tale so dreadful.”
 “partake!” quoth athelstane; “i have been partaking five times to-day—and
 yet a morsel of that savoury ham were not altogether foreign to the
 matter; and i pray you, fair sir, to do me reason in a cup of wine.”
 the guests, though still agape with astonishment, pledged their
 resuscitated landlord, who thus proceeded in his story:—he had
 indeed now many more auditors than those to whom it was commenced, for
 edith, having given certain necessary orders for arranging matters within
 the castle, had followed the dead-alive up to the stranger's apartment
 attended by as many of the guests, male and female, as could squeeze into
 the small room, while others, crowding the staircase, caught up an
 erroneous edition of the story, and transmitted it still more inaccurately
 to those beneath, who again sent it forth to the vulgar without, in a
 fashion totally irreconcilable to the real fact. athelstane, however, went
 on as follows, with the history of his escape:—
 “finding myself freed from the staple, i dragged myself up stairs as well
 as a man loaded with shackles, and emaciated with fasting, might; and
 after much groping about, i was at length directed, by the sound of a
 jolly roundelay, to the apartment where the worthy sacristan, an it so
 please ye, was holding a devil's mass with a huge beetle-browed,
 broad-shouldered brother of the grey-frock and cowl, who looked much more
 like a thief than a clergyman. i burst in upon them, and the fashion of my
 grave-clothes, as well as the clanking of my chains, made me more resemble
 an inhabitant of the other world than of this. both stood aghast; but when
 i knocked down the sacristan with my fist, the other fellow, his
 pot-companion, fetched a blow at me with a huge quarter-staff.”
 “this must be our friar tuck, for a count's ransom,” said richard, looking
 at ivanhoe.
 “he may be the devil, an he will,” said athelstane. “fortunately he missed
 the aim; and on my approaching to grapple with him, took to his heels and
 ran for it. i failed not to set my own heels at liberty by means of the
 fetter-key, which hung amongst others at the sexton's belt; and i had
 thoughts of beating out the knave's brains with the bunch of keys, but
 gratitude for the nook of pasty and the flask of wine which the rascal had
 imparted to my captivity, came over my heart; so, with a brace of hearty
 kicks, i left him on the floor, pouched some baked meat, and a leathern
 bottle of wine, with which the two venerable brethren had been regaling,
 went to the stable, and found in a private stall mine own best palfrey,
 which, doubtless, had been set apart for the holy father abbot's
 particular use. hither i came with all the speed the beast could compass—man
 and mother's son flying before me wherever i came, taking me for a
 spectre, the more especially as, to prevent my being recognised, i drew
 the corpse-hood over my face. i had not gained admittance into my own
 castle, had i not been supposed to be the attendant of a juggler who is
 making the people in the castle-yard very merry, considering they are
 assembled to celebrate their lord's funeral—i say the sewer thought
 i was dressed to bear a part in the tregetour's mummery, and so i got
 admission, and did but disclose myself to my mother, and eat a hasty
 morsel, ere i came in quest of you, my noble friend.”
 “and you have found me,” said cedric, “ready to resume our brave projects
 of honour and liberty. i tell thee, never will dawn a morrow so auspicious
 as the next, for the deliverance of the noble saxon race.”
 “talk not to me of delivering any one,” said athelstane; “it is well i am
 delivered myself. i am more intent on punishing that villain abbot. he
 shall hang on the top of this castle of coningsburgh, in his cope and
 stole; and if the stairs be too strait to admit his fat carcass, i will
 have him craned up from without.”
 “but, my son,” said edith, “consider his sacred office.”
 “consider my three days' fast,” replied athelstane; “i will have their
 blood every one of them. front-de-boeuf was burnt alive for a less matter,
 for he kept a good table for his prisoners, only put too much garlic in
 his last dish of pottage. but these hypocritical, ungrateful slaves, so
 often the self-invited flatterers at my board, who gave me neither pottage
 nor garlic, more or less, they die, by the soul of hengist!”
 “but the pope, my noble friend,”—said cedric—
 “but the devil, my noble friend,”—answered athelstane; “they die,
 and no more of them. were they the best monks upon earth, the world would
 go on without them.”
 “for shame, noble athelstane,” said cedric; “forget such wretches in the
 career of glory which lies open before thee. tell this norman prince,
 richard of anjou, that, lion-hearted as he is, he shall not hold
 undisputed the throne of alfred, while a male descendant of the holy
 confessor lives to dispute it.”
 “how!” said athelstane, “is this the noble king richard?”
 “it is richard plantagenet himself,” said cedric; “yet i need not remind
 thee that, coming hither a guest of free-will, he may neither be injured
 nor detained prisoner—thou well knowest thy duty to him as his
 host.”
 “ay, by my faith!” said athelstane; “and my duty as a subject besides, for
 i here tender him my allegiance, heart and hand.”
 “my son,” said edith, “think on thy royal rights!”
 “think on the freedom of england, degenerate prince!” said cedric.
 “mother and friend,” said athelstane, “a truce to your upbraidings—bread
 and water and a dungeon are marvellous mortifiers of ambition, and i rise
 from the tomb a wiser man than i descended into it. one half of those vain
 follies were puffed into mine ear by that perfidious abbot wolfram, and
 you may now judge if he is a counsellor to be trusted. since these plots
 were set in agitation, i have had nothing but hurried journeys,
 indigestions, blows and bruises, imprisonments and starvation; besides
 that they can only end in the murder of some thousands of quiet folk. i
 tell you, i will be king in my own domains, and nowhere else; and my first
 act of dominion shall be to hang the abbot.”
 “and my ward rowena,” said cedric—“i trust you intend not to desert
 her?”
 “father cedric,” said athelstane, “be reasonable. the lady rowena cares
 not for me—she loves the little finger of my kinsman wilfred's glove
 better than my whole person. there she stands to avouch it—nay,
 blush not, kinswoman, there is no shame in loving a courtly knight better
 than a country franklin—and do not laugh neither, rowena, for
 grave-clothes and a thin visage are, god knows, no matter of merriment—nay,
 an thou wilt needs laugh, i will find thee a better jest—give me thy
 hand, or rather lend it me, for i but ask it in the way of friendship.—here,
 cousin wilfred of ivanhoe, in thy favour i renounce and abjure—-hey!
 by saint dunstan, our cousin wilfred hath vanished!—yet, unless my
 eyes are still dazzled with the fasting i have undergone, i saw him stand
 there but even now.”
 all now looked around and enquired for ivanhoe, but he had vanished. it
 was at length discovered that a jew had been to seek him; and that, after
 very brief conference, he had called for gurth and his armour, and had
 left the castle.
 “fair cousin,” said athelstane to rowena, “could i think that this sudden
 disappearance of ivanhoe was occasioned by other than the weightiest
 reason, i would myself resume—”
 but he had no sooner let go her hand, on first observing that ivanhoe had
 disappeared, than rowena, who had found her situation extremely
 embarrassing, had taken the first opportunity to escape from the
 apartment.
 “certainly,” quoth athelstane, “women are the least to be trusted of all
 animals, monks and abbots excepted. i am an infidel, if i expected not
 thanks from her, and perhaps a kiss to boot—these cursed
 grave-clothes have surely a spell on them, every one flies from me.—to
 you i turn, noble king richard, with the vows of allegiance, which, as a
 liege-subject—”
 but king richard was gone also, and no one knew whither. at length it was
 learned that he had hastened to the court-yard, summoned to his presence
 the jew who had spoken with ivanhoe, and after a moment's speech with him,
 had called vehemently to horse, thrown himself upon a steed, compelled the
 jew to mount another, and set off at a rate, which, according to wamba,
 rendered the old jew's neck not worth a penny's purchase.
 “by my halidome!” said athelstane, “it is certain that zernebock hath
 possessed himself of my castle in my absence. i return in my
 grave-clothes, a pledge restored from the very sepulchre, and every one i
 speak to vanishes as soon as they hear my voice!—but it skills not
 talking of it. come, my friends—such of you as are left, follow me
 to the banquet-hall, lest any more of us disappear—it is, i trust,
 as yet tolerably furnished, as becomes the obsequies of an ancient saxon
 noble; and should we tarry any longer, who knows but the devil may fly off
 with the supper?”
 be mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom,
 that they may break his foaming courser's back,
 and throw the rider headlong in the lists,
 a caitiff recreant!
 —richard ii
 our scene now returns to the exterior of the castle, or preceptory, of
 templestowe, about the hour when the bloody die was to be cast for the
 life or death of rebecca. it was a scene of bustle and life, as if the
 whole vicinity had poured forth its inhabitants to a village wake, or
 rural feast. but the earnest desire to look on blood and death, is not
 peculiar to those dark ages; though in the gladiatorial exercise of single
 combat and general tourney, they were habituated to the bloody spectacle
 of brave men falling by each other's hands. even in our own days, when
 morals are better understood, an execution, a bruising match, a riot, or a
 meeting of radical reformers, collects, at considerable hazard to
 themselves, immense crowds of spectators, otherwise little interested,
 except to see how matters are to be conducted, or whether the heroes of
 the day are, in the heroic language of insurgent tailors, flints or
 dunghills.
 the eyes, therefore, of a very considerable multitude, were bent on the
 gate of the preceptory of templestowe, with the purpose of witnessing the
 procession; while still greater numbers had already surrounded the
 tiltyard belonging to that establishment. this enclosure was formed on a
 piece of level ground adjoining to the preceptory, which had been levelled
 with care, for the exercise of military and chivalrous sports. it occupied
 the brow of a soft and gentle eminence, was carefully palisaded around,
 and, as the templars willingly invited spectators to be witnesses of their
 skill in feats of chivalry, was amply supplied with galleries and benches
 for their use.
 on the present occasion, a throne was erected for the grand master at the
 east end, surrounded with seats of distinction for the preceptors and
 knights of the order. over these floated the sacred standard, called “le
 beau-seant”, which was the ensign, as its name was the battle-cry, of the
 templars.
 at the opposite end of the lists was a pile of faggots, so arranged around
 a stake, deeply fixed in the ground, as to leave a space for the victim
 whom they were destined to consume, to enter within the fatal circle, in
 order to be chained to the stake by the fetters which hung ready for that
 purpose. beside this deadly apparatus stood four black slaves, whose
 colour and african features, then so little known in england, appalled the
 multitude, who gazed on them as on demons employed about their own
 diabolical exercises. these men stirred not, excepting now and then, under
 the direction of one who seemed their chief, to shift and replace the
 ready fuel. they looked not on the multitude. in fact, they seemed
 insensible of their presence, and of every thing save the discharge of
 their own horrible duty.
 and when, in speech with each other, they expanded their blubber lips, and
 showed their white fangs, as if they grinned at the thoughts of the
 expected tragedy, the startled commons could scarcely help believing that
 they were actually the familiar spirits with whom the witch had communed,
 and who, her time being out, stood ready to assist in her dreadful
 punishment. they whispered to each other, and communicated all the feats
 which satan had performed during that busy and unhappy period, not
 failing, of course, to give the devil rather more than his due.
 “have you not heard, father dennet,” quoth one boor to another advanced in
 years, “that the devil has carried away bodily the great saxon thane,
 athelstane of coningsburgh?”
 “ay, but he brought him back though, by the blessing of god and saint
 dunstan.”
 “how's that?” said a brisk young fellow, dressed in a green cassock
 embroidered with gold, and having at his heels a stout lad bearing a harp
 upon his back, which betrayed his vocation. the minstrel seemed of no
 vulgar rank; for, besides the splendour of his gaily braidered doublet, he
 wore around his neck a silver chain, by which hung the “wrest”, or key,
 with which he tuned his harp. on his right arm was a silver plate, which,
 instead of bearing, as usual, the cognizance or badge of the baron to
 whose family he belonged, had barely the word sherwood engraved upon it.—“how
 mean you by that?” said the gay minstrel, mingling in the conversation of
 the peasants; “i came to seek one subject for my rhyme, and, by'r lady, i
 were glad to find two.”
 “it is well avouched,” said the elder peasant, “that after athelstane of
 coningsburgh had been dead four weeks—”
 “that is impossible,” said the minstrel; “i saw him in life at the passage
 of arms at ashby-de-la-zouche.”
 “dead, however, he was, or else translated,” said the younger peasant;
 “for i heard the monks of saint edmund's singing the death's hymn for him;
 and, moreover, there was a rich death-meal and dole at the castle of
 coningsburgh, as right was; and thither had i gone, but for mabel parkins,
 who—”
 “ay, dead was athelstane,” said the old man, shaking his head, “and the
 more pity it was, for the old saxon blood—”
 “but, your story, my masters—your story,” said the minstrel,
 somewhat impatiently.
 “ay, ay—construe us the story,” said a burly friar, who stood beside
 them, leaning on a pole that exhibited an appearance between a pilgrim's
 staff and a quarter-staff, and probably acted as either when occasion
 served,—“your story,” said the stalwart churchman; “burn not
 daylight about it—we have short time to spare.”
 “an please your reverence,” said dennet, “a drunken priest came to visit
 the sacristan at saint edmund's—-”
 “it does not please my reverence,” answered the churchman, “that there
 should be such an animal as a drunken priest, or, if there were, that a
 layman should so speak him. be mannerly, my friend, and conclude the holy
 man only wrapt in meditation, which makes the head dizzy and foot
 unsteady, as if the stomach were filled with new wine—i have felt it
 myself.”
 “well, then,” answered father dennet, “a holy brother came to visit the
 sacristan at saint edmund's—a sort of hedge-priest is the visitor,
 and kills half the deer that are stolen in the forest, who loves the
 tinkling of a pint-pot better than the sacring-bell, and deems a flitch of
 bacon worth ten of his breviary; for the rest, a good fellow and a merry,
 who will flourish a quarter-staff, draw a bow, and dance a cheshire round,
 with e'er a man in yorkshire.”
 “that last part of thy speech, dennet,” said the minstrel, “has saved thee
 a rib or twain.”
 “tush, man, i fear him not,” said dennet; “i am somewhat old and stiff,
 but when i fought for the bell and ram at doncaster—”
 “but the story—the story, my friend,” again said the minstrel.
 “why, the tale is but this—athelstane of coningsburgh was buried at
 saint edmund's.”
 “that's a lie, and a loud one,” said the friar, “for i saw him borne to
 his own castle of coningsburgh.”
 “nay, then, e'en tell the story yourself, my masters,” said dennet,
 turning sulky at these repeated contradictions; and it was with some
 difficulty that the boor could be prevailed on, by the request of his
 comrade and the minstrel, to renew his tale.—“these two 'sober'
 friars,” said he at length, “since this reverend man will needs have them
 such, had continued drinking good ale, and wine, and what not, for the
 best part for a summer's day, when they were aroused by a deep groan, and
