 age of six yesterday.”
 “themistocleus,” went on the father, turning to his first-born, who was
 engaged in striving to free his chin from the bib with which the footman
 had encircled it. on hearing this distinctly greek name (to which, for
 some unknown reason, manilov always appended the termination “eus”),
 chichikov raised his eyebrows a little, but hastened, the next moment, to
 restore his face to a more befitting expression.
 “themistocleus,” repeated the father, “tell me which is the finest city in
 france.”
 upon this the tutor concentrated his attention upon themistocleus, and
 appeared to be trying hard to catch his eye. only when themistocleus had
 muttered “paris” did the preceptor grow calmer, and nod his head.
 “and which is the finest city in russia?” continued manilov.
 again the tutor’s attitude became wholly one of concentration.
 “st. petersburg,” replied themistocleus.
 “and what other city?”
 “moscow,” responded the boy.
 “clever little dear!” burst out chichikov, turning with an air of surprise
 to the father. “indeed, i feel bound to say that the child evinces the
 greatest possible potentialities.”
 “you do not know him fully,” replied the delighted manilov. “the amount of
 sharpness which he possesses is extraordinary. our younger one, alkid, is
 not so quick; whereas his brother—well, no matter what he may happen
 upon (whether upon a cowbug or upon a water-beetle or upon anything else),
 his little eyes begin jumping out of his head, and he runs to catch the
 thing, and to inspect it. for him i am reserving a diplomatic post.
 themistocleus,” added the father, again turning to his son, “do you wish
 to become an ambassador?”
 “yes, i do,” replied themistocleus, chewing a piece of bread and wagging
 his head from side to side.
 at this moment the lacquey who had been standing behind the future
 ambassador wiped the latter’s nose; and well it was that he did so, since
 otherwise an inelegant and superfluous drop would have been added to the
 soup. after that the conversation turned upon the joys of a quiet life—though
 occasionally it was interrupted by remarks from the hostess on the subject
 of acting and actors. meanwhile the tutor kept his eyes fixed upon the
 speakers’ faces; and whenever he noticed that they were on the point of
 laughing he at once opened his mouth, and laughed with enthusiasm.
 probably he was a man of grateful heart who wished to repay his employers
 for the good treatment which he had received. once, however, his features
 assumed a look of grimness as, fixing his eyes upon his vis-a-vis, the
 boys, he tapped sternly upon the table. this happened at a juncture when
 themistocleus had bitten alkid on the ear, and the said alkid, with
 frowning eyes and open mouth, was preparing himself to sob in piteous
 fashion; until, recognising that for such a proceeding he might possibly
 be deprived of his plate, he hastened to restore his mouth to its original
 expression, and fell tearfully to gnawing a mutton bone—the grease
 from which had soon covered his cheeks.
 every now and again the hostess would turn to chichikov with the words,
 “you are eating nothing—you have indeed taken little;” but
 invariably her guest replied: “thank you, i have had more than enough. a
 pleasant conversation is worth all the dishes in the world.”
 at length the company rose from table. manilov was in high spirits, and,
 laying his hand upon his guest’s shoulder, was on the point of conducting
 him to the drawing-room, when suddenly chichikov intimated to him, with a
 meaning look, that he wished to speak to him on a very important matter.
 “that being so,” said manilov, “allow me to invite you into my study.” and
 he led the way to a small room which faced the blue of the forest. “this
 is my sanctum,” he added.
 “what a pleasant apartment!” remarked chichikov as he eyed it carefully.
 and, indeed, the room did not lack a certain attractiveness. the walls
 were painted a sort of blueish-grey colour, and the furniture consisted of
 four chairs, a settee, and a table—the latter of which bore a few
 sheets of writing-paper and the book of which i have before had occasion
 to speak. but the most prominent feature of the room was tobacco, which
 appeared in many different guises—in packets, in a tobacco jar, and
 in a loose heap strewn about the table. likewise, both window sills were
 studded with little heaps of ash, arranged, not without artifice, in rows
 of more or less tidiness. clearly smoking afforded the master of the house
 a frequent means of passing the time.
 “permit me to offer you a seat on this settee,” said manilov. “here you
 will be quieter than you would be in the drawing-room.”
 “but i should prefer to sit upon this chair.”
 “i cannot allow that,” objected the smiling manilov. “the settee is
 specially reserved for my guests. whether you choose or no, upon it you
 must sit.”
 accordingly chichikov obeyed.
 “and also let me hand you a pipe.”
 “no, i never smoke,” answered chichikov civilly, and with an assumed air
 of regret.
 “and why?” inquired manilov—equally civilly, but with a regret that
 was wholly genuine.
 “because i fear that i have never quite formed the habit, owing to my
 having heard that a pipe exercises a desiccating effect upon the system.”
 “then allow me to tell you that that is mere prejudice. nay, i would even
 go so far as to say that to smoke a pipe is a healthier practice than to
 take snuff. among its members our regiment numbered a lieutenant—a
 most excellent, well-educated fellow—who was simply incapable of
 removing his pipe from his mouth, whether at table or (pardon me) in other
 places. he is now forty, yet no man could enjoy better health than he has
 always done.”
 chichikov replied that such cases were common, since nature comprised many
 things which even the finest intellect could not compass.
 “but allow me to put to you a question,” he went on in a tone in which
 there was a strange—or, at all events, rather a strange—note.
 for some unknown reason, also, he glanced over his shoulder. for some
 equally unknown reason, manilov glanced over his.
 “how long is it,” inquired the guest, “since you last rendered a census
 return?”
 “oh, a long, long time. in fact, i cannot remember when it was.”
 “and since then have many of your serfs died?”
 “i do not know. to ascertain that i should need to ask my bailiff.
 footman, go and call the bailiff. i think he will be at home to-day.”
 before long the bailiff made his appearance. he was a man of under forty,
 clean-shaven, clad in a smock, and evidently used to a quiet life, seeing
 that his face was of that puffy fullness, and the skin encircling his
 slit-like eyes was of that sallow tint, which shows that the owner of
 those features is well acquainted with a feather bed. in a trice it could
 be seen that he had played his part in life as all such bailiffs do—that,
 originally a young serf of elementary education, he had married some
 agashka of a housekeeper or a mistress’s favourite, and then himself
 become housekeeper, and, subsequently, bailiff; after which he had
 proceeded according to the rules of his tribe—that is to say, he had
 consorted with and stood in with the more well-to-do serfs on the estate,
 and added the poorer ones to the list of forced payers of obrok, while
 himself leaving his bed at nine o’clock in the morning, and, when the
 samovar had been brought, drinking his tea at leisure.
 “look here, my good man,” said manilov. “how many of our serfs have died
 since the last census revision?”
 “how many of them have died? why, a great many.” the bailiff hiccoughed,
 and slapped his mouth lightly after doing so.
 “yes, i imagined that to be the case,” corroborated manilov. “in fact, a
 very great many serfs have died.” he turned to chichikov and repeated the
 words.
 “how many, for instance?” asked chichikov.
 “yes; how many?” re-echoed manilov.
 “how many?” re-echoed the bailiff. “well, no one knows the exact number,
 for no one has kept any account.”
 “quite so,” remarked manilov. “i supposed the death-rate to have been
 high, but was ignorant of its precise extent.”
 “then would you be so good as to have it computed for me?” said chichikov.
 “and also to have a detailed list of the deaths made out?”
 “yes, i will—a detailed list,” agreed manilov.
 “very well.”
 the bailiff departed.
 “for what purpose do you want it?” inquired manilov when the bailiff had
 gone.
 the question seemed to embarrass the guest, for in chichikov’s face there
 dawned a sort of tense expression, and it reddened as though its owner
 were striving to express something not easy to put into words. true
 enough, manilov was now destined to hear such strange and unexpected
 things as never before had greeted human ears.
 “you ask me,” said chichikov, “for what purpose i want the list. well, my
 purpose in wanting it is this—that i desire to purchase a few
 peasants.” and he broke off in a gulp.
 “but may i ask how you desire to purchase those peasants?” asked manilov.
 “with land, or merely as souls for transferment—that is to say, by
 themselves, and without any land?”
 “i want the peasants themselves only,” replied chichikov. “and i want dead
 ones at that.”
 “what?—excuse me, but i am a trifle deaf. really, your words sound
 most strange!”
 “all that i am proposing to do,” replied chichikov, “is to purchase the
 dead peasants who, at the last census, were returned by you as alive.”
 manilov dropped his pipe on the floor, and sat gaping. yes, the two
 friends who had just been discussing the joys of camaraderie sat staring
 at one another like the portraits which, of old, used to hang on opposite
 sides of a mirror. at length manilov picked up his pipe, and, while doing
 so, glanced covertly at chichikov to see whether there was any trace of a
 smile to be detected on his lips—whether, in short, he was joking.
 but nothing of the sort could be discerned. on the contrary, chichikov’s
 face looked graver than usual. next, manilov wondered whether, for some
 unknown reason, his guest had lost his wits; wherefore he spent some time
 in gazing at him with anxious intentness. but the guest’s eyes seemed
 clear—they contained no spark of the wild, restless fire which is
 apt to wander in the eyes of madmen. all was as it should be.
 consequently, in spite of manilov’s cogitations, he could think of nothing
 better to do than to sit letting a stream of tobacco smoke escape from his
 mouth.
 “so,” continued chichikov, “what i desire to know is whether you are
 willing to hand over to me—to resign—these actually
 non-living, but legally living, peasants; or whether you have any better
 proposal to make?”
 manilov felt too confused and confounded to do aught but continue staring
 at his interlocutor.
 “i think that you are disturbing yourself unnecessarily,” was chichikov’s
 next remark.
 “i? oh no! not at all!” stammered manilov. “only—pardon me—i
 do not quite comprehend you. you see, never has it fallen to my lot to
 acquire the brilliant polish which is, so to speak, manifest in your every
 movement. nor have i ever been able to attain the art of expressing myself
 well. consequently, although there is a possibility that in the—er—utterances
 which have just fallen from your lips there may lie something else
 concealed, it may equally be that—er—you have been pleased so
 to express yourself for the sake of the beauty of the terms wherein that
 expression found shape?”
 “oh, no,” asserted chichikov. “i mean what i say and no more. my reference
 to such of your pleasant souls as are dead was intended to be taken
 literally.”
 manilov still felt at a loss—though he was conscious that he must do
 something, he must propound some question. but what question? the devil
 alone knew! in the end he merely expelled some more tobacco smoke—this
 time from his nostrils as well as from his mouth.
 “so,” went on chichikov, “if no obstacle stands in the way, we might as
 well proceed to the completion of the purchase.”
 “what? of the purchase of the dead souls?”
 “of the ‘dead’ souls? oh dear no! let us write them down as living ones,
 seeing that that is how they figure in the census returns. never do i
 permit myself to step outside the civil law, great though has been the
 harm which that rule has wrought me in my career. in my eyes an obligation
 is a sacred thing. in the presence of the law i am dumb.”
 these last words reassured manilov not a little: yet still the meaning of
 the affair remained to him a mystery. by way of answer, he fell to sucking
 at his pipe with such vehemence that at length the pipe began to gurgle
 like a bassoon. it was as though he had been seeking of it inspiration in
 the present unheard-of juncture. but the pipe only gurgled, et praeterea
 nihil.
 “perhaps you feel doubtful about the proposal?” said chichikov.
 “not at all,” replied manilov. “but you will, i know, excuse me if i say
 (and i say it out of no spirit of prejudice, nor yet as criticising
 yourself in any way)—you will, i know, excuse me if i say that
 possibly this—er—this, er, scheme of yours, this—er—transaction
 of yours, may fail altogether to accord with the civil statutes and
 provisions of the realm?”
 and manilov, with a slight gesture of the head, looked meaningly into
 chichikov’s face, while displaying in his every feature, including his
 closely-compressed lips, such an expression of profundity as never before
 was seen on any human countenance—unless on that of some
 particularly sapient minister of state who is debating some particularly
 abstruse problem.
 nevertheless chichikov rejoined that the kind of scheme or transaction
 which he had adumbrated in no way clashed with the civil statutes and
 provisions of russia; to which he added that the treasury would even
 benefit by the enterprise, seeing it would draw therefrom the usual legal
 percentage.
 “what, then, do you propose?” asked manilov.
 “i propose only what is above-board, and nothing else.”
 “then, that being so, it is another matter, and i have nothing to urge
 against it,” said manilov, apparently reassured to the full.
 “very well,” remarked chichikov. “then we need only to agree as to the
 price.”
 “as to the price?” began manilov, and then stopped. presently he went on:
 “surely you cannot suppose me capable of taking money for souls which, in
 one sense at least, have completed their existence? seeing that this
 fantastic whim of yours (if i may so call it?) has seized upon you to the
 extent that it has, i, on my side, shall be ready to surrender to you
 those souls unconditionally, and to charge myself with the whole expenses
 of the sale.”
 i should be greatly to blame if i were to omit that, as soon as manilov
 had pronounced these words, the face of his guest became replete with
 satisfaction. indeed, grave and prudent a man though chichikov was, he had
 much ado to refrain from executing a leap that would have done credit to a
 goat (an animal which, as we all know, finds itself moved to such
 exertions only during moments of the most ecstatic joy). nevertheless the
 guest did at least execute such a convulsive shuffle that the material
 with which the cushions of the chair were covered came apart, and manilov
 gazed at him with some misgiving. finally chichikov’s gratitude led him to
 plunge into a stream of acknowledgement of a vehemence which caused his
 host to grow confused, to blush, to shake his head in deprecation, and to
 end by declaring that the concession was nothing, and that, his one desire
 being to manifest the dictates of his heart and the psychic magnetism
 which his friend exercised, he, in short, looked upon the dead souls as so
 much worthless rubbish.
 “not at all,” replied chichikov, pressing his hand; after which he heaved
 a profound sigh. indeed, he seemed in the right mood for outpourings of
 the heart, for he continued—not without a ring of emotion in his
 tone: “if you but knew the service which you have rendered to an
 apparently insignificant individual who is devoid both of family and
 kindred! for what have i not suffered in my time—i, a drifting
 barque amid the tempestuous billows of life? what harryings, what
 persecutions, have i not known? of what grief have i not tasted? and why?
 simply because i have ever kept the truth in view, because ever i have
 preserved inviolate an unsullied conscience, because ever i have stretched
 out a helping hand to the defenceless widow and the hapless orphan!” after
 which outpouring chichikov pulled out his handkerchief, and wiped away a
 brimming tear.
 manilov’s heart was moved to the core. again and again did the two friends
 press one another’s hands in silence as they gazed into one another’s
 tear-filled eyes. indeed, manilov could not let go our hero’s hand, but
 clasped it with such warmth that the hero in question began to feel
 himself at a loss how best to wrench it free: until, quietly withdrawing
 it, he observed that to have the purchase completed as speedily as
 possible would not be a bad thing; wherefore he himself would at once
 return to the town to arrange matters. taking up his hat, therefore, he
 rose to make his adieus.
 “what? are you departing already?” said manilov, suddenly recovering
 himself, and experiencing a sense of misgiving. at that moment his wife
 sailed into the room.
 “is paul ivanovitch leaving us so soon, dearest lizanka?” she said with an
 air of regret.
 “yes. surely it must be that we have wearied him?” her spouse replied.
 “by no means,” asserted chichikov, pressing his hand to his heart. “in
 this breast, madam, will abide for ever the pleasant memory of the time
 which i have spent with you. believe me, i could conceive of no greater
 blessing than to reside, if not under the same roof as yourselves, at all
 events in your immediate neighbourhood.”
 “indeed!” exclaimed manilov, greatly pleased with the idea. “how splendid
 it would be if you did come to reside under our roof, so that we could
 recline under an elm tree together, and talk philosophy, and delve to the
 very root of things!”
 “yes, it would be a paradisaical existence!” agreed chichikov with a sigh.
 nevertheless he shook hands with madame. “farewell, sudarina,” he said.
 “and farewell to you, my esteemed host. do not forget what i have
 requested you to do.”
 “rest assured that i will not,” responded manilov. “only for a couple of
 days will you and i be parted from one another.”
 with that the party moved into the drawing-room.
 “farewell, dearest children,” chichikov went on as he caught sight of
 alkid and themistocleus, who were playing with a wooden hussar which
 lacked both a nose and one arm. “farewell, dearest pets. pardon me for
 having brought you no presents, but, to tell you the truth, i was not,
 until my visit, aware of your existence. however, now that i shall be
 coming again, i will not fail to bring you gifts. themistocleus, to you i
 will bring a sword. you would like that, would you not?”
 “i should,” replied themistocleus.
 “and to you, alkid, i will bring a drum. that would suit you, would it
 not?” and he bowed in alkid’s direction.
 “zeth—a drum,” lisped the boy, hanging his head.
 “good! then a drum it shall be—such a beautiful drum! what a
 tur-r-r-ru-ing and a tra-ta-ta-ta-ing you will be able to kick up!
 farewell, my darling.” and, kissing the boy’s head, he turned to manilov
 and madame with the slight smile which one assumes before assuring parents
 of the guileless merits of their offspring.
 “but you had better stay, paul ivanovitch,” said the father as the trio
 stepped out on to the verandah. “see how the clouds are gathering!”
 “they are only small ones,” replied chichikov.
 “and you know your way to sobakevitch’s?”
 “no, i do not, and should be glad if you would direct me.”
 “if you like i will tell your coachman.” and in very civil fashion manilov
 did so, even going so far as to address the man in the second person
 plural. on hearing that he was to pass two turnings, and then to take a
 third, selifan remarked, “we shall get there all right, sir,” and
 chichikov departed amid a profound salvo of salutations and wavings of
 handkerchiefs on the part of his host and hostess, who raised themselves
 on tiptoe in their enthusiasm.
 for a long while manilov stood following the departing britchka with his
 eyes. in fact, he continued to smoke his pipe and gaze after the vehicle
 even when it had become lost to view. then he re-entered the drawing-room,
 seated himself upon a chair, and surrendered his mind to the thought that
 he had shown his guest most excellent entertainment. next, his mind passed
 imperceptibly to other matters, until at last it lost itself god only
 knows where. he thought of the amenities of a life, of friendship, and of
 how nice it would be to live with a comrade on, say, the bank of some
 river, and to span the river with a bridge of his own, and to build an
 enormous mansion with a facade lofty enough even to afford a view to
 moscow. on that facade he and his wife and friend would drink afternoon
 tea in the open air, and discuss interesting subjects; after which, in a
 fine carriage, they would drive to some reunion or other, where with their
 pleasant manners they would so charm the company that the imperial
 government, on learning of their merits, would raise the pair to the grade
 of general or god knows what—that is to say, to heights whereof even
 manilov himself could form no idea. then suddenly chichikov’s
 extraordinary request interrupted the dreamer’s reflections, and he found
 his brain powerless to digest it, seeing that, turn and turn the matter
 about as he might, he could not properly explain its bearing. smoking his
 pipe, he sat where he was until supper time.
 meanwhile, chichikov, seated in his britchka and bowling along the
 turnpike, was feeling greatly pleased with himself. from the preceding
 chapter the reader will have gathered the principal subject of his bent
 and inclinations: wherefore it is no matter for wonder that his body and
 his soul had ended by becoming wholly immersed therein. to all appearances
 the thoughts, the calculations, and the projects which were now reflected
 in his face partook of a pleasant nature, since momentarily they kept
 leaving behind them a satisfied smile. indeed, so engrossed was he that he
 never noticed that his coachman, elated with the hospitality of manilov’s
 domestics, was making remarks of a didactic nature to the off horse of the
 troika ,
 a skewbald. this skewbald was a knowing animal, and made only a show of
 pulling; whereas its comrades, the middle horse (a bay, and known as the
 assessor, owing to his having been acquired from a gentleman of that rank)
 and the near horse (a roan), would do their work gallantly, and even
 evince in their eyes the pleasure which they derived from their exertions.
 “ah, you rascal, you rascal! i’ll get the better of you!” ejaculated
 selifan as he sat up and gave the lazy one a cut with his whip. “you know
 your business all right, you german pantaloon! the bay is a good fellow,
 and does his duty, and i will give him a bit over his feed, for he is a
 horse to be respected; and the assessor too is a good horse. but what are
 you shaking your ears for? you are a fool, so just mind when you’re spoken
 to. ‘tis good advice i’m giving you, you blockhead. ah! you can travel
 when you like.” and he gave the animal another cut, and then shouted to
 the trio, “gee up, my beauties!” and drew his whip gently across the backs
 of the skewbald’s comrades—not as a punishment, but as a sign of his
 approval. that done, he addressed himself to the skewbald again.
 “do you think,” he cried, “that i don’t see what you are doing? you can
 behave quite decently when you like, and make a man respect you.”
 with that he fell to recalling certain reminiscences.
 “they were nice folk, those folk at the gentleman’s yonder,” he mused. “i
 do love a chat with a man when he is a good sort. with a man of that kind
 i am always hail-fellow-well-met, and glad to drink a glass of tea with
 him, or to eat a biscuit. one can’t help respecting a decent fellow. for
 instance, this gentleman of mine—why, every one looks up to him, for
 he has been in the government’s service, and is a collegiate councillor.”
 thus soliloquising, he passed to more remote abstractions; until, had
 chichikov been listening, he would have learnt a number of interesting
 details concerning himself. however, his thoughts were wholly occupied
 with his own subject, so much so that not until a loud clap of thunder
 awoke him from his reverie did he glance around him. the sky was
 completely covered with clouds, and the dusty turnpike beginning to be
 sprinkled with drops of rain. at length a second and a nearer and a louder
 peal resounded, and the rain descended as from a bucket. falling
 slantwise, it beat upon one side of the basketwork of the tilt until the
 splashings began to spurt into his face, and he found himself forced to
 draw the curtains (fitted with circular openings through which to obtain a
 glimpse of the wayside view), and to shout to selifan to quicken his pace.
 upon that the coachman, interrupted in the middle of his harangue,
 bethought him that no time was to be lost; wherefore, extracting from
 under the box-seat a piece of old blanket, he covered over his sleeves,
 resumed the reins, and cheered on his threefold team (which, it may be
 said, had so completely succumbed to the influence of the pleasant
 lassitude induced by selifan’s discourse that it had taken to scarcely
 placing one leg before the other). unfortunately, selifan could not
 clearly remember whether two turnings had been passed or three. indeed, on
 collecting his faculties, and dimly recalling the lie of the road, he
 became filled with a shrewd suspicion that a very large number of turnings
 had been passed. but since, at moments which call for a hasty decision, a
 russian is quick to discover what may conceivably be the best course to
 take, our coachman put away from him all ulterior reasoning, and, turning
 to the right at the next cross-road, shouted, “hi, my beauties!” and set
 off at a gallop. never for a moment did he stop to think whither the road
 might lead him!
 it was long before the clouds had discharged their burden, and, meanwhile,
 the dust on the road became kneaded into mire, and the horses’ task of
 pulling the britchka heavier and heavier. also, chichikov had taken alarm
 at his continued failure to catch sight of sobakevitch’s country house.
 according to his calculations, it ought to have been reached long ago. he
 gazed about him on every side, but the darkness was too dense for the eye
 to pierce.
 “selifan!” he exclaimed, leaning forward in the britchka.
 “what is it, barin?” replied the coachman.
 “can you see the country house anywhere?”
 “no, barin.” after which, with a flourish of the whip, the man broke into
 a sort of endless, drawling song. in that song everything had a place. by
 “everything” i mean both the various encouraging and stimulating cries
 with which russian folk urge on their horses, and a random, unpremeditated
 selection of adjectives.
 meanwhile chichikov began to notice that the britchka was swaying
 violently, and dealing him occasional bumps. consequently he suspected
 that it had left the road and was being dragged over a ploughed field.
 upon selifan’s mind there appeared to have dawned a similar inkling, for
 he had ceased to hold forth.
 “you rascal, what road are you following?” inquired chichikov.
 “i don’t know,” retorted the coachman. “what can a man do at a time of
 night when the darkness won’t let him even see his whip?” and as selifan
 spoke the vehicle tilted to an angle which left chichikov no choice but to
 hang on with hands and teeth. at length he realised the fact that selifan
 was drunk.
 “stop, stop, or you will upset us!” he shouted to the fellow.
 “no, no, barin,” replied selifan. “how could i upset you? to upset people
 is wrong. i know that very well, and should never dream of such conduct.”
 here he started to turn the vehicle round a little—and kept on doing
 so until the britchka capsized on to its side, and chichikov landed in the
 mud on his hands and knees. fortunately selifan succeeded in stopping the
 horses, although they would have stopped of themselves, seeing that they
 were utterly worn out. this unforeseen catastrophe evidently astonished
 their driver. slipping from the box, he stood resting his hands against
 the side of the britchka, while chichikov tumbled and floundered about in
 the mud, in a vain endeavour to wriggle clear of the stuff.
 “ah, you!” said selifan meditatively to the britchka. “to think of
 upsetting us like this!”
 “you are as drunk as a lord!” exclaimed chichikov.
 “no, no, barin. drunk, indeed? why, i know my manners too well. a word or
 two with a friend—that is all that i have taken. any one may talk
 with a decent man when he meets him. there is nothing wrong in that. also,
 we had a snack together. there is nothing wrong in a snack—especially
 a snack with a decent man.”
 “what did i say to you when last you got drunk?” asked chichikov. “have
 you forgotten what i said then?”
 “no, no, barin. how could i forget it? i know what is what, and know that
 it is not right to get drunk. all that i have been having is a word or two
 with a decent man, for the reason that—”
 “well, if i lay the whip about you, you’ll know then how to talk to a
 decent fellow, i’ll warrant!”
 “as you please, barin,” replied the complacent selifan. “should you whip
 me, you will whip me, and i shall have nothing to complain of. why should
 you not whip me if i deserve it? ‘tis for you to do as you like. whippings
 are necessary sometimes, for a peasant often plays the fool, and
 discipline ought to be maintained. if i have deserved it, beat me. why
 should you not?”
 this reasoning seemed, at the moment, irrefutable, and chichikov said
 nothing more. fortunately fate had decided to take pity on the pair, for
 from afar their ears caught the barking of a dog. plucking up courage,
 chichikov gave orders for the britchka to be righted, and the horses to be
 urged forward; and since a russian driver has at least this merit, that,
 owing to a keen sense of smell being able to take the place of eyesight,
 he can, if necessary, drive at random and yet reach a destination of some
 sort, selifan succeeded, though powerless to discern a single object, in
 directing his steeds to a country house near by, and that with such a
 certainty of instinct that it was not until the shafts had collided with a
 garden wall, and thereby made it clear that to proceed another pace was
 impossible, that he stopped. all that chichikov could discern through the
 thick veil of pouring rain was something which resembled a verandah. so he
 dispatched selifan to search for the entrance gates, and that process
 would have lasted indefinitely had it not been shortened by the
 circumstance that, in russia, the place of a swiss footman is frequently
 taken by watchdogs; of which animals a number now proclaimed the
 travellers’ presence so loudly that chichikov found himself forced to stop
 his ears. next, a light gleamed in one of the windows, and filtered in a
 thin stream to the garden wall—thus revealing the whereabouts of the
 entrance gates; whereupon selifan fell to knocking at the gates until the
 bolts of the house door were withdrawn and there issued therefrom a figure
 clad in a rough cloak.
 “who is that knocking? what have you come for?” shouted the hoarse voice
 of an elderly woman.
 “we are travellers, good mother,” said chichikov. “pray allow us to spend
 the night here.”
 “out upon you for a pair of gadabouts!” retorted the old woman. “a fine
 time of night to be arriving! we don’t keep an hotel, mind you. this is a
 lady’s residence.”
 “but what are we to do, mother? we have lost our way, and cannot spend the
 night out of doors in such weather.”
 “no, we cannot. the night is dark and cold,” added selifan.
 “hold your tongue, you fool!” exclaimed chichikov.
 “who are you, then?” inquired the old woman.
 “a dvorianin , good mother.”
 somehow the word dvorianin seemed to give the old woman food for thought.
 “wait a moment,” she said, “and i will tell the mistress.”
 two minutes later she returned with a lantern in her hand, the gates were
 opened, and a light glimmered in a second window. entering the courtyard,
 the britchka halted before a moderate-sized mansion. the darkness did not
 permit of very accurate observation being made, but, apparently, the
 windows only of one-half of the building were illuminated, while a
 quagmire in front of the door reflected the beams from the same. meanwhile
 the rain continued to beat sonorously down upon the wooden roof, and could
 be heard trickling into a water butt; nor for a single moment did the dogs
 cease to bark with all the strength of their lungs. one of them, throwing
 up its head, kept venting a howl of such energy and duration that the
 animal seemed to be howling for a handsome wager; while another, cutting
 in between the yelpings of the first animal, kept restlessly reiterating,
 like a postman’s bell, the notes of a very young puppy. finally, an old
 hound which appeared to be gifted with a peculiarly robust temperament
 kept supplying the part of contrabasso, so that his growls resembled the
 rumbling of a bass singer when a chorus is in full cry, and the tenors are
 rising on tiptoe in their efforts to compass a particularly high note, and
 the whole body of choristers are wagging their heads before approaching a
 climax, and this contrabasso alone is tucking his bearded chin into his
 collar, and sinking almost to a squatting posture on the floor, in order
 to produce a note which shall cause the windows to shiver and their panes
 to crack. naturally, from a canine chorus of such executants it might
 reasonably be inferred that the establishment was one of the utmost
 respectability. to that, however, our damp, cold hero gave not a thought,
 for all his mind was fixed upon bed. indeed, the britchka had hardly come
 to a standstill before he leapt out upon the doorstep, missed his footing,
 and came within an ace of falling. to meet him there issued a female
 younger than the first, but very closely resembling her; and on his being
 conducted to the parlour, a couple of glances showed him that the room was
 hung with old striped curtains, and ornamented with pictures of birds and
 small, antique mirrors—the latter set in dark frames which were
 carved to resemble scrolls of foliage. behind each mirror was stuck either
 a letter or an old pack of cards or a stocking, while on the wall hung a
 clock with a flowered dial. more, however, chichikov could not discern,
 for his eyelids were as heavy as though smeared with treacle. presently
 the lady of the house herself entered—an elderly woman in a sort of
 nightcap (hastily put on) and a flannel neck wrap. she belonged to that
 class of lady landowners who are for ever lamenting failures of the
 harvest and their losses thereby; to the class who, drooping their heads
 despondently, are all the while stuffing money into striped purses, which
 they keep hoarded in the drawers of cupboards. into one purse they will
 stuff rouble pieces, into another half roubles, and into a third
 tchetvertachki , although from their mien you
 would suppose that the cupboard contained only linen and nightshirts and
 skeins of wool and the piece of shabby material which is destined—should
 the old gown become scorched during the baking of holiday cakes and other
 dainties, or should it fall into pieces of itself—to become
 converted into a new dress. but the gown never does get burnt or wear out,
 for the reason that the lady is too careful; wherefore the piece of shabby
 material reposes in its unmade-up condition until the priest advises that
 it be given to the niece of some widowed sister, together with a quantity
 of other such rubbish.
 chichikov apologised for having disturbed the household with his
 unexpected arrival.
 “not at all, not at all,” replied the lady. “but in what dreadful weather
 god has brought you hither! what wind and what rain! you could not help
 losing your way. pray excuse us for being unable to make better
 preparations for you at this time of night.”
 suddenly there broke in upon the hostess’ words the sound of a strange
 hissing, a sound so loud that the guest started in alarm, and the more so
 seeing that it increased until the room seemed filled with adders. on
 glancing upwards, however, he recovered his composure, for he perceived
 the sound to be emanating from the clock, which appeared to be in a mind
 to strike. to the hissing sound there succeeded a wheezing one, until,
 putting forth its best efforts, the thing struck two with as much clatter
 as though some one had been hitting an iron pot with a cudgel. that done,
 the pendulum returned to its right-left, right-left oscillation.
 chichikov thanked his hostess kindly, and said that he needed nothing, and
 she must not put herself about: only for rest was he longing—though
 also he should like to know whither he had arrived, and whether the
 distance to the country house of land-owner sobakevitch was anything very
 great. to this the lady replied that she had never so much as heard the
 name, since no gentleman of the name resided in the locality.
 “but at least you are acquainted with landowner manilov?” continued
 chichikov.
 “no. who is he?”
 “another landed proprietor, madam.”
 “well, neither have i heard of him. no such landowner lives hereabouts.”
 “then who are your local landowners?”
 “bobrov, svinin, kanapatiev, khapakin, trepakin, and plieshakov.”
 “are they rich men?”
 “no, none of them. one of them may own twenty souls, and another thirty,
 but of gentry who own a hundred there are none.”
 chichikov reflected that he had indeed fallen into an aristocratic
 wilderness!
 “at all events, is the town far away?” he inquired.
 “about sixty versts. how sorry i am that i have nothing for you to eat!
 should you care to drink some tea?”
 “i thank you, good mother, but i require nothing beyond a bed.”
 “well, after such a journey you must indeed be needing rest, so you shall
 lie upon this sofa. fetinia, bring a quilt and some pillows and sheets.
 what weather god has sent us! and what dreadful thunder! ever since sunset
 i have had a candle burning before the ikon in my bedroom. my god! why,
 your back and sides are as muddy as a boar’s! however have you managed to
 get into such a state?”
 “that i am nothing worse than muddy is indeed fortunate, since, but for
 the almighty, i should have had my ribs broken.”
 “dear, dear! to think of all that you must have been through. had i not
 better wipe your back?”
 “i thank you, i thank you, but you need not trouble. merely be so good as
 to tell your maid to dry my clothes.”
 “do you hear that, fetinia?” said the hostess, turning to a woman who was
 engaged in dragging in a feather bed and deluging the room with feathers.
 “take this coat and this vest, and, after drying them before the fire—just
 as we used to do for your late master—give them a good rub, and fold
 them up neatly.”
 “very well, mistress,” said fetinia, spreading some sheets over the bed,
 and arranging the pillows.
 “now your bed is ready for you,” said the hostess to chichikov.
 “good-night, dear sir. i wish you good-night. is there anything else that
 you require? perhaps you would like to have your heels tickled before
 retiring to rest? never could my late husband get to sleep without that
 having been done.”
 but the guest declined the proffered heel-tickling, and, on his hostess
 taking her departure, hastened to divest himself of his clothing, both
 upper and under, and to hand the garments to fetinia. she wished him
 good-night, and removed the wet trappings; after which he found himself
 alone. not without satisfaction did he eye his bed, which reached almost
 to the ceiling. clearly fetinia was a past mistress in the art of beating
 up such a couch, and, as the result, he had no sooner mounted it with the
 aid of a chair than it sank well-nigh to the floor, and the feathers,
 squeezed out of their proper confines, flew hither and thither into every
 corner of the apartment. nevertheless he extinguished the candle, covered
 himself over with the chintz quilt, snuggled down beneath it, and
 instantly fell asleep. next day it was late in the morning before he
 awoke. through the window the sun was shining into his eyes, and the flies
 which, overnight, had been roosting quietly on the walls and ceiling now
 turned their attention to the visitor. one settled on his lip, another on
 his ear, a third hovered as though intending to lodge in his very eye, and
 a fourth had the temerity to alight just under his nostrils. in his drowsy
 condition he inhaled the latter insect, sneezed violently, and so returned
 to consciousness. he glanced around the room, and perceived that not all
 the pictures were representative of birds, since among them hung also a
 portrait of kutuzov  and an oil painting of an old
 man in a uniform with red facings such as were worn in the days of the
 emperor paul . at this moment the clock
 uttered its usual hissing sound, and struck ten, while a woman’s face
 peered in at the door, but at once withdrew, for the reason that, with the
 object of sleeping as well as possible, chichikov had removed every stitch
 of his clothing. somehow the face seemed to him familiar, and he set
 himself to recall whose it could be. at length he recollected that it was
 the face of his hostess. his clothes he found lying, clean and dry, beside
 him; so he dressed and approached the mirror, meanwhile sneezing again
 with such vehemence that a cock which happened at the moment to be near
 the window (which was situated at no great distance from the ground)
 chuckled a short, sharp phrase. probably it meant, in the bird’s alien
 tongue, “good morning to you!” chichikov retorted by calling the bird a
 fool, and then himself approached the window to look at the view. it
 appeared to comprise a poulterer’s premises. at all events, the narrow
 yard in front of the window was full of poultry and other domestic
 creatures—of game fowls and barn door fowls, with, among them, a
 cock which strutted with measured gait, and kept shaking its comb, and
 tilting its head as though it were trying to listen to something. also, a
 sow and her family were helping to grace the scene. first, she rooted
 among a heap of litter; then, in passing, she ate up a young pullet;
 lastly, she proceeded carelessly to munch some pieces of melon rind. to
 this small yard or poultry-run a length of planking served as a fence,
 while beyond it lay a kitchen garden containing cabbages, onions,
 potatoes, beetroots, and other household vegetables. also, the garden
 contained a few stray fruit trees that were covered with netting to
 protect them from the magpies and sparrows; flocks of which were even then
 wheeling and darting from one spot to another. for the same reason a
 number of scarecrows with outstretched arms stood reared on long poles,
 with, surmounting one of the figures, a cast-off cap of the hostess’s.
 beyond the garden again there stood a number of peasants’ huts. though
 scattered, instead of being arranged in regular rows, these appeared to
 chichikov’s eye to comprise well-to-do inhabitants, since all rotten
 planks in their roofing had been replaced with new ones, and none of their
 doors were askew, and such of their tiltsheds as faced him evinced
 evidence of a presence of a spare waggon—in some cases almost a new
 one.
 “this lady owns by no means a poor village,” said chichikov to himself;
 wherefore he decided then and there to have a talk with his hostess, and
 to cultivate her closer acquaintance. accordingly he peeped through the
 chink of the door whence her head had recently protruded, and, on seeing
 her seated at a tea table, entered and greeted her with a cheerful, kindly
 smile.
 “good morning, dear sir,” she responded as she rose. “how have you slept?”
 she was dressed in better style than she had been on the previous evening.
 that is to say, she was now wearing a gown of some dark colour, and lacked
 her nightcap, and had swathed her neck in something stiff.
 “i have slept exceedingly well,” replied chichikov, seating himself upon a
 chair. “and how are you, good madam?”
 “but poorly, my dear sir.”
 “and why so?”
 “because i cannot sleep. a pain has taken me in my middle, and my legs,
 from the ankles upwards, are aching as though they were broken.”
 “that will pass, that will pass, good mother. you must pay no attention to
 it.”
 “god grant that it may pass. however, i have been rubbing myself with lard
 and turpentine. what sort of tea will you take? in this jar i have some of
 the scented kind.”
 “excellent, good mother! then i will take that.”
 probably the reader will have noticed that, for all his expressions of
 solicitude, chichikov’s tone towards his hostess partook of a freer, a
 more unceremonious, nature than that which he had adopted towards madam
 manilov. and here i should like to assert that, howsoever much, in certain
 respects, we russians may be surpassed by foreigners, at least we surpass
 them in adroitness of manner. in fact the various shades and subtleties of
 our social intercourse defy enumeration. a frenchman or a german would be
 incapable of envisaging and understanding all its peculiarities and
 differences, for his tone in speaking to a millionaire differs but little
 from that which he employs towards a small tobacconist—and that in
 spite of the circumstance that he is accustomed to cringe before the
 former. with us, however, things are different. in russian society there
 exist clever folk who can speak in one manner to a landowner possessed of
 two hundred peasant souls, and in another to a landowner possessed of
 three hundred, and in another to a landowner possessed of five hundred. in
 short, up to the number of a million souls the russian will have ready for
 each landowner a suitable mode of address. for example, suppose that
 somewhere there exists a government office, and that in that office there
 exists a director. i would beg of you to contemplate him as he sits among
 his myrmidons. sheer nervousness will prevent you from uttering a word in
 his presence, so great are the pride and superiority depicted on his
 countenance. also, were you to sketch him, you would be sketching a
 veritable prometheus, for his glance is as that of an eagle, and he walks
 with measured, stately stride. yet no sooner will the eagle have left the
 room to seek the study of his superior officer than he will go scurrying
 along (papers held close to his nose) like any partridge. but in society,
 and at the evening party (should the rest of those present be of lesser
 rank than himself) the prometheus will once more become prometheus, and
 the man who stands a step below him will treat him in a way never dreamt
 of by ovid, seeing that each fly is of lesser account than its superior
 fly, and becomes, in the presence of the latter, even as a grain of sand.
 “surely that is not ivan petrovitch?” you will say of such and such a man
 as you regard him. “ivan petrovitch is tall, whereas this man is small and
 spare. ivan petrovitch has a loud, deep voice, and never smiles, whereas
 this man (whoever he may be) is twittering like a sparrow, and smiling all
 the time.” yet approach and take a good look at the fellow and you will
 see that is is ivan petrovitch. “alack, alack!” will be the only remark
 you can make.
 let us return to our characters in real life. we have seen that, on this
 occasion, chichikov decided to dispense with ceremony; wherefore, taking
 up the teapot, he went on as follows:
 “you have a nice little village here, madam. how many souls does it
 contain?”
 “a little less than eighty, dear sir. but the times are hard, and i have
 lost a great deal through last year’s harvest having proved a failure.”
 “but your peasants look fine, strong fellows. may i enquire your name?
 through arriving so late at night i have quite lost my wits.”
 “korobotchka, the widow of a collegiate secretary.”
 “i humbly thank you. and your christian name and patronymic?”
 “nastasia petrovna.”
 “nastasia petrovna! those are excellent names. i have a maternal aunt
 named like yourself.”
 “and your name?” queried the lady. “may i take it that you are a
 government assessor?”
 “no, madam,” replied chichikov with a smile. “i am not an assessor, but a
 traveller on private business.”
 “then you must be a buyer of produce? how i regret that i have sold my
 honey so cheaply to other buyers! otherwise you might have bought it, dear
 sir.”
 “i never buy honey.”
 “then what do you buy, pray? hemp? i have a little of that by me, but not
 more than half a pood  or so.”
 “no, madam. it is in other wares that i deal. tell me, have you, of late
 years, lost many of your peasants by death?”
 “yes; no fewer than eighteen,” responded the old lady with a sigh. “such a
 fine lot, too—all good workers! true, others have since grown up,
 but of what use are they? mere striplings. when the assessor last called
 upon me i could have wept; for, though those workmen of mine are dead, i
 have to keep on paying for them as though they were still alive! and only
 last week my blacksmith got burnt to death! such a clever hand at his
 trade he was!”
 “what? a fire occurred at your place?”
 “no, no, god preserve us all! it was not so bad as that. you must
 understand that the blacksmith set himself on fire—he got set on
 fire in his bowels through overdrinking. yes, all of a sudden there burst
 from him a blue flame, and he smouldered and smouldered until he had
 turned as black as a piece of charcoal! yet what a clever blacksmith he
 was! and now i have no horses to drive out with, for there is no one to
 shoe them.”
 “in everything the will of god, madam,” said chichikov with a sigh.
 “against the divine wisdom it is not for us to rebel. pray hand them over
 to me, nastasia petrovna.”
 “hand over whom?”
 “the dead peasants.”
 “but how could i do that?”
 “quite simply. sell them to me, and i will give you some money in
 exchange.”
 “but how am i to sell them to you? i scarcely understand what you mean. am
 i to dig them up again from the ground?”
 chichikov perceived that the old lady was altogether at sea, and that he
 must explain the matter; wherefore in a few words he informed her that the
 transfer or purchase of the souls in question would take place merely on
 paper—that the said souls would be listed as still alive.
 “and what good would they be to you?” asked his hostess, staring at him
 with her eyes distended.
 “that is my affair.”
 “but they are dead souls.”
 “who said they were not? the mere fact of their being dead entails upon
 you a loss as dead as the souls, for you have to continue paying tax upon
 them, whereas my plan is to relieve you both of the tax and of the
 resultant trouble. now do you understand? and i will not only do as i say,
 but also hand you over fifteen roubles per soul. is that clear enough?”
 “yes—but i do not know,” said his hostess diffidently. “you see,
 never before have i sold dead souls.”
 “quite so. it would be a surprising thing if you had. but surely you do
 not think that these dead souls are in the least worth keeping?”
 “oh, no, indeed! why should they be worth keeping? i am sure they are not
 so. the only thing which troubles me is the fact that they are dead.”
 “she seems a truly obstinate old woman!” was chichikov’s inward comment.
 “look here, madam,” he added aloud. “you reason well, but you are simply
 ruining yourself by continuing to pay the tax upon dead souls as though
 they were still alive.”
 “oh, good sir, do not speak of it!” the lady exclaimed. “three weeks ago i
 took a hundred and fifty roubles to that assessor, and buttered him up,
 and—”
 “then you see how it is, do you not? remember that, according to my plan,
 you will never again have to butter up the assessor, seeing that it will
 be i who will be paying for those peasants—i, not you, for i
 shall have taken over the dues upon them, and have transferred them to
 myself as so many bona fide serfs. do you understand at last?”
 however, the old lady still communed with herself. she could see that the
 transaction would be to her advantage, yet it was one of such a novel and
 unprecedented nature that she was beginning to fear lest this purchaser of
 souls intended to cheat her. certainly he had come from god only knew
 where, and at the dead of night, too!
 “but, sir, i have never in my life sold dead folk—only living ones.
 three years ago i transferred two wenches to protopopov for a hundred
 roubles apiece, and he thanked me kindly, for they turned out splendid
 workers—able to make napkins or anything else.
 “yes, but with the living we have nothing to do, damn it! i am asking you
 only about dead folk.”
 “yes, yes, of course. but at first sight i felt afraid lest i should be
 incurring a loss—lest you should be wishing to outwit me, good sir.
 you see, the dead souls are worth rather more than you have offered for
 them.”
 “see here, madam. (what a woman it is!) how could they be worth more?
 think for yourself. they are so much loss to you—so much loss, do
 you understand? take any worthless, rubbishy article you like—a
 piece of old rag, for example. that rag will yet fetch its price, for it
 can be bought for paper-making. but these dead souls are good for nothing
 at all. can you name anything that they are good for?”
 “true, true—they are good for nothing. but what troubles me is the
 fact that they are dead.”
 “what a blockhead of a creature!” said chichikov to himself, for he was
 beginning to lose patience. “bless her heart, i may as well be going. she
 has thrown me into a perfect sweat, the cursed old shrew!”
 he took a handkerchief from his pocket, and wiped the perspiration from
 his brow. yet he need not have flown into such a passion. more than one
 respected statesman reveals himself, when confronted with a business
 matter, to be just such another as madam korobotchka, in that, once he has
 got an idea into his head, there is no getting it out of him—you may
 ply him with daylight-clear arguments, yet they will rebound from his
 brain as an india-rubber ball rebounds from a flagstone. nevertheless,
 wiping away the perspiration, chichikov resolved to try whether he could
 not bring her back to the road by another path.
 “madam,” he said, “either you are declining to understand what i say or
 you are talking for the mere sake of talking. if i hand you over some
 money—fifteen roubles for each soul, do you understand?—it is
 money, not something which can be picked up haphazard on the street. for
 instance, tell me how much you sold your honey for?”
 “for twelve roubles per pood.”
 “ah! then by those words, madam, you have laid a trifling sin upon your
 soul; for you did not sell the honey for twelve roubles.”
 “by the lord god i did!”
 “well, well! never mind. honey is only honey. now, you had collected that
 stuff, it may be, for a year, and with infinite care and labour. you had
 fussed after it, you had trotted to and fro, you had duly frozen out the
 bees, and you had fed them in the cellar throughout the winter. but these
 dead souls of which i speak are quite another matter, for in this case you
 have put forth no exertions—it was merely god’s will that they
 should leave the world, and thus decrease the personnel of your
 establishment. in the former case you received (so you allege) twelve
 roubles per pood for your labour; but in this case you will receive money
 for having done nothing at all. nor will you receive twelve roubles per
 item, but fifteen—and roubles not in silver, but roubles in good
 paper currency.”
 that these powerful inducements would certainly cause the old woman to
 yield chichikov had not a doubt.
 “true,” his hostess replied. “but how strangely business comes to me as a
 widow! perhaps i had better wait a little longer, seeing that other buyers
 might come along, and i might be able to compare prices.”
 “for shame, madam! for shame! think what you are saying. who else, i would
 ask, would care to buy those souls? what use could they be to any one?”
 “if that is so, they might come in useful to me,” mused the old woman
 aloud; after which she sat staring at chichikov with her mouth open and a
 face of nervous expectancy as to his possible rejoinder.
 “dead folk useful in a household!” he exclaimed. “why, what could you do
 with them? set them up on poles to frighten away the sparrows from your
 garden?”
 “the lord save us, but what things you say!” she ejaculated, crossing
 herself.
 “well, what could you do with them? by this time they are so much bones
 and earth. that is all there is left of them. their transfer to myself
 would be on paper only. come, come! at least give me an answer.”
 again the old woman communed with herself.
 “what are you thinking of, nastasia petrovna?” inquired chichikov.
 “i am thinking that i scarcely know what to do. perhaps i had better sell
 you some hemp?”
 “what do i want with hemp? pardon me, but just when i have made to you a
 different proposal altogether you begin fussing about hemp! hemp is hemp,
 and though i may want some when i next visit you, i should like to know
 what you have to say to the suggestion under discussion.”
 “well, i think it a very queer bargain. never have i heard of such a
 thing.”
 upon this chichikov lost all patience, upset his chair, and bid her go to
 the devil; of which personage even the mere mention terrified her
 extremely.
 “do not speak of him, i beg of you!” she cried, turning pale. “may god,
 rather, bless him! last night was the third night that he has appeared to
 me in a dream. you see, after saying my prayers, i bethought me of telling
 my fortune by the cards; and god must have sent him as a punishment. he
 looked so horrible, and had horns longer than a bull’s!”
 “i wonder you don’t see scores of devils in your dreams! merely out of
 christian charity he had come to you to say, ‘i perceive a poor widow
 going to rack and ruin, and likely soon to stand in danger of want.’ well,
 go to rack and ruin—yes, you and all your village together!”
 “the insults!” exclaimed the old woman, glancing at her visitor in terror.
 “i should think so!” continued chichikov. “indeed, i cannot find words to
 describe you. to say no more about it, you are like a dog in a manger. you
 don’t want to eat the hay yourself, yet you won’t let anyone else touch
 it. all that i am seeking to do is to purchase certain domestic products
 of yours, for the reason that i have certain government contracts to
 fulfil.” this last he added in passing, and without any ulterior motive,
 save that it came to him as a happy thought. nevertheless the mention of
 government contracts exercised a powerful influence upon nastasia
 petrovna, and she hastened to say in a tone that was almost supplicatory:
 “why should you be so angry with me? had i known that you were going to
 lose your temper in this way, i should never have discussed the matter.”
 “no wonder that i lose my temper! an egg too many is no great matter, yet
 it may prove exceedingly annoying.”
 “well, well, i will let you have the souls for fifteen roubles each. also,
 with regard to those contracts, do not forget me if at any time you should
 find yourself in need of rye-meal or buckwheat or groats or dead meat.”
 “no, i shall never forget you, madam!” he said, wiping his forehead, where
 three separate streams of perspiration were trickling down his face. then
 he asked her whether in the town she had any acquaintance or agent whom
 she could empower to complete the transference of the serfs, and to carry
 out whatsoever else might be necessary.
 “certainly,” replied madame korobotchka. “the son of our archpriest,
 father cyril, himself is a lawyer.”
 upon that chichikov begged her to accord the gentleman in question a power
 of attorney, while, to save extra trouble, he himself would then and there
 compose the requisite letter.
 “it would be a fine thing if he were to buy up all my meal and stock for
 the government,” thought madame to herself. “i must encourage him a
 little. there has been some dough standing ready since last night, so i
 will go and tell fetinia to try a few pancakes. also, it might be well to
 try him with an egg pie. we make then nicely here, and they do not take
 long in the making.”
 so she departed to translate her thoughts into action, as well as to
 supplement the pie with other products of the domestic cuisine; while, for
 his part, chichikov returned to the drawing-room where he had spent the
 night, in order to procure from his dispatch-box the necessary
 writing-paper. the room had now been set in order, the sumptuous feather
 bed removed, and a table set before the sofa. depositing his dispatch-box
 upon the table, he heaved a gentle sigh on becoming aware that he was so
 soaked with perspiration that he might almost have been dipped in a river.
 everything, from his shirt to his socks, was dripping. “may she starve to
 death, the cursed old harridan!” he ejaculated after a moment’s rest. then
 he opened his dispatch-box. in passing, i may say that i feel certain that
 at least some of my readers will be curious to know the contents and the
 internal arrangements of that receptacle. why should i not gratify their
 curiosity? to begin with, the centre of the box contained a soap-dish,
 with, disposed around it, six or seven compartments for razors. next came
 square partitions for a sand-box  and an
 inkstand, as well as (scooped out in their midst) a hollow of pens,
 sealing-wax, and anything else that required more room. lastly there were
 all sorts of little divisions, both with and without lids, for articles of
 a smaller nature, such as visiting cards, memorial cards, theatre tickets,
 and things which chichikov had laid by as souvenirs. this portion of the
 box could be taken out, and below it were both a space for manuscripts and
 a secret money-box—the latter made to draw out from the side of the
 receptacle.
 chichikov set to work to clean a pen, and then to write. presently his
 hostess entered the room.
 “what a beautiful box you have got, my dear sir!” she exclaimed as she
 took a seat beside him. “probably you bought it in moscow?”
 “yes—in moscow,” replied chichikov without interrupting his writing.
 “i thought so. one can get good things there. three years ago my sister
 brought me a few pairs of warm shoes for my sons, and they were such
 excellent articles! to this day my boys wear them. and what nice stamped
 paper you have!” (she had peered into the dispatch-box, where, sure
 enough, there lay a further store of the paper in question). “would you
 mind letting me have a sheet of it? i am without any at all, although i
 shall soon have to be presenting a plea to the land court, and possess not
 a morsel of paper to write it on.”
 upon this chichikov explained that the paper was not the sort proper for
 the purpose—that it was meant for serf-indenturing, and not for the
 framing of pleas. nevertheless, to quiet her, he gave her a sheet stamped
 to the value of a rouble. next, he handed her the letter to sign, and
 requested, in return, a list of her peasants. unfortunately, such a list
 had never been compiled, let alone any copies of it, and the only way in
 which she knew the peasants’ names was by heart. however, he told her to
 dictate them. some of the names greatly astonished our hero, so, still
 more, did the surnames. indeed, frequently, on hearing the latter, he had
 to pause before writing them down. especially did he halt before a certain
 “peter saveliev neuvazhai korito.” “what a string of titles!”
 involuntarily he ejaculated. to the christian name of another serf was
 appended “korovi kirpitch,” and to that of a third “koleso ivan.” however,
 at length the list was compiled, and he caught a deep breath; which latter
 proceeding caused him to catch also the attractive odour of something
 fried in fat.
 “i beseech you to have a morsel,” murmured his hostess. chichikov looked
 up, and saw that the table was spread with mushrooms, pies, and other
 viands.
 “try this freshly-made pie and an egg,” continued madame.
 chichikov did so, and having eaten more than half of what she offered him,
 praised the pie highly. indeed, it was a toothsome dish, and, after his
 difficulties and exertions with his hostess, it tasted even better than it
 might otherwise have done.
 “and also a few pancakes?” suggested madame.
 for answer chichikov folded three together, and, having dipped them in
 melted butter, consigned the lot to his mouth, and then wiped his mouth
 with a napkin. twice more was the process repeated, and then he requested
 his hostess to order the britchka to be got ready. in dispatching fetinia
 with the necessary instructions, she ordered her to return with a second
 batch of hot pancakes.
 “your pancakes are indeed splendid,” said chichikov, applying himself to
 the second consignment of fried dainties when they had arrived.
 “yes, we make them well here,” replied madame. “yet how unfortunate it is
 that the harvest should have proved so poor as to have prevented me from
 earning anything on my—but why should you be in such a hurry to
 depart, good sir?” she broke off on seeing chichikov reach for his cap.
 “the britchka is not yet ready.”
 “then it is being got so, madam, it is being got so, and i shall need a
 moment or two to pack my things.”
 “as you please, dear sir; but do not forget me in connection with those
 government contracts.”
 “no, i have said that never shall i forget you,” replied chichikov as he
 hurried into the hall.
 “and would you like to buy some lard?” continued his hostess, pursuing
 him.
 “lard? oh certainly. why not? only, only—i will do so another time.”
 “i shall have some ready at about christmas.”
 “quite so, madam. then i will buy anything and everything—the lard
 included.”
 “and perhaps you will be wanting also some feathers? i shall be having
 some for sale about st. philip’s day.”
 “very well, very well, madam.”
 “there you see!” she remarked as they stepped out on to the verandah. “the
 britchka is not yet ready.”
 “but it soon will be, it soon will be. only direct me to the main road.”
 “how am i to do that?” said madame. “‘twould puzzle a wise man to do so,
 for in these parts there are so many turnings. however, i will send a girl
 to guide you. you could find room for her on the box-seat, could you not?”
 “yes, of course.”
 “then i will send her. she knows the way thoroughly. only do not carry her
 off for good. already some traders have deprived me of one of my girls.”
 chichikov reassured his hostess on the point, and madame plucked up
 courage enough to scan, first of all, the housekeeper, who happened to be
 issuing from the storehouse with a bowl of honey, and, next, a young
 peasant who happened to be standing at the gates; and, while thus engaged,
 she became wholly absorbed in her domestic pursuits. but why pay her so
 much attention? the widow korobotchka, madame manilov, domestic life,
 non-domestic life—away with them all! how strangely are things
 compounded! in a trice may joy turn to sorrow, should one halt long enough
 over it: in a trice only god can say what ideas may strike one. you may
 fall even to thinking: “after all, did madame korobotchka stand so very
 low in the scale of human perfection? was there really such a very great
 gulf between her and madame manilov—between her and the madame
 manilov whom we have seen entrenched behind the walls of a genteel mansion
 in which there were a fine staircase of wrought metal and a number of rich
 carpets; the madame manilov who spent most of her time in yawning behind
 half-read books, and in hoping for a visit from some socially
 distinguished person in order that she might display her wit and carefully
 rehearsed thoughts—thoughts which had been de rigeur in town for a
 week past, yet which referred, not to what was going on in her household
 or on her estate—both of which properties were at odds and ends,
 owing to her ignorance of the art of managing them—but to the coming
 political revolution in france and the direction in which fashionable
 catholicism was supposed to be moving? but away with such things! why need
 we speak of them? yet how comes it that suddenly into the midst of our
 careless, frivolous, unthinking moments there may enter another, and a
 very different, tendency?—that the smile may not have left a human
 face before its owner will have radically changed his or her nature
 (though not his or her environment) with the result that the face will
 suddenly become lit with a radiance never before seen there?...
 “here is the britchka, here is the britchka!” exclaimed chichikov on
 perceiving that vehicle slowly advancing. “ah, you blockhead!” he went on
 to selifan. “why have you been loitering about? i suppose last night’s
 fumes have not yet left your brain?”
 to this selifan returned no reply.
 “good-bye, madam,” added the speaker. “but where is the girl whom you
 promised me?”
 “here, pelagea!” called the hostess to a wench of about eleven who was
 dressed in home-dyed garments and could boast of a pair of bare feet
 which, from a distance, might almost have been mistaken for boots, so
 encrusted were they with fresh mire. “here, pelagea! come and show this
 gentleman the way.”
 selifan helped the girl to ascend to the box-seat. placing one foot upon
 the step by which the gentry mounted, she covered the said step with mud,
 and then, ascending higher, attained the desired position beside the
 coachman. chichikov followed in her wake (causing the britchka to heel
 over with his weight as he did so), and then settled himself back into his
 place with an “all right! good-bye, madam!” as the horses moved away at a
 trot.
 selifan looked gloomy as he drove, but also very attentive to his
 business. this was invariably his custom when he had committed the fault
 of getting drunk. also, the horses looked unusually well-groomed. in
 particular, the collar on one of them had been neatly mended, although
 hitherto its state of dilapidation had been such as perennially to allow
 the stuffing to protrude through the leather. the silence preserved was
 well-nigh complete. merely flourishing his whip, selifan spoke to the team
 no word of instruction, although the skewbald was as ready as usual to
 listen to conversation of a didactic nature, seeing that at such times the
 reins hung loosely in the hands of the loquacious driver, and the whip
 wandered merely as a matter of form over the backs of the troika. this
 time, however, there could be heard issuing from selifan’s sullen lips
 only the uniformly unpleasant exclamation, “now then, you brutes! get on
 with you, get on with you!” the bay and the assessor too felt put out at
 not hearing themselves called “my pets” or “good lads”; while, in
 addition, the skewbald came in for some nasty cuts across his sleek and
 ample quarters. “what has put master out like this?” thought the animal as
 it shook its head. “heaven knows where he does not keep beating me—across
 the back, and even where i am tenderer still. yes, he keeps catching the
 whip in my ears, and lashing me under the belly.”
 “to the right, eh?” snapped selifan to the girl beside him as he pointed
 to a rain-soaked road which trended away through fresh green fields.
 “no, no,” she replied. “i will show you the road when the time comes.”
 “which way, then?” he asked again when they had proceeded a little
 further.
 “this way.” and she pointed to the road just mentioned.
 “get along with you!” retorted the coachman. “that does go to the right.
 you don’t know your right hand from your left.”
 the weather was fine, but the ground so excessively sodden that the wheels
 of the britchka collected mire until they had become caked as with a layer
 of felt, a circumstance which greatly increased the weight of the vehicle,
 and prevented it from clearing the neighbouring parishes before the
 afternoon was arrived. also, without the girl’s help the finding of the
 way would have been impossible, since roads wiggled away in every
 direction, like crabs released from a net, and, but for the assistance
 mentioned, selifan would have found himself left to his own devices.
 presently she pointed to a building ahead, with the words, “there is the
 main road.”
 “and what is the building?” asked selifan.
 “a tavern,” she said.
 “then we can get along by ourselves,” he observed. “do you get down, and
 be off home.”
 with that he stopped, and helped her to alight—muttering as he did
 so: “ah, you blackfooted creature!”
 chichikov added a copper groat, and she departed well pleased with her
 ride in the gentleman’s carriage.
 on reaching the tavern, chichikov called a halt. his reasons for this were
 twofold—namely, that he wanted to rest the horses, and that he
 himself desired some refreshment. in this connection the author feels
 bound to confess that the appetite and the capacity of such men are
 greatly to be envied. of those well-to-do folk of st. petersburg and
 moscow who spend their time in considering what they shall eat on the
 morrow, and in composing a dinner for the day following, and who never sit
 down to a meal without first of all injecting a pill and then swallowing
 oysters and crabs and a quantity of other monsters, while eternally
 departing for karlsbad or the caucasus, the author has but a small
 opinion. yes, they are not the persons to inspire envy. rather, it is the
 folk of the middle classes—folk who at one posthouse call for bacon,
 and at another for a sucking pig, and at a third for a steak of sturgeon
 or a baked pudding with onions, and who can sit down to table at any hour,
 as though they had never had a meal in their lives, and can devour fish of
 all sorts, and guzzle and chew it with a view to provoking further
 appetite—these, i say, are the folk who enjoy heaven’s most favoured
 gift. to attain such a celestial condition the great folk of whom i have
 spoken would sacrifice half their serfs and half their mortgaged and
 non-mortgaged property, with the foreign and domestic improvements
 thereon, if thereby they could compass such a stomach as is possessed by
 the folk of the middle class. but, unfortunately, neither money nor real
 estate, whether improved or non-improved, can purchase such a stomach.
 the little wooden tavern, with its narrow, but hospitable, curtain
 suspended from a pair of rough-hewn doorposts like old church
 candlesticks, seemed to invite chichikov to enter. true, the establishment
 was only a russian hut of the ordinary type, but it was a hut of larger
 dimensions than usual, and had around its windows and gables carved and
 patterned cornices of bright-coloured wood which threw into relief the
 darker hue of the walls, and consorted well with the flowered pitchers
 painted on the shutters.
 ascending the narrow wooden staircase to the upper floor, and arriving
 upon a broad landing, chichikov found himself confronted with a creaking
 door and a stout old woman in a striped print gown. “this way, if you
 please,” she said. within the apartment designated chichikov encountered
 the old friends which one invariably finds in such roadside hostelries—to
 wit, a heavy samovar, four smooth, bescratched walls of white pine, a
 three-cornered press with cups and teapots, egg-cups of gilded china
 standing in front of ikons suspended by blue and red ribands, a cat lately
 delivered of a family, a mirror which gives one four eyes instead of two
 and a pancake for a face, and, beside the ikons, some bunches of herbs and
 carnations of such faded dustiness that, should one attempt to smell them,
 one is bound to burst out sneezing.
 “have you a sucking-pig?” chichikov inquired of the landlady as she stood
 expectantly before him.
 “yes.”
 “and some horse-radish and sour cream?”
 “yes.”
 “then serve them.”
 the landlady departed for the purpose, and returned with a plate, a napkin
 (the latter starched to the consistency of dried bark), a knife with a
 bone handle beginning to turn yellow, a two-pronged fork as thin as a
 wafer, and a salt-cellar incapable of being made to stand upright.
 following the accepted custom, our hero entered into conversation with the
 woman, and inquired whether she herself or a landlord kept the tavern; how
 much income the tavern brought in; whether her sons lived with her;
 whether the oldest was a bachelor or married; whom the eldest had taken to
 wife; whether the dowry had been large; whether the father-in-law had been
 satisfied, and whether the said father-in-law had not complained of
 receiving too small a present at the wedding. in short, chichikov touched
 on every conceivable point. likewise (of course) he displayed some
 curiosity as to the landowners of the neighbourhood. their names, he
 ascertained, were blochin, potchitaev, minoi, cheprakov, and sobakevitch.
 “then you are acquainted with sobakevitch?” he said; whereupon the old
 woman informed him that she knew not only sobakevitch, but also manilov,
 and that the latter was the more delicate eater of the two, since, whereas
 manilov always ordered a roast fowl and some veal and mutton, and then
 tasted merely a morsel of each, sobakevitch would order one dish only, but
 consume the whole of it, and then demand more at the same price.
 whilst chichikov was thus conversing and partaking of the sucking pig
 until only a fragment of it seemed likely to remain, the sound of an
 approaching vehicle made itself heard. peering through the window, he saw
 draw up to the tavern door a light britchka drawn by three fine horses.
 from it there descended two men—one flaxen-haired and tall, and the
 other dark-haired and of slighter build. while the flaxen-haired man was
 clad in a dark-blue coat, the other one was wrapped in a coat of striped
 pattern. behind the britchka stood a second, but an empty, turn-out, drawn
 by four long-coated steeds in ragged collars and rope harnesses. the
 flaxen-haired man lost no time in ascending the staircase, while his
 darker friend remained below to fumble at something in the britchka,
 talking, as he did so, to the driver of the vehicle which stood hitched
 behind. somehow, the dark-haired man’s voice struck chichikov as familiar;
 and as he was taking another look at him the flaxen-haired gentleman
 entered the room. the newcomer was a man of lofty stature, with a small
 red moustache and a lean, hard-bitten face whose redness made it evident
 that its acquaintance, if not with the smoke of gunpowder, at all events
 with that of tobacco, was intimate and extensive. nevertheless he greeted
 chichikov civilly, and the latter returned his bow. indeed, the pair would
 have entered into conversation, and have made one another’s acquaintance
 (since a beginning was made with their simultaneously expressing
 satisfaction at the circumstance that the previous night’s rain had laid
 the dust on the roads, and thereby made driving cool and pleasant) when
 the gentleman’s darker-favoured friend also entered the room, and,
 throwing his cap upon the table, pushed back a mass of dishevelled black
 locks from his brow. the latest arrival was a man of medium height, but
 well put together, and possessed of a pair of full red cheeks, a set of
 teeth as white as snow, and coal-black whiskers. indeed, so fresh was his
 complexion that it seemed to have been compounded of blood and milk, while
 health danced in his every feature.
 “ha, ha, ha!” he cried with a gesture of astonishment at the sight of
 chichikov. “what chance brings you here?”
 upon that chichikov recognised nozdrev—the man whom he had met at
 dinner at the public prosecutor’s, and who, within a minute or two of the
 introduction, had become so intimate with his fellow guest as to address
 him in the second person singular, in spite of the fact that chichikov had
 given him no opportunity for doing so.
 “where have you been to-day?” nozdrev inquired, and, without waiting for
 an answer, went on: “for myself, i am just from the fair, and completely
 cleaned out. actually, i have had to do the journey back with stage
 horses! look out of the window, and see them for yourself.” and he turned
 chichikov’s head so sharply in the desired direction that he came very
 near to bumping it against the window frame. “did you ever see such a bag
 of tricks? the cursed things have only just managed to get here. in fact,
 on the way i had to transfer myself to this fellow’s britchka.” he
 indicated his companion with a finger. “by the way, don’t you know one
 another? he is mizhuev, my brother-in-law. he and i were talking of you
 only this morning. ‘just you see,’ said i to him, ‘if we do not fall in
 with chichikov before we have done.’ heavens, how completely cleaned out i
 am! not only have i lost four good horses, but also my watch and chain.”
 chichikov perceived that in very truth his interlocutor was minus the
 articles named, as well as that one of nozdrev’s whiskers was less bushy
 in appearance than the other one. “had i had another twenty roubles in my
 pocket,” went on nozdrev, “i should have won back all that i have lost, as
 well as have pouched a further thirty thousand. yes, i give you my word of
 honour on that.”
 “but you were saying the same thing when last i met you,” put in the
 flaxen-haired man. “yet, even though i lent you fifty roubles, you lost
 them all.”
 “but i should not have lost them this time. don’t try to make me out a
 fool. i should not have lost them, i tell you. had i only played the right
 card, i should have broken the bank.”
 “but you did not break the bank,” remarked the flaxen-haired man.
 “no. that was because i did not play my cards right. but what about your
 precious major’s play? is that good?”
 “good or not, at least he beat you.”
 “splendid of him! nevertheless i will get my own back. let him play me at
 doubles, and we shall soon see what sort of a player he is! friend
 chichikov, at first we had a glorious time, for the fair was a tremendous
 success. indeed, the tradesmen said that never yet had there been such a
 gathering. i myself managed to sell everything from my estate at a good
 price. in fact, we had a magnificent time. i can’t help thinking of it,
 devil take me! but what a pity you were not there! three versts from the
 town there is quartered a regiment of dragoons, and you would scarcely
 believe what a lot of officers it has. forty at least there are, and they
 do a fine lot of knocking about the town and drinking. in particular,
 staff-captain potsieluev is a splendid fellow! you should just see his
 moustache! why, he calls good claret ‘trash’! ‘bring me some of the usual
 trash,’ is his way of ordering it. and lieutenant kuvshinnikov, too! he is
 as delightful as the other man. in fact, i may say that every one of the
 lot is a rake. i spent my whole time with them, and you can imagine that
 ponomarev, the wine merchant, did a fine trade indeed! all the same, he is
 a rascal, you know, and ought not to be dealt with, for he puts all sorts
 of rubbish into his liquor—indian wood and burnt cork and elderberry
 juice, the villain! nevertheless, get him to produce a bottle from what he
 calls his ‘special cellar,’ and you will fancy yourself in the seventh
 heaven of delight. and what quantities of champagne we drank! compared
 with it, provincial stuff is kvass . try to
 imagine not merely clicquot, but a sort of blend of clicquot and matradura—clicquot
 of double strength. also ponomarev produced a bottle of french stuff which
 he calls ‘bonbon.’ had it a bouquet, ask you? why, it had the bouquet of a
 rose garden, of anything else you like. what times we had, to be sure!
 just after we had left pnomarev’s place, some prince or another arrived in
 the town, and sent out for some champagne; but not a bottle was there
 left, for the officers had drunk every one! why, i myself got through
 seventeen bottles at a sitting.”
 “come, come! you can’t have got through seventeen,” remarked the
 flaxen-haired man.
 “but i did, i give my word of honour,” retorted nozdrev.
 “imagine what you like, but you didn’t drink even ten bottles at a
 sitting.”
 “will you bet that i did not?”
 “no; for what would be the use of betting about it?”
 “then at least wager the gun which you have bought.”
 “no, i am not going to do anything of the kind.”
 “just as an experiment?”
 “no.”
 “it is as well for you that you don’t, since, otherwise, you would have
 found yourself minus both gun and cap. however, friend chichikov, it is a
 pity you were not there. had you been there, i feel sure you would have
 found yourself unable to part with lieutenant kuvshinnikov. you and he
 would have hit it off splendidly. you know, he is quite a different sort
 from the public prosecutor and our other provincial skinflints—fellows
 who shiver in their shoes before they will spend a single kopeck. he will
 play faro, or anything else, and at any time. why did you not come with
 us, instead of wasting your time on cattle breeding or something of the
 sort? but never mind. embrace me. i like you immensely. mizhuev, see how
 curiously things have turned out. chichikov has nothing to do with me, or
 i with him, yet here is he come from god knows where, and landed in the
 very spot where i happen to be living! i may tell you that, no matter how
 many carriages i possessed, i should gamble the lot away. recently i went
 in for a turn at billiards, and lost two jars of pomade, a china teapot,
 and a guitar. then i staked some more things, and, like a fool, lost them
 all, and six roubles in addition. what a dog is that kuvshinnikov! he and
 i attended nearly every ball in the place. in particular, there was a
 woman—decolletee, and such a swell! i merely thought to myself, ‘the
 devil take her!’ but kuvshinnikov is such a wag that he sat down beside
 her, and began paying her strings of compliments in french. however, i did
 not neglect the damsels altogether—although he calls that sort of
 thing ‘going in for strawberries.’ by the way, i have a splendid piece of
 fish and some caviare with me. ‘tis all i have brought back! in fact it is
 a lucky chance that i happened to buy the stuff before my money was gone.
 where are you for?”
 “i am about to call on a friend.”
 “on what friend? let him go to the devil, and come to my place instead.”
 “i cannot, i cannot. i have business to do.”
 “oh, business again! i thought so!”
 “but i have business to do—and pressing business at that.”
 “i wager that you’re lying. if not, tell me whom you’re going to call
 upon.”
 “upon sobakevitch.”
 instantly nozdrev burst into a laugh compassable only by a healthy man in
 whose head every tooth still remains as white as sugar. by this i mean the
 laugh of quivering cheeks, the laugh which causes a neighbour who is
 sleeping behind double doors three rooms away to leap from his bed and
 exclaim with distended eyes, “hullo! something has upset him!”
 “what is there to laugh at?” asked chichikov, a trifle nettled; but
 nozdrev laughed more unrestrainedly than ever, ejaculating: “oh, spare us
 all! the thing is so amusing that i shall die of it!”
 “i say that there is nothing to laugh at,” repeated chichikov. “it is in
 fulfilment of a promise that i am on my way to sobakevitch’s.”
 “then you will scarcely be glad to be alive when you’ve got there, for he
 is the veriest miser in the countryside. oh, i know you. however,
 if you think to find there either faro or a bottle of ‘bonbon’ you are
 mistaken. look here, my good friend. let sobakevitch go to the devil, and
 come to my place, where at least i shall have a piece of sturgeon to offer
 you for dinner. ponomarev said to me on parting: ‘this piece is just the
 thing for you. even if you were to search the whole market, you would
 never find a better one.’ but of course he is a terrible rogue. i said to
 him outright: ‘you and the collector of taxes are the two greatest
 skinflints in the town.’ but he only stroked his beard and smiled. every
 day i used to breakfast with kuvshinnikov in his restaurant. well, what i
 was nearly forgetting is this: that, though i am aware that you can’t
 forgo your engagement, i am not going to give you up—no, not for ten
 thousand roubles of money. i tell you that in advance.”
 here he broke off to run to the window and shout to his servant (who was
 holding a knife in one hand and a crust of bread and a piece of sturgeon
 in the other—he had contrived to filch the latter while fumbling in
 the britchka for something else):
 “hi, porphyri! bring here that puppy, you rascal! what a puppy it is!
 unfortunately that thief of a landlord has given it nothing to eat, even
 though i have promised him the roan filly which, as you may remember, i
 swopped from khvostirev.” as a matter of act, chichikov had never in his
 life seen either khvostirev or the roan filly.
 “barin, do you wish for anything to eat?” inquired the landlady as she
 entered.
 “no, nothing at all. ah, friend chichikov, what times we had! yes, give me
 a glass of vodka, old woman. what sort do you keep?”
 “aniseed.”
 “then bring me a glass of it,” repeated nozdrev.
 “and one for me as well,” added the flaxen-haired man.
 “at the theatre,” went on nozdrev, “there was an actress who sang like a
 canary. kuvshinnikov, who happened to be sitting with me, said: ‘my boy,
 you had better go and gather that strawberry.’ as for the booths at the
 fair, they numbered, i should say, fifty.” at this point he broke off to
 take the glass of vodka from the landlady, who bowed low in
 acknowledgement of his doing so. at the same moment porphyri—a
 fellow dressed like his master (that is to say, in a greasy, wadded
 overcoat)—entered with the puppy.
 “put the brute down here,” commanded nozdrev, “and then fasten it up.”
 porphyri deposited the animal upon the floor; whereupon it proceeded to
 act after the manner of dogs.
 “there’s a puppy for you!” cried nozdrev, catching hold of it by the back,
 and lifting it up. the puppy uttered a piteous yelp.
 “i can see that you haven’t done what i told you to do,” he continued to
 porphyri after an inspection of the animal’s belly. “you have quite
 forgotten to brush him.”
 “i did brush him,” protested porphyri.
 “then where did these fleas come from?”
 “i cannot think. perhaps they have leapt into his coat out of the
 britchka.”
 “you liar! as a matter of fact, you have forgotten to brush him.
 nevertheless, look at these ears, chichikov. just feel them.”
 “why should i? without doing that, i can see that he is well-bred.”
 “nevertheless, catch hold of his ears and feel them.”
 to humour the fellow chichikov did as he had requested, remarking: “yes,
 he seems likely to turn out well.”
 “and feel the coldness of his nose! just take it in your hand.”
 not wishing to offend his interlocutor, chichikov felt the puppy’s nose,
 saying: “some day he will have an excellent scent.”
 “yes, will he not? ‘tis the right sort of muzzle for that. i must say that
 i have long been wanting such a puppy. porphyri, take him away again.”
 porphyri lifted up the puppy, and bore it downstairs.
 “look here, chichikov,” resumed nozdrev. “you must come to my place. it
 lies only five versts away, and we can go there like the wind, and you can
 visit sobakevitch afterwards.”
 “shall i, or shall i not, go to nozdrev’s?” reflected chichikov. “is he
 likely to prove any more useful than the rest? well, at least he is as
 promising, even though he has lost so much at play. but he has a head on
 his shoulders, and therefore i must go carefully if i am to tackle him
 concerning my scheme.”
 with that he added aloud: “very well, i will come with you, but do not let
 us be long, for my time is very precious.”
 “that’s right, that’s right!” cried nozdrev. “splendid, splendid! let me
 embrace you!” and he fell upon chichikov’s neck. “all three of us will
 go.”
 “no, no,” put in the flaxen-haired man. “you must excuse me, for i must be
 off home.”
 “rubbish, rubbish! i am not going to excuse you.”
 “but my wife will be furious with me. you and monsieur chichikov must
 change into the other britchka.”
 “come, come! the thing is not to be thought of.”
 the flaxen-haired man was one of those people in whose character, at first
 sight, there seems to lurk a certain grain of stubbornness—so much
 so that, almost before one has begun to speak, they are ready to dispute
 one’s words, and to disagree with anything that may be opposed to their
 peculiar form of opinion. for instance, they will decline to have folly
 called wisdom, or any tune danced to but their own. always, however, will
 there become manifest in their character a soft spot, and in the end they
 will accept what hitherto they have denied, and call what is foolish
 sensible, and even dance—yes, better than any one else will do—to
 a tune set by some one else. in short, they generally begin well, but
 always end badly.
 “rubbish!” said nozdrev in answer to a further objection on his
 brother-in-law’s part. and, sure enough, no sooner had nozdrev clapped his
 cap upon his head than the flaxen-haired man started to follow him and his
 companion.
 “but the gentleman has not paid for the vodka?” put in the old woman.
 “all right, all right, good mother. look here, brother-in-law. pay her,
 will you, for i have not a kopeck left.”
 “how much?” inquired the brother-in-law.
 “what, sir? eighty kopecks, if you please,” replied the old woman.
 “a lie! give her half a rouble. that will be quite enough.”
 “no, it will not, barin,” protested the old woman. however, she took the
 money gratefully, and even ran to the door to open it for the gentlemen.
 as a matter of fact, she had lost nothing by the transaction, since she
 had demanded fully a quarter more than the vodka was worth.
 the travellers then took their seats, and since chichikov’s britchka kept
 alongside the britchka wherein nozdrev and his brother-in-law were seated,
 it was possible for all three men to converse together as they proceeded.
 behind them came nozdrev’s smaller buggy, with its team of lean stage
 horses and porphyri and the puppy. but inasmuch as the conversation which
 the travellers maintained was not of a kind likely to interest the reader,
 i might do worse than say something concerning nozdrev himself, seeing
 that he is destined to play no small role in our story.
 nozdrev’s face will be familiar to the reader, seeing that every one must
 have encountered many such. fellows of the kind are known as “gay young
 sparks,” and, even in their boyhood and school days, earn a reputation for
 being bons camarades (though with it all they come in for some hard
 knocks) for the reason that their faces evince an element of frankness,
 directness, and enterprise which enables them soon to make friends, and,
 almost before you have had time to look around, to start addressing you in
 the second person singular. yet, while cementing such friendships for all
 eternity, almost always they begin quarrelling the same evening, since,
 throughout, they are a loquacious, dissipated, high-spirited, over-showy
 tribe. indeed, at thirty-five nozdrev was just what he had been an
 eighteen and twenty—he was just such a lover of fast living. nor had
 his marriage in any way changed him, and the less so since his wife had
 soon departed to another world, and left behind her two children, whom he
 did not want, and who were therefore placed in the charge of a
 good-looking nursemaid. never at any time could he remain at home for more
 than a single day, for his keen scent could range over scores and scores
 of versts, and detect any fair which promised balls and crowds.
 consequently in a trice he would be there—quarrelling, and creating
 disturbances over the gaming-table (like all men of his type, he had a
 perfect passion for cards) yet playing neither a faultless nor an
 over-clean game, since he was both a blunderer and able to indulge in a
 large number of illicit cuts and other devices. the result was that the
 game often ended in another kind of sport altogether. that is to say,
 either he received a good kicking, or he had his thick and very handsome
 whiskers pulled; with the result that on certain occasions he returned
 home with one of those appendages looking decidedly ragged. yet his plump,
 healthy-looking cheeks were so robustly constituted, and contained such an
 abundance of recreative vigour, that a new whisker soon sprouted in place
 of the old one, and even surpassed its predecessor. again (and the
 following is a phenomenon peculiar to russia) a very short time would have
 elapsed before once more he would be consorting with the very cronies who
 had recently cuffed him—and consorting with them as though nothing
 whatsoever had happened—no reference to the subject being made by
 him, and they too holding their tongues.
 in short, nozdrev was, as it were, a man of incident. never was he present
 at any gathering without some sort of a fracas occurring thereat. either
 he would require to be expelled from the room by gendarmes, or his friends
 would have to kick him out into the street. at all events, should neither
 of those occurrences take place, at least he did something of a nature
 which would not otherwise have been witnessed. that is to say, should he
 not play the fool in a buffet to such an extent as to make every one smile,
 you may be sure that he was engaged in lying to a degree which at times
 abashed even himself. moreover, the man lied without reason. for instance,
 he would begin telling a story to the effect that he possessed a
 blue-coated or a red-coated horse; until, in the end, his listeners would
 be forced to leave him with the remark, “you are giving us some fine
 stuff, old fellow!” also, men like nozdrev have a passion for insulting
 their neighbours without the least excuse afforded. (for that matter, even
 a man of good standing and of respectable exterior—a man with a star
 on his breast—may unexpectedly press your hand one day, and begin
 talking to you on subjects of a nature to give food for serious thought.
 yet just as unexpectedly may that man start abusing you to your face—and
 do so in a manner worthy of a collegiate registrar rather than of a man
 who wears a star on his breast and aspires to converse on subjects which
 merit reflection. all that one can do in such a case is to stand shrugging
 one’s shoulders in amazement.) well, nozdrev had just such a weakness. the
 more he became friendly with a man, the sooner would he insult him, and be
 ready to spread calumnies as to his reputation. yet all the while he would
 consider himself the insulted one’s friend, and, should he meet him again,
 would greet him in the most amicable style possible, and say, “you rascal,
 why have you given up coming to see me.” thus, taken all round, nozdrev
 was a person of many aspects and numerous potentialities. in one and the
 same breath would he propose to go with you whithersoever you might choose
 (even to the very ends of the world should you so require) or to enter
 upon any sort of an enterprise with you, or to exchange any commodity for
 any other commodity which you might care to name. guns, horses, dogs, all
 were subjects for barter—though not for profit so far as you were
 concerned. such traits are mostly the outcome of a boisterous temperament,
 as is additionally exemplified by the fact that if at a fair he chanced to
 fall in with a simpleton and to fleece him, he would then proceed to buy a
 quantity of the very first articles which came to hand—horse-collars,
 cigar-lighters, dresses for his nursemaid, foals, raisins, silver ewers,
 lengths of holland, wheatmeal, tobacco, revolvers, dried herrings,
 pictures, whetstones, crockery, boots, and so forth, until every atom of
 his money was exhausted. yet seldom were these articles conveyed home,
 since, as a rule, the same day saw them lost to some more skilful gambler,
 in addition to his pipe, his tobacco-pouch, his mouthpiece, his
 four-horsed turn-out, and his coachman: with the result that, stripped to
 his very shirt, he would be forced to beg the loan of a vehicle from a
 friend.
 such was nozdrev. some may say that characters of his type have become
 extinct, that nozdrevs no longer exist. alas! such as say this will be
 wrong; for many a day must pass before the nozdrevs will have disappeared
 from our ken. everywhere they are to be seen in our midst—the only
 difference between the new and the old being a difference of garments.
 persons of superficial observation are apt to consider that a man clad in
 a different coat is quite a different person from what he used to be.
 to continue. the three vehicles bowled up to the steps of nozdrev’s house,
 and their occupants alighted. but no preparations whatsoever had been made
 for the guest’s reception, for on some wooden trestles in the centre of
 the dining-room a couple of peasants were engaged in whitewashing the
 ceiling and drawling out an endless song as they splashed their stuff
 about the floor. hastily bidding peasants and trestles to be gone, nozdrev
 departed to another room with further instructions. indeed, so audible was
 the sound of his voice as he ordered dinner that chichikov—who was
 beginning to feel hungry once more—was enabled to gather that it
 would be at least five o’clock before a meal of any kind would be
 available. on his return, nozdrev invited his companions to inspect his
 establishment—even though as early as two o’clock he had to announce
 that nothing more was to be seen.
 the tour began with a view of the stables, where the party saw two mares
 (the one a grey, and the other a roan) and a colt; which latter animal,
 though far from showy, nozdrev declared to have cost him ten thousand
 roubles.
 “you never paid ten thousand roubles for the brute!” exclaimed the
 brother-in-law. “he isn’t worth even a thousand.”
 “by god, i did pay ten thousand!” asserted nozdrev.
 “you can swear that as much as you like,” retorted the other.
 “will you bet that i did not?” asked nozdrev, but the brother-in-law
 declined the offer.
 next, nozdrev showed his guests some empty stalls where a number of
 equally fine animals (so he alleged) had lately stood. also there was on
 view the goat which an old belief still considers to be an indispensable
 adjunct to such places, even though its apparent use is to pace up and
 down beneath the noses of the horses as though the place belonged to it.
 thereafter the host took his guests to look at a young wolf which he had
 got tied to a chain. “he is fed on nothing but raw meat,” he explained,
 “for i want him to grow up as fierce as possible.” then the party
 inspected a pond in which there were “fish of such a size that it would
 take two men all their time to lift one of them out.”
 this piece of information was received with renewed incredulity on the
 part of the brother-in-law.
 “now, chichikov,” went on nozdrev, “let me show you a truly magnificent
 brace of dogs. the hardness of their muscles will surprise you, and they
 have jowls as sharp as needles.”
 so saying, he led the way to a small, but neatly-built, shed surrounded on
 every side with a fenced-in run. entering this run, the visitors beheld a
 number of dogs of all sorts and sizes and colours. in their midst nozdrev
 looked like a father lording it over his family circle. erecting their
 tails—their “stems,” as dog fanciers call those members—the
 animals came bounding to greet the party, and fully a score of them laid
 their paws upon chichikov’s shoulders. indeed, one dog was moved with such
 friendliness that, standing on its hind legs, it licked him on the lips,
 and so forced him to spit. that done, the visitors duly inspected the
 couple already mentioned, and expressed astonishment at their muscles.
 true enough, they were fine animals. next, the party looked at a crimean
 bitch which, though blind and fast nearing her end, had, two years ago,
 been a truly magnificent dog. at all events, so said nozdrev. next came
 another bitch—also blind; then an inspection of the water-mill,
 which lacked the spindle-socket wherein the upper stone ought to have been
 revolving—“fluttering,” to use the russian peasant’s quaint
 expression. “but never mind,” said nozdrev. “let us proceed to the
 blacksmith’s shop.” so to the blacksmith’s shop the party proceeded, and
 when the said shop had been viewed, nozdrev said as he pointed to a field:
 “in this field i have seen such numbers of hares as to render the ground
 quite invisible. indeed, on one occasion i, with my own hands, caught a
 hare by the hind legs.”
 “you never caught a hare by the hind legs with your hands!” remarked the
 brother-in-law.
 “but i did” reiterated nozdrev. “however, let me show you the boundary
 where my lands come to an end.”
 so saying, he started to conduct his guests across a field which consisted
 mostly of moleheaps, and in which the party had to pick their way between
 strips of ploughed land and of harrowed. soon chichikov began to feel
 weary, for the terrain was so low-lying that in many spots water could be
 heard squelching underfoot, and though for a while the visitors watched
 their feet, and stepped carefully, they soon perceived that such a course
 availed them nothing, and took to following their noses, without either
 selecting or avoiding the spots where the mire happened to be deeper or
 the reverse. at length, when a considerable distance had been covered,
 they caught sight of a boundary-post and a narrow ditch.
 “that is the boundary,” said nozdrev. “everything that you see on this
 side of the post is mine, as well as the forest on the other side of it,
 and what lies beyond the forest.”
 “when did that forest become yours?” asked the brother-in-law. “it cannot
 be long since you purchased it, for it never used to be yours.”
 “yes, it isn’t long since i purchased it,” said nozdrev.
 “how long?”
 “how long? why, i purchased it three days ago, and gave a pretty sum for
 it, as the devil knows!”
 “indeed! why, three days ago you were at the fair?”
 “wiseacre! cannot one be at a fair and buy land at the same time? yes, i
 was at the fair, and my steward bought the land in my absence.”
 “oh, your steward bought it.” the brother-in-law seemed doubtful, and
 shook his head.
 the guests returned by the same route as that by which they had come;
 whereafter, on reaching the house, nozdrev conducted them to his study,
 which contained not a trace of the things usually to be found in such
 apartments—such things as books and papers. on the contrary, the
 only articles to be seen were a sword and a brace of guns—the one
 “of them worth three hundred roubles,” and the other “about eight
 hundred.” the brother-in-law inspected the articles in question, and then
 shook his head as before. next, the visitors were shown some “real
 turkish” daggers, of which one bore the inadvertent inscription, “saveli
 sibiriakov ,
 master cutler.” then came a barrel-organ, on which nozdrev started to play
 some tune or another. for a while the sounds were not wholly unpleasing,
 but suddenly something seemed to go wrong, for a mazurka started, to be
 followed by “marlborough has gone to the war,” and to this, again, there
 succeeded an antiquated waltz. also, long after nozdrev had ceased to turn
 the handle, one particularly shrill-pitched pipe which had, throughout,
 refused to harmonise with the rest kept up a protracted whistling on its
 own account. then followed an exhibition of tobacco pipes—pipes of
 clay, of wood, of meerschaum, pipes smoked and non-smoked; pipes wrapped
 in chamois leather and not so wrapped; an amber-mounted hookah (a stake
 won at cards) and a tobacco pouch (worked, it was alleged, by some
 countess who had fallen in love with nozdrev at a posthouse, and whose
 handiwork nozdrev averred to constitute the “sublimity of superfluity”—a
 term which, in the nozdrevian vocabulary, purported to signify the acme of
 perfection).
 finally, after some hors-d’oeuvres of sturgeon’s back, they sat down to
 table—the time being then nearly five o’clock. but the meal did not
 constitute by any means the best of which chichikov had ever partaken,
 seeing that some of the dishes were overcooked, and others were scarcely
 cooked at all. evidently their compounder had trusted chiefly to
 inspiration—she had laid hold of the first thing which had happened
 to come to hand. for instance, had pepper represented the nearest article
 within reach, she had added pepper wholesale. had a cabbage chanced to be
 so encountered, she had pressed it also into the service. and the same
 with milk, bacon, and peas. in short, her rule seemed to have been “make a
 hot dish of some sort, and some sort of taste will result.” for the rest,
 nozdrev drew heavily upon the wine. even before the soup had been served,
 he had poured out for each guest a bumper of port and another of “haut”
 sauterne. (never in provincial towns is ordinary, vulgar sauterne even
 procurable.) next, he called for a bottle of madeira—“as fine a
 tipple as ever a field-marshall drank”; but the madeira only burnt the
 mouth, since the dealers, familiar with the taste of our landed gentry
 (who love “good” madeira) invariably doctor the stuff with copious dashes
 of rum and imperial vodka, in the hope that russian stomachs will thus be
 enabled to carry off the lot. after this bottle nozdrev called for another
 and “a very special” brand—a brand which he declared to consist of a
 blend of burgundy and champagne, and of which he poured generous measures
 into the glasses of chichikov and the brother-in-law as they sat to right
 and left of him. but since chichikov noticed that, after doing so, he
 added only a scanty modicum of the mixture to his own tumbler, our hero
 determined to be cautious, and therefore took advantage of a moment when
 nozdrev had again plunged into conversation and was yet a third time
 engaged in refilling his brother-in-law’s glass, to contrive to upset his
 (chichikov’s) glass over his plate. in time there came also to table a
 tart of mountain-ashberries—berries which the host declared to
 equal, in taste, ripe plums, but which, curiously enough, smacked more of
 corn brandy. next, the company consumed a sort of pasty of which the
 precise name has escaped me, but which the host rendered differently even
 on the second occasion of its being mentioned. the meal over, and the
 whole tale of wines tried, the guests still retained their seats—a
 circumstance which embarrassed chichikov, seeing that he had no mind to
 propound his pet scheme in the presence of nozdrev’s brother-in-law, who
 was a complete stranger to him. no, that subject called for amicable and
 private conversation. nevertheless, the brother-in-law appeared to bode
 little danger, seeing that he had taken on board a full cargo, and was now
 engaged in doing nothing of a more menacing nature than picking his nose.
 at length he himself noticed that he was not altogether in a responsible
 condition; wherefore he rose and began to make excuses for departing
 homewards, though in a tone so drowsy and lethargic that, to quote the
 russian proverb, he might almost have been “pulling a collar on to a horse
 by the clasps.”
 “no, no!” cried nozdrev. “i am not going to let you go.”
 “but i must go,” replied the brother-in-law. “don’t try to hinder me. you
 are annoying me greatly.”
 “rubbish! we are going to play a game of banker.”
 “no, no. you must play it without me, my friend. my wife is expecting me
 at home, and i must go and tell her all about the fair. yes, i must go if
 i am to please her. do not try to detain me.”
 “your wife be—! but have you really an important piece of business
 with her?”
 “no, no, my friend. the real reason is that she is a good and trustful
 woman, and that she does a great deal for me. the tears spring to my eyes
 as i think of it. do not detain me. as an honourable man i say that i must
 go. of that i do assure you in all sincerity.”
 “oh, let him go,” put in chichikov under his breath. “what use will he be
 here?”
 “very well,” said nozdrev, “though, damn it, i do not like fellows who
 lose their heads.” then he added to his brother-in-law: “all right, thetuk
 off you go to your wife and your woman’s talk and may the devil go with
 you!”
 “do not insult me with the term thetuk,” retorted the brother-in-law. “to
 her i owe my life, and she is a dear, good woman, and has shown me much
 affection. at the very thought of it i could weep. you see, she will be
 asking me what i have seen at the fair, and tell her about it i must, for
 she is such a dear, good woman.”
 “then off you go to her with your pack of lies. here is your cap.”
 “no, good friend, you are not to speak of her like that. by so doing you
 offend me greatly—i say that she is a dear, good woman.”
 “then run along home to her.”
 “yes, i am just going. excuse me for having been unable to stay. gladly
 would i have stayed, but really i cannot.”
 the brother-in-law repeated his excuses again and again without noticing
 that he had entered the britchka, that it had passed through the gates,
 and that he was now in the open country. permissibly we may suppose that
 his wife succeeded in gleaning from him few details of the fair.
 “what a fool!” said nozdrev as, standing by the window, he watched the
 departing vehicle. “yet his off-horse is not such a bad one. for a long
 time past i have been wanting to get hold of it. a man like that is simply
 impossible. yes, he is a thetuk, a regular thetuk.”
 with that they repaired to the parlour, where, on porphyri bringing
 candles, chichikov perceived that his host had produced a pack of cards.
 “i tell you what,” said nozdrev, pressing the sides of the pack together,
 and then slightly bending them, so that the pack cracked and a card flew
 out. “how would it be if, to pass the time, i were to make a bank of three
 hundred?”
 chichikov pretended not to have heard him, but remarked with an air of
 having just recollected a forgotten point:
 “by the way, i had omitted to say that i have a request to make of you.”
 “what request?”
 “first give me your word that you will grant it.”
 “what is the request, i say?”
 “then you give me your word, do you?”
 “certainly.”
 “your word of honour?”
 “my word of honour.”
 “this, then, is my request. i presume that you have a large number of dead
 serfs whose names have not yet been removed from the revision list?”
 “i have. but why do you ask?”
 “because i want you to make them over to me.”
 “of what use would they be to you?”
 “never mind. i have a purpose in wanting them.”
 “what purpose?”
 “a purpose which is strictly my own affair. in short, i need them.”
 “you seem to have hatched a very fine scheme. out with it, now! what is in
 the wind?”
 “how could i have hatched such a scheme as you say? one could not very
 well hatch a scheme out of such a trifle as this.”
 “then for what purpose do you want the serfs?”
 “oh, the curiosity of the man! he wants to poke his fingers into and smell
 over every detail!”
 “why do you decline to say what is in your mind? at all events, until you
 do say i shall not move in the matter.”
 “but how would it benefit you to know what my plans are? a whim has seized
 me. that is all. nor are you playing fair. you have given me your word of
 honour, yet now you are trying to back out of it.”
 “no matter what you desire me to do, i decline to do it until you have
 told me your purpose.”
 “what am i to say to the fellow?” thought chichikov. he reflected for a
 moment, and then explained that he wanted the dead souls in order to
 acquire a better standing in society, since at present he possessed little
 landed property, and only a handful of serfs.
 “you are lying,” said nozdrev without even letting him finish. “yes, you
 are lying my good friend.”
 chichikov himself perceived that his device had been a clumsy one, and his
 pretext weak. “i must tell him straight out,” he said to himself as he
 pulled his wits together.
 “should i tell you the truth,” he added aloud, “i must beg of you not to
 repeat it. the truth is that i am thinking of getting married. but,
 unfortunately, my betrothed’s father and mother are very ambitious people,
 and do not want me to marry her, since they desire the bridegroom to own
 not less than three hundred souls, whereas i own but a hundred and fifty,
 and that number is not sufficient.”
 “again you are lying,” said nozdrev.
 “then look here; i have been lying only to this extent.” and chichikov
 marked off upon his little finger a minute portion.
 “nevertheless i will bet my head that you have been lying throughout.”
 “come, come! that is not very civil of you. why should i have been lying?”
 “because i know you, and know that you are a regular skinflint. i say that
 in all friendship. if i possessed any power over you i should hang you to
 the nearest tree.”
 this remark hurt chichikov, for at any time he disliked expressions gross
 or offensive to decency, and never allowed any one—no, not even
 persons of the highest rank—to behave towards him with an undue
 measure of familiarity. consequently his sense of umbrage on the present
 occasion was unbounded.
 “by god, i would hang you!” repeated nozdrev. “i say this frankly, and not
 for the purpose of offending you, but simply to communicate to you my
 friendly opinion.”
 “to everything there are limits,” retorted chichikov stiffly. “if you want
 to indulge in speeches of that sort you had better return to the
 barracks.”
 however, after a pause he added:
 “if you do not care to give me the serfs, why not sell them?”
 “sell them? i know you, you rascal! you wouldn’t give me very much
 for them, would you?”
 “a nice fellow! look here. what are they to you? so many diamonds, eh?”
 “i thought so! i know you!”
 “pardon me, but i could wish that you were a member of the jewish
 persuasion. you would give them to me fast enough then.”
 “on the contrary, to show you that i am not a usurer, i will decline to
 ask of you a single kopeck for the serfs. all that you need do is to buy
 that colt of mine, and then i will throw in the serfs in addition.”
 “but what should i want with your colt?” said chichikov, genuinely
 astonished at the proposal.
 “what should you want with him? why, i have bought him for ten thousand
 roubles, and am ready to let you have him for four.”
 “i ask you again: of what use could the colt possibly be to me? i am not
 the keeper of a breeding establishment.”
 “ah! i see that you fail to understand me. let me suggest that you pay
 down at once three thousand roubles of the purchase money, and leave the
 other thousand until later.”
 “but i do not mean to buy the colt, damn him!”
 “then buy the roan mare.”
 “no, nor the roan mare.”
 “then you shall have both the mare and the grey horse which you have seen
 in my stables for two thousand roubles.”
 “i require no horses at all.”
 “but you would be able to sell them again. you would be able to get thrice
 their purchase price at the very first fair that was held.”
 “then sell them at that fair yourself, seeing that you are so certain of
 making a triple profit.”
 “oh, i should make it fast enough, only i want you to benefit by the
 transaction.”
 chichikov duly thanked his interlocutor, but continued to decline either
 the grey horse or the roan mare.
 “then buy a few dogs,” said nozdrev. “i can sell you a couple of hides
 a-quiver, ears well pricked, coats like quills, ribs barrel-shaped, and
 paws so tucked up as scarcely to graze the ground when they run.”
 “of what use would those dogs be to me? i am not a sportsman.”
 “but i want you to have the dogs. listen. if you won’t have the dogs, then
 buy my barrel-organ. ‘tis a splendid instrument. as a man of honour i can
 tell you that, when new, it cost me fifteen hundred roubles. well, you
 shall have it for nine hundred.”
 “come, come! what should i want with a barrel-organ? i am not a german, to
 go hauling it about the roads and begging for coppers.”
 “but this is quite a different kind of organ from the one which germans
 take about with them. you see, it is a real organ. look at it for
 yourself. it is made of the best wood. i will take you to have another
 view of it.”
 and seizing chichikov by the hand, nozdrev drew him towards the other
 room, where, in spite of the fact that chichikov, with his feet planted
 firmly on the floor, assured his host, again and again, that he knew
 exactly what the organ was like, he was forced once more to hear how
 marlborough went to the war.
 “then, since you don’t care to give me any money for it,” persisted
 nozdrev, “listen to the following proposal. i will give you the
 barrel-organ and all the dead souls which i possess, and in return you
 shall give me your britchka, and another three hundred roubles into the
 bargain.”
 “listen to the man! in that case, what should i have left to drive in?”
 “oh, i would stand you another britchka. come to the coach-house, and i
 will show you the one i mean. it only needs repainting to look a perfectly
 splendid britchka.”
 “the ramping, incorrigible devil!” thought chichikov to himself as at all
 hazards he resolved to escape from britchkas, organs, and every species of
 dog, however marvellously barrel-ribbed and tucked up of paw.
 “and in exchange, you shall have the britchka, the barrel-organ, and the
 dead souls,” repeated nozdrev.
 “i must decline the offer,” said chichikov.
 “and why?”
 “because i don’t want the things—i am full up already.”
 “i can see that you don’t know how things should be done between good
 friends and comrades. plainly you are a man of two faces.”
 “what do you mean, you fool? think for yourself. why should i acquire
 articles which i don’t want?”
 “say no more about it, if you please. i have quite taken your measure. but
 see here. should you care to play a game of banker? i am ready to stake
 both the dead souls and the barrel-organ at cards.”
 “no; to leave an issue to cards means to submit oneself to the unknown,”
 said chichikov, covertly glancing at the pack which nozdrev had got in his
 hands. somehow the way in which his companion had cut that pack seemed to
 him suspicious.
 “why ‘to the unknown’?” asked nozdrev. “there is no such thing as ‘the
 unknown.’ should luck be on your side, you may win the devil knows what a
 haul. oh, luck, luck!” he went on, beginning to deal, in the hope of
 raising a quarrel. “here is the cursed nine upon which, the other night, i
 lost everything. all along i knew that i should lose my money. said i to
 myself: ‘the devil take you, you false, accursed card!’”
 just as nozdrev uttered the words porphyri entered with a fresh bottle of
 liquor; but chichikov declined either to play or to drink.
 “why do you refuse to play?” asked nozdrev.
 “because i feel indisposed to do so. moreover, i must confess that i am no
 great hand at cards.”
 “why are you no great hand at them?”
 chichikov shrugged his shoulders. “because i am not,” he replied.
 “you are no great hand at anything, i think.”
 “what does that matter? god has made me so.”
 “the truth is that you are a thetuk, and nothing else. once upon a time i
 believed you to be a good fellow, but now i see that you don’t understand
 civility. one cannot speak to you as one would to an intimate, for there
 is no frankness or sincerity about you. you are a regular sobakevitch—just
 such another as he.”
 “for what reason are you abusing me? am i in any way at fault for
 declining to play cards? sell me those souls if you are the man to
 hesitate over such rubbish.”
 “the foul fiend take you! i was about to have given them to you for
 nothing, but now you shan’t have them at all—not if you offer me
 three kingdoms in exchange. henceforth i will have nothing to do with you,
 you cobbler, you dirty blacksmith! porphyri, go and tell the ostler to
 give the gentleman’s horses no oats, but only hay.”
 this development chichikov had hardly expected.
 “and do you,” added nozdrev to his guest, “get out of my sight.”
 yet in spite of this, host and guest took supper together—even
 though on this occasion the table was adorned with no wines of fictitious
 nomenclature, but only with a bottle which reared its solitary head beside
 a jug of what is usually known as vin ordinaire. when supper was over
 nozdrev said to chichikov as he conducted him to a side room where a bed
 had been made up:
 “this is where you are to sleep. i cannot very well wish you good-night.”
 left to himself on nozdrev’s departure, chichikov felt in a most
 unenviable frame of mind. full of inward vexation, he blamed himself
 bitterly for having come to see this man and so wasted valuable time; but
 even more did he blame himself for having told him of his scheme—for
 having acted as carelessly as a child or a madman. of a surety the scheme
 was not one which ought to have been confided to a man like nozdrev, for
 he was a worthless fellow who might lie about it, and append additions to
 it, and spread such stories as would give rise to god knows what scandals.
 “this is indeed bad!” chichikov said to himself. “i have been an absolute
 fool.” consequently he spent an uneasy night—this uneasiness being
 increased by the fact that a number of small, but vigorous, insects so
 feasted upon him that he could do nothing but scratch the spots and
 exclaim, “the devil take you and nozdrev alike!” only when morning was
 approaching did he fall asleep. on rising, he made it his first business
 (after donning dressing-gown and slippers) to cross the courtyard to the
 stable, for the purpose of ordering selifan to harness the britchka. just
 as he was returning from his errand he encountered nozdrev, clad in a
 dressing-gown, and holding a pipe between his teeth.
 host and guest greeted one another in friendly fashion, and nozdrev
 inquired how chichikov had slept.
 “fairly well,” replied chichikov, but with a touch of dryness in his tone.
 “the same with myself,” said nozdrev. “the truth is that such a lot of
 nasty brutes kept crawling over me that even to speak of it gives me the
 shudders. likewise, as the effect of last night’s doings, a whole squadron
 of soldiers seemed to be camping on my chest, and giving me a flogging.
 ugh! and whom also do you think i saw in a dream? you would never guess.
 why, it was staff-captain potsieluev and lieutenant kuvshinnikov!”
 “yes,” though chichikov to himself, “and i wish that they too would give
 you a public thrashing!”
 “i felt so ill!” went on nozdrev. “and just after i had fallen asleep
 something did come and sting me. probably it was a party of hag fleas.
 now, dress yourself, and i will be with you presently. first of all i must
 give that scoundrel of a bailiff a wigging.”
 chichikov departed to his own room to wash and dress; which process
 completed, he entered the dining-room to find the table laid with
 tea-things and a bottle of rum. clearly no broom had yet touched the
 place, for there remained traces of the previous night’s dinner and supper
 in the shape of crumbs thrown over the floor and tobacco ash on the
 tablecloth. the host himself, when he entered, was still clad in a
 dressing-gown exposing a hairy chest; and as he sat holding his pipe in
 his hand, and drinking tea from a cup, he would have made a model for the
 sort of painter who prefers to portray gentlemen of the less curled and
 scented order.
 “what think you?” he asked of chichikov after a short silence. “are you
 willing now to play me for those souls?”
 “i have told you that i never play cards. if the souls are for sale, i
 will buy them.”
 “i decline to sell them. such would not be the course proper between
 friends. but a game of banker would be quite another matter. let us deal
 the cards.”
 “i have told you that i decline to play.”
 “and you will not agree to an exchange?”
 “no.”
 “then look here. suppose we play a game of chess. if you win, the souls
 shall be yours. there are lots which i should like to see crossed off the
 revision list. hi, porphyri! bring me the chessboard.”
 “you are wasting your time. i will play neither chess nor cards.”
 “but chess is different from playing with a bank. in chess there can be
 neither luck nor cheating, for everything depends upon skill. in fact, i
 warn you that i cannot possibly play with you unless you allow me a move
 or two in advance.”
 “the same with me,” thought chichikov. “shall i, or shall i not, play this
 fellow? i used not to be a bad chess-player, and it is a sport in which he
 would find it more difficult to be up to his tricks.”
 “very well,” he added aloud. “i will play you at chess.”
 “and stake the souls for a hundred roubles?” asked nozdrev.
 “no. why for a hundred? would it not be sufficient to stake them for
 fifty?”
 “no. what would be the use of fifty? nevertheless, for the hundred roubles
 i will throw in a moderately old puppy, or else a gold seal and
 watch-chain.”
 “very well,” assented chichikov.
 “then how many moves are you going to allow me?”
 “is that to be part of the bargain? why, none, of course.”
 “at least allow me two.”
 “no, none. i myself am only a poor player.”
 “i know you and your poor play,” said nozdrev, moving a chessman.
 “in fact, it is a long time since last i had a chessman in my hand,”
 replied chichikov, also moving a piece.
 “ah! i know you and your poor play,” repeated nozdrev, moving a
 second chessman.
 “i say again that it is a long time since last i had a chessman in my
 hand.” and chichikov, in his turn, moved.
 “ah! i know you and your poor play,” repeated nozdrev, for the
 third time as he made a third move. at the same moment the cuff of one of
 his sleeves happened to dislodge another chessman from its position.
 “again, i say,” said chichikov, “that ‘tis a long time since last—but
 hi! look here! put that piece back in its place!”
 “what piece?”
 “this one.” and almost as chichikov spoke he saw a third chessman coming
 into view between the queens. god only knows whence that chessman had
 materialised.
 “no, no!” shouted chichikov as he rose from the table. “it is impossible
 to play with a man like you. people don’t move three pieces at once.”
 “how ‘three pieces’? all that i have done is to make a mistake—to
 move one of my pieces by accident. if you like, i will forfeit it to you.”
 “and whence has the third piece come?”
 “what third piece?”
 “the one now standing between the queens?”
 “‘tis one of your own pieces. surely you are forgetting?”
 “no, no, my friend. i have counted every move, and can remember each one.
 that piece has only just become added to the board. put it back in its
 place, i say.”
 “its place? which is its place?” but nozdrev had reddened a good deal. “i
 perceive you to be a strategist at the game.”
 “no, no, good friend. you are the strategist—though an unsuccessful
 one, as it happens.”
 “then of what are you supposing me capable? of cheating you?”
 “i am not supposing you capable of anything. all that i say is that i will
 not play with you any more.”
 “but you can’t refuse to,” said nozdrev, growing heated. “you see, the
 game has begun.”
 “nevertheless, i have a right not to continue it, seeing that you are not
 playing as an honest man should do.”
 “you are lying—you cannot truthfully say that.”
 “‘tis you who are lying.”
 “but i have not cheated. consequently you cannot refuse to play, but must
 continue the game to a finish.”
 “you cannot force me to play,” retorted chichikov coldly as, turning to
 the chessboard, he swept the pieces into confusion.
 nozdrev approached chichikov with a manner so threatening that the other
 fell back a couple of paces.
 “i will force you to play,” said nozdrev. “it is no use you making a mess
 of the chessboard, for i can remember every move. we will replace the
 chessmen exactly as they were.”
 “no, no, my friend. the game is over, and i play you no more.”
 “you say that you will not?”
 “yes. surely you can see for yourself that such a thing is impossible?”
 “that cock won’t fight. say at once that you refuse to play with me.” and
 nozdrev approached a step nearer.
 “very well; i do say that,” replied chichikov, and at the same moment
 raised his hands towards his face, for the dispute was growing heated. nor
 was the act of caution altogether unwarranted, for nozdrev also raised his
 fist, and it may be that one of our hero’s plump, pleasant-looking cheeks
 would have sustained an indelible insult had not he (chichikov) parried
 the blow and, seizing nozdrev by his whirling arms, held them fast.
 “porphyri! pavlushka!” shouted nozdrev as madly he strove to free himself.
 on hearing the words, chichikov, both because he wished to avoid rendering
 the servants witnesses of the unedifying scene and because he felt that it
 would be of no avail to hold nozdrev any longer, let go of the latter’s
 arms; but at the same moment porphyri and pavlushka entered the room—a
 pair of stout rascals with whom it would be unwise to meddle.
 “do you, or do you not, intend to finish the game?” said nozdrev. “give me
 a direct answer.”
 “no; it will not be possible to finish the game,” replied chichikov,
 glancing out of the window. he could see his britchka standing ready for
 him, and selifan evidently awaiting orders to draw up to the entrance
 steps. but from the room there was no escape, since in the doorway was
 posted the couple of well-built serving-men.
 “then it is as i say? you refuse to finish the game?” repeated nozdrev,
 his face as red as fire.
 “i would have finished it had you played like a man of honour. but, as it
 is, i cannot.”
 “you cannot, eh, you villain? you find that you cannot as soon as you find
 that you are not winning? thrash him, you fellows!” and as he spoke
 nozdrev grasped the cherrywood shank of his pipe. chichikov turned as
 white as a sheet. he tried to say something, but his quivering lips
 emitted no sound. “thrash him!” again shouted nozdrev as he rushed forward
 in a state of heat and perspiration more proper to a warrior who is
 attacking an impregnable fortress. “thrash him!” again he shouted in a
 voice like that of some half-demented lieutenant whose desperate bravery
 has acquired such a reputation that orders have had to be issued that his
 hands shall be held lest he attempt deeds of over-presumptuous daring.
 seized with the military spirit, however, the lieutenant’s head begins to
 whirl, and before his eye there flits the image of suvorov .
 he advances to the great encounter, and impulsively cries, “forward, my
 sons!”—cries it without reflecting that he may be spoiling the plan
 of the general attack, that millions of rifles may be protruding their
 muzzles through the embrasures of the impregnable, towering walls of the
 fortress, that his own impotent assault may be destined to be dissipated
 like dust before the wind, and that already there may have been launched
 on its whistling career the bullet which is to close for ever his
 vociferous throat. however, if nozdrev resembled the headstrong, desperate
 lieutenant whom we have just pictured as advancing upon a fortress, at
 least the fortress itself in no way resembled the impregnable stronghold
 which i have described. as a matter of fact, the fortress became seized
 with a panic which drove its spirit into its boots. first of all, the
 chair with which chichikov (the fortress in question) sought to defend
 himself was wrested from his grasp by the serfs, and then—blinking
 and neither alive nor dead—he turned to parry the circassian
 pipe-stem of his host. in fact, god only knows what would have happened
 had not the fates been pleased by a miracle to deliver chichikov’s elegant
 back and shoulders from the onslaught. suddenly, and as unexpectedly as
 though the sound had come from the clouds, there made itself heard the
 tinkling notes of a collar-bell, and then the rumble of wheels approaching
 the entrance steps, and, lastly, the snorting and hard breathing of a team
 of horses as a vehicle came to a standstill. involuntarily all present
 glanced through the window, and saw a man clad in a semi-military
 greatcoat leap from a buggy. after making an inquiry or two in the hall,
 he entered the dining-room just at the juncture when chichikov, almost
 swooning with terror, had found himself placed in about as awkward a
 situation as could well befall a mortal man.
 “kindly tell me which of you is monsieur nozdrev?” said the unknown with a
 glance of perplexity both at the person named (who was still standing with
 pipe-shank upraised) and at chichikov (who was just beginning to recover
 from his unpleasant predicament).
 “kindly tell me whom i have the honour of addressing?” retorted nozdrev as
 he approached the official.
 “i am the superintendent of rural police.”
 “and what do you want?”
 “i have come to fulfil a commission imposed upon me. that is to say, i
 have come to place you under arrest until your case shall have been
 decided.”
 “rubbish! what case, pray?”
 “the case in which you involved yourself when, in a drunken condition, and
 through the instrumentality of a walking-stick, you offered grave offence
 to the person of landowner maksimov.”
 “you lie! to your face i tell you that never in my life have i set eyes
 upon landowner maksimov.”
 “good sir, allow me to represent to you that i am a government officer.
 speeches like that you may address to your servants, but not to me.”
 at this point chichikov, without waiting for nozdrev’s reply, seized his
 cap, slipped behind the superintendent’s back, rushed out on to the
 verandah, sprang into his britchka, and ordered selifan to drive like the
 wind.
 certainly chichikov was a thorough coward, for, although the britchka
 pursued its headlong course until nozdrev’s establishment had disappeared
 behind hillocks and hedgerows, our hero continued to glance nervously
 behind him, as though every moment expecting to see a stern chase begin.
 his breath came with difficulty, and when he tried his heart with his
 hands he could feel it fluttering like a quail caught in a net.
 “what a sweat the fellow has thrown me into!” he thought to himself, while
 many a dire and forceful aspiration passed through his mind. indeed, the
 expressions to which he gave vent were most inelegant in their nature. but
 what was to be done next? he was a russian and thoroughly aroused. the
 affair had been no joke. “but for the superintendent,” he reflected, “i
 might never again have looked upon god’s daylight—i might have
 vanished like a bubble on a pool, and left neither trace nor posterity nor
 property nor an honourable name for my future offspring to inherit!” (it
 seemed that our hero was particularly anxious with regard to his possible
 issue).
 “what a scurvy barin!” mused selifan as he drove along. “never have i seen
 such a barin. i should like to spit in his face. ‘tis better to allow a
 man nothing to eat than to refuse to feed a horse properly. a horse needs
 his oats—they are his proper fare. even if you make a man procure a
 meal at his own expense, don’t deny a horse his oats, for he ought always
 to have them.”
 an equally poor opinion of nozdrev seemed to be cherished also by the
 steeds, for not only were the bay and the assessor clearly out of spirits,
 but even the skewbald was wearing a dejected air. true, at home the
 skewbald got none but the poorer sorts of oats to eat, and selifan never
 filled his trough without having first called him a villain; but at least
 they were oats, and not hay—they were stuff which could be chewed
 with a certain amount of relish. also, there was the fact that at
 intervals he could intrude his long nose into his companions’ troughs
 (especially when selifan happened to be absent from the stable) and
 ascertain what their provender was like. but at nozdrev’s there had been
 nothing but hay! that was not right. all three horses felt greatly
 discontented.
 but presently the malcontents had their reflections cut short in a very
 rude and unexpected manner. that is to say, they were brought back to
 practicalities by coming into violent collision with a six-horsed vehicle,
 while upon their heads descended both a babel of cries from the ladies
 inside and a storm of curses and abuse from the coachman. “ah, you damned
 fool!” he vociferated. “i shouted to you loud enough! draw out, you old
 raven, and keep to the right! are you drunk?” selifan himself felt
 conscious that he had been careless, but since a russian does not care to
 admit a fault in the presence of strangers, he retorted with dignity: “why
 have you run into us? did you leave your eyes behind you at the last
 tavern that you stopped at?” with that he started to back the britchka, in
 the hope that it might get clear of the other’s harness; but this would
 not do, for the pair were too hopelessly intertwined. meanwhile the
 skewbald snuffed curiously at his new acquaintances as they stood planted
 on either side of him; while the ladies in the vehicle regarded the scene
 with an expression of terror. one of them was an old woman, and the other
 a damsel of about sixteen. a mass of golden hair fell daintily from a
 small head, and the oval of her comely face was as shapely as an egg, and
 white with the transparent whiteness seen when the hands of a housewife
 hold a new-laid egg to the light to let the sun’s rays filter through its
 shell. the same tint marked the maiden’s ears where they glowed in the
 sunshine, and, in short, what with the tears in her wide-open, arresting
 eyes, she presented so attractive a picture that our hero bestowed upon it
 more than a passing glance before he turned his attention to the hubbub
 which was being raised among the horses and the coachmen.
 “back out, you rook of nizhni novgorod!” the strangers’ coachman shouted.
 selifan tightened his reins, and the other driver did the same. the horses
 stepped back a little, and then came together again—this time
 getting a leg or two over the traces. in fact, so pleased did the skewbald
 seem with his new friends that he refused to stir from the melee into
 which an unforeseen chance had plunged him. laying his muzzle lovingly
 upon the neck of one of his recently-acquired acquaintances, he seemed to
 be whispering something in that acquaintance’s ear—and whispering
 pretty nonsense, too, to judge from the way in which that confidant kept
 shaking his ears.
 at length peasants from a village which happened to be near the scene of
 the accident tackled the mess; and since a spectacle of that kind is to
 the russian muzhik what a newspaper or a club-meeting is to the german,
 the vehicles soon became the centre of a crowd, and the village denuded
 even of its old women and children. the traces were disentangled, and a
 few slaps on the nose forced the skewbald to draw back a little; after
 which the teams were straightened out and separated. nevertheless, either
 sheer obstinacy or vexation at being parted from their new friends caused
 the strange team absolutely to refuse to move a leg. their driver laid the
 whip about them, but still they stood as though rooted to the spot. at
 length the participatory efforts of the peasants rose to an unprecedented
 degree of enthusiasm, and they shouted in an intermittent chorus the
 advice, “do you, andrusha, take the head of the trace horse on the right,
 while uncle mitai mounts the shaft horse. get up, uncle mitai.” upon that
 the lean, long, and red-bearded uncle mitai mounted the shaft horse; in
 which position he looked like a village steeple or the winder which is
 used to raise water from wells. the coachman whipped up his steeds afresh,
 but nothing came of it, and uncle mitai had proved useless. “hold on, hold
 on!” shouted the peasants again. “do you, uncle mitai, mount the trace
 horse, while uncle minai mounts the shaft horse.” whereupon uncle minai—a
 peasant with a pair of broad shoulders, a beard as black as charcoal, and
 a belly like the huge samovar in which sbiten is brewed for all attending
 a local market—hastened to seat himself upon the shaft horse, which
 almost sank to the ground beneath his weight. “now they will go all
 right!” the muzhiks exclaimed. “lay it on hot, lay it on hot! give that
 sorrel horse the whip, and make him squirm like a koramora .”
 nevertheless, the affair in no way progressed; wherefore, seeing that
 flogging was of no use, uncles mitai and minai both mounted the sorrel,
 while andrusha seated himself upon the trace horse. then the coachman
 himself lost patience, and sent the two uncles about their business—and
 not before it was time, seeing that the horses were steaming in a way that
 made it clear that, unless they were first winded, they would never reach
 the next posthouse. so they were given a moment’s rest. that done, they
 moved off of their own accord!
 throughout, chichikov had been gazing at the young unknown with great
 attention, and had even made one or two attempts to enter into
 conversation with her: but without success. indeed, when the ladies
 departed, it was as in a dream that he saw the girl’s comely presence, the
 delicate features of her face, and the slender outline of her form vanish
 from his sight; it was as in a dream that once more he saw only the road,
 the britchka, the three horses, selifan, and the bare, empty fields.
 everywhere in life—yes, even in the plainest, the dingiest ranks of
 society, as much as in those which are uniformly bright and presentable—a
 man may happen upon some phenomenon which is so entirely different from
 those which have hitherto fallen to his lot. everywhere through the web of
 sorrow of which our lives are woven there may suddenly break a clear,
 radiant thread of joy; even as suddenly along the street of some poor,
 poverty-stricken village which, ordinarily, sees nought but a farm waggon
 there may came bowling a gorgeous coach with plated harness, picturesque
 horses, and a glitter of glass, so that the peasants stand gaping, and do
 not resume their caps until long after the strange equipage has become
 lost to sight. thus the golden-haired maiden makes a sudden, unexpected
 appearance in our story, and as suddenly, as unexpectedly, disappears.
 indeed, had it not been that the person concerned was chichikov, and not
 some youth of twenty summers—a hussar or a student or, in general, a
 man standing on the threshold of life—what thoughts would not have
 sprung to birth, and stirred and spoken, within him; for what a length of
 time would he not have stood entranced as he stared into the distance and
 forgot alike his journey, the business still to be done, the possibility
 of incurring loss through lingering—himself, his vocation, the
 world, and everything else that the world contains!
 but in the present case the hero was a man of middle-age, and of cautious
 and frigid temperament. true, he pondered over the incident, but in more
 deliberate fashion than a younger man would have done. that is to say, his
 reflections were not so irresponsible and unsteady. “she was a comely
 damsel,” he said to himself as he opened his snuff-box and took a pinch.
 “but the important point is: is she also a nice damsel? one thing she has
 in her favour—and that is that she appears only just to have left
 school, and not to have had time to become womanly in the worser sense. at
 present, therefore, she is like a child. everything in her is simple, and
 she says just what she thinks, and laughs merely when she feels inclined.
 such a damsel might be made into anything—or she might be turned
 into worthless rubbish. the latter, i surmise, for trudging after her she
 will have a fond mother and a bevy of aunts, and so forth—persons
 who, within a year, will have filled her with womanishness to the point
 where her own father wouldn’t know her. and to that there will be added
 pride and affectation, and she will begin to observe established rules,
 and to rack her brains as to how, and how much, she ought to talk, and to
 whom, and where, and so forth. every moment will see her growing timorous
 and confused lest she be saying too much. finally, she will develop into a
 confirmed prevaricator, and end by marrying the devil knows whom!”
 chichikov paused awhile. then he went on: “yet i should like to know who
 she is, and who her father is, and whether he is a rich landowner of good
 standing, or merely a respectable man who has acquired a fortune in the
 service of the government. should he allow her, on marriage, a dowry of,
 say, two hundred thousand roubles, she will be a very nice catch indeed.
 she might even, so to speak, make a man of good breeding happy.”
 indeed, so attractively did the idea of the two hundred thousand roubles
 begin to dance before his imagination that he felt a twinge of
 self-reproach because, during the hubbub, he had not inquired of the
 postillion or the coachman who the travellers might be. but soon the sight
 of sobakevitch’s country house dissipated his thoughts, and forced him to
 return to his stock subject of reflection.
 sobakevitch’s country house and estate were of very fair size, and on each
 side of the mansion were expanses of birch and pine forest in two shades
 of green. the wooden edifice itself had dark-grey walls and a red-gabled
 roof, for it was a mansion of the kind which russia builds for her
 military settlers and for german colonists. a noticeable circumstance was
 the fact that the taste of the architect had differed from that of the
 proprietor—the former having manifestly been a pedant and desirous
 of symmetry, and the latter having wished only for comfort. consequently
 he (the proprietor) had dispensed with all windows on one side of the
 mansion, and had caused to be inserted, in their place, only a small
 aperture which, doubtless, was intended to light an otherwise dark
 lumber-room. likewise, the architect’s best efforts had failed to cause
 the pediment to stand in the centre of the building, since the proprietor
 had had one of its four original columns removed. evidently durability had
 been considered throughout, for the courtyard was enclosed by a strong and
 very high wooden fence, and both the stables, the coach-house, and the
 culinary premises were partially constructed of beams warranted to last
 for centuries. nay, even the wooden huts of the peasantry were wonderful
 in the solidity of their construction, and not a clay wall or a carved
 pattern or other device was to be seen. everything fitted exactly into its
 right place, and even the draw-well of the mansion was fashioned of the
 oakwood usually thought suitable only for mills or ships. in short,
 wherever chichikov’s eye turned he saw nothing that was not free from
 shoddy make and well and skilfully arranged. as he approached the entrance
 steps he caught sight of two faces peering from a window. one of them was
 that of a woman in a mobcap with features as long and as narrow as a
 cucumber, and the other that of a man with features as broad and as short
 as the moldavian pumpkins (known as gorlianki) whereof balallaiki—the
 species of light, two-stringed instrument which constitutes the pride and
 the joy of the gay young fellow of twenty as he sits winking and smiling
 at the white-necked, white-bosomed maidens who have gathered to listen to
 his low-pitched tinkling—are fashioned. this scrutiny made, both
 faces withdrew, and there came out on to the entrance steps a lacquey clad
 in a grey jacket and a stiff blue collar. this functionary conducted
 chichikov into the hall, where he was met by the master of the house
 himself, who requested his guest to enter, and then led him into the inner
 part of the mansion.
 a covert glance at sobakevitch showed our hero that his host exactly
 resembled a moderate-sized bear. to complete the resemblance,
 sobakevitch’s long frockcoat and baggy trousers were of the precise colour
 of a bear’s hide, while, when shuffling across the floor, he made a
 criss-cross motion of the legs, and had, in addition, a constant habit of
 treading upon his companion’s toes. as for his face, it was of the warm,
 ardent tint of a piatok . persons of this kind—persons
 to whose designing nature has devoted not much thought, and in the
 fashioning of whose frames she has used no instruments so delicate as a
 file or a gimlet and so forth—are not uncommon. such persons she
 merely roughhews. one cut with a hatchet, and there results a nose;
 another such cut with a hatchet, and there materialises a pair of lips;
 two thrusts with a drill, and there issues a pair of eyes. lastly,
 scorning to plane down the roughness, she sends out that person into the
 world, saying: “there is another live creature.” sobakevitch was just such
 a ragged, curiously put together figure—though the above model would
 seem to have been followed more in his upper portion than in his lower.
 one result was that he seldom turned his head to look at the person with
 whom he was speaking, but, rather, directed his eyes towards, say, the
 stove corner or the doorway. as host and guest crossed the dining-room
 chichikov directed a second glance at his companion. “he is a bear, and
 nothing but a bear,” he thought to himself. and, indeed, the strange
 comparison was inevitable. incidentally, sobakevitch’s christian name and
 patronymic were michael semenovitch. of his habit of treading upon other
 people’s toes chichikov had become fully aware; wherefore he stepped
 cautiously, and, throughout, allowed his host to take the lead. as a
 matter of fact, sobakevitch himself seemed conscious of his failing, for
 at intervals he would inquire: “i hope i have not hurt you?” and
 chichikov, with a word of thanks, would reply that as yet he had sustained
 no injury.
 at length they reached the drawing-room, where sobakevitch pointed to an
 armchair, and invited his guest to be seated. chichikov gazed with
 interest at the walls and the pictures. in every such picture there were
 portrayed either young men or greek generals of the type of movrogordato
 (clad in a red uniform and breaches), kanaris, and others; and all these
 heroes were depicted with a solidity of thigh and a wealth of moustache
 which made the beholder simply shudder with awe. among them there were
 placed also, according to some unknown system, and for some unknown
 reason, firstly, bagration —tall and thin, and with a
 cluster of small flags and cannon beneath him, and the whole set in the
 narrowest of frames—and, secondly, the greek heroine, bobelina,
 whose legs looked larger than do the whole bodies of the drawing-room
 dandies of the present day. apparently the master of the house was himself
 a man of health and strength, and therefore liked to have his apartments
 adorned with none but folk of equal vigour and robustness. lastly, in the
 window, and suspended cheek by jowl with bobelina, there hung a cage
 whence at intervals there peered forth a white-spotted blackbird. like
 everything else in the apartment, it bore a strong resemblance to
 sobakevitch. when host and guest had been conversing for two minutes or so
 the door opened, and there entered the hostess—a tall lady in a cap
 adorned with ribands of domestic colouring and manufacture. she entered
 deliberately, and held her head as erect as a palm.
 “this is my wife, theodulia ivanovna,” said sobakevitch.
 chichikov approached and took her hand. the fact that she raised it nearly
 to the level of his lips apprised him of the circumstance that it had just
 been rinsed in cucumber oil.
 “my dear, allow me to introduce paul ivanovitch chichikov,” added
 sobakevitch. “he has the honour of being acquainted both with our governor
 and with our postmaster.”
 upon this theodulia ivanovna requested her guest to be seated, and
 accompanied the invitation with the kind of bow usually employed only by
 actresses who are playing the role of queens. next, she took a seat upon
 the sofa, drew around her her merino gown, and sat thereafter without
 moving an eyelid or an eyebrow. as for chichikov, he glanced upwards, and
 once more caught sight of kanaris with his fat thighs and interminable
 moustache, and of bobelina and the blackbird. for fully five minutes all
 present preserved a complete silence—the only sound audible being
 that of the blackbird’s beak against the wooden floor of the cage as the
 creature fished for grains of corn. meanwhile chichikov again surveyed the
 room, and saw that everything in it was massive and clumsy in the highest
 degree; as also that everything was curiously in keeping with the master
 of the house. for example, in one corner of the apartment there stood a
 hazelwood bureau with a bulging body on four grotesque legs—the
 perfect image of a bear. also, the tables and the chairs were of the same
 ponderous, unrestful order, and every single article in the room appeared
 to be saying either, “i, too, am a sobakevitch,” or “i am exactly like
 sobakevitch.”
 “i heard speak of you one day when i was visiting the president of the
 council,” said chichikov, on perceiving that no one else had a mind to
 begin a conversation. “that was on thursday last. we had a very pleasant
 evening.”
 “yes, on that occasion i was not there,” replied sobakevitch.
 “what a nice man he is!”
 “who is?” inquired sobakevitch, gazing into the corner by the stove.
 “the president of the local council.”
 “did he seem so to you? true, he is a mason, but he is also the greatest
 fool that the world ever saw.”
 chichikov started a little at this mordant criticism, but soon pulled
 himself together again, and continued:
 “of course, every man has his weakness. yet the president seems to be an
 excellent fellow.”
 “and do you think the same of the governor?”
 “yes. why not?”
 “because there exists no greater rogue than he.”
 “what? the governor a rogue?” ejaculated chichikov, at a loss to
 understand how the official in question could come to be numbered with
 thieves. “let me say that i should never have guessed it. permit me also
 to remark that his conduct would hardly seem to bear out your opinion—he
 seems so gentle a man.” and in proof of this chichikov cited the purses
 which the governor knitted, and also expatiated on the mildness of his
 features.
 “he has the face of a robber,” said sobakevitch. “were you to give him a
 knife, and to turn him loose on a turnpike, he would cut your throat for
 two kopecks. and the same with the vice-governor. the pair are just gog
 and magog.”
 “evidently he is not on good terms with them,” thought chichikov to
 himself. “i had better pass to the chief of police, which whom he does
 seem to be friendly.” accordingly he added aloud: “for my own part, i
 should give the preference to the head of the gendarmery. what a frank,
 outspoken nature he has! and what an element of simplicity does his
 expression contain!”
 “he is mean to the core,” remarked sobakevitch coldly. “he will sell you
 and cheat you, and then dine at your table. yes, i know them all, and
 every one of them is a swindler, and the town a nest of rascals engaged in
 robbing one another. not a man of the lot is there but would sell christ.
 yet stay: one decent fellow there is—the public prosecutor; though
 even he, if the truth be told, is little better than a pig.”
 after these eulogia chichikov saw that it would be useless to continue
 running through the list of officials—more especially since suddenly
 he had remembered that sobakevitch was not at any time given to commending
 his fellow man.
 “let us go to luncheon, my dear,” put in theodulia ivanovna to her spouse.
 “yes; pray come to table,” said sobakevitch to his guest; whereupon they
 consumed the customary glass of vodka (accompanied by sundry snacks of
 salted cucumber and other dainties) with which russians, both in town and
 country, preface a meal. then they filed into the dining-room in the wake
 of the hostess, who sailed on ahead like a goose swimming across a pond.
 the small dining-table was found to be laid for four persons—the
 fourth place being occupied by a lady or a young girl (it would have been
 difficult to say which exactly) who might have been either a relative, the
 housekeeper, or a casual visitor. certain persons in the world exist, not
 as personalities in themselves, but as spots or specks on the
 personalities of others. always they are to be seen sitting in the same
 place, and holding their heads at exactly the same angle, so that one
 comes within an ace of mistaking them for furniture, and thinks to oneself
 that never since the day of their birth can they have spoken a single
 word.
 “my dear,” said sobakevitch, “the cabbage soup is excellent.” with that he
 finished his portion, and helped himself to a generous measure of niania
 —the
 dish which follows shtchi and consists of a sheep’s stomach stuffed with
 black porridge, brains, and other things. “what niania this is!” he added
 to chichikov. “never would you get such stuff in a town, where one is
 given the devil knows what.”
 “nevertheless the governor keeps a fair table,” said chichikov.
 “yes, but do you know what all the stuff is made of?” retorted
 sobakevitch. “if you did know you would never touch it.”
 “of course i am not in a position to say how it is prepared, but at least
 the pork cutlets and the boiled fish seemed excellent.”
 “ah, it might have been thought so; yet i know the way in which such
 things are bought in the market-place. they are bought by some rascal of a
 cook whom a frenchman has taught how to skin a tomcat and then serve it up
 as hare.”
 “ugh! what horrible things you say!” put in madame.
 “well, my dear, that is how things are done, and it is no fault of mine
 that it is so. moreover, everything that is left over—everything
 that we (pardon me for mentioning it) cast into the slop-pail—is
 used by such folk for making soup.”
 “always at table you begin talking like this!” objected his helpmeet.
 “and why not?” said sobakevitch. “i tell you straight that i would not eat
 such nastiness, even had i made it myself. sugar a frog as much as you
 like, but never shall it pass my lips. nor would i swallow an oyster, for
 i know only too well what an oyster may resemble. but have some mutton,
 friend chichikov. it is shoulder of mutton, and very different stuff from
 the mutton which they cook in noble kitchens—mutton which has been
 kicking about the market-place four days or more. all that sort of cookery
 has been invented by french and german doctors, and i should like to hang
 them for having done so. they go and prescribe diets and a hunger cure as
 though what suits their flaccid german systems will agree with a russian
 stomach! such devices are no good at all.” sobakevitch shook his head
 wrathfully. “fellows like those are for ever talking of civilisation. as
 if that sort of thing was civilisation! phew!” (perhaps the speaker’s
 concluding exclamation would have been even stronger had he not been
 seated at table.) “for myself, i will have none of it. when i eat pork at
 a meal, give me the whole pig; when mutton, the whole sheep; when goose,
 the whole of the bird. two dishes are better than a thousand, provided
 that one can eat of them as much as one wants.”
 and he proceeded to put precept into practice by taking half the shoulder
 of mutton on to his plate, and then devouring it down to the last morsel
 of gristle and bone.
 “my word!” reflected chichikov. “the fellow has a pretty good holding
 capacity!”
 “none of it for me,” repeated sobakevitch as he wiped his hands on his
 napkin. “i don’t intend to be like a fellow named plushkin, who owns eight
 hundred souls, yet dines worse than does my shepherd.”
 “who is plushkin?” asked chichikov.
 “a miser,” replied sobakevitch. “such a miser as never you could imagine.
 even convicts in prison live better than he does. and he starves his
 servants as well.”
 “really?” ejaculated chichikov, greatly interested. “should you, then, say
 that he has lost many peasants by death?”
 “certainly. they keep dying like flies.”
 “then how far from here does he reside?”
 “about five versts.”
 “only five versts?” exclaimed chichikov, feeling his heart beating
 joyously. “ought one, when leaving your gates, to turn to the right or to
 the left?”
 “i should be sorry to tell you the way to the house of such a cur,” said
 sobakevitch. “a man had far better go to hell than to plushkin’s.”
 “quite so,” responded chichikov. “my only reason for asking you is that it
 interests me to become acquainted with any and every sort of locality.”
 to the shoulder of mutton there succeeded, in turn, cutlets (each one
 larger than a plate), a turkey of about the size of a calf, eggs, rice,
 pastry, and every conceivable thing which could possibly be put into a
 stomach. there the meal ended. when he rose from table chichikov felt as
 though a pood’s weight were inside him. in the drawing-room the company
 found dessert awaiting them in the shape of pears, plums, and apples; but
 since neither host nor guest could tackle these particular dainties the
 hostess removed them to another room. taking advantage of her absence,
 chichikov turned to sobakevitch (who, prone in an armchair, seemed, after
 his ponderous meal, to be capable of doing little beyond belching and
 grunting—each such grunt or belch necessitating a subsequent signing
 of the cross over the mouth), and intimated to him a desire to have a
 little private conversation concerning a certain matter. at this moment
 the hostess returned.
 “here is more dessert,” she said. “pray have a few radishes stewed in
 honey.”
 “later, later,” replied sobakevitch. “do you go to your room, and paul
 ivanovitch and i will take off our coats and have a nap.”
 upon this the good lady expressed her readiness to send for feather beds
 and cushions, but her husband expressed a preference for slumbering in an
 armchair, and she therefore departed. when she had gone sobakevitch
 inclined his head in an attitude of willingness to listen to chichikov’s
 business. our hero began in a sort of detached manner—touching
 lightly upon the subject of the russian empire, and expatiating upon the
 immensity of the same, and saying that even the empire of ancient rome had
 been of considerably smaller dimensions. meanwhile sobakevitch sat with
 his head drooping.
 from that chichikov went on to remark that, according to the statutes of
 the said russian empire (which yielded to none in glory—so much so
 that foreigners marvelled at it), peasants on the census lists who had
 ended their earthly careers were nevertheless, on the rendering of new
 lists, returned equally with the living, to the end that the courts might
 be relieved of a multitude of trifling, useless emendations which might
 complicate the already sufficiently complex mechanism of the state.
 nevertheless, said chichikov, the general equity of this measure did not
 obviate a certain amount of annoyance to landowners, since it forced them
 to pay upon a non-living article the tax due upon a living. hence (our
 hero concluded) he (chichikov) was prepared, owing to the personal respect
 which he felt for sobakevitch, to relieve him, in part, of the irksome
 obligation referred to (in passing, it may be said that chichikov referred
 to his principal point only guardedly, for he called the souls which he
 was seeking not “dead,” but “non-existent”).
 meanwhile sobakevitch listened with bent head; though something like a
 trace of expression dawned in his face as he did so. ordinarily his body
 lacked a soul—or, if he did possess a soul, he seemed to keep it
 elsewhere than where it ought to have been; so that, buried beneath
 mountains (as it were) or enclosed within a massive shell, its movements
 produced no sort of agitation on the surface.
 “well?” said chichikov—though not without a certain tremor of
 diffidence as to the possible response.
 “you are after dead souls?” were sobakevitch’s perfectly simple words. he
 spoke without the least surprise in his tone, and much as though the
 conversation had been turning on grain.
 “yes,” replied chichikov, and then, as before, softened down the
 expression “dead souls.”
 “they are to be found,” said sobakevitch. “why should they not be?”
 “then of course you will be glad to get rid of any that you may chance to
 have?”
 “yes, i shall have no objection to selling them.” at this point the
 speaker raised his head a little, for it had struck him that surely the
 would-be buyer must have some advantage in view.
 “the devil!” thought chichikov to himself. “here is he selling the goods
 before i have even had time to utter a word!”
 “and what about the price?” he added aloud. “of course, the articles are
 not of a kind very easy to appraise.”
 “i should be sorry to ask too much,” said sobakevitch. “how would a
 hundred roubles per head suit you?”
 “what, a hundred roubles per head?” chichikov stared open-mouthed at his
 host—doubting whether he had heard aright, or whether his host’s
 slow-moving tongue might not have inadvertently substituted one word for
 another.
 “yes. is that too much for you?” said sobakevitch. then he added: “what is
 your own price?”
 “my own price? i think that we cannot properly have understood one another—that
 you must have forgotten of what the goods consist. with my hand on my
 heart do i submit that eight grivni per soul would be a handsome, a very
 handsome, offer.”
 “what? eight grivni?”
 “in my opinion, a higher offer would be impossible.”
 “but i am not a seller of boots.”
 “no; yet you, for your part, will agree that these souls are not live
 human beings?”
 “i suppose you hope to find fools ready to sell you souls on the census
 list for a couple of groats apiece?”
 “pardon me, but why do you use the term ‘on the census list’? the souls
 themselves have long since passed away, and have left behind them only
 their names. not to trouble you with any further discussion of the
 subject, i can offer you a rouble and a half per head, but no more.”
 “you should be ashamed even to mention such a sum! since you deal in
 articles of this kind, quote me a genuine price.”
 “i cannot, michael semenovitch. believe me, i cannot. what a man cannot
 do, that he cannot do.” the speaker ended by advancing another half-rouble
 per head.
 “but why hang back with your money?” said sobakevitch. “of a truth i am
 not asking much of you. any other rascal than myself would have cheated
 you by selling you old rubbish instead of good, genuine souls, whereas i
 should be ready to give you of my best, even were you buying only
 nut-kernels. for instance, look at wheelwright michiev. never was there
 such a one to build spring carts! and his handiwork was not like your
 moscow handiwork—good only for an hour. no, he did it all himself,
 even down to the varnishing.”
 chichikov opened his mouth to remark that, nevertheless, the said michiev
 had long since departed this world; but sobakevitch’s eloquence had got
 too thoroughly into its stride to admit of any interruption.
 “and look, too, at probka stepan, the carpenter,” his host went on. “i
 will wager my head that nowhere else would you find such a workman. what a
 strong fellow he was! he had served in the guards, and the lord only knows
 what they had given for him, seeing that he was over three arshins in
 height.”
 again chichikov tried to remark that probka was dead, but sobakevitch’s
 tongue was borne on the torrent of its own verbiage, and the only thing to
 be done was to listen.
 “and milushkin, the bricklayer! he could build a stove in any house you
 liked! and maksim teliatnikov, the bootmaker! anything that he drove his
 awl into became a pair of boots—and boots for which you would be
 thankful, although he was a bit foul of the mouth. and eremi
 sorokoplechin, too! he was the best of the lot, and used to work at his
 trade in moscow, where he paid a tax of five hundred roubles. well,
 there’s an assortment of serfs for you!—a very different assortment
 from what plushkin would sell you!”
 “but permit me,” at length put in chichikov, astounded at this flood of
 eloquence to which there appeared to be no end. “permit me, i say, to
 inquire why you enumerate the talents of the deceased, seeing that they
 are all of them dead, and that therefore there can be no sense in doing
 so. ‘a dead body is only good to prop a fence with,’ says the proverb.”
 “of course they are dead,” replied sobakevitch, but rather as though the
 idea had only just occurred to him, and was giving him food for thought.
 “but tell me, now: what is the use of listing them as still alive? and
 what is the use of them themselves? they are flies, not human beings.”
 “well,” said chichikov, “they exist, though only in idea.”
 “but no—not only in idea. i tell you that nowhere else would you
 find such a fellow for working heavy tools as was michiev. he had the
 strength of a horse in his shoulders.” and, with the words, sobakevitch
 turned, as though for corroboration, to the portrait of bagration, as is
 frequently done by one of the parties in a dispute when he purports to
 appeal to an extraneous individual who is not only unknown to him, but
 wholly unconnected with the subject in hand; with the result that the
 individual is left in doubt whether to make a reply, or whether to betake
 himself elsewhere.
 “nevertheless, i cannot give you more than two roubles per head,” said
 chichikov.
 “well, as i don’t want you to swear that i have asked too much of you and
 won’t meet you halfway, suppose, for friendship’s sake, that you pay me
 seventy-five roubles in assignats?”
 “good heavens!” thought chichikov to himself. “does the man take me for a
 fool?” then he added aloud: “the situation seems to me a strange one, for
 it is as though we were performing a stage comedy. no other explanation
 would meet the case. yet you appear to be a man of sense, and possessed of
 some education. the matter is a very simple one. the question is: what is
 a dead soul worth, and is it of any use to any one?”
 “it is of use to you, or you would not be buying such articles.”
 chichikov bit his lip, and stood at a loss for a retort. he tried to
 saying something about “family and domestic circumstances,” but
 sobakevitch cut him short with:
 “i don’t want to know your private affairs, for i never poke my nose into
 such things. you need the souls, and i am ready to sell them. should you
 not buy them, i think you will repent it.”
 “two roubles is my price,” repeated chichikov.
 “come, come! as you have named that sum, i can understand your not liking
 to go back upon it; but quote me a bona fide figure.”
 “the devil fly away with him!” mused chichikov. “however, i will add
 another half-rouble.” and he did so.
 “indeed!” said sobakevitch. “well, my last word upon it is—fifty
 roubles in assignats. that will mean a sheer loss to me, for nowhere else
 in the world could you buy better souls than mine.”
 “the old skinflint!” muttered chichikov. then he added aloud, with
 irritation in his tone: “see here. this is a serious matter. any one but
 you would be thankful to get rid of the souls. only a fool would stick to
 them, and continue to pay the tax.”
 “yes, but remember (and i say it wholly in a friendly way) that
 transactions of this kind are not generally allowed, and that any one
 would say that a man who engages in them must have some rather doubtful
 advantage in view.”
 “have it your own away,” said chichikov, with assumed indifference. “as a
 matter of fact, i am not purchasing for profit, as you suppose, but to
 humour a certain whim of mine. two and a half roubles is the most that i
 can offer.”
 “bless your heart!” retorted the host. “at least give me thirty roubles in
 assignats, and take the lot.”
 “no, for i see that you are unwilling to sell. i must say good-day to
 you.”
 “hold on, hold on!” exclaimed sobakevitch, retaining his guest’s hand, and
 at the same moment treading heavily upon his toes—so heavily,
 indeed, that chichikov gasped and danced with the pain.
 “i beg your pardon!” said sobakevitch hastily. “evidently i have hurt you.
 pray sit down again.”
 “no,” retorted chichikov. “i am merely wasting my time, and must be off.”
 “oh, sit down just for a moment. i have something more agreeable to say.”
 and, drawing closer to his guest, sobakevitch whispered in his ear, as
 though communicating to him a secret: “how about twenty-five roubles?”
 “no, no, no!” exclaimed chichikov. “i won’t give you even a quarter of
 that. i won’t advance another kopeck.”
 for a while sobakevitch remained silent, and chichikov did the same. this
 lasted for a couple of minutes, and, meanwhile, the aquiline-nosed
 bagration gazed from the wall as though much interested in the bargaining.
 “what is your outside price?” at length said sobakevitch.
 “two and a half roubles.”
 “then you seem to rate a human soul at about the same value as a boiled
 turnip. at least give me three roubles.”
 “no, i cannot.”
 “pardon me, but you are an impossible man to deal with. however, even
 though it will mean a dead loss to me, and you have not shown a very nice
 spirit about it, i cannot well refuse to please a friend. i suppose a
 purchase deed had better be made out in order to have everything in
 order?”
 “of course.”
 “then for that purpose let us repair to the town.”
 the affair ended in their deciding to do this on the morrow, and to
 arrange for the signing of a deed of purchase. next, chichikov requested a
 list of the peasants; to which sobakevitch readily agreed. indeed, he went
 to his writing-desk then and there, and started to indite a list which
 gave not only the peasants’ names, but also their late qualifications.
 meanwhile chichikov, having nothing else to do, stood looking at the
 spacious form of his host; and as he gazed at his back as broad as that of
 a cart horse, and at the legs as massive as the iron standards which adorn
 a street, he could not help inwardly ejaculating:
 “truly god has endowed you with much! though not adjusted with nicety, at
 least you are strongly built. i wonder whether you were born a bear or
 whether you have come to it through your rustic life, with its tilling of
 crops and its trading with peasants? yet no; i believe that, even if you
 had received a fashionable education, and had mixed with society, and had
 lived in st. petersburg, you would still have been just the kulak 
 that you are. the only difference is that circumstances, as they stand,
 permit of your polishing off a stuffed shoulder of mutton at a meal;
 whereas in st. petersburg you would have been unable to do so. also, as
 circumstances stand, you have under you a number of peasants, whom you
 treat well for the reason that they are your property; whereas, otherwise,
 you would have had under you tchinovniks : whom you
 would have bullied because they were not your property. also, you would
 have robbed the treasury, since a kulak always remains a money-grubber.”
 “the list is ready,” said sobakevitch, turning round.
 “indeed! then please let me look at it.” chichikov ran his eye over the
 document, and could not but marvel at its neatness and accuracy. not only
 were there set forth in it the trade, the age, and the pedigree of every
 serf, but on the margin of the sheet were jotted remarks concerning each
 serf’s conduct and sobriety. truly it was a pleasure to look at it.
 “and do you mind handing me the earnest money?” said sobakevitch.
 “yes, i do. why need that be done? you can receive the money in a lump sum
 as soon as we visit the town.”
 “but it is always the custom, you know,” asserted sobakevitch.
 “then i cannot follow it, for i have no money with me. however, here are
 ten roubles.”
 “ten roubles, indeed? you might as well hand me fifty while you are about
 it.”
 once more chichikov started to deny that he had any money upon him, but
 sobakevitch insisted so strongly that this was not so that at length the
 guest pulled out another fifteen roubles, and added them to the ten
 already produced.
 “kindly give me a receipt for the money,” he added.
 “a receipt? why should i give you a receipt?”
 “because it is better to do so, in order to guard against mistakes.”
 “very well; but first hand me over the money.”
 “the money? i have it here. do you write out the receipt, and then the
 money shall be yours.”
 “pardon me, but how am i to write out the receipt before i have seen the
 cash?”
 chichikov placed the notes in sobakevitch’s hand; whereupon the host moved
 nearer to the table, and added to the list of serfs a note that he had
 received for the peasants, therewith sold, the sum of twenty-five roubles,
 as earnest money. this done, he counted the notes once more.
 “this is a very old note,” he remarked, holding one up to the light.
 “also, it is a trifle torn. however, in a friendly transaction one must
 not be too particular.”
 “what a kulak!” thought chichikov to himself. “and what a brute beast!”
 “then you do not want any women souls?” queried sobakevitch.
 “i thank you, no.”
 “i could let you have some cheap—say, as between friends, at a
 rouble a head?”
 “no, i should have no use for them.”
 “then, that being so, there is no more to be said. there is no accounting
 for tastes. ‘one man loves the priest, and another the priest’s wife,’
 says the proverb.”
 chichikov rose to take his leave. “once more i would request of you,” he
 said, “that the bargain be left as it is.”
 “of course, of course. what is done between friends holds good because of
 their mutual friendship. good-bye, and thank you for your visit. in
 advance i would beg that, whenever you should have an hour or two to
 spare, you will come and lunch with us again. perhaps we might be able to
 do one another further service?”
 “not if i know it!” reflected chichikov as he mounted his britchka. “not
 i, seeing that i have had two and a half roubles per soul squeezed out of
 me by a brute of a kulak!”
 altogether he felt dissatisfied with sobakevitch’s behaviour. in spite of
 the man being a friend of the governor and the chief of police, he had
 acted like an outsider in taking money for what was worthless rubbish. as
 the britchka left the courtyard chichikov glanced back and saw sobakevitch
 still standing on the verandah—apparently for the purpose of
 watching to see which way the guest’s carriage would turn.
 “the old villain, to be still standing there!” muttered chichikov through
 his teeth; after which he ordered selifan to proceed so that the vehicle’s
 progress should be invisible from the mansion—the truth being that
 he had a mind next to visit plushkin (whose serfs, to quote sobakevitch,
 had a habit of dying like flies), but not to let his late host learn of
 his intention. accordingly, on reaching the further end of the village, he
 hailed the first peasant whom he saw—a man who was in the act of
 hoisting a ponderous beam on to his shoulder before setting off with it,
 ant-like, to his hut.
 “hi!” shouted chichikov. “how can i reach landowner plushkin’s place
 without first going past the mansion here?”
 the peasant seemed nonplussed by the question.
 “don’t you know?” queried chichikov.
 “no, barin,” replied the peasant.
 “what? you don’t know skinflint plushkin who feeds his people so badly?”
 “of course i do!” exclaimed the fellow, and added thereto an
 uncomplimentary expression of a species not ordinarily employed in polite
 society. we may guess that it was a pretty apt expression, since long
 after the man had become lost to view chichikov was still laughing in his
 britchka. and, indeed, the language of the russian populace is always
 forcible in its phraseology.
 chichikov’s amusement at the peasant’s outburst prevented him from
 noticing that he had reached the centre of a large and populous village;
 but, presently, a violent jolt aroused him to the fact that he was driving
 over wooden pavements of a kind compared with which the cobblestones of
 the town had been as nothing. like the keys of a piano, the planks kept
 rising and falling, and unguarded passage over them entailed either a bump
 on the back of the neck or a bruise on the forehead or a bite on the tip
 of one’s tongue. at the same time chichikov noticed a look of decay about
 the buildings of the village. the beams of the huts had grown dark with
 age, many of their roofs were riddled with holes, others had but a tile of
 the roof remaining, and yet others were reduced to the rib-like framework
 of the same. it would seem as though the inhabitants themselves had
 removed the laths and traverses, on the very natural plea that the huts
 were no protection against the rain, and therefore, since the latter
 entered in bucketfuls, there was no particular object to be gained by
 sitting in such huts when all the time there was the tavern and the
 highroad and other places to resort to.
 suddenly a woman appeared from an outbuilding—apparently the
 housekeeper of the mansion, but so roughly and dirtily dressed as almost
 to seem indistinguishable from a man. chichikov inquired for the master of
 the place.
 “he is not at home,” she replied, almost before her interlocutor had had
 time to finish. then she added: “what do you want with him?”
 “i have some business to do,” said chichikov.
 “then pray walk into the house,” the woman advised. then she turned upon
 him a back that was smeared with flour and had a long slit in the lower
 portion of its covering. entering a large, dark hall which reeked like a
 tomb, he passed into an equally dark parlour that was lighted only by such
 rays as contrived to filter through a crack under the door. when chichikov
 opened the door in question, the spectacle of the untidiness within struck
 him almost with amazement. it would seem that the floor was never washed,
 and that the room was used as a receptacle for every conceivable kind of
 furniture. on a table stood a ragged chair, with, beside it, a clock minus
 a pendulum and covered all over with cobwebs. against a wall leant a
 cupboard, full of old silver, glassware, and china. on a writing table,
 inlaid with mother-of-pearl which, in places, had broken away and left
 behind it a number of yellow grooves (stuffed with putty), lay a pile of
 finely written manuscript, an overturned marble press (turning green), an
 ancient book in a leather cover with red edges, a lemon dried and shrunken
 to the dimensions of a hazelnut, the broken arm of a chair, a tumbler
 containing the dregs of some liquid and three flies (the whole covered
 over with a sheet of notepaper), a pile of rags, two ink-encrusted pens,
 and a yellow toothpick with which the master of the house had picked his
 teeth (apparently) at least before the coming of the french to moscow. as
 for the walls, they were hung with a medley of pictures. among the latter
 was a long engraving of a battle scene, wherein soldiers in three-cornered
 hats were brandishing huge drums and slender lances. it lacked a glass,
 and was set in a frame ornamented with bronze fretwork and bronze corner
 rings. beside it hung a huge, grimy oil painting representative of some
 flowers and fruit, half a water melon, a boar’s head, and the pendent form
 of a dead wild duck. attached to the ceiling there was a chandelier in a
 holland covering—the covering so dusty as closely to resemble a huge
 cocoon enclosing a caterpillar. lastly, in one corner of the room lay a
 pile of articles which had evidently been adjudged unworthy of a place on
 the table. yet what the pile consisted of it would have been difficult to
 say, seeing that the dust on the same was so thick that any hand which
 touched it would have at once resembled a glove. prominently protruding
 from the pile was the shaft of a wooden spade and the antiquated sole of a
 shoe. never would one have supposed that a living creature had tenanted
 the room, were it not that the presence of such a creature was betrayed by
 the spectacle of an old nightcap resting on the table.
 whilst chichikov was gazing at this extraordinary mess, a side door opened
 and there entered the housekeeper who had met him near the outbuildings.
 but now chichikov perceived this person to be a man rather than a woman,
 since a female housekeeper would have had no beard to shave, whereas the
 chin of the newcomer, with the lower portion of his cheeks, strongly
 resembled the curry-comb which is used for grooming horses. chichikov
 assumed a questioning air, and waited to hear what the housekeeper might
 have to say. the housekeeper did the same. at length, surprised at the
 misunderstanding, chichikov decided to ask the first question.
 “is the master at home?” he inquired.
 “yes,” replied the person addressed.
 “then where is he?” continued chichikov.
 “are you blind, my good sir?” retorted the other. “i am the
 master.”
 involuntarily our hero started and stared. during his travels it had
 befallen him to meet various types of men—some of them, it may be,
 types which you and i have never encountered; but even to chichikov this
 particular species was new. in the old man’s face there was nothing very
 special—it was much like the wizened face of many another dotard,
 save that the chin was so greatly projected that whenever he spoke he was
 forced to wipe it with a handkerchief to avoid dribbling, and that his
 small eyes were not yet grown dull, but twinkled under their overhanging
 brows like the eyes of mice when, with attentive ears and sensitive
 whiskers, they snuff the air and peer forth from their holes to see
 whether a cat or a boy may not be in the vicinity. no, the most noticeable
 feature about the man was his clothes. in no way could it have been
 guessed of what his coat was made, for both its sleeves and its skirts
 were so ragged and filthy as to defy description, while instead of two
 posterior tails, there dangled four of those appendages, with, projecting
 from them, a torn newspaper. also, around his neck there was wrapped
 something which might have been a stocking, a garter, or a stomacher, but
 was certainly not a tie. in short, had chichikov chanced to encounter him
 at a church door, he would have bestowed upon him a copper or two (for, to
 do our hero justice, he had a sympathetic heart and never refrained from
 presenting a beggar with alms), but in the present case there was standing
 before him, not a mendicant, but a landowner—and a landowner
 possessed of fully a thousand serfs, the superior of all his neighbours in
 wealth of flour and grain, and the owner of storehouses, and so forth,
 that were crammed with homespun cloth and linen, tanned and undressed
 sheepskins, dried fish, and every conceivable species of produce.
 nevertheless, such a phenomenon is rare in russia, where the tendency is
 rather to prodigality than to parsimony.
 for several minutes plushkin stood mute, while chichikov remained so dazed
 with the appearance of the host and everything else in the room, that he
 too, could not begin a conversation, but stood wondering how best to find
 words in which to explain the object of his visit. for a while he thought
 of expressing himself to the effect that, having heard so much of his
 host’s benevolence and other rare qualities of spirit, he had considered
 it his duty to come and pay a tribute of respect; but presently even he
 came to the conclusion that this would be overdoing the thing, and, after
 another glance round the room, decided that the phrase “benevolence and
 other rare qualities of spirit” might to advantage give place to “economy
 and genius for method.” accordingly, the speech mentally composed, he said
 aloud that, having heard of plushkin’s talents for thrifty and systematic
 management, he had considered himself bound to make the acquaintance of
 his host, and to present him with his personal compliments (i need hardly
 say that chichikov could easily have alleged a better reason, had any
 better one happened, at the moment, to have come into his head).
 with toothless gums plushkin murmured something in reply, but nothing is
 known as to its precise terms beyond that it included a statement that the
 devil was at liberty to fly away with chichikov’s sentiments. however, the
 laws of russian hospitality do not permit even of a miser infringing their
 rules; wherefore plushkin added to the foregoing a more civil invitation
 to be seated.
 “it is long since i last received a visitor,” he went on. “also, i feel
 bound to say that i can see little good in their coming. once introduce
 the abominable custom of folk paying calls, and forthwith there will ensue
 such ruin to the management of estates that landowners will be forced to
 feed their horses on hay. not for a long, long time have i eaten a meal
 away from home—although my own kitchen is a poor one, and has its
 chimney in such a state that, were it to become overheated, it would
 instantly catch fire.”
 “what a brute!” thought chichikov. “i am lucky to have got through so much
 pastry and stuffed shoulder of mutton at sobakevitch’s!”
 “also,” went on plushkin, “i am ashamed to say that hardly a wisp of
 fodder does the place contain. but how can i get fodder? my lands are
 small, and the peasantry lazy fellows who hate work and think of nothing
 but the tavern. in the end, therefore, i shall be forced to go and spend
 my old age in roaming about the world.”
 “but i have been told that you possess over a thousand serfs?” said
 chichikov.
 “who told you that? no matter who it was, you would have been justified in
 giving him the lie. he must have been a jester who wanted to make a fool
 of you. a thousand souls, indeed! why, just reckon the taxes on them, and
 see what there would be left! for these three years that accursed fever
 has been killing off my serfs wholesale.”
 “wholesale, you say?” echoed chichikov, greatly interested.
 “yes, wholesale,” replied the old man.
 “then might i ask you the exact number?”
 “fully eighty.”
 “surely not?”
 “but it is so.”
 “then might i also ask whether it is from the date of the last census
 revision that you are reckoning these souls?”
 “yes, damn it! and since that date i have been bled for taxes upon a
 hundred and twenty souls in all.”
 “indeed! upon a hundred and twenty souls in all!” and chichikov’s surprise
 and elation were such that, this said, he remained sitting open-mouthed.
 “yes, good sir,” replied plushkin. “i am too old to tell you lies, for i
 have passed my seventieth year.”
 somehow he seemed to have taken offence at chichikov’s almost joyous
 exclamation; wherefore the guest hastened to heave a profound sigh, and to
 observe that he sympathised to the full with his host’s misfortunes.
 “but sympathy does not put anything into one’s pocket,” retorted plushkin.
 “for instance, i have a kinsman who is constantly plaguing me. he is a
 captain in the army, damn him, and all day he does nothing but call me
 ‘dear uncle,’ and kiss my hand, and express sympathy until i am forced to
 stop my ears. you see, he has squandered all his money upon his
 brother-officers, as well as made a fool of himself with an actress; so
 now he spends his time in telling me that he has a sympathetic heart!”
 chichikov hastened to explain that his sympathy had nothing in common with
 the captain’s, since he dealt, not in empty words alone, but in actual
 deeds; in proof of which he was ready then and there (for the purpose of
 cutting the matter short, and of dispensing with circumlocution) to
 transfer to himself the obligation of paying the taxes due upon such serfs
 as plushkin’s as had, in the unfortunate manner just described, departed
 this world. the proposal seemed to astonish plushkin, for he sat staring
 open-eyed. at length he inquired:
 “my dear sir, have you seen military service?”
 “no,” replied the other warily, “but i have been a member of the civil
 service.”
 “oh! of the civil service?” and plushkin sat moving his lips as though he
 were chewing something. “well, what of your proposal?” he added presently.
 “are you prepared to lose by it?”
 “yes, certainly, if thereby i can please you.”
 “my dear sir! my good benefactor!” in his delight plushkin lost sight of
 the fact that his nose was caked with snuff of the consistency of thick
 coffee, and that his coat had parted in front and was disclosing some very
 unseemly underclothing. “what comfort you have brought to an old man! yes,
 as god is my witness!”
 for the moment he could say no more. yet barely a minute had elapsed
 before this instantaneously aroused emotion had, as instantaneously,
 disappeared from his wooden features. once more they assumed a careworn
 expression, and he even wiped his face with his handkerchief, then rolled
 it into a ball, and rubbed it to and fro against his upper lip.
 “if it will not annoy you again to state the proposal,” he went on, “what
 you undertake to do is to pay the annual tax upon these souls, and to
 remit the money either to me or to the treasury?”
 “yes, that is how it shall be done. we will draw up a deed of purchase as
 though the souls were still alive and you had sold them to myself.”
 “quite so—a deed of purchase,” echoed plushkin, once more relapsing
 into thought and the chewing motion of the lips. “but a deed of such a
 kind will entail certain expenses, and lawyers are so devoid of
 conscience! in fact, so extortionate is their avarice that they will
 charge one half a rouble, and then a sack of flour, and then a whole
 waggon-load of meal. i wonder that no one has yet called attention to the
 system.”
 upon that chichikov intimated that, out of respect for his host, he
 himself would bear the cost of the transfer of souls. this led plushkin to
 conclude that his guest must be the kind of unconscionable fool who, while
 pretending to have been a member of the civil service, has in reality
 served in the army and run after actresses; wherefore the old man no
 longer disguised his delight, but called down blessings alike upon
 chichikov’s head and upon those of his children (he had never even
 inquired whether chichikov possessed a family). next, he shuffled to the
 window, and, tapping one of its panes, shouted the name of “proshka.”
 immediately some one ran quickly into the hall, and, after much stamping
 of feet, burst into the room. this was proshka—a thirteen-year-old
 youngster who was shod with boots of such dimensions as almost to engulf
 his legs as he walked. the reason why he had entered thus shod was that
 plushkin only kept one pair of boots for the whole of his domestic staff.
 this universal pair was stationed in the hall of the mansion, so that any
 servant who was summoned to the house might don the said boots after
 wading barefooted through the mud of the courtyard, and enter the parlour
 dry-shod—subsequently leaving the boots where he had found them, and
 departing in his former barefooted condition. indeed, had any one, on a
 slushy winter’s morning, glanced from a window into the said courtyard, he
 would have seen plushkin’s servitors performing saltatory feats worthy of
 the most vigorous of stage-dancers.
 “look at that boy’s face!” said plushkin to chichikov as he pointed to
 proshka. “it is stupid enough, yet, lay anything aside, and in a trice he
 will have stolen it. well, my lad, what do you want?”
 he paused a moment or two, but proshka made no reply.
 “come, come!” went on the old man. “set out the samovar, and then give
 mavra the key of the store-room—here it is—and tell her to get
 out some loaf sugar for tea. here! wait another moment, fool! is the devil
 in your legs that they itch so to be off? listen to what more i have to
 tell you. tell mavra that the sugar on the outside of the loaf has gone
 bad, so that she must scrape it off with a knife, and not throw away the
 scrapings, but give them to the poultry. also, see that you yourself don’t
 go into the storeroom, or i will give you a birching that you won’t care
 for. your appetite is good enough already, but a better one won’t hurt
 you. don’t even try to go into the storeroom, for i shall be watching you
 from this window.”
 “you see,” the old man added to chichikov, “one can never trust these
 fellows.” presently, when proshka and the boots had departed, he fell to
 gazing at his guest with an equally distrustful air, since certain
 features in chichikov’s benevolence now struck him as a little open to
 question, and he had begin to think to himself: “after all, the devil only
 knows who he is—whether a braggart, like most of these spendthrifts,
 or a fellow who is lying merely in order to get some tea out of me.”
 finally, his circumspection, combined with a desire to test his guest, led
 him to remark that it might be well to complete the transaction
 immediately, since he had not overmuch confidence in humanity, seeing that
 a man might be alive to-day and dead to-morrow.
 to this chichikov assented readily enough—merely adding that he
 should like first of all to be furnished with a list of the dead souls.
 this reassured plushkin as to his guest’s intention of doing business, so
 he got out his keys, approached a cupboard, and, having pulled back the
 door, rummaged among the cups and glasses with which it was filled. at
 length he said:
 “i cannot find it now, but i used to possess a splendid bottle of liquor.
 probably the servants have drunk it all, for they are such thieves. oh no:
 perhaps this is it!”
 looking up, chichikov saw that plushkin had extracted a decanter coated
 with dust.
 “my late wife made the stuff,” went on the old man, “but that rascal of a
 housekeeper went and threw away a lot of it, and never even replaced the
 stopper. consequently bugs and other nasty creatures got into the
 decanter, but i cleaned it out, and now beg to offer you a glassful.”
 the idea of a drink from such a receptacle was too much for chichikov, so
 he excused himself on the ground that he had just had luncheon.
 “you have just had luncheon?” re-echoed plushkin. “now, that shows how
 invariably one can tell a man of good society, wheresoever one may be. a
 man of that kind never eats anything—he always says that he has had
 enough. very different that from the ways of a rogue, whom one can never
 satisfy, however much one may give him. for instance, that captain of mine
 is constantly begging me to let him have a meal—though he is about
 as much my nephew as i am his grandfather. as it happens, there is never a
 bite of anything in the house, so he has to go away empty. but about the
 list of those good-for-nothing souls—i happen to possess such a
 list, since i have drawn one up in readiness for the next revision.”
 with that plushkin donned his spectacles, and once more started to rummage
 in the cupboard, and to smother his guest with dust as he untied
 successive packages of papers—so much so that his victim burst out
 sneezing. finally he extracted a much-scribbled document in which the
 names of the deceased peasants lay as close-packed as a cloud of midges,
 for there were a hundred and twenty of them in all. chichikov grinned with
 joy at the sight of the multitude. stuffing the list into his pocket, he
 remarked that, to complete the transaction, it would be necessary to
 return to the town.
 “to the town?” repeated plushkin. “but why? moreover, how could i leave
 the house, seeing that every one of my servants is either a thief or a
 rogue? day by day they pilfer things, until soon i shall have not a single
 coat to hang on my back.”
 “then you possess acquaintances in the town?”
 “acquaintances? no. every acquaintance whom i ever possessed has either
 left me or is dead. but stop a moment. i do know the president of the
 council. even in my old age he has once or twice come to visit me, for he
 and i used to be schoolfellows, and to go climbing walls together. yes,
 him i do know. shall i write him a letter?”
 “by all means.”
 “yes, him i know well, for we were friends together at school.”
 over plushkin’s wooden features there had gleamed a ray of warmth—a
 ray which expressed, if not feeling, at all events feeling’s pale
 reflection. just such a phenomenon may be witnessed when, for a brief
 moment, a drowning man makes a last re-appearance on the surface of a
 river, and there rises from the crowd lining the banks a cry of hope that
 even yet the exhausted hands may clutch the rope which has been thrown him—may
 clutch it before the surface of the unstable element shall have resumed
 for ever its calm, dread vacuity. but the hope is short-lived, and the
 hands disappear. even so did plushkin’s face, after its momentary
 manifestation of feeling, become meaner and more insensible than ever.
 “there used to be a sheet of clean writing paper lying on the table,” he
 went on. “but where it is now i cannot think. that comes of my servants
 being such rascals.”
 with that he fell to looking also under the table, as well as to hurrying
 about with cries of “mavra, mavra!” at length the call was answered by a
 woman with a plateful of the sugar of which mention has been made;
 whereupon there ensued the following conversation.
 “what have you done with my piece of writing paper, you pilferer?”
 “i swear that i have seen no paper except the bit with which you covered
 the glass.”
 “your very face tells me that you have made off with it.”
 “why should i make off with it? ‘twould be of no use to me, for i can
 neither read nor write.”
 “you lie! you have taken it away for the sexton to scribble upon.”
 “well, if the sexton wanted paper he could get some for himself. neither
 he nor i have set eyes upon your piece.”
 “ah! wait a bit, for on the judgment day you will be roasted by devils on
 iron spits. just see if you are not!”
 “but why should i be roasted when i have never even touched the paper? you
 might accuse me of any other fault than theft.”
 “nay, devils shall roast you, sure enough. they will say to you, ‘bad
 woman, we are doing this because you robbed your master,’ and then stoke
 up the fire still hotter.”
 “nevertheless i shall continue to say, ‘you are roasting me for
 nothing, for i never stole anything at all.’ why, there it is, lying on
 the table! you have been accusing me for no reason whatever!”
 and, sure enough, the sheet of paper was lying before plushkin’s very
 eyes. for a moment or two he chewed silently. then he went on:
 “well, and what are you making such a noise about? if one says a single
 word to you, you answer back with ten. go and fetch me a candle to seal a
 letter with. and mind you bring a tallow candle, for it will not cost so
 much as the other sort. and bring me a match too.”
 mavra departed, and plushkin, seating himself, and taking up a pen, sat
 turning the sheet of paper over and over, as though in doubt whether to
 tear from it yet another morsel. at length he came to the conclusion that
 it was impossible to do so, and therefore, dipping the pen into the
 mixture of mouldy fluid and dead flies which the ink bottle contained,
 started to indite the letter in characters as bold as the notes of a music
 score, while momentarily checking the speed of his hand, lest it should
 meander too much over the paper, and crawling from line to line as though
 he regretted that there was so little vacant space left on the sheet.
 “and do you happen to know any one to whom a few runaway serfs would be of
 use?” he asked as subsequently he folded the letter.
 “what? you have some runaways as well?” exclaimed chichikov, again greatly
 interested.
 “certainly i have. my son-in-law has laid the necessary information
 against them, but says that their tracks have grown cold. however, he is
 only a military man—that is to say, good at clinking a pair of
 spurs, but of no use for laying a plea before a court.”
 “and how many runaways have you?”
 “about seventy.”
 “surely not?”
 “alas, yes. never does a year pass without a certain number of them making
 off. yet so gluttonous and idle are my serfs that they are simply bursting
 with food, whereas i scarcely get enough to eat. i will take any price for
 them that you may care to offer. tell your friends about it, and, should
 they find even a score of the runaways, it will repay them handsomely,
 seeing that a living serf on the census list is at present worth five
 hundred roubles.”
 “perhaps so, but i am not going to let any one but myself have a finger in
 this,” thought chichikov to himself; after which he explained to plushkin
 that a friend of the kind mentioned would be impossible to discover, since
 the legal expenses of the enterprise would lead to the said friend having
 to cut the very tail from his coat before he would get clear of the
 lawyers.
 “nevertheless,” added chichikov, “seeing that you are so hard pressed for
 money, and that i am so interested in the matter, i feel moved to advance
 you—well, to advance you such a trifle as would scarcely be worth
 mentioning.”
 “but how much is it?” asked plushkin eagerly, and with his hands trembling
 like quicksilver.
 “twenty-five kopecks per soul.”
 “what? in ready money?”
 “yes—in money down.”
 “nevertheless, consider my poverty, dear friend, and make it forty kopecks
 per soul.”
 “venerable sir, would that i could pay you not merely forty kopecks, but
 five hundred roubles. i should be only too delighted if that were
 possible, since i perceive that you, an aged and respected gentleman, are
 suffering for your own goodness of heart.”
 “by god, that is true, that is true.” plushkin hung his head, and wagged
 it feebly from side to side. “yes, all that i have done i have done purely
 out of kindness.”
 “see how instantaneously i have divined your nature! by now it will have
 become clear to you why it is impossible for me to pay you five hundred
 roubles per runaway soul: for by now you will have gathered the fact that
 i am not sufficiently rich. nevertheless, i am ready to add another five
 kopecks, and so to make it that each runaway serf shall cost me, in all,
 thirty kopecks.”
 “as you please, dear sir. yet stretch another point, and throw in another
 two kopecks.”
 “pardon me, but i cannot. how many runaway serfs did you say that you
 possess? seventy?”
 “no; seventy-eight.”
 “seventy-eight souls at thirty kopecks each will amount to—to—”
 only for a moment did our hero halt, since he was strong in his
 arithmetic, “—will amount to twenty-four roubles, ninety-six
 kopecks.” 
 with that he requested plushkin to make out the receipt, and then handed
 him the money. plushkin took it in both hands, bore it to a bureau with as
 much caution as though he were carrying a liquid which might at any moment
 splash him in the face, and, arrived at the bureau, and glancing round
 once more, carefully packed the cash in one of his money bags, where,
 doubtless, it was destined to lie buried until, to the intense joy of his
 daughters and his son-in-law (and, perhaps, of the captain who claimed
 kinship with him), he should himself receive burial at the hands of
 fathers carp and polycarp, the two priests attached to his village.
 lastly, the money concealed, plushkin re-seated himself in the armchair,
 and seemed at a loss for further material for conversation.
 “are you thinking of starting?” at length he inquired, on seeing chichikov
 making a trifling movement, though the movement was only to extract from
 his pocket a handkerchief. nevertheless the question reminded chichikov
 that there was no further excuse for lingering.
 “yes, i must be going,” he said as he took his hat.
 “then what about the tea?”
 “thank you, i will have some on my next visit.”
 “what? even though i have just ordered the samovar to be got ready? well,
 well! i myself do not greatly care for tea, for i think it an expensive
 beverage. moreover, the price of sugar has risen terribly.”
 “proshka!” he then shouted. “the samovar will not be needed. return the
 sugar to mavra, and tell her to put it back again. but no. bring the sugar
 here, and i will put it back.”
 “good-bye, dear sir,” finally he added to chichikov. “may the lord bless
 you! hand that letter to the president of the council, and let him read
 it. yes, he is an old friend of mine. we knew one another as
 schoolfellows.”
 with that this strange phenomenon, this withered old man, escorted his
 guest to the gates of the courtyard, and, after the guest had departed,
 ordered the gates to be closed, made the round of the outbuildings for the
 purpose of ascertaining whether the numerous watchmen were at their posts,
 peered into the kitchen (where, under the pretence of seeing whether his
 servants were being properly fed, he made a light meal of cabbage soup and
 gruel), rated the said servants soundly for their thievishness and general
 bad behaviour, and then returned to his room. meditating in solitude, he
 fell to thinking how best he could contrive to recompense his guest for
 the latter’s measureless benevolence. “i will present him,” he thought to
 himself, “with a watch. it is a good silver article—not one of those
 cheap metal affairs; and though it has suffered some damage, he can easily
 get that put right. a young man always needs to give a watch to his
 betrothed.”
 “no,” he added after further thought. “i will leave him the watch in my
 will, as a keepsake.”
 meanwhile our hero was bowling along in high spirit. such an unexpected
 acquisition both of dead souls and of runaway serfs had come as a
 windfall. even before reaching plushkin’s village he had had a
 presentiment that he would do successful business there, but not business
 of such pre-eminent profitableness as had actually resulted. as he
 proceeded he whistled, hummed with hand placed trumpetwise to his mouth,
 and ended by bursting into a burst of melody so striking that selifan,
 after listening for a while, nodded his head and exclaimed, “my word, but
 the master can sing!”
 by the time they reached the town darkness had fallen, and changed the
 character of the scene. the britchka bounded over the cobblestones, and at
 length turned into the hostelry’s courtyard, where the travellers were met
 by petrushka. with one hand holding back the tails of his coat (which he
 never liked to see fly apart), the valet assisted his master to alight.
 the waiter ran out with candle in hand and napkin on shoulder. whether or
 not petrushka was glad to see the barin return it is impossible to say,
 but at all events he exchanged a wink with selifan, and his ordinarily
 morose exterior seemed momentarily to brighten.
 “then you have been travelling far, sir?” said the waiter, as he lit the
 way upstarts.
 “yes,” said chichikov. “what has happened here in the meanwhile?”
 “nothing, sir,” replied the waiter, bowing, “except that last night there
 arrived a military lieutenant. he has got room number sixteen.”
 “a lieutenant?”
 “yes. he came from riazan, driving three grey horses.”
 on entering his room, chichikov clapped his hand to his nose, and asked
 his valet why he had never had the windows opened.
 “but i did have them opened,” replied petrushka. nevertheless this was a
 lie, as chichikov well knew, though he was too tired to contest the point.
 after ordering and consuming a light supper of sucking pig, he undressed,
 plunged beneath the bedclothes, and sank into the profound slumber which
 comes only to such fortunate folk as are troubled neither with mosquitoes
 nor fleas nor excessive activity of brain.
 when chichikov awoke he stretched himself and realised that he had slept
 well. for a moment or two he lay on his back, and then suddenly clapped
 his hands at the recollection that he was now owner of nearly four hundred
 souls. at once he leapt out of bed without so much as glancing at his face
 in the mirror, though, as a rule, he had much solicitude for his features,
 and especially for his chin, of which he would make the most when in
 company with friends, and more particularly should any one happen to enter
 while he was engaged in the process of shaving. “look how round my chin
 is!” was his usual formula. on the present occasion, however, he looked
 neither at chin nor at any other feature, but at once donned his
 flower-embroidered slippers of morroco leather (the kind of slippers in
 which, thanks to the russian love for a dressing-gowned existence, the
 town of torzhok does such a huge trade), and, clad only in a meagre shirt,
 so far forgot his elderliness and dignity as to cut a couple of capers
 after the fashion of a scottish highlander—alighting neatly, each
 time, on the flat of his heels. only when he had done that did he proceed
 to business. planting himself before his dispatch-box, he rubbed his hands
 with a satisfaction worthy of an incorruptible rural magistrate when
 adjourning for luncheon; after which he extracted from the receptacle a
 bundle of papers. these he had decided not to deposit with a lawyer, for
 the reason that he would hasten matters, as well as save expense, by
 himself framing and fair-copying the necessary deeds of indenture; and
 since he was thoroughly acquainted with the necessary terminology, he
 proceeded to inscribe in large characters the date, and then in smaller
 ones, his name and rank. by two o’clock the whole was finished, and as he
 looked at the sheets of names representing bygone peasants who had
 ploughed, worked at handicrafts, cheated their masters, fetched, carried,
 and got drunk (though some of them may have behaved well), there came over
 him a strange, unaccountable sensation. to his eye each list of names
 seemed to possess a character of its own; and even individual peasants
 therein seemed to have taken on certain qualities peculiar to themselves.
 for instance, to the majority of madame korobotchka’s serfs there were
 appended nicknames and other additions; plushkin’s list was distinguished
 by a conciseness of exposition which had led to certain of the items being
 represented merely by christian name, patronymic, and a couple of dots;
 and sobakevitch’s list was remarkable for its amplitude and
 circumstantiality, in that not a single peasant had such of his peculiar
 characteristics omitted as that the deceased had been “excellent at
 joinery,” or “sober and ready to pay attention to his work.” also, in
 sobakevitch’s list there was recorded who had been the father and the
 mother of each of the deceased, and how those parents had behaved
 themselves. only against the name of a certain thedotov was there
 inscribed: “father unknown, mother the maidservant kapitolina, morals and
 honesty good.” these details communicated to the document a certain air of
 freshness, they seemed to connote that the peasants in question had lived
 but yesterday. as chichikov scanned the list he felt softened in spirit,
 and said with a sigh:
 “my friends, what a concourse of you is here! how did you all pass your
 lives, my brethren? and how did you all come to depart hence?”
 as he spoke his eyes halted at one name in particular—that of the
 same peter saveliev neuvazhai korito who had once been the property of the
 window korobotchka. once more he could not help exclaiming:
 “what a series of titles! they occupy a whole line! peter saveliev, i
 wonder whether you were an artisan or a plain muzhik. also, i wonder how
 you came to meet your end; whether in a tavern, or whether through going
 to sleep in the middle of the road and being run over by a train of
 waggons. again, i see the name, ‘probka stepan, carpenter, very sober.’
 that must be the hero of whom the guards would have been so glad to get
 hold. how well i can imagine him tramping the country with an axe in his
 belt and his boots on his shoulder, and living on a few groats’-worth of
 bread and dried fish per day, and taking home a couple of half-rouble
 pieces in his purse, and sewing the notes into his breeches, or stuffing
 them into his boots! in what manner came you by your end, probka stepan?
 did you, for good wages, mount a scaffold around the cupola of the village
 church, and, climbing thence to the cross above, miss your footing on a
 beam, and fall headlong with none at hand but uncle michai—the good
 uncle who, scratching the back of his neck, and muttering, ‘ah, vania, for
 once you have been too clever!’ straightway lashed himself to a rope, and
 took your place? ‘maksim teliatnikov, shoemaker.’ a shoemaker, indeed? ‘as
 drunk as a shoemaker,’ says the proverb. i know what you were like,
 my friend. if you wish, i will tell you your whole history. you were
 apprenticed to a german, who fed you and your fellows at a common table,
 thrashed you with a strap, kept you indoors whenever you had made a
 mistake, and spoke of you in uncomplimentary terms to his wife and
 friends. at length, when your apprenticeship was over, you said to
 yourself, ‘i am going to set up on my own account, and not just to scrape
 together a kopeck here and a kopeck there, as the germans do, but to grow
 rich quick.’ hence you took a shop at a high rent, bespoke a few orders,
 and set to work to buy up some rotten leather out of which you could make,
 on each pair of boots, a double profit. but those boots split within a
 fortnight, and brought down upon your head dire showers of maledictions;
 with the result that gradually your shop grew empty of customers, and you
 fell to roaming the streets and exclaiming, ‘the world is a very poor
 place indeed! a russian cannot make a living for german competition.’
 well, well! ‘elizabeta vorobei!’ but that is a woman’s name! how comes she
 to be on the list? that villain sobakevitch must have sneaked her in
 without my knowing it.”
 “‘grigori goiezhai-ne-doiedesh,’” he went on. “what sort of a man were
 you, i wonder? were you a carrier who, having set up a team of three
 horses and a tilt waggon, left your home, your native hovel, for ever, and
 departed to cart merchandise to market? was it on the highway that you
 surrendered your soul to god, or did your friends first marry you to some
 fat, red-faced soldier’s daughter; after which your harness and team of
 rough, but sturdy, horses caught a highwayman’s fancy, and you, lying on
 your pallet, thought things over until, willy-nilly, you felt that you
 must get up and make for the tavern, thereafter blundering into an
 icehole? ah, our peasant of russia! never do you welcome death when it
 comes!”
 “and you, my friends?” continued chichikov, turning to the sheet whereon
 were inscribed the names of plushkin’s absconded serfs. “although you are
 still alive, what is the good of you? you are practically dead. whither, i
 wonder, have your fugitive feet carried you? did you fare hardly at
 plushkin’s, or was it that your natural inclinations led you to prefer
 roaming the wilds and plundering travellers? are you, by this time, in
 gaol, or have you taken service with other masters for the tillage of
 their lands? ‘eremei kariakin, nikita volokita and anton volokita (son of
 the foregoing).’ to judge from your surnames, you would seem to have been
 born gadabouts . ‘popov, household serf.’
 probably you are an educated man, good popov, and go in for polite
 thieving, as distinguished from the more vulgar cut-throat sort. in my
 mind’s eye i seem to see a captain of rural police challenging you for
 being without a passport; whereupon you stake your all upon a single
 throw. ‘to whom do you belong?’ asks the captain, probably adding to his
 question a forcible expletive. ‘to such and such a landowner,’ stoutly you
 reply. ‘and what are you doing here?’ continues the captain. ‘i have just
 received permission to go and earn my obrok,’ is your fluent explanation.
 ‘then where is your passport?’ ‘at miestchanin 
 pimenov’s.’ ‘pimenov’s? then are you pimenov himself?’ ‘yes, i am pimenov
 himself.’ ‘he has given you his passport?’ ‘no, he has not given me his
 passport.’ ‘come, come!’ shouts the captain with another forcible
 expletive. ‘you are lying!’ ‘no, i am not,’ is your dogged reply. ‘it is
 only that last night i could not return him his passport, because i came
 home late; so i handed it to antip prochorov, the bell-ringer, for him to
 take care of.’ ‘bell-ringer, indeed! then he gave you a passport?’ ‘no; i
 did not receive a passport from him either.’ ‘what?’—and here the
 captain shouts another expletive—‘how dare you keep on lying? where
 is your own passport?’ ‘i had one all right,’ you reply cunningly, ‘but
 must have dropped it somewhere on the road as i came along.’ ‘and what
 about that soldier’s coat?’ asks the captain with an impolite addition.
 ‘whence did you get it? and what of the priest’s cashbox and copper
 money?’’ ‘about them i know nothing,’ you reply doggedly. ‘never at any
 time have i committed a theft.’ ‘then how is it that the coat was found at
 your place?’ ‘i do not know. probably some one else put it there.’ ‘you
 rascal, you rascal!’ shouts the captain, shaking his head, and closing in
 upon you. ‘put the leg-irons upon him, and off with him to prison!’ ‘with
 pleasure,’ you reply as, taking a snuff-box from your pocket, you offer a
 pinch to each of the two gendarmes who are manacling you, while also
 inquiring how long they have been discharged from the army, and in what
 wars they may have served. and in prison you remain until your case comes
 on, when the justice orders you to be removed from tsarev-kokshaika to
 such and such another prison, and a second justice orders you to be
 transferred thence to vesiegonsk or somewhere else, and you go flitting
 from gaol to gaol, and saying each time, as you eye your new habitation,
 ‘the last place was a good deal cleaner than this one is, and one could
 play babki 
 there, and stretch one’s legs, and see a little society.’”
 “‘abakum thirov,’” chichikov went on after a pause. “what of you, brother?
 where, and in what capacity, are you disporting yourself? have you gone to
 the volga country, and become bitten with the life of freedom, and joined
 the fishermen of the river?”
 here, breaking off, chichikov relapsed into silent meditation. of what was
 he thinking as he sat there? was he thinking of the fortunes of abakum
 thirov, or was he meditating as meditates every russian when his thoughts
 once turn to the joys of an emancipated existence?
 “ah, well!” he sighed, looking at his watch. “it has now gone twelve
 o’clock. why have i so forgotten myself? there is still much to be done,
 yet i go shutting myself up and letting my thoughts wander! what a fool i
 am!”
 so saying, he exchanged his scottish costume (of a shirt and nothing else)
 for attire of a more european nature; after which he pulled tight the
 waistcoat over his ample stomach, sprinkled himself with eau-de-cologne,
 tucked his papers under his arm, took his fur cap, and set out for the
 municipal offices, for the purpose of completing the transfer of souls.
 the fact that he hurried along was not due to a fear of being late (seeing
 that the president of the local council was an intimate acquaintance of
 his, as well as a functionary who could shorten or prolong an interview at
 will, even as homer’s zeus was able to shorten or to prolong a night or a
 day, whenever it became necessary to put an end to the fighting of his
 favourite heroes, or to enable them to join battle), but rather to a
 feeling that he would like to have the affair concluded as quickly as
 possible, seeing that, throughout, it had been an anxious and difficult
 business. also, he could not get rid of the idea that his souls were
 unsubstantial things, and that therefore, under the circumstances, his
 shoulders had better be relieved of their load with the least possible
 delay. pulling on his cinnamon-coloured, bear-lined overcoat as he went,
 he had just stepped thoughtfully into the street when he collided with a
 gentleman dressed in a similar coat and an ear-lappeted fur cap. upon that
 the gentleman uttered an exclamation. behold, it was manilov! at once the
 friends became folded in a strenuous embrace, and remained so locked for
 fully five minutes. indeed, the kisses exchanged were so vigorous that
 both suffered from toothache for the greater portion of the day. also,
 manilov’s delight was such that only his nose and lips remained visible—the
 eyes completely disappeared. afterwards he spent about a quarter of an
 hour in holding chichikov’s hand and chafing it vigorously. lastly, he, in
 the most pleasant and exquisite terms possible, intimated to his friend
 that he had just been on his way to embrace paul ivanovitch; and upon this
 followed a compliment of the kind which would more fittingly have been
 addressed to a lady who was being asked to accord a partner the favour of
 a dance. chichikov had opened his mouth to reply—though even he felt
 at a loss how to acknowledge what had just been said—when manilov
 cut him short by producing from under his coat a roll of paper tied with
 red riband.
 “what have you there?” asked chichikov.
 “the list of my souls.”
 “ah!” and as chichikov unrolled the document and ran his eye over it he
 could not but marvel at the elegant neatness with which it had been
 inscribed.
 “it is a beautiful piece of writing,” he said. “in fact, there will be no
 need to make a copy of it. also, it has a border around its edge! who
 worked that exquisite border?”
 “do not ask me,” said manilov.
 “did you do it?”
 “no; my wife.”
 “dear, dear!” chichikov cried. “to think that i should have put her to so
 much trouble!”
 “nothing could be too much trouble where paul ivanovitch is concerned.”
 chichikov bowed his acknowledgements. next, on learning that he was on his
 way to the municipal offices for the purpose of completing the transfer,
 manilov expressed his readiness to accompany him; wherefore the pair
 linked arm in arm and proceeded together. whenever they encountered a
 slight rise in the ground—even the smallest unevenness or difference
 of level—manilov supported chichikov with such energy as almost to
 lift him off his feet, while accompanying the service with a smiling
 implication that not if he could help it should paul ivanovitch slip or
 fall. nevertheless this conduct appeared to embarrass chichikov, either
 because he could not find any fitting words of gratitude or because he
 considered the proceeding tiresome; and it was with a sense of relief that
 he debouched upon the square where the municipal offices—a large,
 three-storied building of a chalky whiteness which probably symbolised the
 purity of the souls engaged within—were situated. no other building
 in the square could vie with them in size, seeing that the remaining
 edifices consisted only of a sentry-box, a shelter for two or three
 cabmen, and a long hoarding—the latter adorned with the usual bills,
 posters, and scrawls in chalk and charcoal. at intervals, from the windows
 of the second and third stories of the municipal offices, the
 incorruptible heads of certain of the attendant priests of themis would
 peer quickly forth, and as quickly disappear again—probably for the
 reason that a superior official had just entered the room. meanwhile the
 two friends ascended the staircase—nay, almost flew up it, since,
 longing to get rid of manilov’s ever-supporting arm, chichikov hastened
 his steps, and manilov kept darting forward to anticipate any possible
 failure on the part of his companion’s legs. consequently the pair were
 breathless when they reached the first corridor. in passing it may be
 remarked that neither corridors nor rooms evinced any of that cleanliness
 and purity which marked the exterior of the building, for such attributes
 were not troubled about within, and anything that was dirty remained so,
 and donned no meritricious, purely external, disguise. it was as though
 themis received her visitors in neglige and a dressing-gown. the author
 would also give a description of the various offices through which our
 hero passed, were it not that he (the author) stands in awe of such legal
 haunts.
 approaching the first desk which he happened to encounter, chichikov
 inquired of the two young officials who were seated at it whether they
 would kindly tell him where business relating to serf-indenture was
 transacted.
 “of what nature, precisely, is your business?” countered one of the
 youthful officials as he turned himself round.
 “i desire to make an application.”
 “in connection with a purchase?”
 “yes. but, as i say, i should like first to know where i can find the desk
 devoted to such business. is it here or elsewhere?”
 “you must state what it is you have bought, and for how much. then we
 shall be happy to give you the information.”
 chichikov perceived that the officials’ motive was merely one of
 curiosity, as often happens when young tchinovniks desire to cut a more
 important and imposing figure than is rightfully theirs.
 “look here, young sirs,” he said. “i know for a fact that all serf
 business, no matter to what value, is transacted at one desk alone.
 consequently i again request you to direct me to that desk. of course, if
 you do not know your business i can easily ask some one else.”
 to this the tchinovniks made no reply beyond pointing towards a corner of
 the room where an elderly man appeared to be engaged in sorting some
 papers. accordingly chichikov and manilov threaded their way in his
 direction through the desks; whereupon the elderly man became violently
 busy.
 “would you mind telling me,” said chichikov, bowing, “whether this is the
 desk for serf affairs?”
 the elderly man raised his eyes, and said stiffly:
 “this is not the desk for serf affairs.”
 “where is it, then?”
 “in the serf department.”
 “and where might the serf department be?”
 “in charge of ivan antonovitch.”
 “and where is ivan antonovitch?”
 the elderly man pointed to another corner of the room; whither chichikov
 and manilov next directed their steps. as they advanced, ivan antonovitch
 cast an eye backwards and viewed them askance. then, with renewed ardour,
 he resumed his work of writing.
 “would you mind telling me,” said chichikov, bowing, “whether this is the
 desk for serf affairs?”
 it appeared as though ivan antonovitch had not heard, so completely did he
 bury himself in his papers and return no reply. instantly it became plain
 that he at least was of an age of discretion, and not one of your jejune
 chatterboxes and harum-scarums; for, although his hair was still thick and
 black, he had long ago passed his fortieth year. his whole face tended
 towards the nose—it was what, in common parlance, is known as a
 “pitcher-mug.”
 “would you mind telling me,” repeated chichikov, “whether this is the desk
 for serf affairs?”
 “it is that,” said ivan antonovitch, again lowering his jug-shaped jowl,
 and resuming his writing.
 “then i should like to transact the following business. from various
 landowners in this canton i have purchased a number of peasants for
 transfer. here is the purchase list, and it needs but to be registered.”
 “have you also the vendors here?”
 “some of them, and from the rest i have obtained powers of attorney.”
 “and have you your statement of application?”
 “yes. i desire—indeed, it is necessary for me so to do—to
 hasten matters a little. could the affair, therefore, be carried through
 to-day?”
 “to-day? oh, dear no!” said ivan antonovitch. “before that can be done you
 must furnish me with further proofs that no impediments exist.”
 “then, to expedite matters, let me say that ivan grigorievitch, the
 president of the council, is a very intimate friend of mine.”
 “possibly,” said ivan antonovitch without enthusiasm. “but ivan
 grigorievitch alone will not do—it is customary to have others as
 well.”
 “yes, but the absence of others will not altogether invalidate the
 transaction. i too have been in the service, and know how things can be
 done.”
 “you had better go and see ivan grigorievitch,” said ivan antonovitch more
 mildly. “should he give you an order addressed to whom it may concern, we
 shall soon be able to settle the matter.”
 upon that chichikov pulled from his pocket a paper, and laid it before
 ivan antonovitch. at once the latter covered it with a book. chichikov
 again attempted to show it to him, but, with a movement of his head, ivan
 antonovitch signified that that was unnecessary.
 “a clerk,” he added, “will now conduct you to ivan grigorievitch’s room.”
 upon that one of the toilers in the service of themis—a zealot who
 had offered her such heartfelt sacrifice that his coat had burst at the
 elbows and lacked a lining—escorted our friends (even as virgil had
 once escorted dante) to the apartment of the presence. in this sanctum
 were some massive armchairs, a table laden with two or three fat books,
 and a large looking-glass. lastly, in (apparently) sunlike isolation,
 there was seated at the table the president. on arriving at the door of
 the apartment, our modern virgil seemed to have become so overwhelmed with
 awe that, without daring even to intrude a foot, he turned back, and, in
 so doing, once more exhibited a back as shiny as a mat, and having
 adhering to it, in one spot, a chicken’s feather. as soon as the two
 friends had entered the hall of the presence they perceived that the
 president was not alone, but, on the contrary, had seated by his side
 sobakevitch, whose form had hitherto been concealed by the intervening
 mirror. the newcomers’ entry evoked sundry exclamations and the pushing
 back of a pair of government chairs as the voluminous-sleeved sobakevitch
 rose into view from behind the looking-glass. chichikov the president
 received with an embrace, and for a while the hall of the presence
 resounded with osculatory salutations as mutually the pair inquired after
 one another’s health. it seemed that both had lately had a touch of that
 pain under the waistband which comes of a sedentary life. also, it seemed
 that the president had just been conversing with sobakevitch on the
 subject of sales of souls, since he now proceeded to congratulate
 chichikov on the same—a proceeding which rather embarrassed our
 hero, seeing that manilov and sobakevitch, two of the vendors, and persons
 with whom he had bargained in the strictest privacy, were now confronting
 one another direct. however, chichikov duly thanked the president, and
 then, turning to sobakevitch, inquired after his health.
 “thank god, i have nothing to complain of,” replied sobakevitch: which was
 true enough, seeing that a piece of iron would have caught cold and taken
 to sneezing sooner than would that uncouthly fashioned landowner.
 “ah, yes; you have always had good health, have you not?” put in the
 president. “your late father was equally strong.”
 “yes, he even went out bear hunting alone,” replied sobakevitch.
 “i should think that you too could worst a bear if you were to try a
 tussle with him,” rejoined the president.
 “oh no,” said sobakevitch. “my father was a stronger man than i am.” then
 with a sigh the speaker added: “but nowadays there are no such men as he.
 what is even a life like mine worth?”
 “then you do not have a comfortable time of it?” exclaimed the president.
 “no; far from it,” rejoined sobakevitch, shaking his head. “judge for
 yourself, ivan grigorievitch. i am fifty years old, yet never in my life
 had been ill, except for an occasional carbuncle or boil. that is not a
 good sign. sooner or later i shall have to pay for it.” and he relapsed
 into melancholy.
 “just listen to the fellow!” was chichikov’s and the president’s joint
 inward comment. “what on earth has he to complain of?”
 “i have a letter for you, ivan grigorievitch,” went on chichikov aloud as
 he produced from his pocket plushkin’s epistle.
 “from whom?” inquired the president. having broken the seal, he exclaimed:
 “why, it is from plushkin! to think that he is still alive! what a strange
 world it is! he used to be such a nice fellow, and now—”
 “and now he is a cur,” concluded sobakevitch, “as well as a miser who
 starves his serfs to death.”
 “allow me a moment,” said the president. then he read the letter through.
 when he had finished he added: “yes, i am quite ready to act as plushkin’s
 attorney. when do you wish the purchase deeds to be registered, monsieur
 chichikov—now or later?”
 “now, if you please,” replied chichikov. “indeed, i beg that, if possible,
 the affair may be concluded to-day, since to-morrow i wish to leave the
 town. i have brought with me both the forms of indenture and my statement
 of application.”
 “very well. nevertheless we cannot let you depart so soon. the indentures
 shall be completed to-day, but you must continue your sojourn in our
 midst. i will issue the necessary orders at once.”
 so saying, he opened the door into the general office, where the clerks
 looked like a swarm of bees around a honeycomb (if i may liken affairs of
 government to such an article?).
 “is ivan antonovitch here?” asked the president.
 “yes,” replied a voice from within.
 “then send him here.”
 upon that the pitcher-faced ivan antonovitch made his appearance in the
 doorway, and bowed.
 “take these indentures, ivan antonovitch,” said the president, “and see
 that they—”
 “but first i would ask you to remember,” put in sobakevitch, “that
 witnesses ought to be in attendance—not less than two on behalf of
 either party. let us, therefore, send for the public prosecutor, who has
 little to do, and has even that little done for him by his chief clerk,
 zolotucha. the inspector of the medical department is also a man of
 leisure, and likely to be at home—if he has not gone out to a card
 party. others also there are—all men who cumber the ground for
 nothing.”
 “quite so, quite so,” agreed the president, and at once dispatched a clerk
 to fetch the persons named.
 “also,” requested chichikov, “i should be glad if you would send for the
 accredited representative of a certain lady landowner with whom i have
 done business. he is the son of a father cyril, and a clerk in your
 offices.”
 “certainly we shall call him here,” replied the president. “everything
 shall be done to meet your convenience, and i forbid you to present any of
 our officials with a gratuity. that is a special request on my part. no
 friend of mine ever pays a copper.”
 with that he gave ivan antonovitch the necessary instructions; and though
 they scarcely seemed to meet with that functionary’s approval, upon the
 president the purchase deeds had evidently produced an excellent
 impression, more especially since the moment when he had perceived the sum
 total to amount to nearly a hundred thousand roubles. for a moment or two
 he gazed into chichikov’s eyes with an expression of profound
 satisfaction. then he said:
 “well done, paul ivanovitch! you have indeed made a nice haul!”
 “that is so,” replied chichikov.
 “excellent business! yes, excellent business!”
 “i, too, conceive that i could not well have done better. the truth is
 that never until a man has driven home the piles of his life’s structure
 upon a lasting bottom, instead of upon the wayward chimeras of youth, will
 his aims in life assume a definite end.” and, that said, chichikov went on
 to deliver himself of a very telling indictment of liberalism and our
 modern young men. yet in his words there seemed to lurk a certain lack of
 conviction. somehow he seemed secretly to be saying to himself, “my good
 sir, you are talking the most absolute rubbish, and nothing but rubbish.”
 nor did he even throw a glance at sobakevitch and manilov. it was as
 though he were uncertain what he might not encounter in their expression.
 yet he need not have been afraid. never once did sobakevitch’s face move a
 muscle, and, as for manilov, he was too much under the spell of
 chichikov’s eloquence to do aught beyond nod his approval at intervals,
 and strike the kind of attitude which is assumed by lovers of music when a
 lady singer has, in rivalry of an accompanying violin, produced a note
 whereof the shrillness would exceed even the capacity of a bird’s
 throstle.
 “but why not tell ivan grigorievitch precisely what you have bought?”
 inquired sobakevitch of chichikov. “and why, ivan grigorievitch, do you
 not ask monsieur chichikov precisely what his purchases have consisted of?
 what a splendid lot of serfs, to be sure! i myself have sold him my
 wheelwright, michiev.”
 “what? you have sold him michiev?” exclaimed the president. “i know the
 man well. he is a splendid craftsman, and, on one occasion, made me a
 drozhki .
 only, only—well, lately didn’t you tell me that he is dead?”
 “that michiev is dead?” re-echoed sobakevitch, coming perilously near to
 laughing. “oh dear no! that was his brother. michiev himself is very much
 alive, and in even better health than he used to be. any day he could
 knock you up a britchka such as you could not procure even in moscow.
 however, he is now bound to work for only one master.”
 “indeed a splendid craftsman!” repeated the president. “my only wonder is
 that you can have brought yourself to part with him.”
 “then think you that michiev is the only serf with whom i have parted?
 nay, for i have parted also with probka stepan, my carpenter, with
 milushkin, my bricklayer, and with teliatnikov, my bootmaker. yes, the
 whole lot i have sold.”
 and to the president’s inquiry why he had so acted, seeing that the serfs
 named were all skilled workers and indispensable to a household,
 sobakevitch replied that a mere whim had led him to do so, and thus the
 sale had owed its origin to a piece of folly. then he hung his head as
 though already repenting of his rash act, and added:
 “although a man of grey hairs, i have not yet learned wisdom.”
 “but,” inquired the president further, “how comes it about, paul
 ivanovitch, that you have purchased peasants apart from land? is it for
 transferment elsewhere that you need them?”
 “yes.”
 “very well, then. that is quite another matter. to what province of the
 country?”
 “to the province of kherson.”
 “indeed! that region contains some splendid land,” said the president;
 whereupon he proceeded to expatiate on the fertility of the kherson
 pastures.
 “and have you much land there?” he continued.
 “yes; quite sufficient to accommodate the serfs whom i have purchased.”
 “and is there a river on the estate or a lake?”
 “both.”
 after this reply chichikov involuntarily threw a glance at sobakevitch;
 and though that landowner’s face was as motionless as every other, the
 other seemed to detect in it: “you liar! don’t tell me that you own both a
 river and a lake, as well as the land which you say you do.”
 whilst the foregoing conversation had been in progress, various witnesses
 had been arriving on the scene. they consisted of the constantly blinking
 public prosecutor, the inspector of the medical department, and others—all,
 to quote sobakevitch, “men who cumbered the ground for nothing.” with some
 of them, however, chichikov was altogether unacquainted, since certain
 substitutes and supernumeraries had to be pressed into the service from
 among the ranks of the subordinate staff. there also arrived, in answer to
 the summons, not only the son of father cyril before mentioned, but also
 father cyril himself. each such witness appended to his signature a full
 list of his dignities and qualifications: one man in printed characters,
 another in a flowing hand, a third in topsy-turvy characters of a kind
 never before seen in the russian alphabet, and so forth. meanwhile our
 friend ivan antonovitch comported himself with not a little address; and
 after the indentures had been signed, docketed, and registered, chichikov
 found himself called upon to pay only the merest trifle in the way of
 government percentage and fees for publishing the transaction in the
 official gazette. the reason of this was that the president had given
 orders that only half the usual charges were to be exacted from the
 present purchaser—the remaining half being somehow debited to the
 account of another applicant for serf registration.
 “and now,” said ivan grigorievitch when all was completed, “we need only
 to wet the bargain.”
 “for that too i am ready,” said chichikov. “do you but name the hour. if,
 in return for your most agreeable company, i were not to set a few
 champagne corks flying, i should be indeed in default.”
 “but we are not going to let you charge yourself with anything whatsoever.
 we must provide the champagne, for you are our guest, and it is for us—it
 is our duty, it is our bounden obligation—to entertain you. look
 here, gentlemen. let us adjourn to the house of the chief of police. he is
 the magician who needs but to wink when passing a fishmonger’s or a wine
 merchant’s. not only shall we fare well at his place, but also we shall
 get a game of whist.”
 to this proposal no one had any objection to offer, for the mere mention
 of the fish shop aroused the witnesses’ appetite. consequently, the
 ceremony being over, there was a general reaching for hats and caps. as
 the party were passing through the general office, ivan antonovitch
 whispered in chichikov’s ear, with a courteous inclination of his
 jug-shaped physiognomy:
 “you have given a hundred thousand roubles for the serfs, but have paid me
 only a trifle for my trouble.”
 “yes,” replied chichikov with a similar whisper, “but what sort of serfs
 do you suppose them to be? they are a poor, useless lot, and not worth
 even half the purchase money.”
 this gave ivan antonovitch to understand that the visitor was a man of
 strong character—a man from whom nothing more was to be expected.
 “why have you gone and purchased souls from plushkin?” whispered
 sobakevitch in chichikov’s other ear.
 “why did you go and add the woman vorobei to your list?” retorted
 chichikov.
 “vorobei? who is vorobei?”
 “the woman ‘elizabet’ vorobei—‘elizabet,’ not ‘elizabeta?’”
 “i added no such name,” replied sobakevitch, and straightway joined the
 other guests.
 at length the party arrived at the residence of the chief of police. the
 latter proved indeed a man of spells, for no sooner had he learnt what was
 afoot than he summoned a brisk young constable, whispered in his ear,
 adding laconically, “you understand, do you not?” and brought it about
 that, during the time that the guests were cutting for partners at whist
 in an adjoining room, the dining-table became laden with sturgeon,
 caviare, salmon, herrings, cheese, smoked tongue, fresh roe, and a potted
 variety of the same—all procured from the local fish market, and
 reinforced with additions from the host’s own kitchen. the fact was that
 the worthy chief of police filled the office of a sort of father and
 general benefactor to the town, and that he moved among the citizens as
 though they constituted part and parcel of his own family, and watched
 over their shops and markets as though those establishments were merely
 his own private larder. indeed, it would be difficult to say—so
 thoroughly did he perform his duties in this respect—whether the
 post most fitted him, or he the post. matters were also so arranged that
 though his income more than doubled that of his predecessors, he had never
 lost the affection of his fellow townsmen. in particular did the tradesmen
 love him, since he was never above standing godfather to their children or
 dining at their tables. true, he had differences of opinion with them, and
 serious differences at that; but always these were skilfully adjusted by
 his slapping the offended ones jovially on the shoulder, drinking a glass
 of tea with them, promising to call at their houses and play a game of
 chess, asking after their belongings, and, should he learn that a child of
 theirs was ill, prescribing the proper medicine. in short, he bore the
 reputation of being a very good fellow.
 on perceiving the feast to be ready, the host proposed that his guests
 should finish their whist after luncheon; whereupon all proceeded to the
 room whence for some time past an agreeable odour had been tickling the
 nostrils of those present, and towards the door of which sobakevitch in
 particular had been glancing since the moment when he had caught sight of
 a huge sturgeon reposing on the sideboard. after a glassful of warm,
 olive-coloured vodka apiece—vodka of the tint to be seen only in the
 species of siberian stone whereof seals are cut—the company applied
 themselves to knife-and-fork work, and, in so doing, evinced their several
 characteristics and tastes. for instance, sobakevitch, disdaining lesser
 trifles, tackled the large sturgeon, and, during the time that his fellow
 guests were eating minor comestibles, and drinking and talking, contrived
 to consume more than a quarter of the whole fish; so that, on the host
 remembering the creature, and, with fork in hand, leading the way in its
 direction and saying, “what, gentlemen, think you of this striking product
 of nature?” there ensued the discovery that of the said product of nature
 there remained little beyond the tail, while sobakevitch, with an air as
 though at least he had not eaten it, was engaged in plunging his fork into
 a much more diminutive piece of fish which happened to be resting on an
 adjacent platter. after his divorce from the sturgeon, sobakevitch ate and
 drank no more, but sat frowning and blinking in an armchair.
 apparently the host was not a man who believed in sparing the wine, for
 the toasts drunk were innumerable. the first toast (as the reader may
 guess) was quaffed to the health of the new landowner of kherson; the
 second to the prosperity of his peasants and their safe transferment; and
 the third to the beauty of his future wife—a compliment which
 brought to our hero’s lips a flickering smile. lastly, he received from
 the company a pressing, as well as an unanimous, invitation to extend his
 stay in town for at least another fortnight, and, in the meanwhile, to
 allow a wife to be found for him.
 “quite so,” agreed the president. “fight us tooth and nail though you may,
 we intend to have you married. you have happened upon us by chance, and
 you shall have no reason to repent of it. we are in earnest on this
 subject.”
 “but why should i fight you tooth and nail?” said chichikov, smiling.
 “marriage would not come amiss to me, were i but provided with a
 betrothed.”
 “then a betrothed you shall have. why not? we will do as you wish.”
 “very well,” assented chichikov.
 “bravo, bravo!” the company shouted. “long live paul ivanovitch! hurrah!
 hurrah!” and with that every one approached to clink glasses with him, and
 he readily accepted the compliment, and accepted it many times in
 succession. indeed, as the hours passed on, the hilarity of the company
 increased yet further, and more than once the president (a man of great
 urbanity when thoroughly in his cups) embraced the chief guest of the day
 with the heartfelt words, “my dearest fellow! my own most precious of
 friends!” nay, he even started to crack his fingers, to dance around
 chichikov’s chair, and to sing snatches of a popular song. to the
 champagne succeeded hungarian wine, which had the effect of still further
 heartening and enlivening the company. by this time every one had
 forgotten about whist, and given himself up to shouting and disputing.
 every conceivable subject was discussed, including politics and military
 affairs; and in this connection guests voiced jejune opinions for the
 expression of which they would, at any other time, have soundly spanked
 their offspring. chichikov, like the rest, had never before felt so gay,
 and, imagining himself really and truly to be a landowner of kherson,
 spoke of various improvements in agriculture, of the three-field system of
 tillage ,
 and of the beatific felicity of a union between two kindred souls. also,
 he started to recite poetry to sobakevitch, who blinked as he listened,
 for he greatly desired to go to sleep. at length the guest of the evening
 realised that matters had gone far enough, so begged to be given a lift
 home, and was accommodated with the public prosecutor’s drozhki. luckily
 the driver of the vehicle was a practised man at his work, for, while
 driving with one hand, he succeeded in leaning backwards and, with the
 other, holding chichikov securely in his place. arrived at the inn, our
 hero continued babbling awhile about a flaxen-haired damsel with rosy lips
 and a dimple in her right cheek, about villages of his in kherson, and
 about the amount of his capital. nay, he even issued seignorial
 instructions that selifan should go and muster the peasants about to be
 transferred, and make a complete and detailed inventory of them. for a
 while selifan listened in silence; then he left the room, and instructed
 petrushka to help the barin to undress. as it happened, chichikov’s boots
 had no sooner been removed than he managed to perform the rest of his
 toilet without assistance, to roll on to the bed (which creaked terribly
 as he did so), and to sink into a sleep in every way worthy of a landowner
 of kherson. meanwhile petrushka had taken his master’s coat and trousers
 of bilberry-coloured check into the corridor; where, spreading them over a
 clothes’ horse, he started to flick and to brush them, and to fill the
 whole corridor with dust. just as he was about to replace them in his
 master’s room he happened to glance over the railing of the gallery, and
 saw selifan returning from the stable. glances were exchanged, and in an
 instant the pair had arrived at an instinctive understanding—an
 understanding to the effect that the barin was sound asleep, and that
 therefore one might consider one’s own pleasure a little. accordingly
 petrushka proceeded to restore the coat and trousers to their appointed
 places, and then descended the stairs; whereafter he and selifan left the
 house together. not a word passed between them as to the object of their
 expedition. on the contrary, they talked solely of extraneous subjects.
 yet their walk did not take them far; it took them only to the other side
 of the street, and thence into an establishment which immediately
 confronted the inn. entering a mean, dirty courtyard covered with glass,
 they passed thence into a cellar where a number of customers were seated
 around small wooden tables. what thereafter was done by selifan and
 petrushka god alone knows. at all events, within an hour’s time they
 issued, arm in arm, and in profound silence, yet remaining markedly
 assiduous to one another, and ever ready to help one another around an
 awkward corner. still linked together—never once releasing their
 mutual hold—they spent the next quarter of an hour in attempting to
 negotiate the stairs of the inn; but at length even that ascent had been
 mastered, and they proceeded further on their way. halting before his mean
 little pallet, petrushka stood awhile in thought. his difficulty was how
 best to assume a recumbent position. eventually he lay down on his face,
 with his legs trailing over the floor; after which selifan also stretched
 himself upon the pallet, with his head resting upon petrushka’s stomach,
 and his mind wholly oblivious of the fact that he ought not to have been
 sleeping there at all, but in the servant’s quarters, or in the stable
 beside his horses. scarcely a moment had passed before the pair were
 plunged in slumber and emitting the most raucous snores; to which their
 master (next door) responded with snores of a whistling and nasal order.
 indeed, before long every one in the inn had followed their soothing
 example, and the hostelry lay plunged in complete restfulness. only in the
 window of the room of the newly-arrived lieutenant from riazan did a light
 remain burning. evidently he was a devotee of boots, for he had purchased
 four pairs, and was now trying on a fifth. several times he approached the
 bed with a view to taking off the boots and retiring to rest; but each
 time he failed, for the reason that the boots were so alluring in their
 make that he had no choice but to lift up first one foot, and then the
 other, for the purpose of scanning their elegant welts.
 it was not long before chichikov’s purchases had become the talk of the
 town; and various were the opinions expressed as to whether or not it was
 expedient to procure peasants for transferment. indeed such was the
 interest taken by certain citizens in the matter that they advised the
 purchaser to provide himself and his convoy with an escort, in order to
 ensure their safe arrival at the appointed destination; but though
 chichikov thanked the donors of this advice for the same, and declared
 that he should be very glad, in case of need, to avail himself of it, he
 declared also that there was no real need for an escort, seeing that the
 peasants whom he had purchased were exceptionally peace-loving folk, and
 that, being themselves consenting parties to the transferment, they would
 undoubtedly prove in every way tractable.
 one particularly good result of this advertisement of his scheme was that
 he came to rank as neither more nor less than a millionaire. consequently,
 much as the inhabitants had liked our hero in the first instance (as seen
 in chapter i.), they now liked him more than ever. as a matter of fact,
 they were citizens of an exceptionally quiet, good-natured, easy-going
 disposition; and some of them were even well-educated. for instance, the
 president of the local council could recite the whole of zhukovski’s
 ludmilla by heart, and give such an impressive rendering of the passage
 “the pine forest was asleep and the valley at rest” (as well as of the
 exclamation “phew!”) that one felt, as he did so, that the pine forest and
 the valley really were as he described them. the effect was also further
 heightened by the manner in which, at such moments, he assumed the most
 portentous frown. for his part, the postmaster went in more for
 philosophy, and diligently perused such works as young’s night thoughts,
 and eckharthausen’s a key to the mysteries of nature; of which latter work
 he would make copious extracts, though no one had the slightest notion
 what they referred to. for the rest, he was a witty, florid little
 individual, and much addicted to a practice of what he called
 “embellishing” whatsoever he had to say—a feat which he performed
 with the aid of such by-the-way phrases as “my dear sir,” “my good
 so-and-so,” “you know,” “you understand,” “you may imagine,” “relatively
 speaking,” “for instance,” and “et cetera”; of which phrases he would add
 sackfuls to his speech. he could also “embellish” his words by the simple
 expedient of half-closing, half-winking one eye; which trick communicated
 to some of his satirical utterances quite a mordant effect. nor were his
 colleagues a wit inferior to him in enlightenment. for instance, one of
 them made a regular practice of reading karamzin, another of conning the
 moscow gazette, and a third of never looking at a book at all. likewise,
 although they were the sort of men to whom, in their more intimate
 movements, their wives would very naturally address such nicknames as
 “toby jug,” “marmot,” “fatty,” “pot belly,” “smutty,” “kiki,” and
 “buzz-buzz,” they were men also of good heart, and very ready to extend
 their hospitality and their friendship when once a guest had eaten of
 their bread and salt, or spent an evening in their company. particularly,
 therefore, did chichikov earn these good folk’s approval with his taking
 methods and qualities—so much so that the expression of that
 approval bid fair to make it difficult for him to quit the town, seeing
 that, wherever he went, the one phrase dinned into his ears was “stay
 another week with us, paul ivanovitch.” in short, he ceased to be a free
 agent. but incomparably more striking was the impression (a matter for
 unbounded surprise!) which he produced upon the ladies. properly to
 explain this phenomenon i should need to say a great deal about the ladies
 themselves, and to describe in the most vivid of colours their social
 intercourse and spiritual qualities. yet this would be a difficult thing
 for me to do, since, on the one hand, i should be hampered by my boundless
 respect for the womenfolk of all civil service officials, and, on the
 other hand—well, simply by the innate arduousness of the task. the
 ladies of n. were—but no, i cannot do it; my heart has already
 failed me. come, come! the ladies of n. were distinguished for—but
 it is of no use; somehow my pen seems to refuse to move over the paper—it
 seems to be weighted as with a plummet of lead. very well. that being so,
 i will merely say a word or two concerning the most prominent tints on the
 feminine palette of n.—merely a word or two concerning the outward
 appearance of its ladies, and a word or two concerning their more
 superficial characteristics. the ladies of n. were pre-eminently what is
 known as “presentable.” indeed, in that respect they might have served as
 a model to the ladies of many another town. that is to say, in whatever
 pertained to “tone,” etiquette, the intricacies of decorum, and strict
 observance of the prevailing mode, they surpassed even the ladies of
 moscow and st. petersburg, seeing that they dressed with taste, drove
 about in carriages in the latest fashions, and never went out without the
 escort of a footman in gold-laced livery. again, they looked upon a
 visiting card—even upon a make-shift affair consisting of an ace of
 diamonds or a two of clubs—as a sacred thing; so sacred that on one
 occasion two closely related ladies who had also been closely attached
 friends were known to fall out with one another over the mere fact of an
 omission to return a social call! yes, in spite of the best efforts of
 husbands and kinsfolk to reconcile the antagonists, it became clear that,
 though all else in the world might conceivably be possible, never could
 the hatchet be buried between ladies who had quarrelled over a neglected
 visit. likewise strenuous scenes used to take place over questions of
 precedence—scenes of a kind which had the effect of inspiring
 husbands to great and knightly ideas on the subject of protecting the
 fair. true, never did a duel actually take place, since all the husbands
 were officials belonging to the civil service; but at least a given
 combatant would strive to heap contumely upon his rival, and, as we all
 know, that is a resource which may prove even more effectual than a duel.
 as regards morality, the ladies of n. were nothing if not censorious, and
 would at once be fired with virtuous indignation when they heard of a case
 of vice or seduction. nay, even to mere frailty they would award the lash
 without mercy. on the other hand, should any instance of what they called
 “third personism” occur among their own circle, it was always kept dark—not
 a hint of what was going on being allowed to transpire, and even the
 wronged husband holding himself ready, should he meet with, or hear of,
 the “third person,” to quote, in a mild and rational manner, the proverb,
 “whom concerns it that a friend should consort with friend?” in addition,
 i may say that, like most of the female world of st. petersburg, the
 ladies of n. were pre-eminently careful and refined in their choice of
 words and phrases. never did a lady say, “i blew my nose,” or “i
 perspired,” or “i spat.” no, it had to be, “i relieved my nose through the
 expedient of wiping it with my handkerchief,” and so forth. again, to say,
 “this glass, or this plate, smells badly,” was forbidden. no, not even a
 hint to such an effect was to be dropped. rather, the proper phrase, in
 such a case, was “this glass, or this plate, is not behaving very well,”—or
 some such formula.
 in fact, to refine the russian tongue the more thoroughly, something like
 half the words in it were cut out: which circumstance necessitated very
 frequent recourse to the tongue of france, since the same words, if spoken
 in french, were another matter altogether, and one could use even blunter
 ones than the ones originally objected to.
 so much for the ladies of n., provided that one confines one’s
 observations to the surface; yet hardly need it be said that, should one
 penetrate deeper than that, a great deal more would come to light. at the
 same time, it is never a very safe proceeding to peer deeply into the
 hearts of ladies; wherefore, restricting ourselves to the foregoing
 superficialities, let us proceed further on our way.
 hitherto the ladies had paid chichikov no particular attention, though
 giving him full credit for his gentlemanly and urbane demeanour; but from
 the moment that there arose rumours of his being a millionaire other
 qualities of his began to be canvassed. nevertheless, not all the ladies
 were governed by interested motives, since it is due to the term
 “millionaire” rather than to the character of the person who bears it,
 that the mere sound of the word exercises upon rascals, upon decent folk,
 and upon folk who are neither the one nor the other, an undeniable
 influence. a millionaire suffers from the disadvantage of everywhere
 having to behold meanness, including the sort of meanness which, though
 not actually based upon calculations of self-interest, yet runs after the
 wealthy man with smiles, and doffs his hat, and begs for invitations to
 houses where the millionaire is known to be going to dine. that a similar
 inclination to meanness seized upon the ladies of n. goes without saying;
 with the result that many a drawing-room heard it whispered that, if
 chichikov was not exactly a beauty, at least he was sufficiently
 good-looking to serve for a husband, though he could have borne to have
 been a little more rotund and stout. to that there would be added scornful
 references to lean husbands, and hints that they resembled tooth-brushes
 rather than men—with many other feminine additions. also, such
 crowds of feminine shoppers began to repair to the bazaar as almost to
 constitute a crush, and something like a procession of carriages ensued,
 so long grew the rank of vehicles. for their part, the tradesmen had the
 joy of seeing highly priced dress materials which they had bought at
 fairs, and then been unable to dispose of, now suddenly become tradeable,
 and go off with a rush. for instance, on one occasion a lady appeared at
 mass in a bustle which filled the church to an extent which led the verger
 on duty to bid the commoner folk withdraw to the porch, lest the lady’s
 toilet should be soiled in the crush. even chichikov could not help
 privately remarking the attention which he aroused. on one occasion, when
 he returned to the inn, he found on his table a note addressed to himself.
 whence it had come, and who had delivered it, he failed to discover, for
 the waiter declared that the person who had brought it had omitted to
 leave the name of the writer. beginning abruptly with the words “i must
 write to you,” the letter went on to say that between a certain pair of
 souls there existed a bond of sympathy; and this verity the epistle
 further confirmed with rows of full stops to the extent of nearly half a
 page. next there followed a few reflections of a correctitude so
 remarkable that i have no choice but to quote them. “what, i would ask, is
 this life of ours?” inquired the writer. “‘tis nought but a vale of woe.
 and what, i would ask, is the world? ‘tis nought but a mob of unthinking
 humanity.” thereafter, incidentally remarking that she had just dropped a
 tear to the memory of her dear mother, who had departed this life
 twenty-five years ago, the (presumably) lady writer invited chichikov to
 come forth into the wilds, and to leave for ever the city where, penned in
 noisome haunts, folk could not even draw their breath. in conclusion, the
 writer gave way to unconcealed despair, and wound up with the following
 verses:
 “two turtle doves to thee, one day,
 my dust will show, congealed in death;
 and, cooing wearily, they’ll say:
 ‘in grief and loneliness she drew her closing breath.’”
 true, the last line did not scan, but that was a trifle, since the
 quatrain at least conformed to the mode then prevalent. neither signature
 nor date were appended to the document, but only a postscript expressing a
 conjecture that chichikov’s own heart would tell him who the writer was,
 and stating, in addition, that the said writer would be present at the
 governor’s ball on the following night.
 this greatly interested chichikov. indeed, there was so much that was
 alluring and provocative of curiosity in the anonymous missive that he
 read it through a second time, and then a third, and finally said to
 himself: “i should like to know who sent it!” in short, he took the thing
 seriously, and spent over an hour in considering the same. at length,
 muttering a comment upon the epistle’s efflorescent style, he refolded the
 document, and committed it to his dispatch-box in company with a play-bill
 and an invitation to a wedding—the latter of which had for the last
 seven years reposed in the self-same receptacle and in the self-same
 position. shortly afterwards there arrived a card of invitation to the
 governor’s ball already referred to. in passing, it may be said that such
 festivities are not infrequent phenomena in county towns, for the reason
 that where governors exist there must take place balls if from the local
 gentry there is to be evoked that respectful affection which is every
 governor’s due.
 thenceforth all extraneous thoughts and considerations were laid aside in
 favour of preparing for the coming function. indeed, this conjunction of
 exciting and provocative motives led to chichikov devoting to his toilet
 an amount of time never witnessed since the creation of the world. merely
 in the contemplation of his features in the mirror, as he tried to
 communicate to them a succession of varying expressions, was an hour
 spent. first of all he strove to make his features assume an air of
 dignity and importance, and then an air of humble, but faintly satirical,
 respect, and then an air of respect guiltless of any alloy whatsoever.
 next, he practised performing a series of bows to his reflection,
 accompanied with certain murmurs intended to bear a resemblance to a
 french phrase (though chichikov knew not a single word of the gallic
 tongue). lastly came the performing of a series of what i might call
 “agreeable surprises,” in the shape of twitchings of the brow and lips and
 certain motions of the tongue. in short, he did all that a man is apt to
 do when he is not only alone, but also certain that he is handsome and
 that no one is regarding him through a chink. finally he tapped himself
 lightly on the chin, and said, “ah, good old face!” in the same way, when
 he started to dress himself for the ceremony, the level of his high
 spirits remained unimpaired throughout the process. that is to say, while
 adjusting his braces and tying his tie, he shuffled his feet in what was
 not exactly a dance, but might be called the entr’acte of a dance: which
 performance had the not very serious result of setting a wardrobe
 a-rattle, and causing a brush to slide from the table to the floor.
 later, his entry into the ballroom produced an extraordinary effect. every
 one present came forward to meet him, some with cards in their hands, and
 one man even breaking off a conversation at the most interesting point—namely,
 the point that “the inferior land court must be made responsible for
 everything.” yes, in spite of the responsibility of the inferior land
 court, the speaker cast all thoughts of it to the winds as he hurried to
 greet our hero. from every side resounded acclamations of welcome, and
 chichikov felt himself engulfed in a sea of embraces. thus, scarcely had
 he extricated himself from the arms of the president of the local council
 when he found himself just as firmly clasped in the arms of the chief of
 police, who, in turn, surrendered him to the inspector of the medical
 department, who, in turn, handed him over to the commissioner of taxes,
 who, again, committed him to the charge of the town architect. even the
 governor, who hitherto had been standing among his womenfolk with a box of
 sweets in one hand and a lap-dog in the other, now threw down both sweets
 and lap-dog (the lap-dog giving vent to a yelp as he did so) and added his
 greeting to those of the rest of the company. indeed, not a face was there
 to be seen on which ecstatic delight—or, at all events, the
 reflection of other people’s ecstatic delight—was not painted. the
 same expression may be discerned on the faces of subordinate officials
 when, the newly arrived director having made his inspection, the said
 officials are beginning to get over their first sense of awe on perceiving
 that he has found much to commend, and that he can even go so far as to
 jest and utter a few words of smiling approval. thereupon every tchinovnik
 responds with a smile of double strength, and those who (it may be) have
 not heard a single word of the director’s speech smile out of sympathy
 with the rest, and even the gendarme who is posted at the distant door—a
 man, perhaps, who has never before compassed a smile, but is more
 accustomed to dealing out blows to the populace—summons up a kind of
 grin, even though the grin resembles the grimace of a man who is about to
 sneeze after inadvertently taking an over-large pinch of snuff. to all and
 sundry chichikov responded with a bow, and felt extraordinarily at his
 ease as he did so. to right and left did he incline his head in the
 sidelong, yet unconstrained, manner that was his wont and never failed to
 charm the beholder. as for the ladies, they clustered around him in a
 shining bevy that was redolent of every species of perfume—of roses,
 of spring violets, and of mignonette; so much so that instinctively
 chichikov raised his nose to snuff the air. likewise the ladies’ dresses
 displayed an endless profusion of taste and variety; and though the
 majority of their wearers evinced a tendency to embonpoint, those wearers
 knew how to call upon art for the concealment of the fact. confronting
 them, chichikov thought to himself: “which of these beauties is the writer
 of the letter?” then again he snuffed the air. when the ladies had, to a
 certain extent, returned to their seats, he resumed his attempts to
 discern (from glances and expressions) which of them could possibly be the
 unknown authoress. yet, though those glances and expressions were too
 subtle, too insufficiently open, the difficulty in no way diminished his
 high spirits. easily and gracefully did he exchange agreeable bandinage
 with one lady, and then approach another one with the short, mincing steps
 usually affected by young-old dandies who are fluttering around the fair.
 as he turned, not without dexterity, to right and left, he kept one leg
 slightly dragging behind the other, like a short tail or comma. this trick
 the ladies particularly admired. in short, they not only discovered in him
 a host of recommendations and attractions, but also began to see in his
 face a sort of grand, mars-like, military expression—a thing which,
 as we know, never fails to please the feminine eye. certain of the ladies
 even took to bickering over him, and, on perceiving that he spent most of
 his time standing near the door, some of their number hastened to occupy
 chairs nearer to his post of vantage. in fact, when a certain dame chanced
 to have the good fortune to anticipate a hated rival in the race there
 very nearly ensued a most lamentable scene—which, to many of those
 who had been desirous of doing exactly the same thing, seemed a peculiarly
 horrible instance of brazen-faced audacity.
 so deeply did chichikov become plunged in conversation with his fair
 pursuers—or rather, so deeply did those fair pursuers enmesh him in
 the toils of small talk (which they accomplished through the expedient of
 asking him endless subtle riddles which brought the sweat to his brow in
 his attempts to guess them)—that he forgot the claims of courtesy
 which required him first of all to greet his hostess. in fact, he
 remembered those claims only on hearing the governor’s wife herself
 addressing him. she had been standing before him for several minutes, and
 now greeted him with suave expressement and the words, “so here you are,
 paul ivanovitch!” but what she said next i am not in a position to report,
 for she spoke in the ultra-refined tone and vein wherein ladies and
 gentlemen customarily express themselves in high-class novels which have
 been written by experts more qualified than i am to describe salons, and
 able to boast of some acquaintance with good society. in effect, what the
 governor’s wife said was that she hoped—she greatly hoped—that
 monsieur chichikov’s heart still contained a corner—even the
 smallest possible corner—for those whom he had so cruelly forgotten.
 upon that chichikov turned to her, and was on the point of returning a
 reply at least no worse than that which would have been returned, under
 similar circumstances, by the hero of a fashionable novelette, when he
 stopped short, as though thunderstruck.
 before him there was standing not only madame, but also a young girl whom
 she was holding by the hand. the golden hair, the fine-drawn, delicate
 contours, the face with its bewitching oval—a face which might have
 served as a model for the countenance of the madonna, since it was of a
 type rarely to be met with in russia, where nearly everything, from plains
 to human feet, is, rather, on the gigantic scale; these features, i say,
 were those of the identical maiden whom chichikov had encountered on the
 road when he had been fleeing from nozdrev’s. his emotion was such that he
 could not formulate a single intelligible syllable; he could merely murmur
 the devil only knows what, though certainly nothing of the kind which
 would have risen to the lips of the hero of a fashionable novel.
 “i think that you have not met my daughter before?” said madame. “she is
 just fresh from school.”
 he replied that he had had the happiness of meeting mademoiselle before,
 and under rather unexpected circumstances; but on his trying to say
 something further his tongue completely failed him. the governor’s wife
 added a word or two, and then carried off her daughter to speak to some of
 the other guests.
 chichikov stood rooted to the spot, like a man who, after issuing into the
 street for a pleasant walk, has suddenly come to a halt on remembering
 that something has been left behind him. in a moment, as he struggles to
 recall what that something is, the mien of careless expectancy disappears
 from his face, and he no longer sees a single person or a single object in
 his vicinity. in the same way did chichikov suddenly become oblivious to
 the scene around him. yet all the while the melodious tongues of ladies
 were plying him with multitudinous hints and questions—hints and
 questions inspired with a desire to captivate. “might we poor cumberers of
 the ground make so bold as to ask you what you are thinking of?” “pray
 tell us where lie the happy regions in which your thoughts are wandering?”
 “might we be informed of the name of her who has plunged you into this
 sweet abandonment of meditation?”—such were the phrases thrown at
 him. but to everything he turned a dead ear, and the phrases in question
 might as well have been stones dropped into a pool. indeed, his rudeness
 soon reached the pitch of his walking away altogether, in order that he
 might go and reconnoitre wither the governor’s wife and daughter had
 retreated. but the ladies were not going to let him off so easily. every
 one of them had made up her mind to use upon him her every weapon, and to
 exhibit whatsoever might chance to constitute her best point. yet the
 ladies’ wiles proved useless, for chichikov paid not the smallest
 attention to them, even when the dancing had begun, but kept raising
 himself on tiptoe to peer over people’s heads and ascertain in which
 direction the bewitching maiden with the golden hair had gone. also, when
 seated, he continued to peep between his neighbours’ backs and shoulders,
 until at last he discovered her sitting beside her mother, who was wearing
 a sort of oriental turban and feather. upon that one would have thought
 that his purpose was to carry the position by storm; for, whether moved by
 the influence of spring, or whether moved by a push from behind, he
 pressed forward with such desperate resolution that his elbow caused the
 commissioner of taxes to stagger on his feet, and would have caused him to
 lose his balance altogether but for the supporting row of guests in the
 rear. likewise the postmaster was made to give ground; whereupon he turned
 and eyed chichikov with mingled astonishment and subtle irony. but
 chichikov never even noticed him; he saw in the distance only the
 golden-haired beauty. at that moment she was drawing on a long glove and,
 doubtless, pining to be flying over the dancing-floor, where, with
 clicking heels, four couples had now begun to thread the mazes of the
 mazurka. in particular was a military staff-captain working body and soul
 and arms and legs to compass such a series of steps as were never before
 performed, even in a dream. however, chichikov slipped past the mazurka
 dancers, and, almost treading on their heels, made his way towards the
 spot where madame and her daughter were seated. yet he approached them
 with great diffidence and none of his late mincing and prancing. nay, he
 even faltered as he walked; his every movement had about it an air of
 awkwardness.
 it is difficult to say whether or not the feeling which had awakened in
 our hero’s breast was the feeling of love; for it is problematical whether
 or not men who are neither stout nor thin are capable of any such
 sentiment. nevertheless, something strange, something which he could not
 altogether explain, had come upon him. it seemed as though the ball, with
 its talk and its clatter, had suddenly become a thing remote—that
 the orchestra had withdrawn behind a hill, and the scene grown misty, like
 the carelessly painted-in background of a picture. and from that misty
 void there could be seen glimmering only the delicate outlines of the
 bewitching maiden. somehow her exquisite shape reminded him of an ivory
 toy, in such fair, white, transparent relief did it stand out against the
 dull blur of the surrounding throng.
 herein we see a phenomenon not infrequently observed—the phenomenon
 of the chichikovs of this world becoming temporarily poets. at all events,
 for a moment or two our chichikov felt that he was a young man again, if
 not exactly a military officer. on perceiving an empty chair beside the
 mother and daughter, he hastened to occupy it, and though conversation at
 first hung fire, things gradually improved, and he acquired more
 confidence.
 at this point i must reluctantly deviate to say that men of weight and
 high office are always a trifle ponderous when conversing with ladies.
 young lieutenants—or, at all events, officers not above the rank of
 captain—are far more successful at the game. how they contrive to be
 so god only knows. let them but make the most inane of remarks, and at
 once the maiden by their side will be rocking with laughter; whereas,
 should a state councillor enter into conversation with a damsel, and
 remark that the russian empire is one of vast extent, or utter a
 compliment which he has elaborated not without a certain measure of
 intelligence (however strongly the said compliment may smack of a book),
 of a surety the thing will fall flat. even a witticism from him will be
 laughed at far more by him himself than it will by the lady who may happen
 to be listening to his remarks.
 these comments i have interposed for the purpose of explaining to the
 reader why, as our hero conversed, the maiden began to yawn. blind to
 this, however, he continued to relate to her sundry adventures which had
 befallen him in different parts of the world. meanwhile (as need hardly be
 said) the rest of the ladies had taken umbrage at his behaviour. one of
 them purposely stalked past him to intimate to him the fact, as well as to
 jostle the governor’s daughter, and let the flying end of a scarf flick
 her face; while from a lady seated behind the pair came both a whiff of
 violets and a very venomous and sarcastic remark. nevertheless, either he
 did not hear the remark or he pretended not to hear it. this was unwise of
 him, since it never does to disregard ladies’ opinions. later—but too late—he
 was destined to learn this to his cost.
 in short, dissatisfaction began to display itself on every feminine face.
 no matter how high chichikov might stand in society, and no matter how
 much he might be a millionaire and include in his expression of
 countenance an indefinable element of grandness and martial ardour, there
 are certain things which no lady will pardon, whosoever be the person
 concerned. we know that at governor’s balls it is customary for the
 onlookers to compose verses at the expense of the dancers; and in this
 case the verses were directed to chichikov’s address. briefly, the
 prevailing dissatisfaction grew until a tacit edict of proscription had
 been issued against both him and the poor young maiden.
 but an even more unpleasant surprise was in store for our hero; for whilst
 the young lady was still yawning as chichikov recounted to her certain of
 his past adventures and also touched lightly upon the subject of greek
 philosophy, there appeared from an adjoining room the figure of nozdrev.
 whether he had come from the buffet, or whether he had issued from a
 little green retreat where a game more strenuous than whist had been in
 progress, or whether he had left the latter resort unaided, or whether he
 had been expelled therefrom, is unknown; but at all events when he entered
 the ballroom, he was in an elevated condition, and leading by the arm the
 public prosecutor, whom he seemed to have been dragging about for a long
 while past, seeing that the poor man was glancing from side to side as
 though seeking a means of putting an end to this personally conducted
 tour. certainly he must have found the situation almost unbearable, in
 view of the fact that, after deriving inspiration from two glasses of tea
 not wholly undiluted with rum, nozdrev was engaged in lying unmercifully.
 on sighting him in the distance, chichikov at once decided to sacrifice
 himself. that is to say, he decided to vacate his present enviable
 position and make off with all possible speed, since he could see that an
 encounter with the newcomer would do him no good. unfortunately at that
 moment the governor buttonholed him with a request that he would come and
 act as arbiter between him (the governor) and two ladies—the subject
 of dispute being the question as to whether or not woman’s love is
 lasting. simultaneously nozdrev descried our hero and bore down upon him.
 “ah, my fine landowner of kherson!” he cried with a smile which set his
 fresh, spring-rose-pink cheeks a-quiver. “have you been doing much trade
 in departed souls lately?” with that he turned to the governor. “i suppose
 your excellency knows that this man traffics in dead peasants?” he bawled.
 “look here, chichikov. i tell you in the most friendly way possible that
 every one here likes you—yes, including even the governor.
 nevertheless, had i my way, i would hang you! yes, by god i would!”
 chichikov’s discomfiture was complete.
 “and, would you believe it, your excellency,” went on nozdrev, “but this
 fellow actually said to me, ‘sell me your dead souls!’ why, i laughed till
 i nearly became as dead as the souls. and, behold, no sooner do i arrive
 here than i am told that he has bought three million roubles’ worth of
 peasants for transferment! for transferment, indeed! and he wanted to
 bargain with me for my dead ones! look here, chichikov. you are a swine!
 yes, by god, you are an utter swine! is not that so, your excellency? is
 not that so, friend prokurator ?”
 but both his excellency, the public prosecutor, and chichikov were too
 taken aback to reply. the half-tipsy nozdrev, without noticing them,
 continued his harangue as before.
 “ah, my fine sir!” he cried. “this time i don’t mean to let you go. no,
 not until i have learnt what all this purchasing of dead peasants means.
 look here. you ought to be ashamed of yourself. yes, i say that—i
 who am one of your best friends.” here he turned to the governor again.
 “your excellency,” he continued, “you would never believe what
 inseperables this man and i have been. indeed, if you had stood there and
 said to me, ‘nozdrev, tell me on your honour which of the two you love
 best—your father or chichikov?’ i should have replied, ‘chichikov,
 by god!’” with that he tackled our hero again, “come, come, my friend!” he
 urged. “let me imprint upon your cheeks a baiser or two. you will excuse
 me if i kiss him, will you not, your excellency? no, do not resist me,
 chichikov, but allow me to imprint at least one baiser upon your
 lily-white cheek.” and in his efforts to force upon chichikov what he
 termed his “baisers” he came near to measuring his length upon the floor.
 every one now edged away, and turned a deaf ear to his further babblings;
 but his words on the subject of the purchase of dead souls had none the
 less been uttered at the top of his voice, and been accompanied with such
 uproarious laughter that the curiosity even of those who had happened to
 be sitting or standing in the remoter corners of the room had been
 aroused. so strange and novel seemed the idea that the company stood with
 faces expressive of nothing but a dumb, dull wonder. only some of the
 ladies (as chichikov did not fail to remark) exchanged meaning,
 ill-natured winks and a series of sarcastic smiles: which circumstance
 still further increased his confusion. that nozdrev was a notorious liar
 every one, of course, knew, and that he should have given vent to an
 idiotic outburst of this sort had surprised no one; but a dead soul—well,
 what was one to make of nozdrev’s reference to such a commodity?
 naturally this unseemly contretemps had greatly upset our hero; for,
 however foolish be a madman’s words, they may yet prove sufficient to sow
 doubt in the minds of saner individuals. he felt much as does a man who,
 shod with well-polished boots, has just stepped into a dirty, stinking
 puddle. he tried to put away from him the occurrence, and to expand, and
 to enjoy himself once more. nay, he even took a hand at whist. but all was
 of no avail—matters kept going as awry as a badly-bent hoop. twice
 he blundered in his play, and the president of the council was at a loss
 to understand how his friend, paul ivanovitch, lately so good and so
 circumspect a player, could perpetrate such a mauvais pas as to throw away
 a particular king of spades which the president has been “trusting” as (to
 quote his own expression) “he would have trusted god.” at supper, too,
 matters felt uncomfortable, even though the society at chichikov’s table
 was exceedingly agreeable and nozdrev had been removed, owing to the fact
 that the ladies had found his conduct too scandalous to be borne, now that
 the delinquent had taken to seating himself on the floor and plucking at
 the skirts of passing lady dancers. as i say, therefore, chichikov found
 the situation not a little awkward, and eventually put an end to it by
 leaving the supper room before the meal was over, and long before the hour
 when usually he returned to the inn.
 in his little room, with its door of communication blocked with a
 wardrobe, his frame of mind remained as uncomfortable as the chair in
 which he was seated. his heart ached with a dull, unpleasant sensation,
 with a sort of oppressive emptiness.
 “the devil take those who first invented balls!” was his reflection. “who
 derives any real pleasure from them? in this province there exist want and
 scarcity everywhere: yet folk go in for balls! how absurd, too, were those
 overdressed women! one of them must have had a thousand roubles on her
 back, and all acquired at the expense of the overtaxed peasant, or, worse
 still, at that of the conscience of her neighbour. yes, we all know why
 bribes are accepted, and why men become crooked in soul. it is all done to
 provide wives—yes, may the pit swallow them up!—with fal-lals.
 and for what purpose? that some woman may not have to reproach her husband
 with the fact that, say, the postmaster’s wife is wearing a better dress
 than she is—a dress which has cost a thousand roubles! ‘balls and
 gaiety, balls and gaiety’ is the constant cry. yet what folly balls are!
 they do not consort with the russian spirit and genius, and the devil only
 knows why we have them. a grown, middle-aged man—a man dressed in
 black, and looking as stiff as a poker—suddenly takes the floor and
 begins shuffling his feet about, while another man, even though conversing
 with a companion on important business, will, the while, keep capering to
 right and left like a billy-goat! mimicry, sheer mimicry! the fact that
 the frenchman is at forty precisely what he was at fifteen leads us to
 imagine that we too, forsooth, ought to be the same. no; a ball leaves one
 feeling that one has done a wrong thing—so much so that one does not
 care even to think of it. it also leaves one’s head perfectly empty, even
 as does the exertion of talking to a man of the world. a man of that kind
 chatters away, and touches lightly upon every conceivable subject, and
 talks in smooth, fluent phrases which he has culled from books without
 grazing their substance; whereas go and have a chat with a tradesman who
 knows at least one thing thoroughly, and through the medium of experience,
 and see whether his conversation will not be worth more than the prattle
 of a thousand chatterboxes. for what good does one get out of balls?
 suppose that a competent writer were to describe such a scene exactly as
 it stands? why, even in a book it would seem senseless, even as it
 certainly is in life. are, therefore, such functions right or wrong? one
 would answer that the devil alone knows, and then spit and close the
 book.”
 such were the unfavourable comments which chichikov passed upon balls in
 general. with it all, however, there went a second source of
 dissatisfaction. that is to say, his principal grudge was not so much
 against balls as against the fact that at this particular one he had been
 exposed, he had been made to disclose the circumstance that he had been
 playing a strange, an ambiguous part. of course, when he reviewed the
 contretemps in the light of pure reason, he could not but see that it
 mattered nothing, and that a few rude words were of no account now that
 the chief point had been attained; yet man is an odd creature, and
 chichikov actually felt pained by the cold-shouldering administered to
 him by persons for whom he had not an atom of respect, and whose vanity
 and love of display he had only that moment been censuring. still more, on
 viewing the matter clearly, he felt vexed to think that he himself had
 been so largely the cause of the catastrophe.
 yet he was not angry with himself—of that you may be sure, seeing
 that all of us have a slight weakness for sparing our own faults, and
 always do our best to find some fellow-creature upon whom to vent our
 displeasure—whether that fellow-creature be a servant, a subordinate
 official, or a wife. in the same way chichikov sought a scapegoat upon
 whose shoulders he could lay the blame for all that had annoyed him. he
 found one in nozdrev, and you may be sure that the scapegoat in question
 received a good drubbing from every side, even as an experienced captain
 or chief of police will give a knavish starosta or postboy a rating not
 only in the terms become classical, but also in such terms as the said
 captain or chief of police may invent for himself. in short, nozdrev’s
 whole lineage was passed in review; and many of its members in the
 ascending line fared badly in the process.
 meanwhile, at the other end of the town there was in progress an event
 which was destined to augment still further the unpleasantness of our
 hero’s position. that is to say, through the outlying streets and alleys
 of the town there was clattering a vehicle to which it would be difficult
 precisely to assign a name, seeing that, though it was of a species
 peculiar to itself, it most nearly resembled a large, rickety water melon
 on wheels. eventually this monstrosity drew up at the gates of a house
 where the archpriest of one of the churches resided, and from its doors
 there leapt a damsel clad in a jerkin and wearing a scarf over her head.
 for a while she thumped the gates so vigorously as to set all the dogs
 barking; then the gates stiffly opened, and admitted this unwieldy
 phenomenon of the road. lastly, the barinia herself alighted, and stood
 revealed as madame korobotchka, widow of a collegiate secretary! the
 reason of her sudden arrival was that she had felt so uneasy about the
 possible outcome of chichikov’s whim, that during the three nights
 following his departure she had been unable to sleep a wink; whereafter,
 in spite of the fact that her horses were not shod, she had set off for
 the town, in order to learn at first hand how the dead souls were faring,
 and whether (which might god forfend!) she had not sold them at something
 like a third of their true value. the consequences of her venture the
 reader will learn from a conversation between two ladies. we will reserve
 it for the ensuing chapter.
 next morning, before the usual hour for paying calls, there tripped from
 the portals of an orange-coloured wooden house with an attic storey and a
 row of blue pillars a lady in an elegant plaid cloak. with her came a
 footman in a many-caped greatcoat and a polished top hat with a gold band.
 hastily, but gracefully, the lady ascended the steps let down from a
 koliaska which was standing before the entrance, and as soon as she had
 done so the footman shut her in, put up the steps again, and, catching
 hold of the strap behind the vehicle, shouted to the coachman, “right
 away!” the reason of all this was that the lady was the possessor of a
 piece of intelligence that she was burning to communicate to a
 fellow-creature. every moment she kept looking out of the carriage window,
 and perceiving, with almost speechless vexation, that, as yet, she was but
 half-way on her journey. the fronts of the houses appeared to her longer
 than usual, and in particular did the front of the white stone hospital,
 with its rows of narrow windows, seem interminable to a degree which at
 length forced her to ejaculate: “oh, the cursed building! positively there
 is no end to it!” also, she twice adjured the coachman with the words, “go
 quicker, andrusha! you are a horribly long time over the journey this
 morning.” but at length the goal was reached, and the koliaska stopped
 before a one-storied wooden mansion, dark grey in colour, and having white
 carvings over the windows, a tall wooden fence and narrow garden in front
 of the latter, and a few meagre trees looming white with an incongruous
 coating of road dust. in the windows of the building were also a few
 flower pots and a parrot that kept alternately dancing on the floor of its
 cage and hanging on to the ring of the same with its beak. also, in the
 sunshine before the door two pet dogs were sleeping. here there lived the
 lady’s bosom friend. as soon as the bosom friend in question learnt of the
 newcomer’s arrival, she ran down into the hall, and the two ladies kissed
 and embraced one another. then they adjourned to the drawing-room.
 “how glad i am to see you!” said the bosom friend. “when i heard some one
 arriving i wondered who could possibly be calling so early. parasha
 declared that it must be the vice-governor’s wife, so, as i did not want
 to be bored with her, i gave orders that i was to be reported ‘not at
 home.’”
 for her part, the guest would have liked to have proceeded to business by
 communicating her tidings, but a sudden exclamation from the hostess
 imparted (temporarily) a new direction to the conversation.
 “what a pretty chintz!” she cried, gazing at the other’s gown.
 “yes, it is pretty,” agreed the visitor. “on the other hand, praskovia
 thedorovna thinks that—”
 in other words, the ladies proceeded to indulge in a conversation on the
 subject of dress; and only after this had lasted for a considerable while
 did the visitor let fall a remark which led her entertainer to inquire:
 “and how is the universal charmer?”
 “my god!” replied the other. “there has been such a business! in fact, do
 you know why i am here at all?” and the visitor’s breathing became more
 hurried, and further words seemed to be hovering between her lips like
 hawks preparing to stoop upon their prey. only a person of the unhumanity
 of a “true friend” would have had the heart to interrupt her; but the
 hostess was just such a friend, and at once interposed with:
 “i wonder how any one can see anything in the man to praise or to admire.
 for my own part, i think—and i would say the same thing straight to
 his face—that he is a perfect rascal.”
 “yes, but do listen to what i have got to tell you.”
 “oh, i know that some people think him handsome,” continued the hostess,
 unmoved; “but i say that he is nothing of the kind—that, in
 particular, his nose is perfectly odious.”
 “yes, but let me finish what i was saying.” the guest’s tone was almost
 piteous in its appeal.
 “what is it, then?”
 “you cannot imagine my state of mind! you see, this morning i received a
 visit from father cyril’s wife—the archpriest’s wife—you know
 her, don’t you? well, whom do you suppose that fine gentleman visitor of
 ours has turned out to be?”
 “the man who has built the archpriest a poultry-run?”
 “oh dear no! had that been all, it would have been nothing. no. listen to
 what father cyril’s wife had to tell me. she said that, last night, a lady
 landowner named madame korobotchka arrived at the archpriest’s house—arrived
 all pale and trembling—and told her, oh, such things! they sound
 like a piece out of a book. that is to say, at dead of night, just when
 every one had retired to rest, there came the most dreadful knocking
 imaginable, and some one screamed out, ‘open the gates, or we will break
 them down!’ just think! after this, how any one can say that the man is
 charming i cannot imagine.”
 “well, what of madame korobotchka? is she a young woman or good looking?”
 “oh dear no! quite an old woman.”
 “splendid indeed! so he is actually engaged to a person like that? one may
 heartily commend the taste of our ladies for having fallen in love with
 him!”
 “nevertheless, it is not as you suppose. think, now! armed with weapons
 from head to foot, he called upon this old woman, and said: ‘sell me any
 souls of yours which have lately died.’ of course, madame korobotchka
 answered, reasonably enough: ‘i cannot sell you those souls, seeing that
 they have departed this world;’ but he replied: ‘no, no! they are not
 dead. ‘tis i who tell you that—i who ought to know the truth of the
 matter. i swear that they are still alive.’ in short, he made such a scene
 that the whole village came running to the house, and children screamed,
 and men shouted, and no one could tell what it was all about. the affair
 seemed to me so horrible, so utterly horrible, that i trembled beyond
 belief as i listened to the story. ‘my dearest madam,’ said my maid,
 mashka, ‘pray look at yourself in the mirror, and see how white you are.’
 ‘but i have no time for that,’ i replied, ‘as i must be off to tell my
 friend, anna grigorievna, the news.’ nor did i lose a moment in ordering
 the koliaska. yet when my coachman, andrusha, asked me for directions i
 could not get a word out—i just stood staring at him like a fool,
 until i thought he must think me mad. oh, anna grigorievna, if you but
 knew how upset i am!”
 “what a strange affair!” commented the hostess. “what on earth can the man
 have meant by ‘dead souls’? i confess that the words pass my
 understanding. curiously enough, this is the second time i have heard
 speak of those souls. true, my husband avers that nozdrev was lying; yet
 in his lies there seems to have been a grain of truth.”
 “well, just think of my state when i heard all this! ‘and now,’ apparently
 said korobotchka to the archpriest’s wife, ‘i am altogether at a loss what
 to do, for, throwing me fifteen roubles, the man forced me to sign a
 worthless paper—yes, me, an inexperienced, defenceless widow who
 knows nothing of business.’ that such things should happen! try and
 imagine my feelings!”
 “in my opinion, there is in this more than the dead souls which meet the
 eye.”
 “i think so too,” agreed the other. as a matter of fact, her friend’s
 remark had struck her with complete surprise, as well as filled her with
 curiosity to know what the word “more” might possibly signify. in fact,
 she felt driven to inquire: “what do you suppose to be hidden beneath it
 all?”
 “no; tell me what you suppose?”
 “what i suppose? i am at a loss to conjecture.”
 “yes, but tell me what is in your mind?”
 upon this the visitor had to confess herself nonplussed; for, though
 capable of growing hysterical, she was incapable of propounding any
 rational theory. consequently she felt the more that she needed tender
 comfort and advice.
 “then this is what i think about the dead souls,” said the hostess.
 instantly the guest pricked up her ears (or, rather, they pricked
 themselves up) and straightened herself and became, somehow, more modish,
 and, despite her not inconsiderable weight, posed herself to look like a
 piece of thistledown floating on the breeze.
 “the dead souls,” began the hostess.
 “are what, are what?” inquired the guest in great excitement.
 “are, are—”
 “tell me, tell me, for heaven’s sake!”
 “they are an invention to conceal something else. the man’s real object
 is, is—to abduct the governor’s daughter.”
 so startling and unexpected was this conclusion that the guest sat reduced
 to a state of pale, petrified, genuine amazement.
 “my god!” she cried, clapping her hands, “i should never have guessed it!”
 “well, to tell you the truth, i guessed it as soon as ever you opened your
 mouth.”
 “so much, then, for educating girls like the governor’s daughter at
 school! just see what comes of it!”
 “yes, indeed! and they tell me that she says things which i hesitate even
 to repeat.”
 “truly it wrings one’s heart to see to what lengths immorality has come.”
 “some of the men have quite lost their heads about her, but for my part i
 think her not worth noticing.”
 “of course. and her manners are unbearable. but what puzzles me most is
 how a travelled man like chichikov could come to let himself in for such
 an affair. surely he must have accomplices?”
 “yes; and i should say that one of those accomplices is nozdrev.”
 “surely not?”
 “certainly i should say so. why, i have known him even try to sell his own
 father! at all events he staked him at cards.”
 “indeed! you interest me. i should never had thought him capable of such
 things.”
 “i always guessed him to be so.”
 the two ladies were still discussing the matter with acumen and success
 when there walked into the room the public prosecutor—bushy
 eyebrows, motionless features, blinking eyes, and all. at once the ladies
 hastened to inform him of the events related, adducing therewith full
 details both as to the purchase of dead souls and as to the scheme to
 abduct the governor’s daughter; after which they departed in different
 directions, for the purpose of raising the rest of the town. for the
 execution of this undertaking not more than half an hour was required. so
 thoroughly did they succeed in throwing dust in the public’s eyes that for
 a while every one—more especially the army of public officials—was
 placed in the position of a schoolboy who, while still asleep, has had a
 bag of pepper thrown in his face by a party of more early-rising comrades.
 the questions now to be debated resolved themselves into two—namely,
 the question of the dead souls and the question of the governor’s
 daughter. to this end two parties were formed—the men’s party and
 the feminine section. the men’s party—the more absolutely senseless
 of the two—devoted its attention to the dead souls: the women’s
 party occupied itself exclusively with the alleged abduction of the
 governor’s daughter. and here it may be said (to the ladies’ credit) that
 the women’s party displayed far more method and caution than did its rival
 faction, probably because the function in life of its members had always
 been that of managing and administering a household. with the ladies,
 therefore, matters soon assumed vivid and definite shape; they became
 clearly and irrefutably materialised; they stood stripped of all doubt and
 other impedimenta. said some of the ladies in question, chichikov had long
 been in love with the maiden, and the pair had kept tryst by the light of
 the moon, while the governor would have given his consent (seeing that
 chichikov was as rich as a jew) but for the obstacle that chichikov had
 deserted a wife already (how the worthy dames came to know that he was
 married remains a mystery), and the said deserted wife, pining with love
 for her faithless husband, had sent the governor a letter of the most
 touching kind, so that chichikov, on perceiving that the father and mother
 would never give their consent, had decided to abduct the girl. in other
 circles the matter was stated in a different way. that is to say, this
 section averred that chichikov did not possess a wife, but that, as a man
 of subtlety and experience, he had bethought him of obtaining the
 daughter’s hand through the expedient of first tackling the mother and
 carrying on with her an ardent liaison, and that, thereafter, he had made
 an application for the desired hand, but that the mother, fearing to
 commit a sin against religion, and feeling in her heart certain gnawings
 of conscience, had returned a blank refusal to chichikov’s request;
 whereupon chichikov had decided to carry out the abduction alleged. to the
 foregoing, of course, there became appended various additional proofs and
 items of evidence, in proportion as the sensation spread to more remote
 corners of the town. at length, with these perfectings, the affair reached
 the ears of the governor’s wife herself. naturally, as the mother of a
 family, and as the first lady in the town, and as a matron who had never
 before been suspected of things of the kind, she was highly offended when
 she heard the stories, and very justly so: with the result that her poor
 young daughter, though innocent, had to endure about as unpleasant a
 tete-a-tete as ever befell a maiden of sixteen, while, for his part, the
 swiss footman received orders never at any time to admit chichikov to the
 house.
 having done their business with the governor’s wife, the ladies’ party
 descended upon the male section, with a view to influencing it to their
 own side by asserting that the dead souls were an invention used solely
 for the purpose of diverting suspicion and successfully affecting the
 abduction. and, indeed, more than one man was converted, and joined the
 feminine camp, in spite of the fact that thereby such seceders incurred
 strong names from their late comrades—names such as “old women,”
 “petticoats,” and others of a nature peculiarly offensive to the male sex.
 also, however much they might arm themselves and take the field, the men
 could not compass such orderliness within their ranks as could the women.
 with the former everything was of the antiquated and rough-hewn and
 ill-fitting and unsuitable and badly-adapted and inferior kind; their
 heads were full of nothing but discord and triviality and confusion and
 slovenliness of thought. in brief, they displayed everywhere the male
 bent, the rude, ponderous nature which is incapable either of managing a
 household or of jumping to a conclusion, as well as remains always
 distrustful and lazy and full of constant doubt and everlasting timidity.
 for instance, the men’s party declared that the whole story was rubbish—that
 the alleged abduction of the governor’s daughter was the work rather of a
 military than of a civilian culprit; that the ladies were lying when they
 accused chichikov of the deed; that a woman was like a money-bag—whatsoever
 you put into her she thenceforth retained; that the subject which really
 demanded attention was the dead souls, of which the devil only knew the
 meaning, but in which there certainly lurked something that was contrary
 to good order and discipline. one reason why the men’s party was so
 certain that the dead souls connoted something contrary to good order and
 discipline, was that there had just been appointed to the province a new
 governor-general—an event which, of course, had thrown the whole
 army of provincial tchinovniks into a state of great excitement, seeing
 that they knew that before long there would ensue transferments and
 sentences of censure, as well as the series of official dinners with which
 a governor-general is accustomed to entertain his subordinates. “alas,”
 thought the army of tchinovniks, “it is probable that, should he learn of
 the gross reports at present afloat in our town, he will make such a fuss
 that we shall never hear the last of them.” in particular did the director
 of the medical department turn pale at the thought that possibly the new
 governor-general would surmise the term “dead folk” to connote patients in
 the local hospitals who, for want of proper preventative measures, had
 died of sporadic fever. indeed, might it not be that chichikov was neither
 more nor less than an emissary of the said governor-general, sent to
 conduct a secret inquiry? accordingly he (the director of the medical
 department) communicated this last supposition to the president of the
 council, who, though at first inclined to ejaculate “rubbish!” suddenly
 turned pale on propounding to himself the theory. “what if the souls
 purchased by chichikov should really be dead ones?”—a terrible
 thought considering that he, the president, had permitted their
 transferment to be registered, and had himself acted as plushkin’s
 representative! what if these things should reach the governor-general’s
 ears? he mentioned the matter to one friend and another, and they, in
 their turn, went white to the lips, for panic spreads faster and is even
 more destructive, than the dreaded black death. also, to add to the
 tchinovniks’ troubles, it so befell that just at this juncture there came
 into the local governor’s hands two documents of great importance. the
 first of them contained advices that, according to received evidence and
 reports, there was operating in the province a forger of rouble-notes who
 had been passing under various aliases and must therefore be sought for
 with the utmost diligence; while the second document was a letter from the
 governor of a neighbouring province with regard to a malefactor who had
 there evaded apprehension—a letter conveying also a warning that, if
 in the province of the town of n. there should appear any suspicious
 individual who could produce neither references nor passports, he was to
 be arrested forthwith. these two documents left every one thunderstruck,
 for they knocked on the head all previous conceptions and theories. not
 for a moment could it be supposed that the former document referred to
 chichikov; yet, as each man pondered the position from his own point of
 view, he remembered that no one really knew who chichikov was; as also
 that his vague references to himself had—yes!—included
 statements that his career in the service had suffered much to the cause
 of truth, and that he possessed a number of enemies who were seeking his
 life. this gave the tchinovniks further food for thought. perhaps his life
 really did stand in danger? perhaps he really was being sought for by some
 one? perhaps he really had done something of the kind above referred to?
 as a matter of fact, who was he?—not that it could actually be
 supposed that he was a forger of notes, still less a brigand, seeing that
 his exterior was respectable in the highest degree. yet who was he? at
 length the tchinovniks decided to make enquiries among those of whom he
 had purchased souls, in order that at least it might be learnt what the
 purchases had consisted of, and what exactly underlay them, and whether,
 in passing, he had explained to any one his real intentions, or revealed
 to any one his identity. in the first instance, therefore, resort was had
 to korobotchka. yet little was gleaned from that source—merely a
 statement that he had bought of her some souls for fifteen roubles apiece,
 and also a quantity of feathers, while promising also to buy some other
 commodities in the future, seeing that, in particular, he had entered into
 a contract with the treasury for lard, a fact constituting fairly
 presumptive proof that the man was a rogue, seeing that just such another
 fellow had bought a quantity of feathers, yet had cheated folk all round,
 and, in particular, had done the archpriest out of over a hundred roubles.
 thus the net result of madame’s cross-examination was to convince the
 tchinovniks that she was a garrulous, silly old woman. with regard to
 manilov, he replied that he would answer for chichikov as he would for
 himself, and that he would gladly sacrifice his property in toto if
 thereby he could attain even a tithe of the qualities which paul
 ivanovitch possessed. finally, he delivered on chichikov, with
 acutely-knitted brows, a eulogy couched in the most charming of terms, and
 coupled with sundry sentiments on the subject of friendship and affection
 in general. true, these remarks sufficed to indicate the tender impulses
 of the speaker’s heart, but also they did nothing to enlighten his
 examiners concerning the business that was actually at hand. as for
 sobakevitch, that landowner replied that he considered chichikov an
 excellent fellow, as well as that the souls whom he had sold to his
 visitor had been in the truest sense of the word alive, but that he could
 not answer for anything which might occur in the future, seeing that any
 difficulties which might arise in the course of the actual transferment of
 souls would not be his fault, in view of the fact that god was lord of
 all, and that fevers and other mortal complaints were so numerous in the
 world, and that instances of whole villages perishing through the same
 could be found on record.
 finally, our friends the tchinovniks found themselves compelled to resort
 to an expedient which, though not particularly savoury, is not
 infrequently employed—namely, the expedient of getting lacqueys
 quietly to approach the servants of the person concerning whom information
 is desired, and to ascertain from them (the servants) certain details with
 regard to their master’s life and antecedents. yet even from this source
 very little was obtained, since petrushka provided his interrogators
 merely with a taste of the smell of his living-room, and selifan confined
 his replies to a statement that the barin had “been in the employment of
 the state, and also had served in the customs.”
 in short, the sum total of the results gathered by the tchinovniks was
 that they still stood in ignorance of chichikov’s identity, but that he
 must be some one; wherefore it was decided to hold a final debate on the
 subject on what ought to be done, and who chichikov could possibly be, and
 whether or not he was a man who ought to be apprehended and detained as
 not respectable, or whether he was a man who might himself be able to
 apprehend and detain them as persons lacking in respectability. the debate
 in question, it was proposed, should be held at the residence of the chief
 of police, who is known to our readers as the father and the general
 benefactor of the town.
 on assembling at the residence indicated, the tchinovniks had occasion to
 remark that, owing to all these cares and excitements, every one of their
 number had grown thinner. yes, the appointment of a new governor-general,
 coupled with the rumours described and the reception of the two serious
 documents above-mentioned, had left manifest traces upon the features of
 every one present. more than one frockcoat had come to look too large for
 its wearer, and more than one frame had fallen away, including the frames
 of the president of the council, the director of the medical department,
 and the public prosecutor. even a certain semen ivanovitch, who, for some
 reason or another, was never alluded to by his family name, but who wore
 on his index finger a ring with which he was accustomed to dazzle his lady
 friends, had diminished in bulk. yet, as always happens at such junctures,
 there were also present a score of brazen individuals who had succeeded in
 not losing their presence of mind, even though they constituted a mere
 sprinkling. of them the postmaster formed one, since he was a man of
 equable temperament who could always say: “we know you, governor-generals!
 we have seen three or four of you come and go, whereas we have been
 sitting on the same stools these thirty years.” nevertheless a prominent
 feature of the gathering was the total absence of what is vulgarly known
 as “common sense.” in general, we russians do not make a good show at
 representative assemblies, for the reason that, unless there be in
 authority a leading spirit to control the rest, the affair always develops
 into confusion. why this should be so one could hardly say, but at all
 events a success is scored only by such gatherings as have for their
 object dining and festivity—to wit, gatherings at clubs or in
 german-run restaurants. however, on the present occasion, the meeting was
 not one of this kind; it was a meeting convoked of necessity, and likely
 in view of the threatened calamity to affect every tchinovnik in the
 place. also, in addition to the great divergency of views expressed
 thereat, there was visible in all the speakers an invincible tendency to
 indecision which led them at one moment to make assertions, and at the
 next to contradict the same. but on at least one point all seemed to agree—namely,
 that chichikov’s appearance and conversation were too respectable for him
 to be a forger or a disguised brigand. that is to say, all seemed to agree
 on the point; until a sudden shout arose from the direction of the
 postmaster, who for some time past had been sitting plunged in thought.
 “i can tell you,” he cried, “who chichikov is!”
 “who, then?” replied the crowd in great excitement.
 “he is none other than captain kopeikin.”
 “and who may captain kopeikin be?”
 taking a pinch of snuff (which he did with the lid of his snuff-box
 half-open, lest some extraneous person should contrive to insert a not
 over-clean finger into the stuff), the postmaster related the following
 story .
 “after fighting in the campaign of , there was sent home, wounded, a
 certain captain kopeikin—a headstrong, lively blade who, whether on
 duty or under arrest, made things lively for everybody. now, since at
 krasni or at leipzig (it matters not which) he had lost an arm and a leg,
 and in those days no provision was made for wounded soldiers, and he could
 not work with his left arm alone, he set out to see his father.
 unfortunately his father could only just support himself, and was forced
 to tell his son so; wherefore the captain decided to go and apply for help
 in st. petersburg, seeing that he had risked his life for his country, and
 had lost much blood in its service. you can imagine him arriving in the
 capital on a baggage waggon—in the capital which is like no other
 city in the world! before him there lay spread out the whole field of
 life, like a sort of arabian nights—a picture made up of the nevski
 prospect, gorokhovaia street, countless tapering spires, and a number of
 bridges apparently supported on nothing—in fact, a regular second
 nineveh. well, he made shift to hire a lodging, but found everything so
 wonderfully furnished with blinds and persian carpets and so forth that he
 saw it would mean throwing away a lot of money. true, as one walks the
 streets of st. petersburg one seems to smell money by the thousand
 roubles, but our friend kopeikin’s bank was limited to a few score coppers
 and a little silver—not enough to buy a village with! at length, at
 the price of a rouble a day, he obtained a lodging in the sort of tavern
 where the daily ration is a bowl of cabbage soup and a crust of bread; and
 as he felt that he could not manage to live very long on fare of that kind
 he asked folk what he had better do. ‘what you had better do?’ they said.
 ‘well the government is not here—it is in paris, and the troops have
 not yet returned from the war; but there is a temporary commission
 sitting, and you had better go and see what it can do for you.’ ‘all
 right!’ he said. ‘i will go and tell the commission that i have shed my
 blood, and sacrificed my life, for my country.’ and he got up early one
 morning, and shaved himself with his left hand (since the expense of a
 barber was not worth while), and set out, wooden leg and all, to see the
 president of the commission. but first he asked where the president lived,
 and was told that his house was in naberezhnaia street. and you may be
 sure that it was no peasant’s hut, with its glazed windows and great
 mirrors and statues and lacqueys and brass door handles! rather, it was
 the sort of place which you would enter only after you had bought a cheap
 cake of soap and indulged in a two hours’ wash. also, at the entrance
 there was posted a grand swiss footman with a baton and an embroidered
 collar—a fellow looking like a fat, over-fed pug dog. however,
 friend kopeikin managed to get himself and his wooden leg into the
 reception room, and there squeezed himself away into a corner, for fear
 lest he should knock down the gilded china with his elbow. and he stood
 waiting in great satisfaction at having arrived before the president had
 so much as left his bed and been served with his silver wash-basin.
 nevertheless, it was only when kopeikin had been waiting four hours that a
 breakfast waiter entered to say, ‘the president will soon be here.’ by now
 the room was as full of people as a plate is of beans, and when the
 president left the breakfast-room he brought with him, oh, such dignity
 and refinement, and such an air of the metropolis! first he walked up to
 one person, and then up to another, saying: ‘what do you want? and what do
 you want? what can i do for you? what is your business?’ and at length he
 stopped before kopeikin, and kopeikin said to him: ‘i have shed my blood,
 and lost both an arm and a leg, for my country, and am unable to work.
 might i therefore dare to ask you for a little help, if the regulations
 should permit of it, or for a gratuity, or for a pension, or something of
 the kind?’ then the president looked at him, and saw that one of his legs
 was indeed a wooden one, and that an empty right sleeve was pinned to his
 uniform. ‘very well,’ he said. ‘come to me again in a few days’ time.’
 upon this friend kopeikin felt delighted. ‘now i have done my job!’ he
 thought to himself; and you may imagine how gaily he trotted along the
 pavement, and how he dropped into a tavern for a glass of vodka, and how
 he ordered a cutlet and some caper sauce and some other things for
 luncheon, and how he called for a bottle of wine, and how he went to the
 theatre in the evening! in short, he did himself thoroughly well. next, he
 saw in the street a young english lady, as graceful as a swan, and set off
 after her on his wooden leg. ‘but no,’ he thought to himself. ‘to the
 devil with that sort of thing just now! i will wait until i have drawn my
 pension. for the present i have spent enough.’ (and i may tell you that by
 now he had got through fully half his money.) two or three days later he
 went to see the president of the commission again. ‘i should be glad to
 know,’ he said, ‘whether by now you can do anything for me in return for
 my having shed my blood and suffered sickness and wounds on military
 service.’ ‘first of all,’ said the president, ‘i must tell you that
 nothing can be decided in your case without the authority of the supreme
 government. without that sanction we cannot move in the matter. surely you
 see how things stand until the army shall have returned from the war? all
 that i can advise you to do is wait for the minister to return, and, in
 the meanwhile, to have patience. rest assured that then you will not be
 overlooked. and if for the moment you have nothing to live upon, this is
 the best that i can do for you.’ with that he handed kopeikin a trifle
 until his case should have been decided. however, that was not what
 kopeikin wanted. he had supposed that he would be given a gratuity of a
 thousand roubles straight away; whereas, instead of ‘drink and be merry,’
 it was ‘wait, for the time is not yet.’ thus, though his head had been
 full of soup plates and cutlets and english girls, he now descended the
 steps with his ears and his tail down—looking, in fact, like a
 poodle over which the cook has poured a bucketful of water. you see, st.
 petersburg life had changed him not a little since first he had got a
 taste of it, and, now that the devil only knew how he was going to live,
 it came all the harder to him that he should have no more sweets to look
 forward to. remember that a man in the prime of years has an appetite like
 a wolf; and as he passed a restaurant he could see a round-faced,
 holland-shirted, snow-white aproned fellow of a french chef preparing a
 dish delicious enough to make it turn to and eat itself; while, again, as
 he passed a fruit shop he could see delicacies looking out of a window for
 fools to come and buy them at a hundred roubles apiece. imagine,
 therefore, his position! on the one hand, so to speak, were salmon and
 water-melons, while on the other hand was the bitter fare which passed at
 a tavern for luncheon. ‘well,’ he thought to himself, ‘let them do what
 they like with me at the commission, but i intend to go and raise the
 whole place, and to tell every blessed functionary there that i have a
 mind to do as i choose.’ and in truth this bold impertinence of a man did
 have the hardihood to return to the commission. ‘what do you want?’ said
 the president. ‘why are you here for the third time? you have had your
 orders given you.’ ‘i daresay i have,’ he retorted, ‘but i am not going to
 be put off with them. i want some cutlets to eat, and a bottle of french
 wine, and a chance to go and amuse myself at the theatre.’ ‘pardon me,’
 said the president. ‘what you really need (if i may venture to mention it)
 is a little patience. you have been given something for food until the
 military committee shall have met, and then, doubtless, you will receive
 your proper reward, seeing that it would not be seemly that a man who has
 served his country should be left destitute. on the other hand, if, in the
 meanwhile, you desire to indulge in cutlets and theatre-going, please
 understand that we cannot help you, but you must make your own resources,
 and try as best you can to help yourself.’ you can imagine that this went
 in at one of kopeikin’s ears, and out at the other; that it was like
 shooting peas at a stone wall. accordingly he raised a turmoil which sent
 the staff flying. one by one, he gave the mob of secretaries and clerks a
 real good hammering. ‘you, and you, and you,’ he said, ‘do not even know
 your duties. you are law-breakers.’ yes, he trod every man of them under
 foot. at length the general himself arrived from another office, and
 sounded the alarm. what was to be done with a fellow like kopeikin? the
 president saw that strong measures were imperative. ‘very well,’ he said.
 ‘since you decline to rest satisfied with what has been given you, and
 quietly to await the decision of your case in st. petersburg, i must find
 you a lodging. here, constable, remove the man to gaol.’ then a constable
 who had been called to the door—a constable three ells in height,
 and armed with a carbine—a man well fitted to guard a bank—placed
 our friend in a police waggon. ‘well,’ reflected kopeikin, ‘at least i
 shan’t have to pay my fare for this ride. that’s one comfort.’ again,
 after he had ridden a little way, he said to himself: ‘they told me at the
 commission to go and make my own means of enjoying myself. very good. i’ll
 do so.’ however, what became of kopeikin, and whither he went, is known to
 no one. he sank, to use the poet’s expression, into the waters of lethe,
 and his doings now lie buried in oblivion. but allow me, gentlemen, to
 piece together the further threads of the story. not two months later
 there appeared in the forests of riazan a band of robbers: and of that
 band the chieftain was none other than—”
 “allow me,” put in the head of the police department. “you have said that
 kopeikin had lost an arm and a leg; whereas chichikov—”
 to say anything more was unnecessary. the postmaster clapped his hand to
 his forehead, and publicly called himself a fool, though, later, he tried
 to excuse his mistake by saying that in england the science of mechanics
 had reached such a pitch that wooden legs were manufactured which would
 enable the wearer, on touching a spring, to vanish instantaneously from
 sight.
 various other theories were then propounded, among them a theory that
 chichikov was napoleon, escaped from st. helena and travelling about the
 world in disguise. and if it should be supposed that no such notion could
 possibly have been broached, let the reader remember that these events
 took place not many years after the french had been driven out of russia,
 and that various prophets had since declared that napoleon was antichrist,
 and would one day escape from his island prison to exercise universal sway
 on earth. nay, some good folk had even declared the letters of napoleon’s
 name to constitute the apocalyptic cipher!
 as a last resort, the tchinovniks decided to question nozdrev, since not
 only had the latter been the first to mention the dead souls, but also he
 was supposed to stand on terms of intimacy with chichikov. accordingly the
 chief of police dispatched a note by the hand of a commissionaire. at the
 time nozdrev was engaged on some very important business—so much so
 that he had not left his room for four days, and was receiving his meals
 through the window, and no visitors at all. the business referred to
 consisted of the marking of several dozen selected cards in such a way as
 to permit of his relying upon them as upon his bosom friend. naturally he
 did not like having his retirement invaded, and at first consigned the
 commissionaire to the devil; but as soon as he learnt from the note that,
 since a novice at cards was to be the guest of the chief of police that
 evening, a call at the latter’s house might prove not wholly unprofitable
 he relented, unlocked the door of his room, threw on the first garments
 that came to hand, and set forth. to every question put to him by the
 tchinovniks he answered firmly and with assurance. chichikov, he averred,
 had indeed purchased dead souls, and to the tune of several thousand
 roubles. in fact, he (nozdrev) had himself sold him some, and still saw no
 reason why he should not have done so. next, to the question of whether or
 not he considered chichikov to be a spy, he replied in the affirmative,
 and added that, as long ago as his and chichikov’s joint schooldays, the
 said chichikov had been known as “the informer,” and repeatedly been
 thrashed by his companions on that account. again, to the question of
 whether or not chichikov was a forger of currency notes the deponent, as
 before, responded in the affirmative, and appended thereto an anecdote
 illustrative of chichikov’s extraordinary dexterity of hand—namely,
 an anecdote to that effect that, once upon a time, on learning that two
 million roubles worth of counterfeit notes were lying in chichikov’s
 house, the authorities had placed seals upon the building, and had
 surrounded it on every side with an armed guard; whereupon chichikov had,
 during the night, changed each of these seals for a new one, and also so
 arranged matters that, when the house was searched, the forged notes were
 found to be genuine ones!
 again, to the question of whether or not chichikov had schemed to abduct
 the governor’s daughter, and also whether it was true that he, nozdrev,
 had undertaken to aid and abet him in the act, the witness replied that,
 had he not undertaken to do so, the affair would never have come off. at
 this point the witness pulled himself up, on realising that he had told a
 lie which might get him into trouble; but his tongue was not to be denied—the
 details trembling on its tip were too alluring, and he even went on to
 cite the name of the village church where the pair had arranged to be
 married, that of the priest who had performed the ceremony, the amount of
 the fees paid for the same (seventy-five roubles), and statements () that
 the priest had refused to solemnise the wedding until chichikov had
 frightened him by threatening to expose the fact that he (the priest) had
 married mikhail, a local corn dealer, to his paramour, and () that
 chichikov had ordered both a koliaska for the couple’s conveyance and
 relays of horses from the post-houses on the road. nay, the narrative, as
 detailed by nozdrev, even reached the point of his mentioning certain of
 the postillions by name! next, the tchinovniks sounded him on the question
 of chichikov’s possible identity with napoleon; but before long they had
 reason to regret the step, for nozdrev responded with a rambling rigmarole
 such as bore no resemblance to anything possibly conceivable. finally, the
 majority of the audience left the room, and only the chief of police
 remained to listen (in the hope of gathering something more); but at last
 even he found himself forced to disclaim the speaker with a gesture which
 said: “the devil only knows what the fellow is talking about!” and so
 voiced the general opinion that it was no use trying to gather figs of
 thistles.
 meanwhile chichikov knew nothing of these events; for, having contracted a
 slight chill, coupled with a sore throat, he had decided to keep his room
 for three days; during which time he gargled his throat with milk and fig
 juice, consumed the fruit from which the juice had been extracted, and
 wore around his neck a poultice of camomile and camphor. also, to while
 away the hours, he made new and more detailed lists of the souls which he
 had bought, perused a work by the duchesse de la valliere ,
 rummaged in his portmanteau, looked through various articles and papers
 which he discovered in his dispatch-box, and found every one of these
 occupations tedious. nor could he understand why none of his official
 friends had come to see him and inquire after his health, seeing that, not
 long since, there had been standing in front of the inn the drozhkis both
 of the postmaster, the public prosecutor, and the president of the
 council. he wondered and wondered, and then, with a shrug of his
 shoulders, fell to pacing the room. at length he felt better, and his
 spirits rose at the prospect of once more going out into the fresh air;
 wherefore, having shaved a plentiful growth of hair from his face, he
 dressed with such alacrity as almost to cause a split in his trousers,
 sprinkled himself with eau-de-cologne, and wrapping himself in warm
 clothes, and turning up the collar of his coat, sallied forth into the
 street. his first destination was intended to be the governor’s mansion,
 and, as he walked along, certain thoughts concerning the governor’s
 daughter would keep whirling through his head, so that almost he forgot
 where he was, and took to smiling and cracking jokes to himself.
 arrived at the governor’s entrance, he was about to divest himself of his
 scarf when a swiss footman greeted him with the words, “i am forbidden to
 admit you.”
 “what?” he exclaimed. “you do not know me? look at me again, and see if
 you do not recognise me.”
 “of course i recognise you,” the footman replied. “i have seen you before,
 but have been ordered to admit any one else rather than monsieur
 chichikov.”
 “indeed! and why so?”
 “those are my orders, and they must be obeyed,” said the footman,
 confronting chichikov with none of that politeness with which, on former
 occasions, he had hastened to divest our hero of his wrappings. evidently
 he was of opinion that, since the gentry declined to receive the visitor,
 the latter must certainly be a rogue.
 “i cannot understand it,” said chichikov to himself. then he departed, and
 made his way to the house of the president of the council. but so put
 about was that official by chichikov’s entry that he could not utter two
 consecutive words—he could only murmur some rubbish which left both
 his visitor and himself out of countenance. chichikov wondered, as he left
 the house, what the president’s muttered words could have meant, but
 failed to make head or tail of them. next, he visited, in turn, the chief
 of police, the vice-governor, the postmaster, and others; but in each case
 he either failed to be accorded admittance or was received so strangely,
 and with such a measure of constraint and conversational awkwardness and
 absence of mind and embarrassment, that he began to fear for the sanity of
 his hosts. again and again did he strive to divine the cause, but could
 not do so; so he went wandering aimlessly about the town, without
 succeeding in making up his mind whether he or the officials had gone
 crazy. at length, in a state bordering upon bewilderment, he returned to
 the inn—to the establishment whence, that every afternoon, he had
 set forth in such exuberance of spirits. feeling the need of something to
 do, he ordered tea, and, still marvelling at the strangeness of his
 position, was about to pour out the beverage when the door opened and
 nozdrev made his appearance.
 “what says the proverb?” he began. “‘to see a friend, seven versts is not
 too long a round to make.’ i happened to be passing the house, saw a light
 in your window, and thought to myself: ‘now, suppose i were to run up and
 pay him a visit? it is unlikely that he will be asleep.’ ah, ha! i see tea
 on your table! good! then i will drink a cup with you, for i had wretched
 stuff for dinner, and it is beginning to lie heavy on my stomach. also,
 tell your man to fill me a pipe. where is your own pipe?”
 “i never smoke,” rejoined chichikov drily.
 “rubbish! as if i did not know what a chimney-pot you are! what is your
 man’s name? hi, vakhramei! come here!”
 “petrushka is his name, not vakhramei.”
 “indeed! but you used to have a man called vakhramei, didn’t you?”
 “no, never.”
 “oh, well. then it must be derebin’s man i am thinking of. what a lucky
 fellow that derebin is! an aunt of his has gone and quarrelled with her
 son for marrying a serf woman, and has left all her property to him, to
 derebin. would that i had an aunt of that kind to provide against
 future contingencies! but why have you been hiding yourself away? i
 suppose the reason has been that you go in for abstruse subjects and are
 fond of reading” (why nozdrev should have drawn these conclusions no one
 could possibly have said—least of all chichikov himself). “by the
 way, i can tell you of something that would have found you scope for your
 satirical vein” (the conclusion as to chichikov’s “satirical vein” was, as
 before, altogether unwarranted on nozdrev’s part). “that is to say, you
 would have seen merchant likhachev losing a pile of money at play. my
 word, you would have laughed! a fellow with me named perependev said:
 ‘would that chichikov had been here! it would have been the very thing for
 him!’” (as a matter of fact, never since the day of his birth had nozdrev
 met any one of the name of perependev.) “however, my friend, you must
 admit that you treated me rather badly the day that we played that game of
 chess; but, as i won the game, i bear you no malice. a propos, i am just
 from the president’s, and ought to tell you that the feeling against you
 in the town is very strong, for every one believes you to be a forger of
 currency notes. i myself was sent for and questioned about you, but i
 stuck up for you through thick and thin, and told the tchinovniks that i
 had been at school with you, and had known your father. in fact, i gave
 the fellows a knock or two for themselves.”
 “you say that i am believed to be a forger?” said chichikov, starting from
 his seat.
 “yes,” said nozdrev. “why have you gone and frightened everybody as you
 have done? some of our folk are almost out of their minds about it, and
 declare you to be either a brigand in disguise or a spy. yesterday the
 public prosecutor even died of it, and is to be buried to-morrow” (this
 was true in so far as that, on the previous day, the official in question
 had had a fatal stroke—probably induced by the excitement of the
 public meeting). “of course, i don’t suppose you to be anything of
 the kind, but, you see, these fellows are in a blue funk about the new
 governor-general, for they think he will make trouble for them over your
 affair. a propos, he is believed to be a man who puts on airs, and turns
 up his nose at everything; and if so, he will get on badly with the
 dvoriane, seeing that fellows of that sort need to be humoured a bit. yes,
 my word! should the new governor-general shut himself up in his study, and
 give no balls, there will be the very devil to pay! by the way, chichikov,
 that is a risky scheme of yours.”
 “what scheme to you mean?” chichikov asked uneasily.
 “why, that scheme of carrying off the governor’s daughter. however, to
 tell the truth, i was expecting something of the kind. no sooner did i see
 you and her together at the ball than i said to myself: ‘ah, ha! chichikov
 is not here for nothing!’ for my own part, i think you have made a poor
 choice, for i can see nothing in her at all. on the other hand, the niece
 of a friend of mine named bikusov—she is a girl, and no mistake! a
 regular what you might call ‘miracle in muslin!’”
 “what on earth are you talking about?” asked chichikov with his eyes
 distended. “how could i carry off the governor’s daughter? what on earth
 do you mean?”
 “come, come! what a secretive fellow you are! my only object in having
 come to see you is to lend you a helping hand in the matter. look here. on
 condition that you will lend me three thousand roubles, i will stand you
 the cost of the wedding, the koliaska, and the relays of horses. i must
 have the money even if i die for it.”
 throughout nozdrev’s maunderings chichikov had been rubbing his eyes to
 ascertain whether or not he was dreaming. what with the charge of being a
 forger, the accusation of having schemed an abduction, the death of the
 public prosecutor (whatever might have been its cause), and the advent of
 a new governor-general, he felt utterly dismayed.
 “things having come to their present pass,” he reflected, “i had better
 not linger here—i had better be off at once.”
 getting rid of nozdrev as soon as he could, he sent for selifan, and
 ordered him to be up at daybreak, in order to clean the britchka and to
 have everything ready for a start at six o’clock. yet, though selifan
 replied, “very well, paul ivanovitch,” he hesitated awhile by the door.
 next, chichikov bid petrushka get out the dusty portmanteau from under the
 bed, and then set to work to cram into it, pell-mell, socks, shirts,
 collars (both clean and dirty), boot trees, a calendar, and a variety of
 other articles. everything went into the receptacle just as it came to
 hand, since his one object was to obviate any possible delay in the
 morning’s departure. meanwhile the reluctant selifan slowly, very slowly,
 left the room, as slowly descended the staircase (on each separate step of
 which he left a muddy foot-print), and, finally, halted to scratch his
 head. what that scratching may have meant no one could say; for, with the
 russian populace, such a scratching may mean any one of a hundred things.
 nevertheless events did not turn out as chichikov had intended they
 should. in the first place, he overslept himself. that was check number
 one. in the second place, on his rising and inquiring whether the britchka
 had been harnessed and everything got ready, he was informed that neither
 of those two things had been done. that was check number two. beside
 himself with rage, he prepared to give selifan the wigging of his life,
 and, meanwhile, waited impatiently to hear what the delinquent had got to
 say in his defence. it goes without saying that when selifan made his
 appearance in the doorway he had only the usual excuses to offer—the
 sort of excuses usually offered by servants when a hasty departure has
 become imperatively necessary.
 “paul ivanovitch,” he said, “the horses require shoeing.”
 “blockhead!” exclaimed chichikov. “why did you not tell me of that before,
 you damned fool? was there not time enough for them to be shod?”
 “yes, i suppose there was,” agreed selifan. “also one of the wheels is in
 want of a new tyre, for the roads are so rough that the old tyre is worn
 through. also, the body of the britchka is so rickety that probably it
 will not last more than a couple of stages.”
 “rascal!” shouted chichikov, clenching his fists and approaching selifan
 in such a manner that, fearing to receive a blow, the man backed and
 dodged aside. “do you mean to ruin me, and to break all our bones on the
 road, you cursed idiot? for these three weeks past you have been doing
 nothing at all; yet now, at the last moment, you come here stammering and
 playing the fool! do you think i keep you just to eat and to drive
 yourself about? you must have known of this before? did you, or did you
 not, know it? answer me at once.”
 “yes, i did know it,” replied selifan, hanging his head.
 “then why didn’t you tell me about it?”
 selifan had no reply immediately ready, so continued to hang his head
 while quietly saying to himself: “see how well i have managed things! i
 knew what was the matter, yet i did not say.”
 “and now,” continued chichikov, “go you at once and fetch a blacksmith.
 tell him that everything must be put right within two hours at the most.
 do you hear? if that should not be done, i, i—i will give you the
 best flogging that ever you had in your life.” truly chichikov was almost
 beside himself with fury.
 turning towards the door, as though for the purpose of going and carrying
 out his orders, selifan halted and added:
 “that skewbald, barin—you might think it well to sell him, seeing
 that he is nothing but a rascal? a horse like that is more of a hindrance
 than a help.”
 “what? do you expect me to go now to the market-place and sell him?”
 “well, paul ivanovitch, he is good for nothing but show, since by nature
 he is a most cunning beast. never in my life have i seen such a horse.”
 “fool! whenever i may wish to sell him i shall sell him. meanwhile, don’t
 you trouble your head about what doesn’t concern you, but go and fetch a
 blacksmith, and see that everything is put right within two hours.
 otherwise i will take the very hair off your head, and beat you till you
 haven’t a face left. be off! hurry!”
 selifan departed, and chichikov, his ill-humour vented, threw down upon
 the floor the poignard which he always took with him as a means of
 instilling respect into whomsoever it might concern, and spent the next
 quarter of an hour in disputing with a couple of blacksmiths—men
 who, as usual, were rascals of the type which, on perceiving that
 something is wanted in a hurry, at once multiplies its terms for providing
 the same. indeed, for all chichikov’s storming and raging as he dubbed the
 fellows robbers and extortioners and thieves, he could make no impression
 upon the pair, since, true to their character, they declined to abate
 their prices, and, even when they had begun their work, spent upon it, not
 two hours, but five and a half. meanwhile he had the satisfaction of
 experiencing that delightful time with which all travellers are familiar—namely,
 the time during which one sits in a room where, except for a litter of
 string, waste paper, and so forth, everything else has been packed. but to
 all things there comes an end, and there arrived also the long-awaited
 moment when the britchka had received the luggage, the faulty wheel had
 been fitted with a new tyre, the horses had been re-shod, and the
 predatory blacksmiths had departed with their gains. “thank god!” thought
 chichikov as the britchka rolled out of the gates of the inn, and the
 vehicle began to jolt over the cobblestones. yet a feeling which he could
 not altogether have defined filled his breast as he gazed upon the houses
 and the streets and the garden walls which he might never see again.
 presently, on turning a corner, the britchka was brought to a halt through
 the fact that along the street there was filing a seemingly endless
 funeral procession. leaning forward in his britchka, chichikov asked
 petrushka whose obsequies the procession represented, and was told that
 they represented those of the public prosecutor. disagreeably shocked, our
 hero hastened to raise the hood of the vehicle, to draw the curtains
 across the windows, and to lean back into a corner. while the britchka
 remained thus halted selifan and petrushka, their caps doffed, sat
 watching the progress of the cortege, after they had received strict
 instructions not to greet any fellow-servant whom they might recognise.
 behind the hearse walked the whole body of tchinovniks, bare-headed; and
 though, for a moment or two, chichikov feared that some of their number
 might discern him in his britchka, he need not have disturbed himself,
 since their attention was otherwise engaged. in fact, they were not even
 exchanging the small talk customary among members of such processions, but
 thinking exclusively of their own affairs, of the advent of the new
 governor-general, and of the probable manner in which he would take up the
 reins of administration. next came a number of carriages, from the windows
 of which peered the ladies in mourning toilets. yet the movements of their
 hands and lips made it evident that they were indulging in animated
 conversation—probably about the governor-general, the balls which he
 might be expected to give, and their own eternal fripperies and gewgaws.
 lastly came a few empty drozhkis. as soon as the latter had passed, our
 hero was able to continue on his way. throwing back the hood of the
 britchka, he said to himself:
 “ah, good friend, you have lived your life, and now it is over! in the
 newspapers they will say of you that you died regretted not only by your
 subordinates, but also by humanity at large, as well as that, a respected
 citizen, a kind father, and a husband beyond reproach, you went to your
 grave amid the tears of your widow and orphans. yet, should those journals
 be put to it to name any particular circumstance which justified this
 eulogy of you, they would be forced to fall back upon the fact that you
 grew a pair of exceptionally thick eyebrows!”
 with that chichikov bid selifan quicken his pace, and concluded: “after
 all, it is as well that i encountered the procession, for they say that to
 meet a funeral is lucky.”
 presently the britchka turned into some less frequented streets, lines of
 wooden fencing of the kind which mark the outskirts of a town began to
 file by, the cobblestones came to an end, the macadam of the highroad
 succeeded to them, and once more there began on either side of the
 turnpike a procession of verst stones, road menders, and grey villages;
 inns with samovars and peasant women and landlords who came running out of
 yards with seivefuls of oats; pedestrians in worn shoes which, it might
 be, had covered eight hundred versts; little towns, bright with booths for
 the sale of flour in barrels, boots, small loaves, and other trifles;
 heaps of slag; much repaired bridges; expanses of field to right and to
 left; stout landowners; a mounted soldier bearing a green, iron-clamped
 box inscribed: “the —th battery of artillery”; long strips of
 freshly-tilled earth which gleamed green, yellow, and black on the face of
 the countryside. with it mingled long-drawn singing, glimpses of elm-tops
 amid mist, the far-off notes of bells, endless clouds of rocks, and the
 illimitable line of the horizon.
 ah, russia, russia, from my beautiful home in a strange land i can still
 see you! in you everything is poor and disordered and unhomely; in you the
 eye is neither cheered nor dismayed by temerities of nature which a yet
 more temerarious art has conquered; in you one beholds no cities with
 lofty, many-windowed mansions, lofty as crags, no picturesque trees, no
 ivy-clad ruins, no waterfalls with their everlasting spray and roar, no
 beetling precipices which confuse the brain with their stony immensity, no
 vistas of vines and ivy and millions of wild roses and ageless lines of
 blue hills which look almost unreal against the clear, silvery background
 of the sky. in you everything is flat and open; your towns project like
 points or signals from smooth levels of plain, and nothing whatsoever
 enchants or deludes the eye. yet what secret, what invincible force draws
 me to you? why does there ceaselessly echo and re-echo in my ears the sad
 song which hovers throughout the length and the breadth of your borders?
 what is the burden of that song? why does it wail and sob and catch at my
 heart? what say the notes which thus painfully caress and embrace my soul,
 and flit, uttering their lamentations, around me? what is it you seek of
 me, o russia? what is the hidden bond which subsists between us? why do
 you regard me as you do? why does everything within you turn upon me eyes
 full of yearning? even at this moment, as i stand dumbly, fixedly,
 perplexedly contemplating your vastness, a menacing cloud, charged with
 gathering rain, seems to overshadow my head. what is it that your
 boundless expanses presage? do they not presage that one day there will
 arise in you ideas as boundless as yourself? do they not presage that one
 day you too will know no limits? do they not presage that one day, when
 again you shall have room for their exploits, there will spring to life
 the heroes of old? how the power of your immensity enfolds me, and
 reverberates through all my being with a wild, strange spell, and flashes
 in my eyes with an almost supernatural radiance! yes, a strange,
 brilliant, unearthly vista indeed do you disclose, o russia, country of
 mine!
 “stop, stop, you fool!” shouted chichikov to selifan; and even as he spoke
 a troika, bound on government business, came chattering by, and
 disappeared in a cloud of dust. to chichikov’s curses at selifan for not
 having drawn out of the way with more alacrity a rural constable with
 moustaches of the length of an arshin added his quota.
 what a curious and attractive, yet also what an unreal, fascination the
 term “highway” connotes! and how interesting for its own sake is a
 highway! should the day be a fine one (though chilly) in mellowing autumn,
 press closer your travelling cloak, and draw down your cap over your ears,
 and snuggle cosily, comfortably into a corner of the britchka before a
 last shiver shall course through your limbs, and the ensuing warmth shall
 put to flight the autumnal cold and damp. as the horses gallop on their
 way, how delightfully will drowsiness come stealing upon you, and make
 your eyelids droop! for a while, through your somnolence, you will
 continue to hear the hard breathing of the team and the rumbling of the
 wheels; but at length, sinking back into your corner, you will relapse
 into the stage of snoring. and when you awake—behold! you will find
 that five stages have slipped away, and that the moon is shining, and that
 you have reached a strange town of churches and old wooden cupolas and
 blackened spires and white, half-timbered houses! and as the moonlight
 glints hither and thither, almost you will believe that the walls and the
 streets and the pavements of the place are spread with sheets—sheets
 shot with coal-black shadows which make the wooden roofs look all the
 brighter under the slanting beams of the pale luminary. nowhere is a soul
 to be seen, for every one is plunged in slumber. yet no. in a solitary
 window a light is flickering where some good burgher is mending his boots,
 or a baker drawing a batch of dough. o night and powers of heaven, how
 perfect is the blackness of your infinite vault—how lofty, how
 remote its inaccessible depths where it lies spread in an intangible, yet
 audible, silence! freshly does the lulling breath of night blow in your
 face, until once more you relapse into snoring oblivion, and your poor
 neighbour turns angrily in his corner as he begins to be conscious of your
 weight. then again you awake, but this time to find yourself confronted
 with only fields and steppes. everywhere in the ascendant is the
 desolation of space. but suddenly the ciphers on a verst stone leap to the
 eye! morning is rising, and on the chill, gradually paling line of the
 horizon you can see gleaming a faint gold streak. the wind freshens and
 grows keener, and you snuggle closer in your cloak; yet how glorious is
 that freshness, and how marvellous the sleep in which once again you
 become enfolded! a jolt!—and for the last time you return to
 consciousness. by now the sun is high in the heavens, and you hear a voice
 cry “gently, gently!” as a farm waggon issues from a by-road. below,
 enclosed within an ample dike, stretches a sheet of water which glistens
 like copper in the sunlight. beyond, on the side of a slope, lie some
 scattered peasants’ huts, a manor house, and, flanking the latter, a
 village church with its cross flashing like a star. there also comes
 wafted to your ear the sound of peasants’ laughter, while in your inner
 man you are becoming conscious of an appetite which is not to be
 withstood.
 oh long-drawn highway, how excellent you are! how often have i in
 weariness and despondency set forth upon your length, and found in you
 salvation and rest! how often, as i followed your leading, have i been
 visited with wonderful thoughts and poetic dreams and curious, wild
 impressions!
 at this moment our friend chichikov also was experiencing visions of a not
 wholly prosaic nature. let us peep into his soul and share them. at first
 he remained unconscious of anything whatsoever, for he was too much
 engaged in making sure that he was really clear of the town; but as soon
 as he saw that it had completely disappeared, with its mills and factories
 and other urban appurtenances, and that even the steeples of the white
 stone churches had sunk below the horizon, he turned his attention to the
 road, and the town of n. vanished from his thoughts as completely as
 though he had not seen it since childhood. again, in its turn, the road
 ceased to interest him, and he began to close his eyes and to loll his
 head against the cushions. of this let the author take advantage, in order
 to speak at length concerning his hero; since hitherto he (the author) has
 been prevented from so doing by nozdrev and balls and ladies and local
 intrigues—by those thousand trifles which seem trifles only when
 they are introduced into a book, but which, in life, figure as affairs of
 importance. let us lay them aside, and betake ourselves to business.
 whether the character whom i have selected for my hero has pleased my
 readers is, of course, exceedingly doubtful. at all events the ladies will
 have failed to approve him for the fair sex demands in a hero perfection,
 and, should there be the least mental or physical stain on him—well,
 woe betide! yes, no matter how profoundly the author may probe that hero’s
 soul, no matter how clearly he may portray his figure as in a mirror, he
 will be given no credit for the achievement. indeed, chichikov’s very
 stoutness and plenitude of years may have militated against him, for never
 is a hero pardoned for the former, and the majority of ladies will, in
 such case, turn away, and mutter to themselves: “phew! what a beast!” yes,
 the author is well aware of this. yet, though he could not, to save his
 life, take a person of virtue for his principal character, it may be that
 this story contains themes never before selected, and that in it there
 projects the whole boundless wealth of russian psychology; that it
 portrays, as well as chichikov, the peasant who is gifted with the virtues
 which god has sent him, and the marvellous maiden of russia who has not
 her like in all the world for her beautiful feminine spirituality, the
 roots of which lie buried in noble aspirations and boundless self-denial.
 in fact, compared with these types, the virtuous of other races seem
 lifeless, as does an inanimate volume when compared with the living word.
 yes, each time that there arises in russia a movement of thought, it
 becomes clear that the movement sinks deep into the slavonic nature where
 it would but have skimmed the surface of other nations.—but why am i
 talking like this? whither am i tending? it is indeed shameful that an
 author who long ago reached man’s estate, and was brought up to a course
 of severe introspection and sober, solitary self-enlightenment, should
 give way to such jejune wandering from the point. to everything its proper
 time and place and turn. as i was saying, it does not lie in me to take a
 virtuous character for my hero: and i will tell you why. it is because it
 is high time that a rest were given to the “poor, but virtuous”
 individual; it is because the phrase “a man of worth” has grown into a
 by-word; it is because the “man of worth” has become converted into a
 horse, and there is not a writer but rides him and flogs him, in and out
 of season; it is because the “man of worth” has been starved until he has
 not a shred of his virtue left, and all that remains of his body is but
 the ribs and the hide; it is because the “man of worth” is for ever being
 smuggled upon the scene; it is because the “man of worth” has at length
 forfeited every one’s respect. for these reasons do i reaffirm that it is
 high time to yoke a rascal to the shafts. let us yoke that rascal.
 our hero’s beginnings were both modest and obscure. true, his parents were
 dvoriane, but he in no way resembled them. at all events, a short, squab
 female relative who was present at his birth exclaimed as she lifted up
 the baby: “he is altogether different from what i had expected him to be.
 he ought to have taken after his maternal grandmother, whereas he has been
 born, as the proverb has it, ‘like not father nor mother, but like a
 chance passer-by.’” thus from the first life regarded the little chichikov
 with sour distaste, and as through a dim, frost-encrusted window. a tiny
 room with diminutive casements which were never opened, summer or winter;
 an invalid father in a dressing-gown lined with lambskin, and with an
 ailing foot swathed in bandages—a man who was continually drawing
 deep breaths, and walking up and down the room, and spitting into a
 sandbox; a period of perpetually sitting on a bench with pen in hand and
 ink on lips and fingers; a period of being eternally confronted with the
 copy-book maxim, “never tell a lie, but obey your superiors, and cherish
 virtue in your heart;” an everlasting scraping and shuffling of slippers
 up and down the room; a period of continually hearing a well-known,
 strident voice exclaim: “so you have been playing the fool again!” at
 times when the child, weary of the mortal monotony of his task, had added
 a superfluous embellishment to his copy; a period of experiencing the
 ever-familiar, but ever-unpleasant, sensation which ensued upon those
 words as the boy’s ear was painfully twisted between two long fingers bent
 backwards at the tips—such is the miserable picture of that youth of
 which, in later life, chichikov preserved but the faintest of memories!
 but in this world everything is liable to swift and sudden change; and,
 one day in early spring, when the rivers had melted, the father set forth
 with his little son in a teliezshka  drawn by a
 sorrel steed of the kind known to horsy folk as a soroka, and having as
 coachman the diminutive hunchback who, father of the only serf family
 belonging to the elder chichikov, served as general factotum in the
 chichikov establishment. for a day and a half the soroka conveyed them on
 their way; during which time they spent the night at a roadside inn,
 crossed a river, dined off cold pie and roast mutton, and eventually
 arrived at the county town. to the lad the streets presented a spectacle
 of unwonted brilliancy, and he gaped with amazement. turning into a side
 alley wherein the mire necessitated both the most strenuous exertions on
 the soroka’s part and the most vigorous castigation on the part of the
 driver and the barin, the conveyance eventually reached the gates of a
 courtyard which, combined with a small fruit garden containing various
 bushes, a couple of apple-trees in blossom, and a mean, dirty little shed,
 constituted the premises attached to an antiquated-looking villa. here
 there lived a relative of the chichikovs, a wizened old lady who went to
 market in person and dried her stockings at the samovar. on seeing the
 boy, she patted his cheek and expressed satisfaction at his physique;
 whereupon the fact became disclosed that here he was to abide for a while,
 for the purpose of attending a local school. after a night’s rest his
 father prepared to betake himself homeward again; but no tears marked the
 parting between him and his son, he merely gave the lad a copper or two
 and (a far more important thing) the following injunctions. “see here, my
 boy. do your lessons well, do not idle or play the fool, and above all
 things, see that you please your teachers. so long as you observe these
 rules you will make progress, and surpass your fellows, even if god shall
 have denied you brains, and you should fail in your studies. also, do not
 consort overmuch with your comrades, for they will do you no good; but,
 should you do so, then make friends with the richer of them, since one day
 they may be useful to you. also, never entertain or treat any one, but see
 that every one entertains and treats you. lastly, and above all else, keep
 and save your every kopeck. to save money is the most important thing in
 life. always a friend or a comrade may fail you, and be the first to
 desert you in a time of adversity; but never will a kopeck fail you,
 whatever may be your plight. nothing in the world cannot be done, cannot
 be attained, with the aid of money.” these injunctions given, the father
 embraced his son, and set forth on his return; and though the son never
 again beheld his parent, the latter’s words and precepts sank deep into
 the little chichikov’s soul.
 the next day young pavlushka made his first attendance at school. but no
 special aptitude in any branch of learning did he display. rather, his
 distinguishing characteristics were diligence and neatness. on the other
 hand, he developed great intelligence as regards the practical aspect of
 life. in a trice he divined and comprehended how things ought to be
 worked, and, from that time forth, bore himself towards his school-fellows
 in such a way that, though they frequently gave him presents, he not only
 never returned the compliment, but even on occasions pocketed the gifts
 for the mere purpose of selling them again. also, boy though he was, he
 acquired the art of self-denial. of the trifle which his father had given
 him on parting he spent not a kopeck, but, the same year, actually added
 to his little store by fashioning a bullfinch of wax, painting it, and
 selling the same at a handsome profit. next, as time went on, he engaged
 in other speculations—in particular, in the scheme of buying up
 eatables, taking his seat in class beside boys who had plenty of
 pocket-money, and, as soon as such opulent individuals showed signs of
 failing attention (and, therefore, of growing appetite), tendering them,
 from beneath the desk, a roll of pudding or a piece of gingerbread, and
 charging according to degree of appetite and size of portion. he also
 spent a couple of months in training a mouse, which he kept confined in a
 little wooden cage in his bedroom. at length, when the training had
 reached the point that, at the several words of command, the mouse would
 stand upon its hind legs, lie down, and get up again, he sold the creature
 for a respectable sum. thus, in time, his gains attained the amount of
 five roubles; whereupon he made himself a purse and then started to fill a
 second receptacle of the kind. still more studied was his attitude towards
 the authorities. no one could sit more quietly in his place on the bench
 than he. in the same connection it may be remarked that his teacher was a
 man who, above all things, loved peace and good behaviour, and simply
 could not abide clever, witty boys, since he suspected them of laughing at
 him. consequently any lad who had once attracted the master’s attention
 with a manifestation of intelligence needed but to shuffle in his place,
 or unintentionally to twitch an eyebrow, for the said master at once to
 burst into a rage, to turn the supposed offender out of the room, and to
 visit him with unmerciful punishment. “ah, my fine fellow,” he would say,
 “i’ll cure you of your impudence and want of respect! i know you through
 and through far better than you know yourself, and will take good care
 that you have to go down upon your knees and curb your appetite.”
 whereupon the wretched lad would, for no cause of which he was aware, be
 forced to wear out his breeches on the floor and go hungry for days.
 “talents and gifts,” the schoolmaster would declare, “are so much rubbish.
 i respect only good behaviour, and shall award full marks to those who
 conduct themselves properly, even if they fail to learn a single letter of
 their alphabet: whereas to those in whom i may perceive a tendency to
 jocularity i shall award nothing, even though they should outdo solon
 himself.” for the same reason he had no great love of the author krylov,
 in that the latter says in one of his fables: “in my opinion, the more one
 sings, the better one works;” and often the pedagogue would relate how, in
 a former school of his, the silence had been such that a fly could be
 heard buzzing on the wing, and for the space of a whole year not a single
 pupil sneezed or coughed in class, and so complete was the absence of all
 sound that no one could have told that there was a soul in the place. of
 this mentor young chichikov speedily appraised the mentality; wherefore he
 fashioned his behaviour to correspond with it. not an eyelid, not an
 eyebrow, would he stir during school hours, howsoever many pinches he
 might receive from behind; and only when the bell rang would he run to
 anticipate his fellows in handing the master the three-cornered cap which
 that dignitary customarily sported, and then to be the first to leave the
 class-room, and contrive to meet the master not less than two or three
 times as the latter walked homeward, in order that, on each occasion, he
 might doff his cap. and the scheme proved entirely successful. throughout
 the period of his attendance at school he was held in high favour, and, on
 leaving the establishment, received full marks for every subject, as well
 as a diploma and a book inscribed (in gilt letters) “for exemplary
 diligence and the perfection of good conduct.” by this time he had grown
 into a fairly good-looking youth of the age when the chin first calls for
 a razor; and at about the same period his father died, leaving behind him,
 as his estate, four waistcoats completely worn out, two ancient
 frockcoats, and a small sum of money. apparently he had been skilled only
 in recommending the saving of kopecks—not in actually practising the
 art. upon that chichikov sold the old house and its little parcel of land
 for a thousand roubles, and removed, with his one serf and the serf’s
 family, to the capital, where he set about organising a new establishment
 and entering the civil service. simultaneously with his doing so, his old
 schoolmaster lost (through stupidity or otherwise) the establishment over
 which he had hitherto presided, and in which he had set so much store by
 silence and good behaviour. grief drove him to drink, and when nothing was
 left, even for that purpose, he retired—ill, helpless, and starving—into
 a broken-down, cheerless hovel. but certain of his former pupils—the
 same clever, witty lads whom he had once been wont to accuse of
 impertinence and evil conduct generally—heard of his pitiable
 plight, and collected for him what money they could, even to the point of
 selling their own necessaries. only chichikov, when appealed to, pleaded
 inability, and compromised with a contribution of a single piatak :
 which his old schoolfellows straightway returned him—full in the
 face, and accompanied with a shout of “oh, you skinflint!” as for the poor
 schoolmaster, when he heard what his former pupils had done, he buried his
 face in his hands, and the tears gushed from his failing eyes as from
 those of a helpless infant. “god has brought you but to weep over my
 death-bed,” he murmured feebly; and added with a profound sigh, on hearing
 of chichikov’s conduct: “ah, pavlushka, how a human being may become
 changed! once you were a good lad, and gave me no trouble; but now you are
 become proud indeed!”
 yet let it not be inferred from this that our hero’s character had grown
 so blase and hard, or his conscience so blunted, as to preclude his
 experiencing a particle of sympathy or compassion. as a matter of fact, he
 was capable both of the one and the other, and would have been glad to
 assist his old teacher had no great sum been required, or had he not been
 called upon to touch the fund which he had decided should remain intact.
 in other words, the father’s injunction, “guard and save every kopeck,”
 had become a hard and fast rule of the son’s. yet the youth had no
 particular attachment to money for money’s sake; he was not possessed with
 the true instinct for hoarding and niggardliness. rather, before his eyes
 there floated ever a vision of life and its amenities and advantages—a
 vision of carriages and an elegantly furnished house and recherche
 dinners; and it was in the hope that some day he might attain these things
 that he saved every kopeck and, meanwhile, stinted both himself and
 others. whenever a rich man passed him by in a splendid drozhki drawn by
 swift and handsomely-caparisoned horses, he would halt as though deep in
 thought, and say to himself, like a man awakening from a long sleep: “that
 gentleman must have been a financier, he has so little hair on his brow.”
 in short, everything connected with wealth and plenty produced upon him an
 ineffaceable impression. even when he left school he took no holiday, so
 strong in him was the desire to get to work and enter the civil service.
 yet, for all the encomiums contained in his diploma, he had much ado to
 procure a nomination to a government department; and only after a long
 time was a minor post found for him, at a salary of thirty or forty
 roubles a year. nevertheless, wretched though this appointment was, he
 determined, by strict attention to business, to overcome all obstacles,
 and to win success. and, indeed, the self-denial, the patience, and the
 economy which he displayed were remarkable. from early morn until late at
 night he would, with indefatigable zeal of body and mind, remain immersed
 in his sordid task of copying official documents—never going home,
 snatching what sleep he could on tables in the building, and dining with
 the watchman on duty. yet all the while he contrived to remain clean and
 neat, to preserve a cheerful expression of countenance, and even to
 cultivate a certain elegance of movement. in passing, it may be remarked
 that his fellow tchinovniks were a peculiarly plain, unsightly lot, some
 of them having faces like badly baked bread, swollen cheeks, receding
 chins, and cracked and blistered upper lips. indeed, not a man of them was
 handsome. also, their tone of voice always contained a note of sullenness,
 as though they had a mind to knock some one on the head; and by their
 frequent sacrifices to bacchus they showed that even yet there remains in
 the slavonic nature a certain element of paganism. nay, the director’s
 room itself they would invade while still licking their lips, and since
 their breath was not over-aromatic, the atmosphere of the room grew not
 over-pleasant. naturally, among such an official staff a man like
 chichikov could not fail to attract attention and remark, since in
 everything—in cheerfulness of demeanour, in suavity of voice, and in
 complete neglect of the use of strong potions—he was the absolute
 antithesis of his companions. yet his path was not an easy one to tread,
 for over him he had the misfortune to have placed in authority a chief
 clerk who was a graven image of elderly insensibility and inertia. always
 the same, always unapproachable, this functionary could never in his life
 have smiled or asked civilly after an acquaintance’s health. nor had any
 one ever seen him a whit different in the street or at his own home from
 what he was in the office, or showing the least interest in anything
 whatever, or getting drunk and relapsing into jollity in his cups, or
 indulging in that species of wild gaiety which, when intoxicated, even a
 burglar affects. no, not a particle of this was there in him. nor, for
 that matter, was there in him a particle of anything at all, whether good
 or bad: which complete negativeness of character produced rather a strange
 effect. in the same way, his wizened, marble-like features reminded one of
 nothing in particular, so primly proportioned were they. only the numerous
 pockmarks and dimples with which they were pitted placed him among the
 number of those over whose faces, to quote the popular saying, “the devil
 has walked by night to grind peas.” in short, it would seem that no human
 agency could have approached such a man and gained his goodwill. yet
 chichikov made the effort. as a first step, he took to consulting the
 other’s convenience in all manner of insignificant trifles—to
 cleaning his pens carefully, and, when they had been prepared exactly to
 the chief clerk’s liking, laying them ready at his elbow; to dusting and
 sweeping from his table all superfluous sand and tobacco ash; to procuring
 a new mat for his inkstand; to looking for his hat—the
 meanest-looking hat that ever the world beheld—and having it ready
 for him at the exact moment when business came to an end; to brushing his
 back if it happened to become smeared with whitewash from a wall. yet all
 this passed as unnoticed as though it had never been done. finally,
 chichikov sniffed into his superior’s family and domestic life, and learnt
 that he possessed a grown-up daughter on whose face also there had taken
 place a nocturnal, diabolical grinding of peas. here was a quarter whence
 a fresh attack might be delivered! after ascertaining what church the
 daughter attended on sundays, our hero took to contriving to meet her in a
 neat suit and a well-starched dickey: and soon the scheme began to work.
 the surly chief clerk wavered for a while; then ended by inviting
 chichikov to tea. nor could any man in the office have told you how it
 came about that before long chichikov had removed to the chief clerk’s
 house, and become a person necessary—indeed indispensable—to
 the household, seeing that he bought the flour and the sugar, treated the
 daughter as his betrothed, called the chief clerk “papenka,” and
 occasionally kissed “papenka’s” hand. in fact, every one at the office
 supposed that, at the end of february (i.e. before the beginning of lent)
 there would take place a wedding. nay, the surly father even began to
 agitate with the authorities on chichikov’s behalf, and so enabled our
 hero, on a vacancy occurring, to attain the stool of a chief clerk.
 apparently this marked the consummation of chichikov’s relations with his
 host, for he hastened stealthily to pack his trunk and, the next day,
 figured in a fresh lodging. also, he ceased to call the chief clerk
 “papenka,” or to kiss his hand; and the matter of the wedding came to as
 abrupt a termination as though it had never been mooted. yet also he never
 failed to press his late host’s hand, whenever he met him, and to invite
 him to tea; while, on the other hand, for all his immobility and dry
 indifference, the chief clerk never failed to shake his head with a
 muttered, “ah, my fine fellow, you have grown too proud, you have grown
 too proud.”
 the foregoing constituted the most difficult step that our hero had to
 negotiate. thereafter things came with greater ease and swifter success.
 everywhere he attracted notice, for he developed within himself everything
 necessary for this world—namely, charm of manner and bearing, and
 great diligence in business matters. armed with these resources, he next
 obtained promotion to what is known as “a fat post,” and used it to the
 best advantage; and even though, at that period, strict inquiry had begun
 to be made into the whole subject of bribes, such inquiry failed to alarm
 him—nay, he actually turned it to account and thereby manifested the
 russian resourcefulness which never fails to attain its zenith where
 extortion is concerned. his method of working was the following. as soon
 as a petitioner or a suitor put his hand into his pocket, to extract
 thence the necessary letters of recommendation for signature, chichikov
 would smilingly exclaim as he detained his interlocutor’s hand: “no, no!
 surely you do not think that i—? but no, no! it is our duty, it is
 our obligation, and we do not require rewards for doing our work properly.
 so far as your matter is concerned, you may rest easy. everything shall be
 carried through to-morrow. but may i have your address? there is no need
 to trouble yourself, seeing that the documents can easily be brought to
 you at your residence.” upon which the delighted suitor would return home
 in raptures, thinking: “here, at long last, is the sort of man so badly
 needed. a man of that kind is a jewel beyond price.” yet for a day, for
 two days—nay, even for three—the suitor would wait in vain so
 far as any messengers with documents were concerned. then he would repair
 to the office—to find that his business had not so much as been
 entered upon! lastly, he would confront the “jewel beyond price.” “oh,
 pardon me, pardon me!” chichikov would exclaim in the politest of tones as
 he seized and grasped the visitor’s hands. “the truth is that we have such
 a quantity of business on hand! but the matter shall be put through
 to-morrow, and in the meanwhile i am most sorry about it.” and with this
 would go the most fascinating of gestures. yet neither on the morrow, nor
 on the day following, nor on the third would documents arrive at the
 suitor’s abode. upon that he would take thought as to whether something
 more ought not to have been done; and, sure enough, on his making inquiry,
 he would be informed that “something will have to be given to the
 copyists.” “well, there can be no harm in that,” he would reply. “as a
 matter of fact, i have ready a tchetvertak  or two.”
 “oh, no, no,” the answer would come. “not a tchetvertak per copyist, but a
 rouble, is the fee.” “what? a rouble per copyist?” “certainly. what is
 there to grumble at in that? of the money the copyists will receive a
 tchetvertak apiece, and the rest will go to the government.” upon that the
 disillusioned suitor would fly out upon the new order of things brought
 about by the inquiry into illicit fees, and curse both the tchinovniks and
 their uppish, insolent behaviour. “once upon a time,” would the suitor
 lament, “one did know what to do. once one had tipped the director a
 bank-note, one’s affair was, so to speak, in the hat. but now one has to
 pay a rouble per copyist after waiting a week because otherwise it was
 impossible to guess how the wind might set! the devil fly away with all
 ‘disinterested’ and ‘trustworthy’ tchinovniks!” and certainly the
 aggrieved suitor had reason to grumble, seeing that, now that bribe-takers
 had ceased to exist, and directors had uniformly become men of honour and
 integrity, secretaries and clerks ought not with impunity to have
 continued their thievish ways. in time there opened out to chichikov a
 still wider field, for a commission was appointed to supervise the
 erection of a government building, and, on his being nominated to that
 body, he proved himself one of its most active members. the commission got
 to work without delay, but for a space of six years had some trouble with
 the building in question. either the climate hindered operations or the
 materials used were of the kind which prevents official edifices from ever
 rising higher than the basement. but, meanwhile, other quarters of the
 town saw arise, for each member of the commission, a handsome house of the
 non-official style of architecture. clearly the foundation afforded by the
 soil of those parts was better than that where the government building was
 still engaged in hanging fire! likewise the members of the commission
 began to look exceedingly prosperous, and to blossom out into family life;
 and, for the first time in his existence, even chichikov also departed
 from the iron laws of his self-imposed restraint and inexorable
 self-denial, and so far mitigated his heretofore asceticism as to show
 himself a man not averse to those amenities which, during his youth, he
 had been capable of renouncing. that is to say, certain superfluities
 began to make their appearance in his establishment. he engaged a good
 cook, took to wearing linen shirts, bought for himself cloth of a pattern
 worn by no one else in the province, figured in checks shot with the
 brightest of reds and browns, fitted himself out with two splendid horses
 (which he drove with a single pair of reins, added to a ring attachment
 for the trace horse), developed a habit of washing with a sponge dipped in
 eau-de-cologne, and invested in soaps of the most expensive quality, in
 order to communicate to his skin a more elegant polish.
 but suddenly there appeared upon the scene a new director—a military
 man, and a martinet as regarded his hostility to bribe-takers and anything
 which might be called irregular. on the very day after his arrival he
 struck fear into every breast by calling for accounts, discovering hosts
 of deficits and missing sums, and directing his attention to the aforesaid
 fine houses of civilian architecture. upon that there ensued a complete
 reshuffling. tchinovniks were retired wholesale, and the houses were
 sequestrated to the government, or else converted into various pious
 institutions and schools for soldiers’ children. thus the whole fabric,
 and especially chichikov, came crashing to the ground. particularly did
 our hero’s agreeable face displease the new director. why that was so it
 is impossible to say, but frequently, in cases of the kind, no reason
 exists. however, the director conceived a mortal dislike to him, and also
 extended that enmity to the whole of chichikov’s colleagues. but inasmuch
 as the said director was a military man, he was not fully acquainted with
 the myriad subtleties of the civilian mind; wherefore it was not long
 before, by dint of maintaining a discreet exterior, added to a faculty for
 humouring all and sundry, a fresh gang of tchinovniks succeeded in
 restoring him to mildness, and the general found himself in the hands of
 greater thieves than before, but thieves whom he did not even suspect,
 seeing that he believed himself to have selected men fit and proper, and
 even ventured to boast of possessing a keen eye for talent. in a trice the
 tchinovniks concerned appraised his spirit and character; with the result
 that the entire sphere over which he ruled became an agency for the
 detection of irregularities. everywhere, and in every case, were those
 irregularities pursued as a fisherman pursues a fat sturgeon with a gaff;
 and to such an extent did the sport prove successful that almost in no
 time each participator in the hunt was seen to be in possession of several
 thousand roubles of capital. upon that a large number of the former band
 of tchinovniks also became converted to paths of rectitude, and were
 allowed to re-enter the service; but not by hook or by crook could
 chichikov worm his way back, even though, incited thereto by sundry items
 of paper currency, the general’s first secretary and principal bear leader
 did all he could on our hero’s behalf. it seemed that the general was the
 kind of man who, though easily led by the nose (provided it was done
 without his knowledge) no sooner got an idea into his head than it stuck
 there like a nail, and could not possibly be extracted; and all that the
 wily secretary succeeded in procuring was the tearing up of a certain
 dirty fragment of paper—even that being effected only by an appeal
 to the general’s compassion, on the score of the unhappy fate which,
 otherwise, would befall chichikov’s wife and children (who, luckily, had
 no existence in fact).
 “well,” said chichikov to himself, “i have done my best, and now
 everything has failed. lamenting my misfortune won’t help me, but only
 action.” and with that he decided to begin his career anew, and once more
 to arm himself with the weapons of patience and self-denial. the better to
 effect this, he had, of course to remove to another town. yet somehow, for
 a while, things miscarried. more than once he found himself forced to
 exchange one post for another, and at the briefest of notice; and all of
 them were posts of the meanest, the most wretched, order. yet, being a man
 of the utmost nicety of feeling, the fact that he found himself rubbing
 shoulders with anything but nice companions did not prevent him from
 preserving intact his innate love of what was decent and seemly, or from
 cherishing the instinct which led him to hanker after office fittings of
 lacquered wood, with neatness and orderliness everywhere. nor did he at
 any time permit a foul word to creep into his speech, and would feel hurt
 even if in the speech of others there occurred a scornful reference to
 anything which pertained to rank and dignity. also, the reader will be
 pleased to know that our hero changed his linen every other day, and in
 summer, when the weather was very hot, every day, seeing that the very
 faintest suspicion of an unpleasant odour offended his fastidiousness. for
 the same reason it was his custom, before being valeted by petrushka,
 always to plug his nostrils with a couple of cloves. in short, there were
 many occasions when his nerves suffered rackings as cruel as a young
 girl’s, and so helped to increase his disgust at having once more to
 associate with men who set no store by the decencies of life. yet, though
 he braced himself to the task, this period of adversity told upon his
 health, and he even grew a trifle shabby. more than once, on happening to
 catch sight of himself in the mirror, he could not forbear exclaiming:
 “holy mother of god, but what a nasty-looking brute i have become!” and
 for a long while afterwards could not with anything like sang-froid
 contemplate his reflection. yet throughout he bore up stoutly and
 patiently—and ended by being transferred to the customs department.
 it may be said that the department had long constituted the secret goal of
 his ambition, for he had noted the foreign elegancies with which its
 officials always contrived to provide themselves, and had also observed
 that invariably they were able to send presents of china and cambric to
 their sisters and aunts—well, to their lady friends generally. yes,
 more than once he had said to himself with a sigh: “that is the department
 to which i ought to belong, for, given a town near the frontier, and a
 sensible set of colleagues, i might be able to fit myself out with
 excellent linen shirts.” also, it may be said that most frequently of all
 had his thoughts turned towards a certain quality of french soap which
 imparted a peculiar whiteness to the skin and a peerless freshness to the
 cheeks. its name is known to god alone, but at least it was to be procured
 only in the immediate neighbourhood of the frontier. so, as i say,
 chichikov had long felt a leaning towards the customs, but for a time had
 been restrained from applying for the same by the various current
 advantages of the building commission; since rightly he had adjudged the
 latter to constitute a bird in the hand, and the former to constitute only
 a bird in the bush. but now he decided that, come what might, into the
 customs he must make his way. and that way he made, and then applied
 himself to his new duties with a zeal born of the fact that he realised
 that fortune had specially marked him out for a customs officer. indeed,
 such activity, perspicuity, and ubiquity as his had never been seen or
 thought of. within four weeks at the most he had so thoroughly got his
 hand in that he was conversant with customs procedure in every detail. not
 only could he weigh and measure, but also he could divine from an invoice
 how many arshins of cloth or other material a given piece contained, and
 then, taking a roll of the latter in his hand, could specify at once the
 number of pounds at which it would tip the scale. as for searchings, well,
 even his colleagues had to admit that he possessed the nose of a veritable
 bloodhound, and that it was impossible not to marvel at the patience
 wherewith he would try every button of the suspected person, yet preserve,
 throughout, a deadly politeness and an icy sang-froid which surpass
 belief. and while the searched were raging, and foaming at the mouth, and
 feeling that they would give worlds to alter his smiling exterior with a
 good, resounding slap, he would move not a muscle of his face, nor abate
 by a jot the urbanity of his demeanour, as he murmured, “do you mind so
 far incommoding yourself as to stand up?” or “pray step into the next
 room, madam, where the wife of one of our staff will attend you,” or “pray
 allow me to slip this penknife of mine into the lining of your coat”
 (after which he would extract thence shawls and towels with as much
 nonchalance as he would have done from his own travelling-trunk). even his
 superiors acknowledged him to be a devil at the job, rather than a human
 being, so perfect was his instinct for looking into cart-wheels,
 carriage-poles, horses’ ears, and places whither an author ought not to
 penetrate even in thought—places whither only a customs official is
 permitted to go. the result was that the wretched traveller who had just
 crossed the frontier would, within a few minutes, become wholly at sea,
 and, wiping away the perspiration, and breaking out into body flushes,
 would be reduced to crossing himself and muttering, “well, well, well!” in
 fact, such a traveller would feel in the position of a schoolboy who,
 having been summoned to the presence of the headmaster for the ostensible
 purpose of being given an order, has found that he receives, instead, a
 sound flogging. in short, for some time chichikov made it impossible for
 smugglers to earn a living. in particular, he reduced polish jewry almost
 to despair, so invincible, so almost unnatural, was the rectitude, the
 incorruptibility which led him to refrain from converting himself into a
 small capitalist with the aid of confiscated goods and articles which, “to
 save excessive clerical labour,” had failed to be handed over to the
 government. also, without saying it goes that such phenomenally zealous
 and disinterested service attracted general astonishment, and, eventually,
 the notice of the authorities; whereupon he received promotion, and
 followed that up by mooting a scheme for the infallible detection of
 contrabandists, provided that he could be furnished with the necessary
 authority for carrying out the same. at once such authority was accorded
 him, as also unlimited power to conduct every species of search and
 investigation. and that was all he wanted. it happened that previously
 there had been formed a well-found association for smuggling on regular,
 carefully prepared lines, and that this daring scheme seemed to promise
 profit to the extent of some millions of money: yet, though he had long
 had knowledge of it, chichikov had said to the association’s emissaries,
 when sent to buy him over, “the time is not yet.” but now that he had got
 all the reins into his hands, he sent word of the fact to the gang, and
 with it the remark, “the time is now.” nor was he wrong in his
 calculations, for, within the space of a year, he had acquired what he
 could not have made during twenty years of non-fraudulent service. with
 similar sagacity he had, during his early days in the department, declined
 altogether to enter into relations with the association, for the reason
 that he had then been a mere cipher, and would have come in for nothing
 large in the way of takings; but now—well, now it was another matter
 altogether, and he could dictate what terms he liked. moreover, that the
 affair might progress the more smoothly, he suborned a fellow tchinovnik
 of the type which, in spite of grey hairs, stands powerless against
 temptation; and, the contract concluded, the association duly proceeded to
 business. certainly business began brilliantly. but probably most of my
 readers are familiar with the oft-repeated story of the passage of spanish
 sheep across the frontier in double fleeces which carried between their
 outer layers and their inner enough lace of brabant to sell to the tune of
 millions of roubles; wherefore i will not recount the story again beyond
 saying that those journeys took place just when chichikov had become head
 of the customs, and that, had he not a hand in the enterprise, not all the
 jews in the world could have brought it to success. by the time that three
 or four of these ovine invasions had taken place, chichikov and his
 accomplice had come to be the possessors of four hundred thousand roubles
 apiece; while some even aver that the former’s gains totalled half a
 million, owing to the greater industry which he had displayed in the
 matter. nor can any one but god say to what a figure the fortunes of the
 pair might not eventually have attained, had not an awkward contretemps
 cut right across their arrangements. that is to say, for some reason or
 another the devil so far deprived these tchinovnik-conspirators of sense
 as to make them come to words with one another, and then to engage in a
 quarrel. beginning with a heated argument, this quarrel reached the point
 of chichikov—who was, possibly, a trifle tipsy—calling his
 colleague a priest’s son; and though that description of the person so
 addressed was perfectly accurate, he chose to take offence, and to answer
 chichikov with the words (loudly and incisively uttered), “it is you who
 have a priest for your father,” and to add to that (the more to incense
 his companion), “yes, mark you! that is how it is.” yet, though he had
 thus turned the tables upon chichikov with a tu quoque, and then capped
 that exploit with the words last quoted, the offended tchinovnik could not
 remain satisfied, but went on to send in an anonymous document to the
 authorities. on the other hand, some aver that it was over a woman that
 the pair fell out—over a woman who, to quote the phrase then current
 among the staff of the customs department, was “as fresh and as strong as
 the pulp of a turnip,” and that night-birds were hired to assault our hero
 in a dark alley, and that the scheme miscarried, and that in any case both
 chichikov and his friend had been deceived, seeing that the person to whom
 the lady had really accorded her favours was a certain staff-captain named
 shamsharev. however, only god knows the truth of the matter. let the
 inquisitive reader ferret it out for himself. the fact remains that a
 complete exposure of the dealings with the contrabandists followed, and
 that the two tchinovniks were put to the question, deprived of their
 property, and made to formulate in writing all that they had done. against
 this thunderbolt of fortune the state councillor could make no headway,
 and in some retired spot or another sank into oblivion; but chichikov put
 a brave face upon the matter, for, in spite of the authorities’ best
 efforts to smell out his gains, he had contrived to conceal a portion of
 them, and also resorted to every subtle trick of intellect which could
 possibly be employed by an experienced man of the world who has a wide
 knowledge of his fellows. nothing which could be effected by pleasantness
 of demeanour, by moving oratory, by clouds of flattery, and by the
 occasional insertion of a coin into a palm did he leave undone; with the
 result that he was retired with less ignominy than was his companion, and
 escaped actual trial on a criminal charge. yet he issued stripped of all
 his capital, stripped of his imported effects, stripped of everything.
 that is to say, all that remained to him consisted of ten thousand roubles
 which he had stored against a rainy day, two dozen linen shirts, a small
 britchka of the type used by bachelors, and two serving-men named selifan
 and petrushka. yes, and an impulse of kindness moved the tchinovniks of
 the customs also to set aside for him a few cakes of the soap which he had
 found so excellent for the freshness of the cheeks. thus once more our
 hero found himself stranded. and what an accumulation of misfortunes had
 descended upon his head!—though, true, he termed them “suffering in
 the service in the cause of truth.” certainly one would have thought that,
 after these buffetings and trials and changes of fortune—after this
 taste of the sorrows of life—he and his precious ten thousand
 roubles would have withdrawn to some peaceful corner in a provincial town,
 where, clad in a stuff dressing-gown, he could have sat and listened to
 the peasants quarrelling on festival days, or (for the sake of a breath of
 fresh air) have gone in person to the poulterer’s to finger chickens for
 soup, and so have spent a quiet, but not wholly useless, existence; but
 nothing of the kind took place, and therein we must do justice to the
 strength of his character. in other words, although he had undergone what,
 to the majority of men, would have meant ruin and discouragement and a
 shattering of ideals, he still preserved his energy. true, downcast and
 angry, and full of resentment against the world in general, he felt
 furious with the injustice of fate, and dissatisfied with the dealings of
 men; yet he could not forbear courting additional experiences. in short,
 the patience which he displayed was such as to make the wooden persistency
 of the german—a persistency merely due to the slow, lethargic
 circulation of the teuton’s blood—seem nothing at all, seeing that
 by nature chichikov’s blood flowed strongly, and that he had to employ
 much force of will to curb within himself those elements which longed to
 burst forth and revel in freedom. he thought things over, and, as he did
 so, a certain spice of reason appeared in his reflections.
 “how have i come to be what i am?” he said to himself. “why has misfortune
 overtaken me in this way? never have i wronged a poor person, or robbed a
 widow, or turned any one out of doors: i have always been careful only to
 take advantage of those who possess more than their share. moreover, i
 have never gleaned anywhere but where every one else was gleaning; and,
 had i not done so, others would have gleaned in my place. why, then,
 should those others be prospering, and i be sunk as low as a worm? what am
 i? what am i good for? how can i, in future, hope to look any honest
 father of a family in the face? how shall i escape being tortured with the
 thought that i am cumbering the ground? what, in the years to come, will
 my children say, save that ‘our father was a brute, for he left us nothing
 to live upon?’”
 here i may remark that we have seen how much thought chichikov devoted to
 his future descendants. indeed, had not there been constantly recurring to
 his mind the insistent question, “what will my children say?” he might not
 have plunged into the affair so deeply. nevertheless, like a wary cat
 which glances hither and thither to see whether its mistress be not coming
 before it can make off with whatsoever first falls to its paw (butter,
 fat, lard, a duck, or anything else), so our future founder of a family
 continued, though weeping and bewailing his lot, to let not a single
 detail escape his eye. that is to say, he retained his wits ever in a
 state of activity, and kept his brain constantly working. all that he
 required was a plan. once more he pulled himself together, once more he
 embarked upon a life of toil, once more he stinted himself in everything,
 once more he left clean and decent surroundings for a dirty, mean
 existence. in other words, until something better should turn up, he
 embraced the calling of an ordinary attorney—a calling which, not
 then possessed of a civic status, was jostled on very side, enjoyed little
 respect at the hands of the minor legal fry (or, indeed, at its own), and
 perforce met with universal slights and rudeness. but sheer necessity
 compelled chichikov to face these things. among commissions entrusted to
 him was that of placing in the hands of the public trustee several hundred
 peasants who belonged to a ruined estate. the estate had reached its
 parlous condition through cattle disease, through rascally bailiffs,
 through failures of the harvest, through such epidemic diseases that had
 killed off the best workmen, and, last, but not least, through the
 senseless conduct of the owner himself, who had furnished a house in
 moscow in the latest style, and then squandered his every kopeck, so that
 nothing was left for his further maintenance, and it became necessary to
 mortgage the remains—including the peasants—of the estate. in
 those days mortgage to the treasury was an innovation looked upon with
 reserve, and, as attorney in the matter, chichikov had first of all to
 “entertain” every official concerned (we know that, unless that be
 previously done, unless a whole bottle of madeira first be emptied down
 each clerical throat, not the smallest legal affair can be carried
 through), and to explain, for the barring of future attachments, that half
 of the peasants were dead.
 “and are they entered on the revision lists?” asked the secretary. “yes,”
 replied chichikov. “then what are you boggling at?” continued the
 secretary. “should one soul die, another will be born, and in time grow up
 to take the first one’s place.” upon that there dawned on our hero one of
 the most inspired ideas which ever entered the human brain. “what a
 simpleton i am!” he thought to himself. “here am i looking about for my
 mittens when all the time i have got them tucked into my belt. why, were i
 myself to buy up a few souls which are dead—to buy them before a new
 revision list shall have been made, the council of public trust might pay
 me two hundred roubles apiece for them, and i might find myself with, say,
 a capital of two hundred thousand roubles! the present moment is
 particularly propitious, since in various parts of the country there has
 been an epidemic, and, glory be to god, a large number of souls have died
 of it. nowadays landowners have taken to card-playing and junketting and
 wasting their money, or to joining the civil service in st. petersburg;
 consequently their estates are going to rack and ruin, and being managed
 in any sort of fashion, and succeeding in paying their dues with greater
 difficulty each year. that being so, not a man of the lot but would gladly
 surrender to me his dead souls rather than continue paying the poll-tax;
 and in this fashion i might make—well, not a few kopecks. of course
 there are difficulties, and, to avoid creating a scandal, i should need to
 employ plenty of finesse; but man was given his brain to use, not to
 neglect. one good point about the scheme is that it will seem so
 improbable that in case of an accident, no one in the world will believe
 in it. true, it is illegal to buy or mortgage peasants without land, but i
 can easily pretend to be buying them only for transferment elsewhere. land
 is to be acquired in the provinces of taurida and kherson almost for
 nothing, provided that one undertakes subsequently to colonise it; so to
 kherson i will ‘transfer’ them, and long may they live there! and the
 removal of my dead souls shall be carried out in the strictest legal form;
 and if the authorities should want confirmation by testimony, i shall
 produce a letter signed by my own superintendent of the khersonian rural
 police—that is to say, by myself. lastly, the supposed village in
 kherson shall be called chichikovoe—better still pavlovskoe,
 according to my christian name.”
 in this fashion there germinated in our hero’s brain that strange scheme
 for which the reader may or may not be grateful, but for which the author
 certainly is so, seeing that, had it never occurred to chichikov, this
 story would never have seen the light.
 after crossing himself, according to the russian custom, chichikov set
 about carrying out his enterprise. on pretence of selecting a place
 wherein to settle, he started forth to inspect various corners of the
 russian empire, but more especially those which had suffered from such
 unfortunate accidents as failures of the harvest, a high rate of
 mortality, or whatsoever else might enable him to purchase souls at the
 lowest possible rate. but he did not tackle his landowners haphazard: he
 rather selected such of them as seemed more particularly suited to his
 taste, or with whom he might with the least possible trouble conclude
 identical agreements; though, in the first instance, he always tried, by
 getting on terms of acquaintanceship—better still, of friendship—with
 them, to acquire the souls for nothing, and so to avoid purchase at all.
 in passing, my readers must not blame me if the characters whom they have
 encountered in these pages have not been altogether to their liking. the
 fault is chichikov’s rather than mine, for he is the master, and where he
 leads we must follow. also, should my readers gird at me for a certain
 dimness and want of clarity in my principal characters and actors, that
 will be tantamount to saying that never do the broad tendency and the
 general scope of a work become immediately apparent. similarly does the
 entry to every town—the entry even to the capital itself—convey
 to the traveller such an impression of vagueness that at first everything
 looks grey and monotonous, and the lines of smoky factories and workshops
 seem never to be coming to an end; but in time there will begin also to
 stand out the outlines of six-storied mansions, and of shops and
 balconies, and wide perspectives of streets, and a medley of steeples,
 columns, statues, and turrets—the whole framed in rattle and roar
 and the infinite wonders which the hand and the brain of men have
 conceived. of the manner in which chichikov’s first purchases were made
 the reader is aware. subsequently he will see also how the affair
 progressed, and with what success or failure our hero met, and how
 chichikov was called upon to decide and to overcome even more difficult
 problems than the foregoing, and by what colossal forces the levers of his
 far-flung tale are moved, and how eventually the horizon will become
 extended until everything assumes a grandiose and a lyrical tendency. yes,
 many a verst of road remains to be travelled by a party made up of an
 elderly gentleman, a britchka of the kind affected by bachelors, a valet
 named petrushka, a coachman named selifan, and three horses which, from
 the assessor to the skewbald, are known to us individually by name. again,
 although i have given a full description of our hero’s exterior (such as
 it is), i may yet be asked for an inclusive definition also of his moral
 personality. that he is no hero compounded of virtues and perfections must
 be already clear. then what is he? a villain? why should we call him a
 villain? why should we be so hard upon a fellow man? in these days our
 villains have ceased to exist. rather it would be fairer to call him an
 acquirer. the love of acquisition, the love of gain, is a fault common to
 many, and gives rise to many and many a transaction of the kind generally
 known as “not strictly honourable.” true, such a character contains an
 element of ugliness, and the same reader who, on his journey through life,
 would sit at the board of a character of this kind, and spend a most
 agreeable time with him, would be the first to look at him askance if he
 should appear in the guise of the hero of a novel or a play. but wise is
 the reader who, on meeting such a character, scans him carefully, and,
 instead of shrinking from him with distaste, probes him to the springs of
 his being. the human personality contains nothing which may not, in the
 twinkling of an eye, become altogether changed—nothing in which,
 before you can look round, there may not spring to birth some cankerous
 worm which is destined to suck thence the essential juice. yes, it is a
 common thing to see not only an overmastering passion, but also a passion
 of the most petty order, arise in a man who was born to better things, and
 lead him both to forget his greatest and most sacred obligations, and to
 see only in the veriest trifles the great and the holy. for human passions
 are as numberless as is the sand of the seashore, and go on to become his
 most insistent of masters. happy, therefore, the man who may choose from
 among the gamut of human passions one which is noble! hour by hour will
 that instinct grow and multiply in its measureless beneficence; hour by
 hour will it sink deeper and deeper into the infinite paradise of his
 soul. but there are passions of which a man cannot rid himself, seeing
 that they are born with him at his birth, and he has no power to abjure
 them. higher powers govern those passions, and in them is something which
 will call to him, and refuse to be silenced, to the end of his life. yes,
 whether in a guise of darkness, or whether in a guise which will become
 converted into a light to lighten the world, they will and must attain
 their consummation on life’s field: and in either case they have been
 evoked for man’s good. in the same way may the passion which drew our
 chichikov onwards have been one that was independent of himself; in the
 same way may there have lurked even in his cold essence something which
 will one day cause men to humble themselves in the dust before the
 infinite wisdom of god.
 yet that folk should be dissatisfied with my hero matters nothing. what
 matters is the fact that, under different circumstances, their approval
 could have been taken as a foregone conclusion. that is to say, had not
 the author pried over-deeply into chichikov’s soul, nor stirred up in its
 depths what shunned and lay hidden from the light, nor disclosed those of
 his hero’s thoughts which that hero would have not have disclosed even to
 his most intimate friend; had the author, indeed, exhibited chichikov just
 as he exhibited himself to the townsmen of n. and manilov and the rest;
 well, then we may rest assured that every reader would have been delighted
 with him, and have voted him a most interesting person. for it is not
 nearly so necessary that chichikov should figure before the reader as
 though his form and person were actually present to the eye as that, on
 concluding a perusal of this work, the reader should be able to return,
 unharrowed in soul, to that cult of the card-table which is the solace and
 delight of all good russians. yes, readers of this book, none of you
 really care to see humanity revealed in its nakedness. “why should we do
 so?” you say. “what would be the use of it? do we not know for ourselves
 that human life contains much that is gross and contemptible? do we not
 with our own eyes have to look upon much that is anything but comforting?
 far better would it be if you would put before us what is comely and
 attractive, so that we might forget ourselves a little.” in the same
 fashion does a landowner say to his bailiff: “why do you come and tell me
 that the affairs of my estate are in a bad way? i know that without your
 help. have you nothing else to tell me? kindly allow me to forget the
 fact, or else to remain in ignorance of it, and i shall be much obliged to
 you.” whereafter the said landowner probably proceeds to spend on his
 diversion the money which ought to have gone towards the rehabilitation of
 his affairs.
 possibly the author may also incur censure at the hands of those so-called
 “patriots” who sit quietly in corners, and become capitalists through
 making fortunes at the expense of others. yes, let but something which
 they conceive to be derogatory to their country occur—for instance,
 let there be published some book which voices the bitter truth—and
 out they will come from their hiding-places like a spider which perceives
 a fly to be caught in its web. “is it well to proclaim this to the world,
 and to set folk talking about it?” they will cry. “what you have described
 touches us, is our affair. is conduct of that kind right? what will
 foreigners say? does any one care calmly to sit by and hear himself
 traduced? why should you lead foreigners to suppose that all is not well
 with us, and that we are not patriotic?” well, to these sage remarks no
 answer can really be returned, especially to such of the above as refer to
 foreign opinion. but see here. there once lived in a remote corner of
 russia two natives of the region indicated. one of those natives was a
 good man named kifa mokievitch, and a man of kindly disposition; a man who
 went through life in a dressing-gown, and paid no heed to his household,
 for the reason that his whole being was centred upon the province of
 speculation, and that, in particular, he was preoccupied with a
 philosophical problem usually stated by him thus: “a beast,” he would say,
 “is born naked. now, why should that be? why should not a beast be born as
 a bird is born—that is to say, through the process of being hatched
 from an egg? nature is beyond the understanding, however much one may
 probe her.” this was the substance of kifa mokievitch’s reflections. but
 herein is not the chief point. the other of the pair was a fellow named
 mofi kifovitch, and son to the first named. he was what we russians call a
 “hero,” and while his father was pondering the parturition of beasts, his,
 the son’s, lusty, twenty-year-old temperament was violently struggling for
 development. yet that son could tackle nothing without some accident
 occurring. at one moment would he crack some one’s fingers in half, and at
 another would he raise a bump on somebody’s nose; so that both at home and
 abroad every one and everything—from the serving-maid to the
 yard-dog—fled on his approach, and even the bed in his bedroom
 became shattered to splinters. such was mofi kifovitch; and with it all he
 had a kindly soul. but herein is not the chief point. “good sir, good kifa
 mokievitch,” servants and neighbours would come and say to the father,
 “what are you going to do about your moki kifovitch? we get no rest from
 him, he is so above himself.” “that is only his play, that is only his
 play,” the father would reply. “what else can you expect? it is too late
 now to start a quarrel with him, and, moreover, every one would accuse me
 of harshness. true, he is a little conceited; but, were i to reprove him
 in public, the whole thing would become common talk, and folk would begin
 giving him a dog’s name. and if they did that, would not their opinion
 touch me also, seeing that i am his father? also, i am busy with
 philosophy, and have no time for such things. lastly, moki kifovitch is my
 son, and very dear to my heart.” and, beating his breast, kifa mokievitch
 again asserted that, even though his son should elect to continue his
 pranks, it would not be for him, for the father, to proclaim the fact, or
 to fall out with his offspring. and, this expression of paternal feeling
 uttered, kifa mokievitch left moki kifovitch to his heroic exploits, and
 himself returned to his beloved subject of speculation, which now included
 also the problem, “suppose elephants were to take to being hatched from
 eggs, would not the shell of such eggs be of a thickness proof against
 cannonballs, and necessitate the invention of some new type of firearm?”
 thus at the end of this little story we have these two denizens of a
 peaceful corner of russia looking thence, as from a window, in less terror
 of doing what was scandalous than of having it said of them that they were
 acting scandalously. yes, the feeling animating our so-called “patriots”
 is not true patriotism at all. something else lies beneath it. who, if not
 an author, is to speak aloud the truth? men like you, my pseudo-patriots,
 stand in dread of the eye which is able to discern, yet shrink from using
 your own, and prefer, rather, to glance at everything unheedingly. yes,
 after laughing heartily over chichikov’s misadventures, and perhaps even
 commending the author for his dexterity of observation and pretty turn of
 wit, you will look at yourselves with redoubled pride and a self-satisfied
 smile, and add: “well, we agree that in certain parts of the provinces
 there exists strange and ridiculous individuals, as well as unconscionable
 rascals.”
 yet which of you, when quiet, and alone, and engaged in solitary
 self-communion, would not do well to probe your own souls, and to put to
 yourselves the solemn question, “is there not in me an element of
 chichikov?” for how should there not be? which of you is not liable at any
 moment to be passed in the street by an acquaintance who, nudging his
 neighbour, may say of you, with a barely suppressed sneer: “look! there
 goes chichikov! that is chichikov who has just gone by!”
 but here are we talking at the top of our voices whilst all the time our
 hero lies slumbering in his britchka! indeed, his name has been repeated
 so often during the recital of his life’s history that he must almost have
 heard us! and at any time he is an irritable, irascible fellow when spoken
 of with disrespect. true, to the reader chichikov’s displeasure cannot
 matter a jot; but for the author it would mean ruin to quarrel with his
 hero, seeing that, arm in arm, chichikov and he have yet far to go.
 “tut, tut, tut!” came in a shout from chichikov. “hi, selifan!”
 “what is it?” came the reply, uttered with a drawl.
 “what is it? why, how dare you drive like that? come! bestir yourself a
 little!”
 and indeed, selifan had long been sitting with half-closed eyes, and hands
 which bestowed no encouragement upon his somnolent steeds save an
 occasional flicking of the reins against their flanks; whilst petrushka
 had lost his cap, and was leaning backwards until his head had come to
 rest against chichikov’s knees—a position which necessitated his
 being awakened with a cuff. selifan also roused himself, and apportioned
 to the skewbald a few cuts across the back of a kind which at least had
 the effect of inciting that animal to trot; and when, presently, the other
 two horses followed their companion’s example, the light britchka moved
 forwards like a piece of thistledown. selifan flourished his whip and
 shouted, “hi, hi!” as the inequalities of the road jerked him vertically
 on his seat; and meanwhile, reclining against the leather cushions of the
 vehicle’s interior, chichikov smiled with gratification at the sensation
 of driving fast. for what russian does not love to drive fast? which of us
 does not at times yearn to give his horses their head, and to let them go,
 and to cry, “to the devil with the world!”? at such moments a great force
 seems to uplift one as on wings; and one flies, and everything else flies,
 but contrariwise—both the verst stones, and traders riding on the
 shafts of their waggons, and the forest with dark lines of spruce and fir
 amid which may be heard the axe of the woodcutter and the croaking of the
 raven. yes, out of a dim, remote distance the road comes towards one, and
 while nothing save the sky and the light clouds through which the moon is
 cleaving her way seem halted, the brief glimpses wherein one can discern
 nothing clearly have in them a pervading touch of mystery. ah, troika,
 troika, swift as a bird, who was it first invented you? only among a hardy
 race of folk can you have come to birth—only in a land which, though
 poor and rough, lies spread over half the world, and spans versts the
 counting whereof would leave one with aching eyes. nor are you a
 modishly-fashioned vehicle of the road—a thing of clamps and iron.
 rather, you are a vehicle but shapen and fitted with the axe or chisel of
 some handy peasant of yaroslav. nor are you driven by a coachman clothed
 in german livery, but by a man bearded and mittened. see him as he mounts,
 and flourishes his whip, and breaks into a long-drawn song! away like the
 wind go the horses, and the wheels, with their spokes, become transparent
 circles, and the road seems to quiver beneath them, and a pedestrian, with
 a cry of astonishment, halts to watch the vehicle as it flies, flies,
 flies on its way until it becomes lost on the ultimate horizon—a
 speck amid a cloud of dust!
 and you, russia of mine—are not you also speeding like a troika
 which nought can overtake? is not the road smoking beneath your wheels,
 and the bridges thundering as you cross them, and everything being left in
 the rear, and the spectators, struck with the portent, halting to wonder
 whether you be not a thunderbolt launched from heaven? what does that
 awe-inspiring progress of yours foretell? what is the unknown force which
 lies within your mysterious steeds? surely the winds themselves must abide
 in their manes, and every vein in their bodies be an ear stretched to
 catch the celestial message which bids them, with iron-girded breasts, and
 hooves which barely touch the earth as they gallop, fly forward on a
 mission of god? whither, then, are you speeding, o russia of mine?
 whither? answer me! but no answer comes—only the weird sound of your
 collar-bells. rent into a thousand shreds, the air roars past you, for you
 are overtaking the whole world, and shall one day force all nations, all
 empires to stand aside, to give you way!
 why do i so persistently paint the poverty, the imperfections of russian
 life, and delve into the remotest depths, the most retired holes and
 corners, of our empire for my subjects? the answer is that there is
 nothing else to be done when an author’s idiosyncrasy happens to incline
 him that way. so again we find ourselves in a retired spot. but what a
 spot!
 imagine, if you can, a mountain range like a gigantic fortress, with
 embrasures and bastions which appear to soar a thousand versts towards the
 heights of heaven, and, towering grandly over a boundless expanse of
 plain, are broken up into precipitous, overhanging limestone cliffs. here
 and there those cliffs are seamed with water-courses and gullies, while at
 other points they are rounded off into spurs of green—spurs now
 coated with fleece-like tufts of young undergrowth, now studded with the
 stumps of felled trees, now covered with timber which has, by some
 miracle, escaped the woodman’s axe. also, a river winds awhile between its
 banks, then leaves the meadow land, divides into runlets (all flashing in
 the sun like fire), plunges, re-united, into the midst of a thicket of
 elder, birch, and pine, and, lastly, speeds triumphantly past bridges and
 mills and weirs which seem to be lying in wait for it at every turn.
 at one particular spot the steep flank of the mountain range is covered
 with billowy verdure of denser growth than the rest; and here the aid of
 skilful planting, added to the shelter afforded by a rugged ravine, has
 enabled the flora of north and south so to be brought together that,
 twined about with sinuous hop-tendrils, the oak, the spruce fir, the wild
 pear, the maple, the cherry, the thorn, and the mountain ash either assist
 or check one another’s growth, and everywhere cover the declivity with
 their straggling profusion. also, at the edge of the summit there can be
 seen mingling with the green of the trees the red roofs of a manorial
 homestead, while behind the upper stories of the mansion proper and its
 carved balcony and a great semi-circular window there gleam the tiles and
 gables of some peasants’ huts. lastly, over this combination of trees and
 roofs there rises—overtopping everything with its gilded, sparkling
 steeple—an old village church. on each of its pinnacles a cross of
 carved gilt is stayed with supports of similar gilding and design; with
 the result that from a distance the gilded portions have the effect of
 hanging without visible agency in the air. and the whole—the three
 successive tiers of woodland, roofs, and crosses whole—lies
 exquisitely mirrored in the river below, where hollow willows, grotesquely
 shaped (some of them rooted on the river’s banks, and some in the water
 itself, and all drooping their branches until their leaves have formed a
 tangle with the water lilies which float on the surface), seem to be
 gazing at the marvellous reflection at their feet.
 thus the view from below is beautiful indeed. but the view from above is
 even better. no guest, no visitor, could stand on the balcony of the
 mansion and remain indifferent. so boundless is the panorama revealed that
 surprise would cause him to catch at his breath, and exclaim: “lord of
 heaven, but what a prospect!” beyond meadows studded with spinneys and
 water-mills lie forests belted with green; while beyond, again, there can
 be seen showing through the slightly misty air strips of yellow heath,
 and, again, wide-rolling forests (as blue as the sea or a cloud), and more
 heath, paler than the first, but still yellow. finally, on the far horizon
 a range of chalk-topped hills gleams white, even in dull weather, as
 though it were lightened with perpetual sunshine; and here and there on
 the dazzling whiteness of its lower slopes some plaster-like, nebulous
 patches represent far-off villages which lie too remote for the eye to
 discern their details. indeed, only when the sunlight touches a steeple to
 gold does one realise that each such patch is a human settlement. finally,
 all is wrapped in an immensity of silence which even the far, faint echoes
 of persons singing in the void of the plain cannot shatter.
 even after gazing at the spectacle for a couple of hours or so, the
 visitor would still find nothing to say, save: “lord of heaven, but what a
 prospect!” then who is the dweller in, the proprietor of, this manor—a
 manor to which, as to an impregnable fortress, entrance cannot be gained
 from the side where we have been standing, but only from the other
 approach, where a few scattered oaks offer hospitable welcome to the
 visitor, and then, spreading above him their spacious branches (as in
 friendly embrace), accompany him to the facade of the mansion whose top we
 have been regarding from the reverse aspect, but which now stands
 frontwise on to us, and has, on one side of it, a row of peasants’ huts
 with red tiles and carved gables, and, on the other, the village church,
 with those glittering golden crosses and gilded open-work charms which
 seem to hang suspended in the air? yes, indeed!—to what fortunate
 individual does this corner of the world belong? it belongs to andrei
 ivanovitch tientietnikov, landowner of the canton of tremalakhan, and,
 withal, a bachelor of about thirty.
 should my lady readers ask of me what manner of man is tientietnikov, and
 what are his attributes and peculiarities, i should refer them to his
 neighbours. of these, a member of the almost extinct tribe of intelligent
 staff officers on the retired list once summed up tientietnikov in the
 phrase, “he is an absolute blockhead;” while a general who resided ten
 versts away was heard to remark that “he is a young man who, though not
 exactly a fool, has at least too much crowded into his head. i myself
 might have been of use to him, for not only do i maintain certain
 connections with st. petersburg, but also—” and the general left his
 sentence unfinished. thirdly, a captain-superintendent of rural police
 happened to remark in the course of conversation: “to-morrow i must go and
 see tientietnikov about his arrears.” lastly, a peasant of tientietnikov’s
 own village, when asked what his barin was like, returned no answer at
 all. all of which would appear to show that tientietnikov was not exactly
 looked upon with favour.
 to speak dispassionately, however, he was not a bad sort of fellow—merely
 a star-gazer; and since the world contains many watchers of the skies, why
 should tientietnikov not have been one of them? however, let me describe
 in detail a specimen day of his existence—one that will closely
 resemble the rest, and then the reader will be enabled to judge of
 tientietnikov’s character, and how far his life corresponded to the
 beauties of nature with which he lived surrounded.
 on the morning of the specimen day in question he awoke very late, and,
 raising himself to a sitting posture, rubbed his eyes. and since those
 eyes were small, the process of rubbing them occupied a very long time,
 and throughout its continuance there stood waiting by the door his valet,
 mikhailo, armed with a towel and basin. for one hour, for two hours, did
 poor mikhailo stand there: then he departed to the kitchen, and returned
 to find his master still rubbing his eyes as he sat on the bed. at length,
 however, tientietnikov rose, washed himself, donned a dressing-gown, and
 moved into the drawing-room for morning tea, coffee, cocoa, and warm milk;
 of all of which he partook but sparingly, while munching a piece of bread,
 and scattering tobacco ash with complete insouciance. two hours did he sit
 over this meal, then poured himself out another cup of the rapidly cooling
 tea, and walked to the window. this faced the courtyard, and outside it,
 as usual, there took place the following daily altercation between a serf
 named grigory (who purported to act as butler) and the housekeeper,
 perfilievna.
 grigory. ah, you nuisance, you good-for-nothing, you had better hold your
 stupid tongue.
 perfilievna. yes; and don’t you wish that i would?
 grigory. what? you so thick with that bailiff of yours, you housekeeping
 jade!
 perfilievna. nay, he is as big a thief as you are. do you think the barin
 doesn’t know you? and there he is! he must have heard everything!
 grigory. where?
 perfilievna. there—sitting by the window, and looking at us!
 next, to complete the hubbub, a serf child which had been clouted by its
 mother broke out into a bawl, while a borzoi puppy which had happened to
 get splashed with boiling water by the cook fell to yelping vociferously.
 in short, the place soon became a babel of shouts and squeals, and, after
 watching and listening for a time, the barin found it so impossible to
 concentrate his mind upon anything that he sent out word that the noise
 would have to be abated.
 the next item was that, a couple of hours before luncheon time, he
 withdrew to his study, to set about employing himself upon a weighty work
 which was to consider russia from every point of view: from the political,
 from the philosophical, and from the religious, as well as to resolve
 various problems which had arisen to confront the empire, and to define
 clearly the great future to which the country stood ordained. in short, it
 was to be the species of compilation in which the man of the day so much
 delights. yet the colossal undertaking had progressed but little beyond
 the sphere of projection, since, after a pen had been gnawed awhile, and a
 few strokes had been committed to paper, the whole would be laid aside in
 favour of the reading of some book; and that reading would continue also
 during luncheon and be followed by the lighting of a pipe, the playing of
 a solitary game of chess, and the doing of more or less nothing for the
 rest of the day.
 the foregoing will give the reader a pretty clear idea of the manner in
 which it was possible for this man of thirty-three to waste his time. clad
 constantly in slippers and a dressing-gown, tientietnikov never went out,
 never indulged in any form of dissipation, and never walked upstairs.
 nothing did he care for fresh air, and would bestow not a passing glance
 upon all those beauties of the countryside which moved visitors to such
 ecstatic admiration. from this the reader will see that andrei ivanovitch
 tientietnikov belonged to that band of sluggards whom we always have with
 us, and who, whatever be their present appellation, used to be known by
 the nicknames of “lollopers,” “bed pressers,” and “marmots.” whether the
 type is a type originating at birth, or a type resulting from untoward
 circumstances in later life, it is impossible to say. a better course than
 to attempt to answer that question would be to recount the story of
 tientietnikov’s boyhood and upbringing.
 everything connected with the latter seemed to promise success, for at
 twelve years of age the boy—keen-witted, but dreamy of temperament,
 and inclined to delicacy—was sent to an educational establishment
 presided over by an exceptional type of master. the idol of his pupils,
 and the admiration of his assistants, alexander petrovitch was gifted with
 an extraordinary measure of good sense. how thoroughly he knew the
 peculiarities of the russian of his day! how well he understood boys! how
 capable he was of drawing them out! not a practical joker in the school
 but, after perpetrating a prank, would voluntarily approach his preceptor
 and make to him free confession. true, the preceptor would put a stern
 face upon the matter, yet the culprit would depart with head held higher,
 not lower, than before, since in alexander petrovitch there was something
 which heartened—something which seemed to say to a delinquent:
 “forward you! rise to your feet again, even though you have fallen!” not
 lectures on good behaviour was it, therefore, that fell from his lips, but
 rather the injunction, “i want to see intelligence, and nothing else. the
 boy who devotes his attention to becoming clever will never play the fool,
 for under such circumstances, folly disappears of itself.” and so folly
 did, for the boy who failed to strive in the desired direction incurred
 the contempt of all his comrades, and even dunces and fools of senior
 standing did not dare to raise a finger when saluted by their juniors with
 opprobrious epithets. yet “this is too much,” certain folk would say to
 alexander. “the result will be that your students will turn out prigs.”
 “but no,” he would reply. “not at all. you see, i make it my principle to
 keep the incapables for a single term only, since that is enough for them;
 but to the clever ones i allot a double course of instruction.” and, true
 enough, any lad of brains was retained for this finishing course. yet he
 did not repress all boyish playfulness, since he declared it to be as
 necessary as a rash to a doctor, inasmuch as it enabled him to diagnose
 what lay hidden within.
 consequently, how the boys loved him! never was there such an attachment
 between master and pupils. and even later, during the foolish years, when
 foolish things attract, the measure of affection which alexander
 petrovitch retained was extraordinary. in fact, to the day of his death,
 every former pupil would celebrate the birthday of his late master by
 raising his glass in gratitude to the mentor dead and buried—then
 close his eyelids upon the tears which would come trickling through them.
 even the slightest word of encouragement from alexander petrovitch could
 throw a lad into a transport of tremulous joy, and arouse in him an
 honourable emulation of his fellows. boys of small capacity he did not
 long retain in his establishment; whereas those who possessed exceptional
 talent he put through an extra course of schooling. this senior class—a
 class composed of specially-selected pupils—was a very different
 affair from what usually obtains in other colleges. only when a boy had
 attained its ranks did alexander demand of him what other masters
 indiscreetly require of mere infants—namely the superior frame of
 mind which, while never indulging in mockery, can itself bear ridicule,
 and disregard the fool, and keep its temper, and repress itself, and
 eschew revenge, and calmly, proudly retain its tranquillity of soul. in
 short, whatever avails to form a boy into a man of assured character, that
 did alexander petrovitch employ during the pupil’s youth, as well as
 constantly put him to the test. how well he understood the art of life!
 of assistant tutors he kept but few, since most of the necessary
 instruction he imparted in person, and, without pedantic terminology and
 inflated diction and views, could so transmit to his listeners the inmost
 spirit of a lesson that even the youngest present absorbed its essential
 elements. also, of studies he selected none but those which may help a boy
 to become a good citizen; and therefore most of the lectures which he
 delivered consisted of discourses on what may be awaiting a youth, as well
 as of such demarcations of life’s field that the pupil, though seated, as
 yet, only at the desk, could beforehand bear his part in that field both
 in thought and spirit. nor did the master conceal anything. that is to
 say, without mincing words, he invariably set before his hearers the
 sorrows and the difficulties which may confront a man, the trials and the
 temptations which may beset him. and this he did in terms as though, in
 every possible calling and capacity, he himself had experienced the same.
 consequently, either the vigorous development of self-respect or the
 constant stimulus of the master’s eye (which seemed to say to the pupil,
 “forward!”—that word which has become so familiar to the
 contemporary russian, that word which has worked such wonders upon his
 sensitive temperament); one or the other, i repeat, would from the first
 cause the pupil to tackle difficulties, and only difficulties, and to
 hunger for prowess only where the path was arduous, and obstacles were
 many, and it was necessary to display the utmost strength of mind. indeed,
 few completed the course of which i have spoken without issuing therefrom
 reliable, seasoned fighters who could keep their heads in the most
 embarrassing of official positions, and at times when older and wiser men,
 distracted with the annoyances of life, had either abandoned everything
 or, grown slack and indifferent, had surrendered to the bribe-takers and
 the rascals. in short, no ex-pupil of alexander petrovitch ever wavered
 from the right road, but, familiar with life and with men, armed with the
 weapons of prudence, exerted a powerful influence upon wrongdoers.
 for a long time past the ardent young tientietnikov’s excitable heart had
 also beat at the thought that one day he might attain the senior class
 described. and, indeed, what better teacher could he have had befall him
 than its preceptor? yet just at the moment when he had been transferred
 thereto, just at the moment when he had reached the coveted position, did
 his instructor come suddenly by his death! this was indeed a blow for the
 boy—indeed a terrible initial loss! in his eyes everything connected
 with the school seemed to undergo a change—the chief reason being
 the fact that to the place of the deceased headmaster there succeeded a
 certain thedor ivanovitch, who at once began to insist upon certain
 external rules, and to demand of the boys what ought rightly to have been
 demanded only of adults. that is to say, since the lads’ frank and open
 demeanour savoured to him only of lack of discipline, he announced (as
 though in deliberate spite of his predecessor) that he cared nothing for
 progress and intellect, but that heed was to be paid only to good
 behaviour. yet, curiously enough, good behaviour was just what he never
 obtained, for every kind of secret prank became the rule; and while, by
 day, there reigned restraint and conspiracy, by night there began to take
 place chambering and wantonness.
 also, certain changes in the curriculum of studies came about, for there
 were engaged new teachers who held new views and opinions, and confused
 their hearers with a multitude of new terms and phrases, and displayed in
 their exposition of things both logical sequence and a zest for modern
 discovery and much warmth of individual bias. yet their instruction, alas!
 contained no life—in the mouths of those teachers a dead language
 savoured merely of carrion. thus everything connected with the school
 underwent a radical alteration, and respect for authority and the
 authorities waned, and tutors and ushers came to be dubbed “old thedor,”
 “crusty,” and the like. and sundry other things began to take place—things
 which necessitated many a penalty and expulsion; until, within a couple of
 years, no one who had known the school in former days would now have
 recognised it.
 nevertheless tientietnikov, a youth of retiring disposition, experienced
 no leanings towards the nocturnal orgies of his companions, orgies during
 which the latter used to flirt with damsels before the very windows of the
 headmaster’s rooms, nor yet towards their mockery of all that was sacred,
 simply because fate had cast in their way an injudicious priest. no,
 despite its dreaminess, his soul ever remembered its celestial origin, and
 could not be diverted from the path of virtue. yet still he hung his head,
 for, while his ambition had come to life, it could find no sort of outlet.
 truly ‘twere well if it had not come to life, for throughout the time that
 he was listening to professors who gesticulated on their chairs he could
 not help remembering the old preceptor who, invariably cool and calm, had
 yet known how to make himself understood. to what subjects, to what
 lectures, did the boy not have to listen!—to lectures on medicine,
 and on philosophy, and on law, and on a version of general history so
 enlarged that even three years failed to enable the professor to do more
 than finish the introduction thereto, and also the account of the
 development of some self-governing towns in germany. none of the stuff
 remained fixed in tientietnikov’s brain save as shapeless clots; for
 though his native intellect could not tell him how instruction ought to be
 imparted, it at least told him that this was not the way. and frequently,
 at such moments he would recall alexander petrovitch, and give way to such
 grief that scarcely did he know what he was doing.
 but youth is fortunate in the fact that always before it there lies a
 future; and in proportion as the time for his leaving school drew nigh,
 tientietnikov’s heart began to beat higher and higher, and he said to
 himself: “this is not life, but only a preparation for life. true life is
 to be found in the public service. there at least will there be scope for
 activity.” so, bestowing not a glance upon that beautiful corner of the
 world which never failed to strike the guest or chance visitor with
 amazement, and reverencing not a whit the dust of his ancestors, he
 followed the example of most ambitious men of his class by repairing to
 st. petersburg (whither, as we know, the more spirited youth of russia
 from every quarter gravitates—there to enter the public service, to
 shine, to obtain promotion, and, in a word, to scale the topmost peaks of
 that pale, cold, deceptive elevation which is known as society). but the
 real starting-point of tientietnikov’s ambition was the moment when his
 uncle (one state councillor onifri ivanovitch) instilled into him the
 maxim that the only means to success in the service lay in good
 handwriting, and that, without that accomplishment, no one could ever hope
 to become a minister or statesman. thus, with great difficulty, and also
 with the help of his uncle’s influence, young tientietnikov at length
 succeeded in being posted to a department. on the day that he was
 conducted into a splendid, shining hall—a hall fitted with inlaid
 floors and lacquered desks as fine as though this were actually the place
 where the great ones of the empire met for discussion of the fortunes of
 the state; on the day that he saw legions of handsome gentlemen of the
 quill-driving profession making loud scratchings with pens, and cocking
 their heads to one side; lastly on the day that he saw himself also
 allotted a desk, and requested to copy a document which appeared purposely
 to be one of the pettiest possible order (as a matter of fact it related
 to a sum of three roubles, and had taken half a year to produce)—well,
 at that moment a curious, an unwonted sensation seized upon the
 inexperienced youth, for the gentlemen around him appeared so exactly like
 a lot of college students. and, the further to complete the resemblance,
 some of them were engaged in reading trashy translated novels, which they
 kept hurriedly thrusting between the sheets of their apportioned work
 whenever the director appeared, as though to convey the impression that it
 was to that work alone that they were applying themselves. in short, the
 scene seemed to tientietnikov strange, and his former pursuits more
 important than his present, and his preparation for the service preferable
 to the service itself. yes, suddenly he felt a longing for his old school;
 and as suddenly, and with all the vividness of life, there appeared before
 his vision the figure of alexander petrovitch. he almost burst into tears
 as he beheld his old master, and the room seemed to swim before his eyes,
 and the tchinovniks and the desks to become a blur, and his sight to grow
 dim. then he thought to himself with an effort: “no, no! i will apply
 myself to my work, however petty it be at first.” and hardening his heart
 and recovering his spirit, he determined then and there to perform his
 duties in such a manner as should be an example to the rest.
 but where are compensations to be found? even in st. petersburg, despite
 its grim and murky exterior, they exist. yes, even though thirty degrees
 of keen, cracking frost may have bound the streets, and the family of the
 north wind be wailing there, and the snowstorm witch have heaped high the
 pavements, and be blinding the eyes, and powdering beards and fur collars
 and the shaggy manes of horses—even then there will be shining
 hospitably through the swirling snowflakes a fourth-floor window where, in
 a cosy room, and by the light of modest candles, and to the hiss of the
 samovar, there will be in progress a discussion which warms the heart and
 soul, or else a reading aloud of a brilliant page of one of those inspired
 russian poets with whom god has dowered us, while the breast of each
 member of the company is heaving with a rapture unknown under a noontide
 sky.
 gradually, therefore, tientietnikov grew more at home in the service. yet
 never did it become, for him, the main pursuit, the main object in life,
 which he had expected. no, it remained but one of a secondary kind. that
 is to say, it served merely to divide up his time, and enable him the more
 to value his hours of leisure. nevertheless, just when his uncle was
 beginning to flatter himself that his nephew was destined to succeed in
 the profession, the said nephew elected to ruin his every hope. thus it
 befell. tientietnikov’s friends (he had many) included among their number
 a couple of fellows of the species known as “embittered.” that is to say,
 though good-natured souls of that curiously restless type which cannot
 endure injustice, nor anything which it conceives to be such, they were
 thoroughly unbalanced of conduct themselves, and, while demanding general
 agreement with their views, treated those of others with the scantiest of
 ceremony. nevertheless these two associates exercised upon tientietnikov—both
 by the fire of their eloquence and by the form of their noble
 dissatisfaction with society—a very strong influence; with the
 result that, through arousing in him an innate tendency to nervous
 resentment, they led him also to notice trifles which before had escaped
 his attention. an instance of this is seen in the fact that he conceived
 against thedor thedorovitch lienitsin, director of one of the departments
 which was quartered in the splendid range of offices before mentioned, a
 dislike which proved the cause of his discerning in the man a host of
 hitherto unmarked imperfections. above all things did tientietnikov take
 it into his head that, when conversing with his superiors, lienitsin
 became, of the moment, a stick of luscious sweetmeat, but that, when
 conversing with his inferiors, he approximated more to a vinegar cruet.
 certain it is that, like all petty-minded individuals, lienitsin made a
 note of any one who failed to offer him a greeting on festival days, and
 that he revenged himself upon any one whose visiting-card had not been
 handed to his butler. eventually the youth’s aversion almost attained the
 point of hysteria; until he felt that, come what might, he must insult the
 fellow in some fashion. to that task he applied himself con amore; and so
 thoroughly that he met with complete success. that is to say, he seized on
 an occasion to address lienitsin in such fashion that the delinquent
 received notice either to apologise or to leave the service; and when of
 these alternatives he chose the latter his uncle came to him, and made a
 terrified appeal. “for god’s sake remember what you are doing!” he cried.
 “to think that, after beginning your career so well, you should abandon it
 merely for the reason that you have not fallen in with the sort of
 director whom you prefer! what do you mean by it, what do you mean by it?
 were others to regard things in the same way, the service would find
 itself without a single individual. reconsider your conduct—forego
 your pride and conceit, and make lienitsin amends.”
 “but, dear uncle,” the nephew replied, “that is not the point. the point
 is, not that i should find an apology difficult to offer, seeing that,
 since lienitsin is my superior, and i ought not to have addressed him as i
 did, i am clearly in the wrong. rather, the point is the following. to my
 charge there has been committed the performance of another kind of
 service. that is to say, i am the owner of three hundred peasant souls, a
 badly administered estate, and a fool of a bailiff. that being so, whereas
 the state will lose little by having to fill my stool with another
 copyist, it will lose very much by causing three hundred peasant souls to
 fail in the payment of their taxes. as i say (how am i to put it?), i am a
 landowner who has preferred to enter the public service. now, should i
 employ myself henceforth in conserving, restoring, and improving the
 fortunes of the souls whom god has entrusted to my care, and thereby
 provide the state with three hundred law-abiding, sober, hard-working
 taxpayers, how will that service of mine rank as inferior to the service
 of a department-directing fool like lienitsin?”
 on hearing this speech, the state councillor could only gape, for he had
 not expected tientietnikov’s torrent of words. he reflected a few moments,
 and then murmured:
 “yes, but, but—but how can a man like you retire to rustication in
 the country? what society will you get there? here one meets at least a
 general or a prince sometimes; indeed, no matter whom you pass in the
 street, that person represents gas lamps and european civilisation; but in
 the country, no matter what part of it you are in, not a soul is to be
 encountered save muzhiks and their women. why should you go and condemn
 yourself to a state of vegetation like that?”
 nevertheless the uncle’s expostulations fell upon deaf ears, for already
 the nephew was beginning to think of his estate as a retreat of a type
 more likely to nourish the intellectual faculties and afford the only
 profitable field of activity. after unearthing one or two modern works on
 agriculture, therefore, he, two weeks later, found himself in the
 neighbourhood of the home where his boyhood had been spent, and
 approaching the spot which never failed to enthral the visitor or guest.
 and in the young man’s breast there was beginning to palpitate a new
 feeling—in the young man’s soul there were reawakening old,
 long-concealed impressions; with the result that many a spot which had
 long been faded from his memory now filled him with interest, and the
 beautiful views on the estate found him gazing at them like a newcomer,
 and with a beating heart. yes, as the road wound through a narrow ravine,
 and became engulfed in a forest where, both above and below, he saw
 three-centuries-old oaks which three men could not have spanned, and where
 siberian firs and elms overtopped even the poplars, and as he asked the
 peasants to tell him to whom the forest belonged, and they replied, “to
 tientietnikov,” and he issued from the forest, and proceeded on his way
 through meadows, and past spinneys of elder, and of old and young willows,
 and arrived in sight of the distant range of hills, and, crossing by two
 different bridges the winding river (which he left successively to right
 and to left of him as he did so), he again questioned some peasants
 concerning the ownership of the meadows and the flooded lands, and was
 again informed that they all belonged to tientietnikov, and then,
 ascending a rise, reached a tableland where, on one side, lay ungarnered
 fields of wheat and rye and barley, and, on the other, the country already
 traversed (but which now showed in shortened perspective), and then
 plunged into the shade of some forked, umbrageous trees which stood
 scattered over turf and extended to the manor-house itself, and caught
 glimpses of the carved huts of the peasants, and of the red roofs of the
 stone manorial outbuildings, and of the glittering pinnacles of the
 church, and felt his heart beating, and knew, without being told by any
 one, whither he had at length arrived—well, then the feeling which
 had been growing within his soul burst forth, and he cried in ecstasy:
 “why have i been a fool so long? why, seeing that fate has appointed me to
 be ruler of an earthly paradise, did i prefer to bind myself in servitude
 as a scribe of lifeless documents? to think that, after i had been
 nurtured and schooled and stored with all the knowledge necessary for the
 diffusion of good among those under me, and for the improvement of my
 domain, and for the fulfilment of the manifold duties of a landowner who
 is at once judge, administrator, and constable of his people, i should
 have entrusted my estate to an ignorant bailiff, and sought to maintain an
 absentee guardianship over the affairs of serfs whom i have never met, and
 of whose capabilities and characters i am yet ignorant! to think that i
 should have deemed true estate-management inferior to a documentary,
 fantastical management of provinces which lie a thousand versts away, and
 which my foot has never trod, and where i could never have effected aught
 but blunders and irregularities!”
 meanwhile another spectacle was being prepared for him. on learning that
 the barin was approaching the mansion, the muzhiks collected on the
 verandah in very variety of picturesque dress and tonsure; and when these
 good folk surrounded him, and there arose a resounding shout of “here is
 our foster father! he has remembered us!” and, in spite of themselves,
 some of the older men and women began weeping as they recalled his
 grandfather and great-grandfather, he himself could not restrain his
 tears, but reflected: “how much affection! and in return for what? in
 return for my never having come to see them—in return for my never
 having taken the least interest in their affairs!” and then and there he
 registered a mental vow to share their every task and occupation.
 so he applied himself to supervising and administering. he reduced the
 amount of the barstchina , he decreased the number of
 working-days for the owner, and he augmented the sum of the peasants’
 leisure-time. he also dismissed the fool of a bailiff, and took to bearing
 a personal hand in everything—to being present in the fields, at the
 threshing-floor, at the kilns, at the wharf, at the freighting of barges
 and rafts, and at their conveyance down the river: wherefore even the lazy
 hands began to look to themselves. but this did not last long. the peasant
 is an observant individual, and tientietnikov’s muzhiks soon scented the
 fact that, though energetic and desirous of doing much, the barin had no
 notion how to do it, nor even how to set about it—that, in short, he
 spoke by the book rather than out of his personal knowledge. consequently
 things resulted, not in master and men failing to understand one another,
 but in their not singing together, in their not producing the very same
 note.
 that is to say, it was not long before tientietnikov noticed that on the
 manorial lands, nothing prospered to the extent that it did on the
 peasants’. the manorial crops were sown in good time, and came up well,
 and every one appeared to work his best, so much so that tientietnikov,
 who supervised the whole, frequently ordered mugs of vodka to be served
 out as a reward for the excellence of the labour performed. yet the rye on
 the peasants’ land had formed into ear, and the oats had begun to shoot
 their grain, and the millet had filled before, on the manorial lands, the
 corn had so much as grown to stalk, or the ears had sprouted in embryo. in
 short, gradually the barin realised that, in spite of favours conferred,
 the peasants were playing the rogue with him. next he resorted to
 remonstrance, but was met with the reply, “how could we not do our best
 for our barin? you yourself saw how well we laboured at the ploughing and
 the sowing, for you gave us mugs of vodka for our pains.”
 “then why have things turned out so badly?” the barin persisted.
 “who can say? it must be that a grub has eaten the crop from below.
 besides, what a summer has it been—never a drop of rain!”
 nevertheless, the barin noted that no grub had eaten the peasants’ crops,
 as well as that the rain had fallen in the most curious fashion—namely,
 in patches. it had obliged the muzhiks, but had shed a mere sprinkling for
 the barin.
 still more difficult did he find it to deal with the peasant women. ever
 and anon they would beg to be excused from work, or start making
 complaints of the severity of the barstchina. indeed, they were terrible
 folk! however, tientietnikov abolished the majority of the tithes of
 linen, hedge fruit, mushrooms, and nuts, and also reduced by one-half
 other tasks proper to the women, in the hope that they would devote their
 spare time to their own domestic concerns—namely, to sewing and
 mending, and to making clothes for their husbands, and to increasing the
 area of their kitchen gardens. yet no such result came about. on the
 contrary, such a pitch did the idleness, the quarrelsomeness, and the
 intriguing and caballing of the fair sex attain that their helpmeets were
 for ever coming to the barin with a request that he would rid one or
 another of his wife, since she had become a nuisance, and to live with her
 was impossible.
 next, hardening his heart, the barin attempted severity. but of what avail
 was severity? the peasant woman remained always the peasant woman, and
 would come and whine that she was sick and ailing, and keep pitifully
 hugging to herself the mean and filthy rags which she had donned for the
 occasion. and when poor tientietnikov found himself unable to say more to
 her than just, “get out of my sight, and may the lord go with you!” the
 next item in the comedy would be that he would see her, even as she was
 leaving his gates, fall to contending with a neighbour for, say, the
 possession of a turnip, and dealing out slaps in the face such as even a
 strong, healthy man could scarcely have compassed!
 again, amongst other things, tientietnikov conceived the idea of
 establishing a school for his people; but the scheme resulted in a farce
 which left him in sackcloth and ashes. in the same way he found that, when
 it came to a question of dispensing justice and of adjusting disputes, the
 host of juridical subtleties with which the professors had provided him
 proved absolutely useless. that is to say, the one party lied, and the
 other party lied, and only the devil could have decided between them.
 consequently he himself perceived that a knowledge of mankind would have
 availed him more than all the legal refinements and philosophical maxims
 in the world could do. he lacked something; and though he could not divine
 what it was, the situation brought about was the common one of the barin
 failing to understand the peasant, and the peasant failing to understand
 the barin, and both becoming disaffected. in the end, these difficulties
 so chilled tientietnikov’s enthusiasm that he took to supervising the
 labours of the field with greatly diminished attention. that is to say, no
 matter whether the scythes were softly swishing through the grass, or
 ricks were being built, or rafts were being loaded, he would allow his
 eyes to wander from his men, and to fall to gazing at, say, a red-billed,
 red-legged heron which, after strutting along the bank of a stream, would
 have caught a fish in its beak, and be holding it awhile, as though in
 doubt whether to swallow it. next he would glance towards the spot where a
 similar bird, but one not yet in possession of a fish, was engaged in
 watching the doings of its mate. lastly, with eyebrows knitted, and face
 turned to scan the zenith, he would drink in the smell of the fields, and
 fall to listening to the winged population of the air as from earth and
 sky alike the manifold music of winged creatures combined in a single
 harmonious chorus. in the rye the quail would be calling, and, in the
 grass, the corncrake, and over them would be wheeling flocks of twittering
 linnets. also, the jacksnipe would be uttering its croak, and the lark
 executing its roulades where it had become lost in the sunshine, and
 cranes sending forth their trumpet-like challenge as they deployed towards
 the zenith in triangle-shaped flocks. in fact, the neighbourhood would
 seem to have become converted into one great concert of melody. o creator,
 how fair is thy world where, in remote, rural seclusion, it lies apart
 from cities and from highways!
 but soon even this began to pall upon tientietnikov, and he ceased
 altogether to visit his fields, or to do aught but shut himself up in his
 rooms, where he refused to receive even the bailiff when that functionary
 called with his reports. again, although, until now, he had to a certain
 extent associated with a retired colonel of hussars—a man saturated
 with tobacco smoke—and also with a student of pronounced, but
 immature, opinions who culled the bulk of his wisdom from contemporary
 newspapers and pamphlets, he found, as time went on, that these companions
 proved as tedious as the rest, and came to think their conversation
 superficial, and their european method of comporting themselves—that
 is to say, the method of conversing with much slapping of knees and a
 great deal of bowing and gesticulation—too direct and unadorned. so
 these and every one else he decided to “drop,” and carried this resolution
 into effect with a certain amount of rudeness. on the next occasion that
 varvar nikolaievitch vishnepokromov called to indulge in a free-and-easy
 symposium on politics, philosophy, literature, morals, and the state of
 financial affairs in england (he was, in all matters which admit of
 superficial discussion, the pleasantest fellow alive, seeing that he was a
 typical representative both of the retired fire-eater and of the school of
 thought which is now becoming the rage)—when, i say, this next
 happened, tientietnikov merely sent out to say that he was not at home,
 and then carefully showed himself at the window. host and guest exchanged
 glances, and, while the one muttered through his teeth “the cur!” the
 other relieved his feelings with a remark or two on swine. thus the
 acquaintance came to an abrupt end, and from that time forth no visitor
 called at the mansion.
 tientietnikov in no way regretted this, for he could now devote himself
 wholly to the projection of a great work on russia. of the scale on which
 this composition was conceived the reader is already aware. the reader
 also knows how strange, how unsystematic, was the system employed in it.
 yet to say that tientietnikov never awoke from his lethargy would not be
 altogether true. on the contrary, when the post brought him newspapers and
 reviews, and he saw in their printed pages, perhaps, the well-known name
 of some former comrade who had succeeded in the great field of public
 service, or had conferred upon science and the world’s work some notable
 contribution, he would succumb to secret and suppressed grief, and
 involuntarily there would burst from his soul an expression of aching,
 voiceless regret that he himself had done so little. and at these times
 his existence would seem to him odious and repellent; at these times there
 would uprise before him the memory of his school days, and the figure of
 alexander petrovitch, as vivid as in life. and, slowly welling, the tears
 would course over tientietnikov’s cheeks.
 what meant these repinings? was there not disclosed in them the secret of
 his galling spiritual pain—the fact that he had failed to order his
 life aright, to confirm the lofty aims with which he had started his
 course; the fact that, always poorly equipped with experience, he had
 failed to attain the better and the higher state, and there to strengthen
 himself for the overcoming of hindrances and obstacles; the fact that,
 dissolving like overheated metal, his bounteous store of superior
 instincts had failed to take the final tempering; the fact that the tutor
 of his boyhood, a man in a thousand, had prematurely died, and left to
 tientietnikov no one who could restore to him the moral strength shattered
 by vacillation and the will power weakened by want of virility—no
 one, in short, who could cry hearteningly to his soul “forward!”—the
 word for which the russian of every degree, of every class, of every
 occupation, of every school of thought, is for ever hungering.
 indeed, where is the man who can cry aloud for any of us, in the russian
 tongue dear to our soul, the all-compelling command “forward!”? who is
 there who, knowing the strength and the nature and the inmost depths of
 the russian genius, can by a single magic incantation divert our ideals to
 the higher life? were there such a man, with what tears, with what
 affection, would not the grateful sons of russia repay him! yet age
 succeeds to age, and our callow youth still lies wrapped in shameful
 sloth, or strives and struggles to no purpose. god has not yet given us
 the man able to sound the call.
 one circumstance which almost aroused tientietnikov, which almost brought
 about a revolution in his character, was the fact that he came very near
 to falling in love. yet even this resulted in nothing. ten versts away
 there lived the general whom we have heard expressing himself in highly
 uncomplimentary terms concerning tientietnikov. he maintained a
 general-like establishment, dispensed hospitality (that is to say, was
 glad when his neighbours came to pay him their respects, though he himself
 never went out), spoke always in a hoarse voice, read a certain number of
 books, and had a daughter—a curious, unfamiliar type, but full of
 life as life itself. this maiden’s name was ulinka, and she had been
 strangely brought up, for, losing her mother in early childhood, she had
 subsequently received instruction at the hands of an english governess who
 knew not a single word of russian. moreover her father, though excessively
 fond of her, treated her always as a toy; with the result that, as she
 grew to years of discretion, she became wholly wayward and spoilt. indeed,
 had any one seen the sudden rage which would gather on her beautiful young
 forehead when she was engaged in a heated dispute with her father, he
 would have thought her one of the most capricious beings in the world. yet
 that rage gathered only when she had heard of injustice or harsh
 treatment, and never because she desired to argue on her own behalf, or to
 attempt to justify her own conduct. also, that anger would disappear as
 soon as ever she saw any one whom she had formerly disliked fall upon evil
 times, and, at his first request for alms would, without consideration or
 subsequent regret, hand him her purse and its whole contents. yes, her
 every act was strenuous, and when she spoke her whole personality seemed
 to be following hot-foot upon her thought—both her expression of
 face and her diction and the movements of her hands. nay, the very folds
 of her frock had a similar appearance of striving; until one would have
 thought that all her self were flying in pursuit of her words. nor did she
 know reticence: before any one she would disclose her mind, and no force
 could compel her to maintain silence when she desired to speak. also, her
 enchanting, peculiar gait—a gait which belonged to her alone—was
 so absolutely free and unfettered that every one involuntarily gave her
 way. lastly, in her presence churls seemed to become confused and fall to
 silence, and even the roughest and most outspoken would lose their heads,
 and have not a word to say; whereas the shy man would find himself able to
 converse as never in his life before, and would feel, from the first, as
 though he had seen her and known her at some previous period—during
 the days of some unremembered childhood, when he was at home, and spending
 a merry evening among a crowd of romping children. and for long afterwards
 he would feel as though his man’s intellect and estate were a burden.
 this was what now befell tientietnikov; and as it did so a new feeling
 entered into his soul, and his dreamy life lightened for a moment.
 at first the general used to receive him with hospitable civility, but
 permanent concord between them proved impossible; their conversation
 always merged into dissension and soreness, seeing that, while the general
 could not bear to be contradicted or worsted in an argument, tientietnikov
 was a man of extreme sensitiveness. true, for the daughter’s sake, the
 father was for a while deferred to, and thus peace was maintained; but
 this lasted only until the time when there arrived, on a visit to the
 general, two kinswomen of his—the countess bordirev and the princess
 uziakin, retired court dames, but ladies who still kept up a certain
 connection with court circles, and therefore were much fawned upon by
 their host. no sooner had they appeared on the scene than (so it seemed to
 tientietnikov) the general’s attitude towards the young man became colder—either
 he ceased to notice him at all or he spoke to him familiarly, and as to a
 person having no standing in society. this offended tientietnikov deeply,
 and though, when at length he spoke out on the subject, he retained
 sufficient presence of mind to compress his lips, and to preserve a gentle
 and courteous tone, his face flushed and his inner man was boiling.
 “general,” he said, “i thank you for your condescension. by addressing me
 in the second person singular, you have admitted me to the circle of your
 most intimate friends. indeed, were it not that a difference of years
 forbids any familiarity on my part, i should answer you in similar
 fashion.”
 the general sat aghast. at length, rallying his tongue and his faculties,
 he replied that, though he had spoken with a lack of ceremony, he had used
 the term “thou” merely as an elderly man naturally employs it towards a
 junior (he made no reference to difference of rank).
 nevertheless, the acquaintance broke off here, and with it any possibility
 of love-making. the light which had shed a momentary gleam before
 tientietnikov’s eyes had become extinguished for ever, and upon it there
 followed a darkness denser than before. henceforth everything conduced to
 evolve the regime which the reader has noted—that regime of sloth
 and inaction which converted tientietnikov’s residence into a place of
 dirt and neglect. for days at a time would a broom and a heap of dust be
 left lying in the middle of a room, and trousers tossing about the salon,
 and pairs of worn-out braces adorning the what-not near the sofa. in
 short, so mean and untidy did tientietnikov’s mode of life become, that
 not only his servants, but even his very poultry ceased to treat him with
 respect. taking up a pen, he would spend hours in idly sketching houses,
 huts, waggons, troikas, and flourishes on a piece of paper; while at other
 times, when he had sunk into a reverie, the pen would, all unknowingly,
 sketch a small head which had delicate features, a pair of quick,
 penetrating eyes, and a raised coiffure. then suddenly the dreamer would
 perceive, to his surprise, that the pen had executed the portrait of a
 maiden whose picture no artist could adequately have painted; and
 therewith his despondency would become greater than ever, and, believing
 that happiness did not exist on earth, he would relapse into increased
 ennui, increased neglect of his responsibilities.
 but one morning he noticed, on moving to the window after breakfast, that
 not a word was proceeding either from the butler or the housekeeper, but
 that, on the contrary, the courtyard seemed to smack of a certain bustle
 and excitement. this was because through the entrance gates (which the
 kitchen maid and the scullion had run to open) there were appearing the
 noses of three horses—one to the right, one in the middle, and one
 to the left, after the fashion of triumphal groups of statuary. above
 them, on the box seat, were seated a coachman and a valet, while behind,
 again, there could be discerned a gentleman in a scarf and a fur cap. only
 when the equipage had entered the courtyard did it stand revealed as a
 light spring britchka. and as it came to a halt, there leapt on to the
 verandah of the mansion an individual of respectable exterior, and
 possessed of the art of moving with the neatness and alertness of a
 military man.
 upon this tientietnikov’s heart stood still. he was unused to receiving
 visitors, and for the moment conceived the new arrival to be a government
 official, sent to question him concerning an abortive society to which he
 had formerly belonged. (here the author may interpolate the fact that, in
 tientietnikov’s early days, the young man had become mixed up in a very
 absurd affair. that is to say, a couple of philosophers belonging to a
 regiment of hussars had, together with an aesthete who had not yet
 completed his student’s course and a gambler who had squandered his all,
 formed a secret society of philanthropic aims under the presidency of a
 certain old rascal of a freemason and the ruined gambler aforesaid. the
 scope of the society’s work was to be extensive: it was to bring lasting
 happiness to humanity at large, from the banks of the thames to the shores
 of kamtchatka. but for this much money was needed: wherefore from the
 noble-minded members of the society generous contributions were demanded,
 and then forwarded to a destination known only to the supreme authorities
 of the concern. as for tientietnikov’s adhesion, it was brought about by
 the two friends already alluded to as “embittered”—good-hearted
 souls whom the wear and tear of their efforts on behalf of science,
 civilisation, and the future emancipation of mankind had ended by
 converting into confirmed drunkards. perhaps it need hardly be said that
 tientietnikov soon discovered how things stood, and withdrew from the
 association; but, meanwhile, the latter had had the misfortune so to have
 engaged in dealings not wholly creditable to gentlemen of noble origin as
 likewise to have become entangled in dealings with the police.
 consequently, it is not to be wondered at that, though tientietnikov had
 long severed his connection with the society and its policy, he still
 remained uneasy in his mind as to what might even yet be the result.)
 however, his fears vanished the instant that the guest saluted him with
 marked politeness and explained, with many deferential poises of the head,
 and in terms at once civil and concise, that for some time past he (the
 newcomer) had been touring the russian empire on business and in the
 pursuit of knowledge, that the empire abounded in objects of interest—not
 to mention a plenitude of manufactures and a great diversity of soil, and
 that, in spite of the fact that he was greatly struck with the amenities
 of his host’s domain, he would certainly not have presumed to intrude at
 such an inconvenient hour but for the circumstance that the inclement
 spring weather, added to the state of the roads, had necessitated sundry
 repairs to his carriage at the hands of wheelwrights and blacksmiths.
 finally he declared that, even if this last had not happened, he would
 still have felt unable to deny himself the pleasure of offering to his
 host that meed of homage which was the latter’s due.
 this speech—a speech of fascinating bonhomie—delivered, the
 guest executed a sort of shuffle with a half-boot of patent leather
 studded with buttons of mother-of-pearl, and followed that up by (in spite
 of his pronounced rotundity of figure) stepping backwards with all the
 elan of an india-rubber ball.
 from this the somewhat reassured tientietnikov concluded that his visitor
 must be a literary, knowledge-seeking professor who was engaged in roaming
 the country in search of botanical specimens and fossils; wherefore he
 hastened to express both his readiness to further the visitor’s objects
 (whatever they might be) and his personal willingness to provide him with
 the requisite wheelwrights and blacksmiths. meanwhile he begged his guest
 to consider himself at home, and, after seating him in an armchair, made
 preparations to listen to the newcomer’s discourse on natural history.
 but the newcomer applied himself, rather, to phenomena of the internal
 world, saying that his life might be likened to a barque tossed on the
 crests of perfidious billows, that in his time he had been fated to play
 many parts, and that on more than one occasion his life had stood in
 danger at the hands of foes. at the same time, these tidings were
 communicated in a manner calculated to show that the speaker was also a
 man of practical capabilities. in conclusion, the visitor took out a
 cambric pocket-handkerchief, and sneezed into it with a vehemence wholly
 new to tientietnikov’s experience. in fact, the sneeze rather resembled
 the note which, at times, the trombone of an orchestra appears to utter
 not so much from its proper place on the platform as from the immediate
 neighbourhood of the listener’s ear. and as the echoes of the drowsy
 mansion resounded to the report of the explosion there followed upon the
 same a wave of perfume, skilfully wafted abroad with a flourish of the
 eau-de-cologne-scented handkerchief.
 by this time the reader will have guessed that the visitor was none other
 than our old and respected friend paul ivanovitch chichikov. naturally,
 time had not spared him his share of anxieties and alarms; wherefore his
 exterior had come to look a trifle more elderly, his frockcoat had taken
 on a suggestion of shabbiness, and britchka, coachman, valet, horses, and
 harness alike had about them a sort of second-hand, worse-for-wear effect.
 evidently the chichikovian finances were not in the most flourishing of
 conditions. nevertheless, the old expression of face, the old air of
 breeding and refinement, remained unimpaired, and our hero had even
 improved in the art of walking and turning with grace, and of dexterously
 crossing one leg over the other when taking a seat. also, his mildness of
 diction, his discreet moderation of word and phrase, survived in, if
 anything, increased measure, and he bore himself with a skill which caused
 his tactfulness to surpass itself in sureness of aplomb. and all these
 accomplishments had their effect further heightened by a snowy
 immaculateness of collar and dickey, and an absence of dust from his
 frockcoat, as complete as though he had just arrived to attend a nameday
 festival. lastly, his cheeks and chin were of such neat clean-shavenness
 that no one but a blind man could have failed to admire their rounded
 contours.
 from that moment onwards great changes took place in tientietnikov’s
 establishment, and certain of its rooms assumed an unwonted air of
 cleanliness and order. the rooms in question were those assigned to
 chichikov, while one other apartment—a little front chamber opening
 into the hall—became permeated with petrushka’s own peculiar smell.
 but this lasted only for a little while, for presently petrushka was
 transferred to the servants’ quarters, a course which ought to have been
 adopted in the first instance.
 during the initial days of chichikov’s sojourn, tientietnikov feared
 rather to lose his independence, inasmuch as he thought that his guest
 might hamper his movements, and bring about alterations in the established
 routine of the place. but these fears proved groundless, for paul
 ivanovitch displayed an extraordinary aptitude for accommodating himself
 to his new position. to begin with, he encouraged his host in his
 philosophical inertia by saying that the latter would help tientietnikov
 to become a centenarian. next, in the matter of a life of isolation, he
 hit things off exactly by remarking that such a life bred in a man a
 capacity for high thinking. lastly, as he inspected the library and
 dilated on books in general, he contrived an opportunity to observe that
 literature safeguarded a man from a tendency to waste his time. in short,
 the few words of which he delivered himself were brief, but invariably to
 the point. and this discretion of speech was outdone by his discretion of
 conduct. that is to say, whether entering or leaving the room, he never
 wearied his host with a question if tientietnikov had the air of being
 disinclined to talk; and with equal satisfaction the guest could either
 play chess or hold his tongue. consequently tientietnikov said to himself:
 “for the first time in my life i have met with a man with whom it is
 possible to live. in general, not many of the type exist in russia, and,
 though clever, good-humoured, well-educated men abound, one would be hard
 put to it to find an individual of equable temperament with whom one could
 share a roof for centuries without a quarrel arising. anyway, chichikov is
 the first of his sort that i have met.”
 for his part, chichikov was only too delighted to reside with a person so
 quiet and agreeable as his host. of a wandering life he was temporarily
 weary, and to rest, even for a month, in such a beautiful spot, and in
 sight of green fields and the slow flowering of spring, was likely to
 benefit him also from the hygienic point of view. and, indeed, a more
 delightful retreat in which to recuperate could not possibly have been
 found. the spring, long retarded by previous cold, had now begun in all
 its comeliness, and life was rampant. already, over the first emerald of
 the grass, the dandelion was showing yellow, and the red-pink anemone was
 hanging its tender head; while the surface of every pond was a swarm of
 dancing gnats and midges, and the water-spider was being joined in their
 pursuit by birds which gathered from every quarter to the vantage-ground
 of the dry reeds. every species of creature also seemed to be assembling
 in concourse, and taking stock of one another. suddenly the earth became
 populous, the forest had opened its eyes, and the meadows were lifting up
 their voice in song. in the same way had choral dances begun to be weaved
 in the village, and everywhere that the eye turned there was merriment.
 what brightness in the green of nature, what freshness in the air, what
 singing of birds in the gardens of the mansion, what general joy and
 rapture and exaltation! particularly in the village might the shouting and
 singing have been in honour of a wedding!
 chichikov walked hither, thither, and everywhere—a pursuit for which
 there was ample choice and facility. at one time he would direct his steps
 along the edge of the flat tableland, and contemplate the depths below,
 where still there lay sheets of water left by the floods of winter, and
 where the island-like patches of forest showed leafless boughs; while at
 another time he would plunge into the thicket and ravine country, where
 nests of birds weighted branches almost to the ground, and the sky was
 darkened with the criss-cross flight of cawing rooks. again, the drier
 portions of the meadows could be crossed to the river wharves, whence the
 first barges were just beginning to set forth with pea-meal and barley and
 wheat, while at the same time one’s ear would be caught with the sound of
 some mill resuming its functions as once more the water turned the wheel.
 chichikov would also walk afield to watch the early tillage operations of
 the season, and observe how the blackness of a new furrow would make its
 way across the expanse of green, and how the sower, rhythmically striking
 his hand against the pannier slung across his breast, would scatter his
 fistfuls of seed with equal distribution, apportioning not a grain too
 much to one side or to the other.
 in fact, chichikov went everywhere. he chatted and talked, now with the
 bailiff, now with a peasant, now with a miller, and inquired into the
 manner and nature of everything, and sought information as to how an
 estate was managed, and at what price corn was selling, and what species
 of grain was best for spring and autumn grinding, and what was the name of
 each peasant, and who were his kinsfolk, and where he had bought his cow,
 and what he fed his pigs on. chichikov also made inquiry concerning the
 number of peasants who had lately died: but of these there appeared to be
 few. and suddenly his quick eye discerned that tientietnikov’s estate was
 not being worked as it might have been—that much neglect and
 listlessness and pilfering and drunkenness was abroad; and on perceiving
 this, he thought to himself: “what a fool is that tientietnikov! to think
 of letting a property like this decay when he might be drawing from it an
 income of fifty thousand roubles a year!”
 also, more than once, while taking these walks, our hero pondered the idea
 of himself becoming a landowner—not now, of course, but later, when
 his chief aim should have been achieved, and he had got into his hands the
 necessary means for living the quiet life of the proprietor of an estate.
 yes, and at these times there would include itself in his castle-building
 the figure of a young, fresh, fair-faced maiden of the mercantile or other
 rich grade of society, a woman who could both play and sing. he also
 dreamed of little descendants who should perpetuate the name of chichikov;
 perhaps a frolicsome little boy and a fair young daughter, or possibly,
 two boys and quite two or three daughters; so that all should know that he
 had really lived and had his being, that he had not merely roamed the
 world like a spectre or a shadow; so that for him and his the country
 should never be put to shame. and from that he would go on to fancy that a
 title appended to his rank would not be a bad thing—the title of
 state councillor, for instance, which was deserving of all honour and
 respect. ah, it is a common thing for a man who is taking a solitary walk
 so to detach himself from the irksome realities of the present that he is
 able to stir and to excite and to provoke his imagination to the
 conception of things he knows can never really come to pass!
 chichikov’s servants also found the mansion to their taste, and, like
 their master, speedily made themselves at home in it. in particular did
 petrushka make friends with grigory the butler, although at first the pair
 showed a tendency to outbrag one another—petrushka beginning by
 throwing dust in grigory’s eyes on the score of his (petrushka’s) travels,
 and grigory taking him down a peg or two by referring to st. petersburg (a
 city which petrushka had never visited), and petrushka seeking to recover
 lost ground by dilating on towns which he had visited, and grigory capping
 this by naming some town which is not to be found on any map in existence,
 and then estimating the journey thither as at least thirty thousand versts—a
 statement which would so completely flabbergast the henchman of
 chichikov’s suite that he would be left staring open-mouthed, amid the
 general laughter of the domestic staff. however, as i say, the pair ended
 by swearing eternal friendship with one another, and making a practice of
 resorting to the village tavern in company.
 for selifan, however, the place had a charm of a different kind. that is
 to say, each evening there would take place in the village a singing of
 songs and a weaving of country dances; and so shapely and buxom were the
 maidens—maidens of a type hard to find in our present-day villages
 on large estates—that he would stand for hours wondering which of
 them was the best. white-necked and white-bosomed, all had great roving
 eyes, the gait of peacocks, and hair reaching to the waist. and as, with
 his hands clasping theirs, he glided hither and thither in the dance, or
 retired backwards towards a wall with a row of other young fellows, and
 then, with them, returned to meet the damsels—all singing in chorus
 (and laughing as they sang it), “boyars, show me my bridegroom!” and dusk
 was falling gently, and from the other side of the river there kept coming
 far, faint, plaintive echoes of the melody—well, then our selifan
 hardly knew whether he were standing upon his head or his heels. later,
 when sleeping and when waking, both at noon and at twilight, he would seem
 still to be holding a pair of white hands, and moving in the dance.
 chichikov’s horses also found nothing of which to disapprove. yes, both
 the bay, the assessor, and the skewbald accounted residence at
 tientietnikov’s a most comfortable affair, and voted the oats excellent,
 and the arrangement of the stables beyond all cavil. true, on this
 occasion each horse had a stall to himself; yet, by looking over the
 intervening partition, it was possible always to see one’s fellows, and,
 should a neighbour take it into his head to utter a neigh, to answer it at
 once.
 as for the errand which had hitherto led chichikov to travel about russia,
 he had now decided to move very cautiously and secretly in the matter. in
 fact, on noticing that tientietnikov went in absorbedly for reading and
 for talking philosophy, the visitor said to himself, “no—i had
 better begin at the other end,” and proceeded first to feel his way among
 the servants of the establishment. from them he learnt several things,
 and, in particular, that the barin had been wont to go and call upon a
 certain general in the neighbourhood, and that the general possessed a
 daughter, and that she and tientietnikov had had an affair of some sort,
 but that the pair had subsequently parted, and gone their several ways.
 for that matter, chichikov himself had noticed that tientietnikov was in
 the habit of drawing heads of which each representation exactly resembled
 the rest.
 once, as he sat tapping his silver snuff-box after luncheon, chichikov
 remarked:
 “one thing you lack, and only one, andrei ivanovitch.”
 “what is that?” asked his host.
 “a female friend or two,” replied chichikov.
 tientietnikov made no rejoinder, and the conversation came temporarily to
 an end.
 but chichikov was not to be discouraged; wherefore, while waiting for
 supper and talking on different subjects, he seized an opportunity to
 interject:
 “do you know, it would do you no harm to marry.”
 as before, tientietnikov did not reply, and the renewed mention of the
 subject seemed to have annoyed him.
 for the third time—it was after supper—chichikov returned to
 the charge by remarking:
 “to-day, as i was walking round your property, i could not help thinking
 that marriage would do you a great deal of good. otherwise you will
 develop into a hypochondriac.”
 whether chichikov’s words now voiced sufficiently the note of persuasion,
 or whether tientietnikov happened, at the moment, to be unusually disposed
 to frankness, at all events the young landowner sighed, and then responded
 as he expelled a puff of tobacco smoke:
 “to attain anything, paul ivanovitch, one needs to have been born under a
 lucky star.”
 and he related to his guest the whole history of his acquaintanceship and
 subsequent rupture with the general.
 as chichikov listened to the recital, and gradually realised that the
 affair had arisen merely out of a chance word on the general’s part, he
 was astounded beyond measure, and gazed at tientietnikov without knowing
 what to make of him.
 “andrei ivanovitch,” he said at length, “what was there to take offence
 at?”
 “nothing, as regards the actual words spoken,” replied the other. “the
 offence lay, rather, in the insult conveyed in the general’s tone.”
 tientietnikov was a kindly and peaceable man, yet his eyes flashed as he
 said this, and his voice vibrated with wounded feeling.
 “yet, even then, need you have taken it so much amiss?”
 “what? could i have gone on visiting him as before?”
 “certainly. no great harm had been done?”
 “i disagree with you. had he been an old man in a humble station of life,
 instead of a proud and swaggering officer, i should not have minded so
 much. but, as it was, i could not, and would not, brook his words.”
 “a curious fellow, this tientietnikov!” thought chichikov to himself.
 “a curious fellow, this chichikov!” was tientietnikov’s inward reflection.
 “i tell you what,” resumed chichikov. “to-morrow i myself will go and see
 the general.”
 “to what purpose?” asked tientietnikov, with astonishment and distrust in
 his eyes.
 “to offer him an assurance of my personal respect.”
 “a strange fellow, this chichikov!” reflected tientietnikov.
 “a strange fellow, this tientietnikov!” thought chichikov, and then added
 aloud: “yes, i will go and see him at ten o’clock to-morrow; but since my
 britchka is not yet altogether in travelling order, would you be so good
 as to lend me your koliaska for the purpose?”
 tientietnikov’s good horses covered the ten versts to the general’s house
 in a little over half an hour. descending from the koliaska with features
 attuned to deference, chichikov inquired for the master of the house, and
 was at once ushered into his presence. bowing with head held respectfully
 on one side and hands extended like those of a waiter carrying a trayful
 of teacups, the visitor inclined his whole body forward, and said:
 “i have deemed it my duty to present myself to your excellency. i have
 deemed it my duty because in my heart i cherish a most profound respect
 for the valiant men who, on the field of battle, have proved the saviours
 of their country.”
 that this preliminary attack did not wholly displease the general was
 proved by the fact that, responding with a gracious inclination of the
 head, he replied:
 “i am glad to make your acquaintance. pray be so good as to take a seat.
 in what capacity or capacities have you yourself seen service?”
 “of my service,” said chichikov, depositing his form, not exactly in the
 centre of the chair, but rather on one side of it, and resting a hand upon
 one of its arms, “—of my service the scene was laid, in the first
 instance, in the treasury; while its further course bore me successively
 into the employ of the public buildings commission, of the customs board,
 and of other government offices. but, throughout, my life has resembled a
 barque tossed on the crests of perfidious billows. in suffering i have
 been swathed and wrapped until i have come to be, as it were, suffering
 personified; while of the extent to which my life has been sought by foes,
 no words, no colouring, no (if i may so express it?) painter’s brush could
 ever convey to you an adequate idea. and now, at length, in my declining
 years, i am seeking a corner in which to eke out the remainder of my
 miserable existence, while at the present moment i am enjoying the
 hospitality of a neighbour of your acquaintance.”
 “and who is that?”
 “your neighbour tientietnikov, your excellency.”
 upon that the general frowned.
 “led me add,” put in chichikov hastily, “that he greatly regrets that on a
 former occasion he should have failed to show a proper respect for—for—”
 “for what?” asked the general.
 “for the services to the public which your excellency has rendered.
 indeed, he cannot find words to express his sorrow, but keeps repeating to
 himself: ‘would that i had valued at their true worth the men who have
 saved our fatherland!’”
 “and why should he say that?” asked the mollified general. “i bear him no
 grudge. in fact, i have never cherished aught but a sincere liking for
 him, a sincere esteem, and do not doubt but that, in time, he may become a
 useful member of society.”
 “in the words which you have been good enough to utter,” said chichikov
 with a bow, “there is embodied much justice. yes, tientietnikov is in very
 truth a man of worth. not only does he possess the gift of eloquence, but
 also he is a master of the pen.”
 “ah, yes; he does write rubbish of some sort, doesn’t he? verses, or
 something of the kind?”
 “not rubbish, your excellency, but practical stuff. in short, he is
 inditing a history.”
 “a history? but a history of what?”
 “a history of, of—” for a moment or two chichikov hesitated. then,
 whether because it was a general that was seated in front of him, or
 because he desired to impart greater importance to the subject which he
 was about to invent, he concluded: “a history of generals, your
 excellency.”
 “of generals? of what generals?”
 “of generals generally—of generals at large. that is to say, and to
 be more precise, a history of the generals of our fatherland.”
 by this time chichikov was floundering badly. mentally he spat upon
 himself and reflected: “gracious heavens! what rubbish i am talking!”
 “pardon me,” went on his interlocutor, “but i do not quite understand you.
 is tientietnikov producing a history of a given period, or only a history
 made up of a series of biographies? also, is he including all our
 generals, or only those who took part in the campaign of ?”
 “the latter, your excellency—only the generals of ,” replied
 chichikov. then he added beneath his breath: “were i to be killed for it,
 i could not say what that may be supposed to mean.”
 “then why should he not come and see me in person?” went on his host.
 “possibly i might be able to furnish him with much interesting material?”
 “he is afraid to come, your excellency.”
 “nonsense! just because of a hasty word or two! i am not that sort of man
 at all. in fact, i should be very happy to call upon him.”
 “never would he permit that, your excellency. he would greatly prefer to
 be the first to make advances.” and chichikov added to himself: “what a
 stroke of luck those generals were! otherwise, the lord knows where my
 tongue might have landed me!”
 at this moment the door into the adjoining room opened, and there appeared
 in the doorway a girl as fair as a ray of the sun—so fair, indeed,
 that chichikov stared at her in amazement. apparently she had come to
 speak to her father for a moment, but had stopped short on perceiving that
 there was some one with him. the only fault to be found in her appearance
 was the fact that she was too thin and fragile-looking.
 “may i introduce you to my little pet?” said the general to chichikov. “to
 tell you the truth, i do not know your name.”
 “that you should be unacquainted with the name of one who has never
 distinguished himself in the manner of which you yourself can boast is
 scarcely to be wondered at.” and chichikov executed one of his sidelong,
 deferential bows.
 “well, i should be delighted to know it.”
 “it is paul ivanovitch chichikov, your excellency.” with that went the
 easy bow of a military man and the agile backward movement of an
 india-rubber ball.
 “ulinka, this is paul ivanovitch,” said the general, turning to his
 daughter. “he has just told me some interesting news—namely, that
 our neighbour tientietnikov is not altogether the fool we had at first
 thought him. on the contrary, he is engaged upon a very important work—upon
 a history of the russian generals of .”
 “but who ever supposed him to be a fool?” asked the girl quickly. “what
 happened was that you took vishnepokromov’s word—the word of a man
 who is himself both a fool and a good-for-nothing.”
 “well, well,” said the father after further good-natured dispute on the
 subject of vishnepokromov. “do you now run away, for i wish to dress for
 luncheon. and you, sir,” he added to chichikov, “will you not join us at
 table?”
 chichikov bowed so low and so long that, by the time that his eyes had
 ceased to see nothing but his own boots, the general’s daughter had
 disappeared, and in her place was standing a bewhiskered butler, armed
 with a silver soap-dish and a hand-basin.
 “do you mind if i wash in your presence?” asked the host.
 “by no means,” replied chichikov. “pray do whatsoever you please in that
 respect.”
 upon that the general fell to scrubbing himself—incidentally, to
 sending soapsuds flying in every direction. meanwhile he seemed so
 favourably disposed that chichikov decided to sound him then and there,
 more especially since the butler had left the room.
 “may i put to you a problem?” he asked.
 “certainly,” replied the general. “what is it?”
 “it is this, your excellency. i have a decrepit old uncle who owns three
 hundred souls and two thousand roubles-worth of other property. also,
 except for myself, he possesses not a single heir. now, although his
 infirm state of health will not permit of his managing his property in
 person, he will not allow me either to manage it. and the reason for his
 conduct—his very strange conduct—he states as follows: ‘i do
 not know my nephew, and very likely he is a spendthrift. if he wishes to
 show me that he is good for anything, let him go and acquire as many souls
 as i have acquired; and when he has done that i will transfer to
 him my three hundred souls as well.”
 “the man must be an absolute fool,” commented the general.
 “possibly. and were that all, things would not be as bad as they are. but,
 unfortunately, my uncle has gone and taken up with his housekeeper, and
 has had children by her. consequently, everything will now pass to them.”
 “the old man must have taken leave of his senses,” remarked the general.
 “yet how i can help you i fail to see.”
 “well, i have thought of a plan. if you will hand me over all the dead
 souls on your estate—hand them over to me exactly as though they
 were still alive, and were purchasable property—i will offer them to
 the old man, and then he will leave me his fortune.”
 at this point the general burst into a roar of laughter such as few can
 ever have heard. half-dressed, he subsided into a chair, threw back his
 head, and guffawed until he came near to choking. in fact, the house shook
 with his merriment, so much so that the butler and his daughter came
 running into the room in alarm.
 it was long before he could produce a single articulate word; and even
 when he did so (to reassure his daughter and the butler) he kept
 momentarily relapsing into spluttering chuckles which made the house ring
 and ring again.
 chichikov was greatly taken aback.
 “oh, that uncle!” bellowed the general in paroxysms of mirth. “oh, that
 blessed uncle! what a fool he’ll look! ha, ha, ha! dead souls offered him
 instead of live ones! oh, my goodness!”
 “i suppose i’ve put my foot in it again,” ruefully reflected chichikov.
 “but, good lord, what a man the fellow is to laugh! heaven send that he
 doesn’t burst of it!”
 “ha, ha, ha!” broke out the general afresh. “what a donkey the old man
 must be! to think of his saying to you: ‘you go and fit yourself out with
 three hundred souls, and i’ll cap them with my own lot’! my word! what a
 jackass!”
 “a jackass, your excellency?”
 “yes, indeed! and to think of the jest of putting him off with dead souls!
 ha, ha, ha! what wouldn’t i give to see you handing him the title deeds?
 who is he? what is he like? is he very old?”
 “he is eighty, your excellency.”
 “but still brisk and able to move about, eh? surely he must be pretty
 strong to go on living with his housekeeper like that?”
 “yes. but what does such strength mean? sand runs away, your excellency.”
 “the old fool! but is he really such a fool?”
 “yes, your excellency.”
 “and does he go out at all? does he see company? can he still hold himself
 upright?”
 “yes, but with great difficulty.”
 “and has he any teeth left?”
 “no more than two at the most.”
 “the old jackass! don’t be angry with me, but i must say that, though your
 uncle, he is also a jackass.”
 “quite so, your excellency. and though it grieves me to have to confess
 that he is my uncle, what am i to do with him?”
 yet this was not altogether the truth. what would have been a far harder
 thing for chichikov to have confessed was the fact that he possessed no
 uncles at all.
 “i beg of you, your excellency,” he went on, “to hand me over those, those—”
 “those dead souls, eh? why, in return for the jest i will give you some
 land as well. yes, you can take the whole graveyard if you like. ha, ha,
 ha! the old man! ha, ha, ha! what a fool he’ll look! ha, ha, ha!”
 and once more the general’s guffaws went ringing through the house.
 [at this point there is a long hiatus in the original.]
 “if colonel koshkarev should turn out to be as mad as the last one it is a
 bad look-out,” said chichikov to himself on opening his eyes amid fields
 and open country—everything else having disappeared save the vault
 of heaven and a couple of low-lying clouds.
 “selifan,” he went on, “did you ask how to get to colonel koshkarev’s?”
 “yes, paul ivanovitch. at least, there was such a clatter around the
 koliaska that i could not; but petrushka asked the coachman.”
 “you fool! how often have i told you not to rely on petrushka? petrushka
 is a blockhead, an idiot. besides, at the present moment i believe him to
 be drunk.”
 “no, you are wrong, barin,” put in the person referred to, turning his
 head with a sidelong glance. “after we get down the next hill we shall
 need but to keep bending round it. that is all.”
 “yes, and i suppose you’ll tell me that sivnkha is the only thing that has
 passed your lips? well, the view at least is beautiful. in fact, when one
 has seen this place one may say that one has seen one of the beauty spots
 of europe.” this said, chichikov added to himself, smoothing his chin:
 “what a difference between the features of a civilised man of the world
 and those of a common lacquey!”
 meanwhile the koliaska quickened its pace, and chichikov once more caught
 sight of tientietnikov’s aspen-studded meadows. undulating gently on
 elastic springs, the vehicle cautiously descended the steep incline, and
 then proceeded past water-mills, rumbled over a bridge or two, and jolted
 easily along the rough-set road which traversed the flats. not a molehill,
 not a mound jarred the spine. the vehicle was comfort itself.
 swiftly there flew by clumps of osiers, slender elder trees, and
 silver-leaved poplars, their branches brushing against selifan and
 petrushka, and at intervals depriving the valet of his cap. each time that
 this happened, the sullen-faced servitor fell to cursing both the tree
 responsible for the occurrence and the landowner responsible for the tree
 being in existence; yet nothing would induce him thereafter either to tie
 on the cap or to steady it with his hand, so complete was his assurance
 that the accident would never be repeated. soon to the foregoing trees
 there became added an occasional birch or spruce fir, while in the dense
 undergrowth around their roots could be seen the blue iris and the yellow
 wood-tulip. gradually the forest grew darker, as though eventually the
 obscurity would become complete. then through the trunks and the boughs
 there began to gleam points of light like glittering mirrors, and as the
 number of trees lessened, these points grew larger, until the travellers
 debouched upon the shore of a lake four versts or so in circumference, and
 having on its further margin the grey, scattered log huts of a peasant
 village. in the water a great commotion was in progress. in the first
 place, some twenty men, immersed to the knee, to the breast, or to the
 neck, were dragging a large fishing-net inshore, while, in the second
 place, there was entangled in the same, in addition to some fish, a stout
 man shaped precisely like a melon or a hogshead. greatly excited, he was
 shouting at the top of his voice: “let kosma manage it, you lout of a
 denis! kosma, take the end of the rope from denis! don’t bear so hard on
 it, thoma bolshoy ! go where thoma menshov 
 is! damn it, bring the net to land, will you!” from this it became clear
 that it was not on his own account that the stout man was worrying.
 indeed, he had no need to do so, since his fat would in any case have
 prevented him from sinking. yes, even if he had turned head over heels in
 an effort to dive, the water would persistently have borne him up; and the
 same if, say, a couple of men had jumped on his back—the only result
 would have been that he would have become a trifle deeper submerged, and
 forced to draw breath by spouting bubbles through his nose. no, the cause
 of his agitation was lest the net should break, and the fish escape:
 wherefore he was urging some additional peasants who were standing on the
 bank to lay hold of and to pull at, an extra rope or two.
 “that must be the barin—colonel koshkarev,” said selifan.
 “why?” asked chichikov.
 “because, if you please, his skin is whiter than the rest, and he has the
 respectable paunch of a gentleman.”
 meanwhile good progress was being made with the hauling in of the barin;
 until, feeling the ground with his feet, he rose to an upright position,
 and at the same moment caught sight of the koliaska, with chichikov seated
 therein, descending the declivity.
 “have you dined yet?” shouted the barin as, still entangled in the net, he
 approached the shore with a huge fish on his back. with one hand shading
 his eyes from the sun, and the other thrown backwards, he looked, in point
 of pose, like the medici venus emerging from her bath.
 “no,” replied chichikov, raising his cap, and executing a series of bows.
 “then thank god for that,” rejoined the gentleman.
 “why?” asked chichikov with no little curiosity, and still holding his cap
 over his head.
 “because of this. cast off the net, thoma menshov, and pick up that
 sturgeon for the gentleman to see. go and help him, telepen kuzma.”
 with that the peasants indicated picked up by the head what was a
 veritable monster of a fish.
 “isn’t it a beauty—a sturgeon fresh run from the river?” exclaimed
 the stout barin. “and now let us be off home. coachman, you can take the
 lower road through the kitchen garden. run, you lout of a thoma bolshoy,
 and open the gate for him. he will guide you to the house, and i myself
 shall be along presently.”
 thereupon the barelegged thoma bolshoy, clad in nothing but a shirt, ran
 ahead of the koliaska through the village, every hut of which had hanging
 in front of it a variety of nets, for the reason that every inhabitant of
 the place was a fisherman. next, he opened a gate into a large vegetable
 enclosure, and thence the koliaska emerged into a square near a wooden
 church, with, showing beyond the latter, the roofs of the manorial
 homestead.
 “a queer fellow, that koshkarev!” said chichikov to himself.
 “well, whatever i may be, at least i’m here,” said a voice by his side.
 chichikov looked round, and perceived that, in the meanwhile, the barin
 had dressed himself and overtaken the carriage. with a pair of yellow
 trousers he was wearing a grass-green jacket, and his neck was as
 guiltless of a collar as cupid’s. also, as he sat sideways in his drozhki,
 his bulk was such that he completely filled the vehicle. chichikov was
 about to make some remark or another when the stout gentleman disappeared;
 and presently his drozhki re-emerged into view at the spot where the fish
 had been drawn to land, and his voice could be heard reiterating
 exhortations to his serfs. yet when chichikov reached the verandah of the
 house he found, to his intense surprise, the stout gentleman waiting to
 welcome the visitor. how he had contrived to convey himself thither passed
 chichikov’s comprehension. host and guest embraced three times, according
 to a bygone custom of russia. evidently the barin was one of the old
 school.
 “i bring you,” said chichikov, “a greeting from his excellency.”
 “from whom?”
 “from your relative general alexander dmitrievitch.”
 “who is alexander dmitrievitch?”
 “what? you do not know general alexander dmitrievitch betrishev?”
 exclaimed chichikov with a touch of surprise.
 “no, i do not,” replied the gentleman.
 chichikov’s surprise grew to absolute astonishment.
 “how comes that about?” he ejaculated. “i hope that i have the honour of
 addressing colonel koshkarev?”
 “your hopes are vain. it is to my house, not to his, that you have come;
 and i am peter petrovitch pietukh—yes, peter petrovitch pietukh.”
 chichikov, dumbfounded, turned to selifan and petrushka.
 “what do you mean?” he exclaimed. “i told you to drive to the house of
 colonel koshkarev, whereas you have brought me to that of peter petrovitch
 pietukh.”
 “all the same, your fellows have done quite right,” put in the gentleman
 referred to. “do you” (this to selifan and petrushka) “go to the kitchen,
 where they will give you a glassful of vodka apiece. then put up the
 horses, and be off to the servants’ quarters.”
 “i regret the mistake extremely,” said chichikov.
 “but it is not a mistake. when you have tried the dinner which i have in
 store for you, just see whether you think it a mistake. enter, i beg of
 you.” and, taking chichikov by the arm, the host conducted him within,
 where they were met by a couple of youths.
 “let me introduce my two sons, home for their holidays from the gymnasium
 said pietukh. “nikolasha, come and entertain our good visitor, while you,
 aleksasha, follow me.” and with that the host disappeared.
 chichikov turned to nikolasha, whom he found to be a budding man about
 town, since at first he opened a conversation by stating that, as no good
 was to be derived from studying at a provincial institution, he and his
 brother desired to remove, rather, to st. petersburg, the provinces not
 being worth living in.
 “i quite understand,” chichikov thought to himself. “the end of the
 chapter will be confectioners’ assistants and the boulevards.”
 “tell me,” he added aloud, “how does your father’s property at present
 stand?”
 “it is all mortgaged,” put in the father himself as he re-entered the
 room. “yes, it is all mortgaged, every bit of it.”
 “what a pity!” thought chichikov. “at this rate it will not be long before
 this man has no property at all left. i must hurry my departure.” aloud he
 said with an air of sympathy: “that you have mortgaged the estate seems to
 me a matter of regret.”
 “no, not at all,” replied pietukh. “in fact, they tell me that it is a
 good thing to do, and that every one else is doing it. why should i act
 differently from my neighbours? moreover, i have had enough of living
 here, and should like to try moscow—more especially since my sons
 are always begging me to give them a metropolitan education.”
 “oh, the fool, the fool!” reflected chichikov. “he is for throwing up
 everything and making spendthrifts of his sons. yet this is a nice
 property, and it is clear that the local peasants are doing well, and that
 the family, too, is comfortably off. on the other hand, as soon as ever
 these lads begin their education in restaurants and theatres, the devil
 will away with every stick of their substance. for my own part, i could
 desire nothing better than this quiet life in the country.”
 “let me guess what is in your mind,” said pietukh.
 “what, then?” asked chichikov, rather taken aback.
 “you are thinking to yourself: ‘that fool of a pietukh has asked me to
 dinner, yet not a bite of dinner do i see.’ but wait a little. it will be
 ready presently, for it is being cooked as fast as a maiden who has had
 her hair cut off plaits herself a new set of tresses.”
 “here comes platon mikhalitch, father!” exclaimed aleksasha, who had been
 peeping out of the window.
 “yes, and on a grey horse,” added his brother.
 “who is platon mikhalitch?” inquired chichikov.
 “a neighbour of ours, and an excellent fellow.”
 the next moment platon mikhalitch himself entered the room, accompanied by
 a sporting dog named yarb. he was a tall, handsome man, with extremely red
 hair. as for his companion, it was of the keen-muzzled species used for
 shooting.
 “have you dined yet?” asked the host.
 “yes,” replied platon.
 “indeed! what do you mean by coming here to laugh at us all? do i ever go
 to your place after dinner?”
 the newcomer smiled. “well, if it can bring you any comfort,” he said,
 “let me tell you that i ate nothing at the meal, for i had no appetite.”
 “but you should see what i have caught—what sort of a sturgeon fate
 has brought my way! yes, and what crucians and carp!”
 “really it tires one to hear you. how come you always to be so cheerful?”
 “and how come you always to be so gloomy?” retorted the host.
 “how, you ask? simply because i am so.”
 “the truth is you don’t eat enough. try the plan of making a good dinner.
 weariness of everything is a modern invention. once upon a time one never
 heard of it.”
 “well, boast away, but have you yourself never been tired of things?”
 “never in my life. i do not so much as know whether i should find time to
 be tired. in the morning, when one awakes, the cook is waiting, and the
 dinner has to be ordered. then one drinks one’s morning tea, and then the
 bailiff arrives for his orders, and then there is fishing to be done, and
 then one’s dinner has to be eaten. next, before one has even had a chance
 to utter a snore, there enters once again the cook, and one has to order
 supper; and when she has departed, behold, back she comes with a request
 for the following day’s dinner! what time does that leave one to be weary
 of things?”
 throughout this conversation, chichikov had been taking stock of the
 newcomer, who astonished him with his good looks, his upright, picturesque
 figure, his appearance of fresh, unwasted youthfulness, and the boyish
 purity, innocence, and clarity of his features. neither passion nor care
 nor aught of the nature of agitation or anxiety of mind had ventured to
 touch his unsullied face, or to lay a single wrinkle thereon. yet the
 touch of life which those emotions might have imparted was wanting. the
 face was, as it were, dreaming, even though from time to time an ironical
 smile disturbed it.
 “i, too, cannot understand,” remarked chichikov, “how a man of your
 appearance can find things wearisome. of course, if a man is hard pressed
 for money, or if he has enemies who are lying in wait for his life (as
 have certain folk of whom i know), well, then—”
 “believe me when i say,” interrupted the handsome guest, “that, for the
 sake of a diversion, i should be glad of any sort of an anxiety. would
 that some enemy would conceive a grudge against me! but no one does so.
 everything remains eternally dull.”
 “but perhaps you lack a sufficiency of land or souls?”
 “not at all. i and my brother own ten thousand desiatins 
 of land, and over a thousand souls.”
 “curious! i do not understand it. but perhaps the harvest has failed, or
 you have sickness about, and many of your male peasants have died of it?”
 “on the contrary, everything is in splendid order, for my brother is the
 best of managers.”
 “then to find things wearisome!” exclaimed chichikov. “it passes my
 comprehension.” and he shrugged his shoulders.
 “well, we will soon put weariness to flight,” interrupted the host.
 “aleksasha, do you run helter-skelter to the kitchen, and there tell the
 cook to serve the fish pasties. yes, and where have that gawk of an
 emelian and that thief of an antoshka got to? why have they not handed
 round the zakuski?”
 at this moment the door opened, and the “gawk” and the “thief” in question
 made their appearance with napkins and a tray—the latter bearing six
 decanters of variously-coloured beverages. these they placed upon the
 table, and then ringed them about with glasses and platefuls of every
 conceivable kind of appetiser. that done, the servants applied themselves
 to bringing in various comestibles under covers, through which could be
 heard the hissing of hot roast viands. in particular did the “gawk” and
 the “thief” work hard at their tasks. as a matter of fact, their
 appellations had been given them merely to spur them to greater activity,
 for, in general, the barin was no lover of abuse, but, rather, a
 kind-hearted man who, like most russians, could not get on without a sharp
 word or two. that is to say, he needed them for his tongue as he need a
 glass of vodka for his digestion. what else could you expect? it was his
 nature to care for nothing mild.
 to the zakuski succeeded the meal itself, and the host became a perfect
 glutton on his guests’ behalf. should he notice that a guest had taken but
 a single piece of a comestible, he added thereto another one, saying:
 “without a mate, neither man nor bird can live in this world.” should any
 one take two pieces, he added thereto a third, saying: “what is the good
 of the number ? god loves a trinity.” should any one take three pieces,
 he would say: “where do you see a waggon with three wheels? who builds a
 three-cornered hut?” lastly, should any one take four pieces, he would cap
 them with a fifth, and add thereto the punning quip, “na piat opiat ”.
 after devouring at least twelve steaks of sturgeon, chichikov ventured to
 think to himself, “my host cannot possibly add to them,” but found that he
 was mistaken, for, without a word, pietukh heaped upon his plate an
 enormous portion of spit-roasted veal, and also some kidneys. and what
 veal it was!
 “that calf was fed two years on milk,” he explained. “i cared for it like
 my own son.”
 “nevertheless i can eat no more,” said chichikov.
 “do you try the veal before you say that you can eat no more.”
 “but i could not get it down my throat. there is no room left.”
 “if there be no room in a church for a newcomer, the beadle is sent for,
 and room is very soon made—yes, even though before there was such a
 crush that an apple couldn’t have been dropped between the people. do you
 try the veal, i say. that piece is the titbit of all.”
 so chichikov made the attempt; and in very truth the veal was beyond all
 praise, and room was found for it, even though one would have supposed the
 feat impossible.
 “fancy this good fellow removing to st. petersburg or moscow!” said the
 guest to himself. “why, with a scale of living like this, he would be
 ruined in three years.” for that matter, pietukh might well have been
 ruined already, for hospitality can dissipate a fortune in three months as
 easily as it can in three years.
 the host also dispensed the wine with a lavish hand, and what the guests
 did not drink he gave to his sons, who thus swallowed glass after glass.
 indeed, even before coming to table, it was possible to discern to what
 department of human accomplishment their bent was turned. when the meal
 was over, however, the guests had no mind for further drinking. indeed, it
 was all that they could do to drag themselves on to the balcony, and there
 to relapse into easy chairs. indeed, the moment that the host subsided
 into his seat—it was large enough for four—he fell asleep, and
 his portly presence, converting itself into a sort of blacksmith’s
 bellows, started to vent, through open mouth and distended nostrils, such
 sounds as can have greeted the reader’s ear but seldom—sounds as of
 a drum being beaten in combination with the whistling of a flute and the
 strident howling of a dog.
 “listen to him!” said platon.
 chichikov smiled.
 “naturally, on such dinners as that,” continued the other, “our host does
 not find the time dull. and as soon as dinner is ended there can ensue
 sleep.”
 “yes, but, pardon me, i still fail to understand why you should find life
 wearisome. there are so many resources against ennui!”
 “as for instance?”
 “for a young man, dancing, the playing of one or another musical
 instrument, and—well, yes, marriage.”
 “marriage to whom?”
 “to some maiden who is both charming and rich. are there none in these
 parts?”
 “no.”
 “then, were i you, i should travel, and seek a maiden elsewhere.” and a
 brilliant idea therewith entered chichikov’s head. “this last resource,”
 he added, “is the best of all resources against ennui.”
 “what resource are you speaking of?”
 “of travel.”
 “but whither?”
 “well, should it so please you, you might join me as my companion.” this
 said, the speaker added to himself as he eyed platon: “yes, that would
 suit me exactly, for then i should have half my expenses paid, and could
 charge him also with the cost of mending the koliaska.”
 “and whither should we go?”
 “in that respect i am not wholly my own master, as i have business to do
 for others as well as for myself. for instance, general betristchev—an
 intimate friend and, i might add, a generous benefactor of mine—has
 charged me with commissions to certain of his relatives. however, though
 relatives are relatives, i am travelling likewise on my own account, since
 i wish to see the world and the whirligig of humanity—which, in
 spite of what people may say, is as good as a living book or a second
 education.” as a matter of fact, chichikov was reflecting, “yes, the plan
 is an excellent one. i might even contrive that he should have to bear the
 whole of our expenses, and that his horses should be used while my own
 should be put out to graze on his farm.”
 “well, why should i not adopt the suggestion?” was platon’s thought.
 “there is nothing for me to do at home, since the management of the estate
 is in my brother’s hands, and my going would cause him no inconvenience.
 yes, why should i not do as chichikov has suggested?”
 then he added aloud:
 “would you come and stay with my brother for a couple of days? otherwise
 he might refuse me his consent.”
 “with great pleasure,” said chichikov. “or even for three days.”
 “then here is my hand on it. let us be off at once.” platon seemed
 suddenly to have come to life again.
 “where are you off to?” put in their host unexpectedly as he roused
 himself and stared in astonishment at the pair. “no, no, my good sirs. i
 have had the wheels removed from your koliaska, monsieur chichikov, and
 have sent your horse, platon mikhalitch, to a grazing ground fifteen
 versts away. consequently you must spend the night here, and depart
 to-morrow morning after breakfast.”
 what could be done with a man like pietukh? there was no help for it but
 to remain. in return, the guests were rewarded with a beautiful spring
 evening, for, to spend the time, the host organised a boating expedition
 on the river, and a dozen rowers, with a dozen pairs of oars, conveyed the
 party (to the accompaniment of song) across the smooth surface of the lake
 and up a great river with towering banks. from time to time the boat would
 pass under ropes, stretched across for purposes of fishing, and at each
 turn of the rippling current new vistas unfolded themselves as tier upon
 tier of woodland delighted the eye with a diversity of timber and foliage.
 in unison did the rowers ply their sculls, yet it was though of itself
 that the skiff shot forward, bird-like, over the glassy surface of the
 water; while at intervals the broad-shouldered young oarsman who was
 seated third from the bow would raise, as from a nightingale’s throat, the
 opening staves of a boat song, and then be joined by five or six more,
 until the melody had come to pour forth in a volume as free and boundless
 as russia herself. and pietukh, too, would give himself a shake, and help
 lustily to support the chorus; and even chichikov felt acutely conscious
 of the fact that he was a russian. only platon reflected: “what is there
 so splendid in these melancholy songs? they do but increase one’s
 depression of spirits.”
 the journey homeward was made in the gathering dusk. rhythmically the oars
 smote a surface which no longer reflected the sky, and darkness had fallen
 when they reached the shore, along which lights were twinkling where the
 fisherfolk were boiling live eels for soup. everything had now wended its
 way homeward for the night; the cattle and poultry had been housed, and
 the herdsmen, standing at the gates of the village cattle-pens, amid the
 trailing dust lately raised by their charges, were awaiting the milk-pails
 and a summons to partake of the eel-broth. through the dusk came the hum
 of humankind, and the barking of dogs in other and more distant villages;
 while, over all, the moon was rising, and the darkened countryside was
 beginning to glimmer to light again under her beams. what a glorious
 picture! yet no one thought of admiring it. instead of galloping over the
 countryside on frisky cobs, nikolasha and aleksasha were engaged in
 dreaming of moscow, with its confectioners’ shops and the theatres of
 which a cadet, newly arrived on a visit from the capital, had just been
 telling them; while their father had his mind full of how best to stuff
 his guests with yet more food, and platon was given up to yawning. only in
 chichikov was a spice of animation visible. “yes,” he reflected, “some day
 i, too, will become lord of such a country place.” and before his mind’s
 eye there arose also a helpmeet and some little chichikovs.
 by the time that supper was finished the party had again over-eaten
 themselves, and when chichikov entered the room allotted him for the
 night, he lay down upon the bed, and prodded his stomach. “it is as tight
 as a drum,” he said to himself. “not another titbit of veal could now get
 into it.” also, circumstances had so brought it about that next door to
 him there was situated his host’s apartment; and since the intervening
 wall was thin, chichikov could hear every word that was said there. at the
 present moment the master of the house was engaged in giving the cook
 orders for what, under the guise of an early breakfast, promised to
 constitute a veritable dinner. you should have heard pietukh’s behests!
 they would have excited the appetite of a corpse.
 “yes,” he said, sucking his lips, and drawing a deep breath, “in the first
 place, make a pasty in four divisions. into one of the divisions put the
 sturgeon’s cheeks and some viaziga , and into
 another division some buckwheat porridge, young mushrooms and onions,
 sweet milk, calves’ brains, and anything else that you may find suitable—anything
 else that you may have got handy. also, bake the pastry to a nice brown on
 one side, and but lightly on the other. yes, and, as to the under side,
 bake it so that it will be all juicy and flaky, so that it shall not
 crumble into bits, but melt in the mouth like the softest snow that ever
 you heard of.” and as he said this pietukh fairly smacked his lips.
 “the devil take him!” muttered chichikov, thrusting his head beneath the
 bedclothes to avoid hearing more. “the fellow won’t give one a chance to
 sleep.”
 nevertheless he heard through the blankets:
 “and garnish the sturgeon with beetroot, smelts, peppered mushrooms, young
 radishes, carrots, beans, and anything else you like, so as to have plenty
 of trimmings. yes, and put a lump of ice into the pig’s bladder, so as to
 swell it up.”
 many other dishes did pietukh order, and nothing was to be heard but his
 talk of boiling, roasting, and stewing. finally, just as mention was being
 made of a turkey cock, chichikov fell asleep.
 next morning the guest’s state of repletion had reached the point of
 platon being unable to mount his horse; wherefore the latter was
 dispatched homeward with one of pietukh’s grooms, and the two guests
 entered chichikov’s koliaska. even the dog trotted lazily in the rear; for
 he, too, had over-eaten himself.
 “it has been rather too much of a good thing,” remarked chichikov as the
 vehicle issued from the courtyard.
 “yes, and it vexes me to see the fellow never tire of it,” replied platon.
 “ah,” thought chichikov to himself, “if i had an income of seventy
 thousand roubles, as you have, i’d very soon give tiredness one in the
 eye! take murazov, the tax-farmer—he, again, must be worth ten
 millions. what a fortune!”
 “do you mind where we drive?” asked platon. “i should like first to go and
 take leave of my sister and my brother-in-law.”
 “with pleasure,” said chichikov.
 “my brother-in-law is the leading landowner hereabouts. at the present
 moment he is drawing an income of two hundred thousand roubles from a
 property which, eight years ago, was producing a bare twenty thousand.”
 “truly a man worthy of the utmost respect! i shall be most interested to
 make his acquaintance. to think of it! and what may his family name be?”
 “kostanzhoglo.”
 “and his christian name and patronymic?”
 “constantine thedorovitch.”
 “constantine thedorovitch kostanzhoglo. yes, it will be a most interesting
 event to make his acquaintance. to know such a man must be a whole
 education.”
 here platon set himself to give selifan some directions as to the way, a
 necessary proceeding in view of the fact that selifan could hardly
 maintain his seat on the box. twice petrushka, too, had fallen headlong,
 and this necessitated being tied to his perch with a piece of rope. “what
 a clown!” had been chichikov’s only comment.
 “this is where my brother-in-law’s land begins,” said platon.
 “they give one a change of view.”
 and, indeed, from this point the countryside became planted with timber;
 the rows of trees running as straight as pistol-shots, and having beyond
 them, and on higher ground, a second expanse of forest, newly planted like
 the first; while beyond it, again, loomed a third plantation of older
 trees. next there succeeded a flat piece of the same nature.
 “all this timber,” said platon, “has grown up within eight or ten years at
 the most; whereas on another man’s land it would have taken twenty to
 attain the same growth.”
 “and how has your brother-in-law effected this?”
 “you must ask him yourself. he is so excellent a husbandman that nothing
 ever fails with him. you see, he knows the soil, and also knows what ought
 to be planted beside what, and what kinds of timber are the best
 neighbourhood for grain. again, everything on his estate is made to
 perform at least three or four different functions. for instance, he makes
 his timber not only serve as timber, but also serve as a provider of
 moisture and shade to a given stretch of land, and then as a fertiliser
 with its fallen leaves. consequently, when everywhere else there is
 drought, he still has water, and when everywhere else there has been a
 failure of the harvest, on his lands it will have proved a success. but it
 is a pity that i know so little about it all as to be unable to explain to
 you his many expedients. folk call him a wizard, for he produces so much.
 nevertheless, personally i find what he does uninteresting.”
 “truly an astonishing fellow!” reflected chichikov with a glance at his
 companion. “it is sad indeed to see a man so superficial as to be unable
 to explain matters of this kind.”
 at length the manor appeared in sight—an establishment looking
 almost like a town, so numerous were the huts where they stood arranged in
 three tiers, crowned with three churches, and surrounded with huge ricks
 and barns. “yes,” thought chichikov to himself, “one can see what a jewel
 of a landowner lives here.” the huts in question were stoutly built and
 the intervening alleys well laid-out; while, wherever a waggon was
 visible, it looked serviceable and more or less new. also, the local
 peasants bore an intelligent look on their faces, the cattle were of the
 best possible breed, and even the peasants’ pigs belonged to the porcine
 aristocracy. clearly there dwelt here peasants who, to quote the song,
 were accustomed to “pick up silver by the shovelful.” nor were
 englishified gardens and parterres and other conceits in evidence, but, on
 the contrary, there ran an open view from the manor house to the farm
 buildings and the workmen’s cots, so that, after the old russian fashion,
 the barin should be able to keep an eye upon all that was going on around
 him. for the same purpose, the mansion was topped with a tall lantern and
 a superstructure—a device designed, not for ornament, nor for a
 vantage-spot for the contemplation of the view, but for supervision of the
 labourers engaged in distant fields. lastly, the brisk, active servants
 who received the visitors on the verandah were very different menials from
 the drunken petrushka, even though they did not wear swallow-tailed coats,
 but only cossack tchekmenu  of blue homespun cloth.
 the lady of the house also issued on to the verandah. with her face of the
 freshness of “blood and milk” and the brightness of god’s daylight, she as
 nearly resembled platon as one pea resembles another, save that, whereas
 he was languid, she was cheerful and full of talk.
 “good day, brother!” she cried. “how glad i am to see you! constantine is
 not at home, but will be back presently.”
 “where is he?”
 “doing business in the village with a party of factors,” replied the lady
 as she conducted her guests to the drawing-room.
 with no little curiosity did chichikov gaze at the interior of the mansion
 inhabited by the man who received an annual income of two hundred thousand
 roubles; for he thought to discern therefrom the nature of its proprietor,
 even as from a shell one may deduce the species of oyster or snail which
 has been its tenant, and has left therein its impression. but no such
 conclusions were to be drawn. the rooms were simple, and even bare. not a
 fresco nor a picture nor a bronze nor a flower nor a china what-not nor a
 book was there to be seen. in short, everything appeared to show that the
 proprietor of this abode spent the greater part of his time, not between
 four walls, but in the field, and that he thought out his plans, not in
 sybaritic fashion by the fireside, nor in an easy chair beside the stove,
 but on the spot where work was actually in progress—that, in a word,
 where those plans were conceived, there they were put into execution. nor
 in these rooms could chichikov detect the least trace of a feminine hand,
 beyond the fact that certain tables and chairs bore drying-boards whereon
 were arranged some sprinklings of flower petals.
 “what is all this rubbish for?” asked platon.
 “it is not rubbish,” replied the lady of the house. “on the contrary, it
 is the best possible remedy for fever. last year we cured every one of our
 sick peasants with it. some of the petals i am going to make into an
 ointment, and some into an infusion. you may laugh as much as you like at
 my potting and preserving, yet you yourself will be glad of things of the
 kind when you set out on your travels.”
 platon moved to the piano, and began to pick out a note or two.
 “good lord, what an ancient instrument!” he exclaimed. “are you not
 ashamed of it, sister?”
 “well, the truth is that i get no time to practice my music. you see,” she
 added to chichikov, “i have an eight-year-old daughter to educate; and to
 hand her over to a foreign governess in order that i may have leisure for
 my own piano-playing—well, that is a thing which i could never bring
 myself to do.”
 “you have become a wearisome sort of person,” commented platon, and walked
 away to the window. “ah, here comes constantine,” presently he added.
 chichikov also glanced out of the window, and saw approaching the verandah
 a brisk, swarthy-complexioned man of about forty, a man clad in a rough
 cloth jacket and a velveteen cap. evidently he was one of those who care
 little for the niceties of dress. with him, bareheaded, there came a
 couple of men of a somewhat lower station in life, and all three were
 engaged in an animated discussion. one of the barin’s two companions was a
 plain peasant, and the other (clad in a blue siberian smock) a travelling
 factor. the fact that the party halted awhile by the entrance steps made
 it possible to overhear a portion of their conversation from within.
 “this is what you peasants had better do,” the barin was saying. “purchase
 your release from your present master. i will lend you the necessary
 money, and afterwards you can work for me.”
 “no, constantine thedorovitch,” replied the peasant. “why should we do
 that? remove us just as we are. you will know how to arrange it, for a
 cleverer gentleman than you is nowhere to be found. the misfortune of us
 muzhiks is that we cannot protect ourselves properly. the tavern-keepers
 sell us such liquor that, before a man knows where he is, a glassful of it
 has eaten a hole through his stomach, and made him feel as though he could
 drink a pail of water. yes, it knocks a man over before he can look
 around. everywhere temptation lies in wait for the peasant, and he needs
 to be cunning if he is to get through the world at all. in fact, things
 seem to be contrived for nothing but to make us peasants lose our wits,
 even to the tobacco which they sell us. what are folk like ourselves to
 do, constantine thedorovitch? i tell you it is terribly difficult for a
 muzhik to look after himself.”
 “listen to me. this is how things are done here. when i take on a serf, i
 fit him out with a cow and a horse. on the other hand, i demand of him
 thereafter more than is demanded of a peasant anywhere else. that is to
 say, first and foremost i make him work. whether a peasant be working for
 himself or for me, never do i let him waste time. i myself toil like a
 bullock, and i force my peasants to do the same, for experience has taught
 me that that is the only way to get through life. all the mischief in the
 world comes through lack of employment. now, do you go and consider the
 matter, and talk it over with your mir .”
 “we have done that already, constantine thedorovitch, and our elders’
 opinion is: ‘there is no need for further talk. every peasant belonging to
 constantine thedorovitch is well off, and hasn’t to work for nothing. the
 priests of his village, too, are men of good heart, whereas ours have been
 taken away, and there is no one to bury us.’”
 “nevertheless, do you go and talk the matter over again.”
 “we will, barin.”
 here the factor who had been walking on the barin’s other side put in a
 word.
 “constantine thedorovitch,” he said, “i beg of you to do as i have
 requested.”
 “i have told you before,” replied the barin, “that i do not care to play
 the huckster. i am not one of those landowners whom fellows of your sort
 visit on the very day that the interest on a mortgage is due. ah, i know
 your fraternity thoroughly, and know that you keep lists of all who have
 mortgages to repay. but what is there so clever about that? any man, if
 you pinch him sufficiently, will surrender you a mortgage at half-price,—any
 man, that is to say, except myself, who care nothing for your money. were
 a loan of mine to remain out three years, i should never demand a kopeck
 of interest on it.”
 “quite so, constantine thedorovitch,” replied the factor. “but i am asking
 this of you more for the purpose of establishing us on a business footing
 than because i desire to win your favour. prey, therefore, accept this
 earnest money of three thousand roubles.” and the man drew from his breast
 pocket a dirty roll of bank-notes, which, carelessly receiving,
 kostanzhoglo thrust, uncounted, into the back pocket of his overcoat.
 “hm!” thought chichikov. “for all he cares, the notes might have been a
 handkerchief.”
 when kostanzhoglo appeared at closer quarters—that is to say, in the
 doorway of the drawing-room—he struck chichikov more than ever with
 the swarthiness of his complexion, the dishevelment of his black, slightly
 grizzled locks, the alertness of his eye, and the impression of fiery
 southern origin which his whole personality diffused. for he was not
 wholly a russian, nor could he himself say precisely who his forefathers
 had been. yet, inasmuch as he accounted genealogical research no part of
 the science of estate-management, but a mere superfluity, he looked upon
 himself as, to all intents and purposes, a native of russia, and the more
 so since the russian language was the only tongue he knew.
 platon presented chichikov, and the pair exchanged greetings.
 “to get rid of my depression, constantine,” continued platon, “i am
 thinking of accompanying our guest on a tour through a few of the
 provinces.”
 “an excellent idea,” said kostanzhoglo. “but precisely whither?” he added,
 turning hospitably to chichikov.
 “to tell you the truth,” replied that personage with an affable
 inclination of the head as he smoothed the arm of his chair with his hand,
 “i am travelling less on my own affairs than on the affairs of others.
 that is to say, general betristchev, an intimate friend, and, i might add,
 a generous benefactor, of mine, has charged me with commissions to some of
 his relatives. nevertheless, though relatives are relatives, i may say
 that i am travelling on my own account as well, in that, in addition to
 possible benefit to my health, i desire to see the world and the whirligig
 of humanity, which constitute, so to speak, a living book, a second course
 of education.”
 “yes, there is no harm in looking at other corners of the world besides
 one’s own.”
 “you speak truly. there is no harm in such a proceeding. thereby one may
 see things which one has not before encountered, one may meet men with
 whom one has not before come in contact. and with some men of that kind a
 conversation is as precious a benefit as has been conferred upon me by the
 present occasion. i come to you, most worthy constantine thedorovitch, for
 instruction, and again for instruction, and beg of you to assuage my
 thirst with an exposition of the truth as it is. i hunger for the favour
 of your words as for manna.”
 “but how so? what can i teach you?” exclaimed kostanzhoglo in
 confusion. “i myself was given but the plainest of educations.”
 “nay, most worthy sir, you possess wisdom, and again wisdom. wisdom only
 can direct the management of a great estate, that can derive a sound
 income from the same, that can acquire wealth of a real, not a fictitious,
 order while also fulfilling the duties of a citizen and thereby earning
 the respect of the russian public. all this i pray you to teach me.”
 “i tell you what,” said kostanzhoglo, looking meditatively at his guest.
 “you had better stay with me for a few days, and during that time i can
 show you how things are managed here, and explain to you everything. then
 you will see for yourself that no great wisdom is required for the
 purpose.”
 “yes, certainly you must stay here,” put in the lady of the house. then,
 turning to her brother, she added: “and you too must stay. why should you
 be in such a hurry?”
 “very well,” he replied. “but what say you, paul ivanovitch?”
 “i say the same as you, and with much pleasure,” replied chichikov. “but
 also i ought to tell you this: that there is a relative of general
 betristchev’s, a certain colonel koshkarev—”
 “yes, we know him; but he is quite mad.”
 “as you say, he is mad, and i should not have been intending to visit him,
 were it not that general betristchev is an intimate friend of mine, as
 well as, i might add, my most generous benefactor.”
 “then,” said kostanzhoglo, “do you go and see colonel koshkarev now. he
 lives less than ten versts from here, and i have a gig already harnessed.
 go to him at once, and return here for tea.”
 “an excellent idea!” cried chichikov, and with that he seized his cap.
 half an hour’s drive sufficed to bring him to the colonel’s establishment.
 the village attached to the manor was in a state of utter confusion, since
 in every direction building and repairing operations were in progress, and
 the alleys were choked with heaps of lime, bricks, and beams of wood.
 also, some of the huts were arranged to resemble offices, and superscribed
 in gilt letters “depot for agricultural implements,” “chief office of
 accounts,” “estate works committee,” “normal school for the education of
 colonists,” and so forth.
 chichikov found the colonel posted behind a desk and holding a pen between
 his teeth. without an instant’s delay the master of the establishment—who
 seemed a kindly, approachable man, and accorded to his visitor a very
 civil welcome—plunged into a recital of the labour which it had cost
 him to bring the property to its present condition of affluence. then he
 went on to lament the fact that he could not make his peasantry understand
 the incentives to labour which the riches of science and art provide; for
 instance, he had failed to induce his female serfs to wear corsets,
 whereas in germany, where he had resided for fourteen years, every humble
 miller’s daughter could play the piano. none the less, he said, he meant
 to peg away until every peasant on the estate should, as he walked behind
 the plough, indulge in a regular course of reading franklin’s notes on
 electricity, virgil’s georgics, or some work on the chemical properties of
 soil.
 “good gracious!” mentally exclaimed chichikov. “why, i myself have not had
 time to finish that book by the duchesse de la valliere!”
 much else the colonel said. in particular did he aver that, provided the
 russian peasant could be induced to array himself in german costume,
 science would progress, trade increase, and the golden age dawn in russia.
 for a while chichikov listened with distended eyes. then he felt
 constrained to intimate that with all that he had nothing to do, seeing
 that his business was merely to acquire a few souls, and thereafter to
 have their purchase confirmed.
 “if i understand you aright,” said the colonel, “you wish to present a
 statement of plea?”
 “yes, that is so.”
 “then kindly put it into writing, and it shall be forwarded to the office
 for the reception of reports and returns. thereafter that office will
 consider it, and return it to me, who will, in turn, dispatch it to the
 estate works committee, who will, in turn, revise it, and present it to
 the administrator, who, jointly with the secretary, will—”
 “pardon me,” expostulated chichikov, “but that procedure will take up a
 great deal of time. why need i put the matter into writing at all? it is
 simply this. i want a few souls which are—well, which are, so to
 speak, dead.”
 “very good,” commented the colonel. “do you write down in your statement
 of plea that the souls which you desire are, ‘so to speak, dead.’”
 “but what would be the use of my doing so? though the souls are dead, my
 purpose requires that they should be represented as alive.”
 “very good,” again commented the colonel. “do you write down in your
 statement that ‘it is necessary’ (or, should you prefer an alternative
 phrase, ‘it is requested,’ or ‘it is desiderated,’ or ‘it is prayed,’)
 ‘that the souls be represented as alive.’ at all events, without
 documentary process of that kind, the matter cannot possibly be carried
 through. also, i will appoint a commissioner to guide you round the
 various offices.”
 and he sounded a bell; whereupon there presented himself a man whom,
 addressing as “secretary,” the colonel instructed to summon the
 “commissioner.” the latter, on appearing, was seen to have the air, half
 of a peasant, half of an official.
 “this man,” the colonel said to chichikov, “will act as your escort.”
 what could be done with a lunatic like koshkarev? in the end, curiosity
 moved chichikov to accompany the commissioner. the committee for the
 reception of reports and returns was discovered to have put up its
 shutters, and to have locked its doors, for the reason that the director
 of the committee had been transferred to the newly-formed committee of
 estate management, and his successor had been annexed by the same
 committee. next, chichikov and his escort rapped at the doors of the
 department of estate affairs; but that department’s quarters happened to
 be in a state of repair, and no one could be made to answer the summons
 save a drunken peasant from whom not a word of sense was to be extracted.
 at length the escort felt himself moved to remark:
 “there is a deal of foolishness going on here. fellows like that drunkard
 lead the barin by the nose, and everything is ruled by the committee of
 management, which takes men from their proper work, and sets them to do
 any other it likes. indeed, only through the committee does anything get
 done.”
 by this time chichikov felt that he had seen enough; wherefore he returned
 to the colonel, and informed him that the office for the reception of
 reports and returns had ceased to exist. at once the colonel flamed to
 noble rage. pressing chichikov’s hand in token of gratitude for the
 information which the guest had furnished, he took paper and pen, and
 noted eight searching questions under three separate headings: () “why
 has the committee of management presumed to issue orders to officials not
 under its jurisdiction?” () “why has the chief manager permitted his
 predecessor, though still in retention of his post, to follow him to
 another department?” and () “why has the committee of estate affairs
 suffered the office for the reception of reports and returns to lapse?”
 “now for a row!” thought chichikov to himself, and turned to depart; but
 his host stopped him, saying:
 “i cannot let you go, for, in addition to my honour having become
 involved, it behoves me to show my people how the regular, the organised,
 administration of an estate may be conducted. herewith i will hand over
 the conduct of your affair to a man who is worth all the rest of the staff
 put together, and has had a university education. also, the better to lose
 no time, may i humbly beg you to step into my library, where you will find
 notebooks, paper, pens, and everything else that you may require. of these
 articles pray make full use, for you are a gentleman of letters, and it is
 your and my joint duty to bring enlightenment to all.”
 so saying, he ushered his guest into a large room lined from floor to
 ceiling with books and stuffed specimens. the books in question were
 divided into sections—a section on forestry, a section on
 cattle-breeding, a section on the raising of swine, and a section on
 horticulture, together with special journals of the type circulated merely
 for the purposes of reference, and not for general reading. perceiving
 that these works were scarcely of a kind calculated to while away an idle
 hour, chichikov turned to a second bookcase. but to do so was to fall out
 of the frying-pan into the fire, for the contents of the second bookcase
 proved to be works on philosophy, while, in particular, six huge volumes
 confronted him under a label inscribed “a preparatory course to the
 province of thought, with the theory of community of effort, co-operation,
 and subsistence, in its application to a right understanding of the
 organic principles of a mutual division of social productivity.” indeed,
 wheresoever chichikov looked, every page presented to his vision some such
 words as “phenomenon,” “development,” “abstract,” “contents,” and
 “synopsis.” “this is not the sort of thing for me,” he murmured, and
 turned his attention to a third bookcase, which contained books on the
 arts. extracting a huge tome in which some by no means reticent
 mythological illustrations were contained, he set himself to examine these
 pictures. they were of the kind which pleases mostly middle-aged bachelors
 and old men who are accustomed to seek in the ballet and similar
 frivolities a further spur to their waning passions. having concluded his
 examination, chichikov had just extracted another volume of the same
 species when colonel koshkarev returned with a document of some sort and a
 radiant countenance.
 “everything has been carried through in due form!” he cried. “the man whom
 i mentioned is a genius indeed, and i intend not only to promote him over
 the rest, but also to create for him a special department. herewith shall
 you hear what a splendid intellect is his, and how in a few minutes he has
 put the whole affair in order.”
 “may the lord be thanked for that!” thought chichikov. then he settled
 himself while the colonel read aloud:
 “‘after giving full consideration to the reference which your excellency
 has entrusted to me, i have the honour to report as follows:
 “‘() in the statement of plea presented by one paul ivanovitch chichikov,
 gentleman, chevalier, and collegiate councillor, there lurks an error, in
 that an oversight has led the petitioner to apply to revisional souls the
 term “dead.” now, from the context it would appear that by this term the
 petitioner desires to signify souls approaching death rather than souls
 actually deceased: wherefore the term employed betrays such an empirical
 instruction in letters as must, beyond doubt, have been confined to the
 village school, seeing that in truth the soul is deathless.’
 “the rascal!” koshkarev broke off to exclaim delightedly. “he has got you
 there, monsieur chichikov. and you will admit that he has a sufficiently
 incisive pen?
 “‘() on this estate there exist no unmortgaged souls whatsoever, whether
 approaching death or otherwise; for the reason that all souls thereon have
 been pledged not only under a first deed of mortgage, but also (for the
 sum of one hundred and fifty roubles per soul) under a second,—the
 village of gurmailovka alone excepted, in that, in consequence of a suit
 having been brought against landowner priadistchev, and of a caveat having
 been pronounced by the land court, and of such caveat having been
 published in no.  of the gazette of moscow, the said village has come
 within the jurisdiction of the court above-mentioned.”
 “why did you not tell me all this before?” cried chichikov furiously. “why
 you have kept me dancing about for nothing?”
 “because it was absolutely necessary that you should view the matter
 through forms of documentary process. this is no jest on my part. the
 inexperienced may see things subconsciously, yet it is imperative that he
 should also see them consciously.”
 but to chichikov’s patience an end had come. seizing his cap, and casting
 all ceremony to the winds, he fled from the house, and rushed through the
 courtyard. as it happened, the man who had driven him thither had, warned
 by experience, not troubled even to take out the horses, since he knew
 that such a proceeding would have entailed not only the presentation of a
 statement of plea for fodder, but also a delay of twenty-four hours until
 the resolution granting the same should have been passed. nevertheless the
 colonel pursued his guest to the gates, and pressed his hand warmly as he
 thanked him for having enabled him (the colonel) thus to exhibit in
 operation the proper management of an estate. also, he begged to state
 that, under the circumstances, it was absolutely necessary to keep things
 moving and circulating, since, otherwise, slackness was apt to supervene,
 and the working of the machine to grow rusty and feeble; but that, in
 spite of all, the present occasion had inspired him with a happy idea—namely,
 the idea of instituting a committee which should be entitled “the
 committee of supervision of the committee of management,” and which should
 have for its function the detection of backsliders among the body first
 mentioned.
 it was late when, tired and dissatisfied, chichikov regained
 kostanzhoglo’s mansion. indeed, the candles had long been lit.
 “what has delayed you?” asked the master of the house as chichikov entered
 the drawing-room.
 “yes, what has kept you and the colonel so long in conversation together?”
 added platon.
 “this—the fact that never in my life have i come across such an
 imbecile,” was chichikov’s reply.
 “never mind,” said kostanzhoglo. “koshkarev is a most reassuring
 phenomenon. he is necessary in that in him we see expressed in caricature
 all the more crying follies of our intellectuals—of the
 intellectuals who, without first troubling to make themselves acquainted
 with their own country, borrow silliness from abroad. yet that is how
 certain of our landowners are now carrying on. they have set up ‘offices’
 and factories and schools and ‘commissions,’ and the devil knows what else
 besides. a fine lot of wiseacres! after the french war in  they had to
 reconstruct their affairs: and see how they have done it! yet so much
 worse have they done it than a frenchman would have done that any fool of
 a peter petrovitch pietukh now ranks as a good landowner!”
 “but he has mortgaged the whole of his estate?” remarked chichikov.
 “yes, nowadays everything is being mortgaged, or is going to be.” this
 said, kostanzhoglo’s temper rose still further. “out upon your factories
 of hats and candles!” he cried. “out upon procuring candle-makers from
 london, and then turning landowners into hucksters! to think of a russian
 pomiestchik , a member of the noblest of
 callings, conducting workshops and cotton mills! why, it is for the
 wenches of towns to handle looms for muslin and lace.”
 “but you yourself maintain workshops?” remarked platon.
 “i do; but who established them? they established themselves. for
 instance, wool had accumulated, and since i had nowhere to store it, i
 began to weave it into cloth—but, mark you, only into good, plain
 cloth of which i can dispose at a cheap rate in the local markets, and
 which is needed by peasants, including my own. again, for six years on end
 did the fish factories keep dumping their offal on my bank of the river;
 wherefore, at last, as there was nothing to be done with it, i took to
 boiling it into glue, and cleared forty thousand roubles by the process.”
 “the devil!” thought chichikov to himself as he stared at his host. “what
 a fist this man has for making money!”
 “another reason why i started those factories,” continued kostanzhoglo,
 “is that they might give employment to many peasants who would otherwise
 have starved. you see, the year happened to have been a lean one—thanks
 to those same industry-mongering landowners, in that they had neglected to
 sow their crops; and now my factories keep growing at the rate of a
 factory a year, owing to the circumstance that such quantities of remnants
 and cuttings become so accumulated that, if a man looks carefully to his
 management, he will find every sort of rubbish to be capable of bringing
 in a return—yes, to the point of his having to reject money on the
 plea that he has no need of it. yet i do not find that to do all this i
 require to build a mansion with facades and pillars!”
 “marvellous!” exclaimed chichikov. “beyond all things does it surprise me
 that refuse can be so utilised.”
 “yes, and that is what can be done by simple methods. but nowadays every
 one is a mechanic, and wants to open that money chest with an instrument
 instead of simply. for that purpose he hies him to england. yes, that is
 the thing to do. what folly!” kostanzhoglo spat and added: “yet when he
 returns from abroad he is a hundred times more ignorant than when he
 went.”
 “ah, constantine,” put in his wife anxiously, “you know how bad for you it
 is to talk like this.”
 “yes, but how am i to help losing my temper? the thing touches me too
 closely, it vexes me too deeply to think that the russian character should
 be degenerating. for in that character there has dawned a sort of
 quixotism which never used to be there. yes, no sooner does a man get a
 little education into his head than he becomes a don quixote, and
 establishes schools on his estate such as even a madman would never have
 dreamed of. and from that school there issues a workman who is good for
 nothing, whether in the country or in the town—a fellow who drinks
 and is for ever standing on his dignity. yet still our landowners keep
 taking to philanthropy, to converting themselves into philanthropic
 knights-errant, and spending millions upon senseless hospitals and
 institutions, and so ruining themselves and turning their families adrift.
 yes, that is all that comes of philanthropy.”
 chichikov’s business had nothing to do with the spread of enlightenment,
 he was but seeking an opportunity to inquire further concerning the
 putting of refuse to lucrative uses; but kostanzhoglo would not let him
 get a word in edgeways, so irresistibly did the flow of sarcastic comment
 pour from the speaker’s lips.
 “yes,” went on kostanzhoglo, “folk are always scheming to educate the
 peasant. but first make him well-off and a good farmer. then he will
 educate himself fast enough. as things are now, the world has grown stupid
 to a degree that passes belief. look at the stuff our present-day
 scribblers write! let any sort of a book be published, and at once you
 will see every one making a rush for it. similarly will you find folk
 saying: ‘the peasant leads an over-simple life. he ought to be
 familiarised with luxuries, and so led to yearn for things above his
 station.’ and the result of such luxuries will be that the peasant will
 become a rag rather than a man, and suffer from the devil only knows what
 diseases, until there will remain in the land not a boy of eighteen who
 will not have experienced the whole gamut of them, and found himself left
 with not a tooth in his jaws or a hair on his pate. yes, that is what will
 come of infecting the peasant with such rubbish. but, thank god, there is
 still one healthy class left to us—a class which has never taken up
 with the ‘advantages’ of which i speak. for that we ought to be grateful.
 and since, even yet, the russian agriculturist remains the most
 respect-worthy man in the land, why should he be touched? would to god
 every one were an agriculturist!”
 “then you believe agriculture to be the most profitable of occupations?”
 said chichikov.
 “the best, at all events—if not the most profitable. ‘in the sweat
 of thy brow shalt thou till the land.’ to quote that requires no great
 wisdom, for the experience of ages has shown us that, in the agricultural
 calling, man has ever remained more moral, more pure, more noble than in
 any other. of course i do not mean to imply that no other calling ought to
 be practised: simply that the calling in question lies at the root of all
 the rest. however much factories may be established privately or by the
 law, there will still lie ready to man’s hand all that he needs—he
 will still require none of those amenities which are sapping the vitality
 of our present-day folk, nor any of those industrial establishments which
 make their profit, and keep themselves going, by causing foolish measures
 to be adopted which, in the end, are bound to deprave and corrupt our
 unfortunate masses. i myself am determined never to establish any
 manufacture, however profitable, which will give rise to a demand for
 ‘higher things,’ such as sugar and tobacco—no not if i lose a
 million by my refusing to do so. if corruption must overtake the mir, it
 shall not be through my hands. and i think that god will justify me in my
 resolve. twenty years have i lived among the common folk, and i know what
 will inevitably come of such things.”
 “but what surprises me most,” persisted chichikov, “is that from refuse it
 should be possible, with good management, to make such an immensity of
 profit.”
 “and as for political economy,” continued kostanzhoglo, without noticing
 him, and with his face charged with bilious sarcasm, “—as for
 political economy, it is a fine thing indeed. just one fool sitting on
 another fool’s back, and flogging him along, even though the rider can see
 no further than his own nose! yet into the saddle will that fool climb—spectacles
 and all! oh, the folly, the folly of such things!” and the speaker spat
 derisively.
 “that may be true,” said his wife. “yet you must not get angry about it.
 surely one can speak on such subjects without losing one’s temper?”
 “as i listen to you, most worthy constantine thedorovitch,” chichikov
 hastened to remark, “it becomes plain to me that you have penetrated into
 the meaning of life, and laid your finger upon the essential root of the
 matter. yet supposing, for a moment, we leave the affairs of humanity in
 general, and turn our attention to a purely individual affair, might i ask
 you how, in the case of a man becoming a landowner, and having a mind to
 grow wealthy as quickly as possible (in order that he may fulfil his
 bounden obligations as a citizen), he can best set about it?”
 “how he can best set about growing wealthy?” repeated kostanzhoglo. “why,—”
 “let us go to supper,” interrupted the lady of the house, rising from her
 chair, and moving towards the centre of the room, where she wrapped her
 shivering young form in a shawl. chichikov sprang up with the alacrity of
 a military man, offered her his arm, and escorted her, as on parade, to
 the dining-room, where awaiting them there was the soup-toureen. from it
 the lid had just been removed, and the room was redolent of the fragrant
 odour of early spring roots and herbs. the company took their seats, and
 at once the servants placed the remainder of the dishes (under covers)
 upon the table and withdrew, for kostanzhoglo hated to have servants
 listening to their employers’ conversation, and objected still more to
 their staring at him all the while that he was eating.
 when the soup had been consumed, and glasses of an excellent vintage
 resembling hungarian wine had been poured out, chichikov said to his host:
 “most worthy sir, allow me once more to direct your attention to the
 subject of which we were speaking at the point when the conversation
 became interrupted. you will remember that i was asking you how best a man
 can set about, proceed in, the matter of growing...”
 [here from the original two pages are missing.]
 ... “a property for which, had he asked forty thousand, i should still
 have demanded a reduction.”
 “hm!” thought chichikov; then added aloud: “but why do you not purchase it
 yourself?”
 “because to everything there must be assigned a limit. already my property
 keeps me sufficiently employed. moreover, i should cause our local
 dvoriane to begin crying out in chorus that i am exploiting their
 extremities, their ruined position, for the purpose of acquiring land for
 under its value. of that i am weary.”
 “how readily folk speak evil!” exclaimed chichikov.
 “yes, and the amount of evil-speaking in our province surpasses belief.
 never will you hear my name mentioned without my being called also a miser
 and a usurer of the worst possible sort; whereas my accusers justify
 themselves in everything, and say that, ‘though we have wasted our money,
 we have started a demand for the higher amenities of life, and therefore
 encouraged industry with our wastefulness, a far better way of doing
 things than that practised by kostanzhoglo, who lives like a pig.’”
 “would i could live in your ‘piggish’ fashion!” ejaculated
 chichikov.
 “and so forth, and so forth. yet what are the ‘higher amenities of life’?
 what good can they do to any one? even if a landowner of the day sets up a
 library, he never looks at a single book in it, but soon relapses into
 card-playing—the usual pursuit. yet folk call me names simply
 because i do not waste my means upon the giving of dinners! one reason why
 i do not give such dinners is that they weary me; and another reason is
 that i am not used to them. but come you to my house for the purpose of
 taking pot luck, and i shall be delighted to see you. also, folk foolishly
 say that i lend money on interest; whereas the truth is that if you should
 come to me when you are really in need, and should explain to me openly
 how you propose to employ my money, and i should perceive that you are
 purposing to use that money wisely, and that you are really likely to
 profit thereby—well, in that case you would find me ready to lend
 you all that you might ask without interest at all.”
 “that is a thing which it is well to know,” reflected chichikov.
 “yes,” repeated kostanzhoglo, “under those circumstances i should never
 refuse you my assistance. but i do object to throwing my money to the
 winds. pardon me for expressing myself so plainly. to think of lending
 money to a man who is merely devising a dinner for his mistress, or
 planning to furnish his house like a lunatic, or thinking of taking his
 paramour to a masked ball or a jubilee in honour of some one who had
 better never have been born!”
 and, spitting, he came near to venting some expression which would
 scarcely have been becoming in the presence of his wife. over his face the
 dark shadow of hypochondria had cast a cloud, and furrows had formed on
 his brow and temples, and his every gesture bespoke the influence of a
 hot, nervous rancour.
 “but allow me once more to direct your attention to the subject of our
 recently interrupted conversation,” persisted chichikov as he sipped a
 glass of excellent raspberry wine. “that is to say, supposing i were to
 acquire the property which you have been good enough to bring to my
 notice, how long would it take me to grow rich?”
 “that would depend on yourself,” replied kostanzhoglo with grim abruptness
 and evident ill-humour. “you might either grow rich quickly or you might
 never grow rich at all. if you made up your mind to grow rich, sooner or
 later you would find yourself a wealthy man.”
 “indeed!” ejaculated chichikov.
 “yes,” replied kostanzhoglo, as sharply as though he were angry with
 chichikov. “you would merely need to be fond of work: otherwise you would
 effect nothing. the main thing is to like looking after your property.
 believe me, you would never grow weary of doing so. people would have it
 that life in the country is dull; whereas, if i were to spend a single day
 as it is spent by some folk, with their stupid clubs and their restaurants
 and their theatres, i should die of ennui. the fools, the idiots, the
 generations of blind dullards! but a landowner never finds the days
 wearisome—he has not the time. in his life not a moment remains
 unoccupied; it is full to the brim. and with it all goes an endless
 variety of occupations. and what occupations! occupations which genuinely
 uplift the soul, seeing that the landowner walks with nature and the
 seasons of the year, and takes part in, and is intimate with, everything
 which is evolved by creation. for let us look at the round of the year’s
 labours. even before spring has arrived there will have begun a general
 watching and a waiting for it, and a preparing for sowing, and an
 apportioning of crops, and a measuring of seed grain by byres, and drying
 of seed, and a dividing of the workers into teams. for everything needs to
 be examined beforehand, and calculations must be made at the very start.
 and as soon as ever the ice shall have melted, and the rivers be flowing,
 and the land have dried sufficiently to be workable, the spade will begin
 its task in kitchen and flower garden, and the plough and the harrow their
 tasks in the field; until everywhere there will be tilling and sowing and
 planting. and do you understand what the sum of that labour will mean? it
 will mean that the harvest is being sown, that the welfare of the world is
 being sown, that the food of millions is being put into the earth. and
 thereafter will come summer, the season of reaping, endless reaping; for
 suddenly the crops will have ripened, and rye-sheaf will be lying heaped
 upon rye-sheaf, with, elsewhere, stocks of barley, and of oats, and of
 wheat. and everything will be teeming with life, and not a moment will
 there need to be lost, seeing that, had you even twenty eyes, you would
 have need for them all. and after the harvest festivities there will be
 grain to be carted to byre or stacked in ricks, and stores to be prepared
 for the winter, and storehouses and kilns and cattle-sheds to be cleaned
 for the same purpose, and the women to be assigned their tasks, and the
 totals of everything to be calculated, so that one may see the value of
 what has been done. and lastly will come winter, when in every
 threshing-floor the flail will be working, and the grain, when threshed,
 will need to be carried from barn to binn, and the mills require to be
 seen to, and the estate factories to be inspected, and the workmen’s huts
 to be visited for the purpose of ascertaining how the muzhik is faring
 (for, given a carpenter who is clever with his tools, i, for one, am only
 too glad to spend an hour or two in his company, so cheering to me is
 labour). and if, in addition, one discerns the end to which everything is
 moving, and the manner in which the things of earth are everywhere
 multiplying and multiplying, and bringing forth more and more fruit to
 one’s profiting, i cannot adequately express what takes place in a man’s
 soul. and that, not because of the growth in his wealth—money is
 money and no more—but because he will feel that everything is the
 work of his own hands, and that he has been the cause of everything, and
 its creator, and that from him, as from a magician, there has flowed
 bounty and goodness for all. in what other calling will you find such
 delights in prospect?” as he spoke, kostanzhoglo raised his face, and it
 became clear that the wrinkles had fled from it, and that, like the tsar
 on the solemn day of his crowning, kostanzhoglo’s whole form was diffusing
 light, and his features had in them a gentle radiance. “in all the world,”
 he repeated, “you will find no joys like these, for herein man imitates
 the god who projected creation as the supreme happiness, and now demands
 of man that he, too, should act as the creator of prosperity. yet there
 are folk who call such functions tedious!”
 kostanzhoglo’s mellifluous periods fell upon chichikov’s ear like the
 notes of a bird of paradise. from time to time he gulped, and his softened
 eyes expressed the pleasure which it gave him to listen.
 “constantine, it is time to leave the table,” said the lady of the house,
 rising from her seat. every one followed her example, and chichikov once
 again acted as his hostess’s escort—although with less dexterity of
 deportment than before, owing to the fact that this time his thoughts were
 occupied with more essential matters of procedure.
 “in spite of what you say,” remarked platon as he walked behind the pair,
 “i, for my part, find these things wearisome.”
 but the master of the house paid no attention to his remark, for he was
 reflecting that his guest was no fool, but a man of serious thought and
 speech who did not take things lightly. and, with the thought,
 kostanzhoglo grew lighter in soul, as though he had warmed himself with
 his own words, and were exulting in the fact that he had found some one
 capable of listening to good advice.
 when they had settled themselves in the cosy, candle-lighted drawing-room,
 with its balcony and the glass door opening out into the garden—a
 door through which the stars could be seen glittering amid the slumbering
 tops of the trees—chichikov felt more comfortable than he had done
 for many a day past. it was as though, after long journeying, his own
 roof-tree had received him once more—had received him when his quest
 had been accomplished, when all that he wished for had been gained, when
 his travelling-staff had been laid aside with the words “it is finished.”
 and of this seductive frame of mind the true source had been the eloquent
 discourse of his hospitable host. yes, for every man there exist certain
 things which, instantly that they are said, seem to touch him more
 closely, more intimately, than anything has done before. nor is it an
 uncommon occurrence that in the most unexpected fashion, and in the most
 retired of retreats, one will suddenly come face to face with a man whose
 burning periods will lead one to forget oneself and the tracklessness of
 the route and the discomfort of one’s nightly halting-places, and the
 futility of crazes and the falseness of tricks by which one human being
 deceives another. and at once there will become engraven upon one’s memory—vividly,
 and for all time—the evening thus spent. and of that evening one’s
 remembrance will hold true, both as to who was present, and where each
 such person sat, and what he or she was wearing, and what the walls and
 the stove and other trifling features of the room looked like.
 in the same way did chichikov note each detail that evening—both the
 appointments of the agreeable, but not luxuriously furnished, room, and
 the good-humoured expression which reigned on the face of the thoughtful
 host, and the design of the curtains, and the amber-mounted pipe smoked by
 platon, and the way in which he kept puffing smoke into the fat jowl of
 the dog yarb, and the sneeze which, on each such occasion, yarb vented,
 and the laughter of the pleasant-faced hostess (though always followed by
 the words “pray do not tease him any more”) and the cheerful candle-light,
 and the cricket chirping in a corner, and the glass door, and the spring
 night which, laying its elbows upon the tree-tops, and spangled with
 stars, and vocal with the nightingales which were pouring forth warbled
 ditties from the recesses of the foliage, kept glancing through the door,
 and regarding the company within.
 “how it delights me to hear your words, good constantine thedorovitch!”
 said chichikov. “indeed, nowhere in russia have i met with a man of equal
 intellect.”
 kostanzhoglo smiled, while realising that the compliment was scarcely
 deserved.
 “if you want a man of genuine intellect,” he said, “i can tell you of one.
 he is a man whose boot soles are worth more than my whole body.”
 “who may he be?” asked chichikov in astonishment.
 “murazov, our local commissioner of taxes.”
 “ah! i have heard of him before,” remarked chichikov.
 “he is a man who, were he not the director of an estate, might well be a
 director of the empire. and were the empire under my direction, i should
 at once appoint him my minister of finance.”
 “i have heard tales beyond belief concerning him—for instance, that
 he has acquired ten million roubles.”
 “ten? more than forty. soon half russia will be in his hands.”
 “you don’t say so?” cried chichikov in amazement.
 “yes, certainly. the man who has only a hundred thousand roubles to work
 with grows rich but slowly, whereas he who has millions at his disposal
 can operate over a greater radius, and so back whatsoever he undertakes
 with twice or thrice the money which can be brought against him.
 consequently his field becomes so spacious that he ends by having no
 rivals. yes, no one can compete with him, and, whatsoever price he may fix
 for a given commodity, at that price it will have to remain, nor will any
 man be able to outbid it.”
 “my god!” muttered chichikov, crossing himself, and staring at
 kostanzhoglo with his breath catching in his throat. “the mind cannot
 grasp it—it petrifies one’s thoughts with awe. you see folk
 marvelling at what science has achieved in the matter of investigating the
 habits of cowbugs, but to me it is a far more marvellous thing that in the
 hands of a single mortal there can become accumulated such gigantic sums
 of money. but may i ask whether the great fortune of which you speak has
 been acquired through honest means?”
 “yes; through means of the most irreproachable kind—through the most
 honourable of methods.”
 “yet so improbable does it seem that i can scarcely believe it. thousands
 i could understand, but millions—!”
 “on the contrary, to make thousands honestly is a far more difficult
 matter than to make millions. millions are easily come by, for a
 millionaire has no need to resort to crooked ways; the way lies straight
 before him, and he needs but to annex whatsoever he comes across. no rival
 will spring up to oppose him, for no rival will be sufficiently strong,
 and since the millionaire can operate over an extensive radius, he can
 bring (as i have said) two or three roubles to bear upon any one else’s
 one. consequently, what interest will he derive from a thousand roubles?
 why, ten or twenty per cent. at the least.”
 “and it is beyond measure marvellous that the whole should have started
 from a single kopeck.”
 “had it started otherwise, the thing could never have been done at all.
 such is the normal course. he who is born with thousands, and is brought
 up to thousands, will never acquire a single kopeck more, for he will have
 been set up with the amenities of life in advance, and so never come to
 stand in need of anything. it is necessary to begin from the beginning
 rather than from the middle; from a kopeck rather than from a rouble; from
 the bottom rather than from the top. for only thus will a man get to know
 the men and conditions among which his career will have to be carved. that
 is to say, through encountering the rough and the tumble of life, and
 through learning that every kopeck has to be beaten out with a
 three-kopeck nail, and through worsting knave after knave, he will acquire
 such a degree of perspicuity and wariness that he will err in nothing
 which he may tackle, and never come to ruin. believe me, it is so. the
 beginning, and not the middle, is the right starting point. no one who
 comes to me and says, ‘give me a hundred thousand roubles, and i will grow
 rich in no time,’ do i believe, for he is likely to meet with failure
 rather than with the success of which he is so assured. ‘tis with a
 kopeck, and with a kopeck only, that a man must begin.”
 “if that is so, i shall grow rich,” said chichikov, involuntarily
 remembering the dead souls. “for of a surety i began with nothing.”
 “constantine, pray allow paul ivanovitch to retire to rest,” put in the
 lady of the house. “it is high time, and i am sure you have talked
 enough.”
 “yes, beyond a doubt you will grow rich,” continued kostanzhoglo, without
 heeding his wife. “for towards you there will run rivers and rivers of
 gold, until you will not know what to do with all your gains.”
 as though spellbound, chichikov sat in an aureate world of ever-growing
 dreams and fantasies. all his thoughts were in a whirl, and on a carpet of
 future wealth his tumultuous imagination was weaving golden patterns,
 while ever in his ears were ringing the words, “towards you there will run
 rivers and rivers of gold.”
 “really, constantine, do allow paul ivanovitch to go to bed.”
 “what on earth is the matter?” retorted the master of the household
 testily. “pray go yourself if you wish to.” then he stopped short, for the
 snoring of platon was filling the whole room, and also—outrivalling
 it—that of the dog yarb. this caused kostanzhoglo to realise that
 bedtime really had arrived; wherefore, after he had shaken platon out of
 his slumbers, and bidden chichikov good night, all dispersed to their
 several chambers, and became plunged in sleep.
 all, that is to say, except chichikov, whose thoughts remained wakeful,
 and who kept wondering and wondering how best he could become the owner,
 not of a fictitious, but of a real, estate. the conversation with his host
 had made everything clear, had made the possibility of his acquiring
 riches manifest, had made the difficult art of estate management at once
 easy and understandable; until it would seem as though particularly was
 his nature adapted for mastering the art in question. all that he would
 need to do would be to mortgage the dead souls, and then to set up a
 genuine establishment. already he saw himself acting and administering as
 kostanzhoglo had advised him—energetically, and through personal
 oversight, and undertaking nothing new until the old had been thoroughly
 learned, and viewing everything with his own eyes, and making himself
 familiar with each member of his peasantry, and abjuring all
 superfluities, and giving himself up to hard work and husbandry. yes,
 already could he taste the pleasure which would be his when he had built
 up a complete industrial organisation, and the springs of the industrial
 machine were in vigorous working order, and each had become able to
 reinforce the other. labour should be kept in active operation, and, even
 as, in a mill, flour comes flowing from grain, so should cash, and yet
 more cash, come flowing from every atom of refuse and remnant. and all the
 while he could see before him the landowner who was one of the leading men
 in russia, and for whom he had conceived such an unbounded respect.
 hitherto only for rank or for opulence had chichikov respected a man—never
 for mere intellectual power; but now he made a first exception in favour
 of kostanzhoglo, seeing that he felt that nothing undertaken by his host
 could possibly come to naught. and another project which was occupying
 chichikov’s mind was the project of purchasing the estate of a certain
 landowner named khlobuev. already chichikov had at his disposal ten
 thousand roubles, and a further fifteen thousand he would try and borrow
 of kostanzhoglo (seeing that the latter had himself said that he was
 prepared to help any one who really desired to grow rich); while, as for
 the remainder, he would either raise the sum by mortgaging the estate or
 force khlobuev to wait for it—just to tell him to resort to the
 courts if such might be his pleasure.
 long did our hero ponder the scheme; until at length the slumber which
 had, these four hours past, been holding the rest of the household in its
 embraces enfolded also chichikov, and he sank into oblivion.
 next day, with platon and constantine, chichikov set forth to interview
 khlobuev, the owner whose estate constantine had consented to help
 chichikov to purchase with a non-interest-bearing, uncovenanted loan of
 ten thousand roubles. naturally, our hero was in the highest of spirits.
 for the first fifteen versts or so the road led through forest land and
 tillage belonging to platon and his brother-in-law; but directly the limit
 of these domains was reached, forest land began to be replaced with swamp,
 and tillage with waste. also, the village in khlobuev’s estate had about
 it a deserted air, and as for the proprietor himself, he was discovered in
 a state of drowsy dishevelment, having not long left his bed. a man of
 about forty, he had his cravat crooked, his frockcoat adorned with a large
 stain, and one of his boots worn through. nevertheless he seemed delighted
 to see his visitors.
 “what?” he exclaimed. “constantine thedorovitch and platon mikhalitch?
 really i must rub my eyes! never again in this world did i look to see
 callers arriving. as a rule, folk avoid me like the devil, for they cannot
 disabuse their minds of the idea that i am going to ask them for a loan.
 yes, it is my own fault, i know, but what would you? to the end will swine
 cheat swine. pray excuse my costume. you will observe that my boots are in
 holes. but how can i afford to get them mended?”
 “never mind,” said constantine. “we have come on business only. may i
 present to you a possible purchaser of your estate, in the person of paul
 ivanovitch chichikov?”
 “i am indeed glad to meet you!” was khlobuev’s response. “pray shake hands
 with me, paul ivanovitch.”
 chichikov offered one hand, but not both.
 “i can show you a property worth your attention,” went on the master of
 the estate. “may i ask if you have yet dined?”
 “yes, we have,” put in constantine, desirous of escaping as soon as
 possible. “to save you further trouble, let us go and view the estate at
 once.”
 “very well,” replied khlobuev. “pray come and inspect my irregularities
 and futilities. you have done well to dine beforehand, for not so much as
 a fowl is left in the place, so dire are the extremities to which you see
 me reduced.”
 sighing deeply, he took platon by the arm (it was clear that he did not
 look for any sympathy from constantine) and walked ahead, while
 constantine and chichikov followed.
 “things are going hard with me, platon mikhalitch,” continued khlobuev.
 “how hard you cannot imagine. no money have i, no food, no boots. were i
 still young and a bachelor, it would have come easy to me to live on bread
 and cheese; but when a man is growing old, and has got a wife and five
 children, such trials press heavily upon him, and, in spite of himself,
 his spirits sink.”
 “but, should you succeed in selling the estate, that would help to put you
 right, would it not?” said platon.
 “how could it do so?” replied khlobuev with a despairing gesture. “what i
 might get for the property would have to go towards discharging my debts,
 and i should find myself left with less than a thousand roubles besides.”
 “then what do you intend to do?”
 “god knows.”
 “but is there nothing to which you could set your hand in order to clear
 yourself of your difficulties?”
 “how could there be?”
 “well, you might accept a government post.”
 “become a provincial secretary, you mean? how could i obtain such a post?
 they would not offer me one of the meanest possible kind. even supposing
 that they did, how could i live on a salary of five hundred roubles—i
 who have a wife and five children?”
 “then try and obtain a bailiff’s post.”
 “who would entrust their property to a man who has squandered his own
 estate?”
 “nevertheless, when death and destitution threaten, a man must either do
 something or starve. shall i ask my brother to use his influence to
 procure you a post?”
 “no, no, platon mikhalitch,” sighed khlobuev, gripping the other’s hand.
 “i am no longer serviceable—i am grown old before my time, and find
 that liver and rheumatism are paying me for the sins of my youth. why
 should the government be put to a loss on my account?—not to speak
 of the fact that for every salaried post there are countless numbers of
 applicants. god forbid that, in order to provide me with a livelihood
 further burdens should be imposed upon an impoverished public!”
 “such are the results of improvident management!” thought platon to
 himself. “the disease is even worse than my slothfulness.”
 meanwhile kostanzhoglo, walking by chichikov’s side, was almost taking
 leave of his senses.
 “look at it!” he cried with a wave of his hand. “see to what wretchedness
 the peasant has become reduced! should cattle disease come, khlobuev will
 have nothing to fall back upon, but will be forced to sell his all—to
 leave the peasant without a horse, and therefore without the means to
 labour, even though the loss of a single day’s work may take years of
 labour to rectify. meanwhile it is plain that the local peasant has become
 a mere dissolute, lazy drunkard. give a muzhik enough to live upon for
 twelve months without working, and you will corrupt him for ever, so
 inured to rags and vagrancy will he grow. and what is the good of that
 piece of pasture there—of that piece on the further side of those
 huts? it is a mere flooded tract. were it mine, i should put it under
 flax, and clear five thousand roubles, or else sow it with turnips, and
 clear, perhaps, four thousand. and see how the rye is drooping, and nearly
 laid. as for wheat, i am pretty sure that he has not sown any. look, too,
 at those ravines! were they mine, they would be standing under timber
 which even a rook could not top. to think of wasting such quantities of
 land! where land wouldn’t bear corn, i should dig it up, and plant it with
 vegetables. what ought to be done is that khlobuev ought to take a spade
 into his own hands, and to set his wife and children and servants to do
 the same; and even if they died of the exertion, they would at least die
 doing their duty, and not through guzzling at the dinner table.”
 this said, kostanzhoglo spat, and his brow flushed with grim indignation.
 presently they reached an elevation whence the distant flashing of a
 river, with its flood waters and subsidiary streams, caught the eye,
 while, further off, a portion of general betristchev’s homestead could be
 discerned among the trees, and, over it, a blue, densely wooded hill which
 chichikov guessed to be the spot where tientietnikov’s mansion was
 situated.
 “this is where i should plant timber,” said chichikov. “and, regarded as a
 site for a manor house, the situation could scarcely be beaten for beauty
 of view.”
 “you seem to get great store upon views and beauty,” remarked kostanzhoglo
 with reproof in his tone. “should you pay too much attention to those
 things, you might find yourself without crops or view. utility should be
 placed first, not beauty. beauty will come of itself. take, for example,
 towns. the fairest and most beautiful towns are those which have built
 themselves—those in which each man has built to suit his own
 exclusive circumstances and needs; whereas towns which men have
 constructed on regular, string-taut lines are no better than collections
 of barracks. put beauty aside, and look only to what is necessary.”
 “yes, but to me it would always be irksome to have to wait. all the time
 that i was doing so i should be hungering to see in front of me the
 sort of prospect which i prefer.”
 “come, come! are you a man of twenty-five—you who have served as a
 tchinovnik in st. petersburg? have patience, have patience. for six years
 work, and work hard. plant, sow, and dig the earth without taking a
 moment’s rest. it will be difficult, i know—yes, difficult indeed;
 but at the end of that time, if you have thoroughly stirred the soil, the
 land will begin to help you as nothing else can do. that is to say, over
 and above your seventy or so pairs of hands, there will begin to assist in
 the work seven hundred pairs of hands which you cannot see. thus
 everything will be multiplied tenfold. i myself have ceased even to have
 to lift a finger, for whatsoever needs to be done gets done of itself.
 nature loves patience: always remember that. it is a law given her of god
 himself, who has blessed all those who are strong to endure.”
 “to hear your words is to be both encouraged and strengthened,” said
 chichikov. to this kostanzhoglo made no reply, but presently went on:
 “and see how that piece of land has been ploughed! to stay here longer is
 more than i can do. for me, to have to look upon such want of orderliness
 and foresight is death. finish your business with khlobuev without me, and
 whatsoever you do, get this treasure out of that fool’s hands as quickly
 as possible, for he is dishonouring god’s gifts.”
 and kostanzhoglo, his face dark with the rage that was seething in his
 excitable soul, left chichikov, and caught up the owner of the
 establishment.
 “what, constantine thedorovitch?” cried khlobuev in astonishment. “just
 arrived, you are going already?”
 “yes; i cannot help it; urgent business requires me at home.” and entering
 his gig, kostanzhoglo drove rapidly away. somehow khlobuev seemed to
 divine the cause of his sudden departure.
 “it was too much for him,” he remarked. “an agriculturist of that kind
 does not like to have to look upon the results of such feckless management
 as mine. would you believe it, paul ivanovitch, but this year i have been
 unable to sow any wheat! am i not a fine husbandman? there was no seed for
 the purpose, nor yet anything with which to prepare the ground. no, i am
 not like constantine thedorovitch, who, i hear, is a perfect napoleon in
 his particular line. again and again the thought occurs to me, ‘why has so
 much intellect been put into that head, and only a drop or two into my own
 dull pate?’ take care of that puddle, gentlemen. i have told my peasants
 to lay down planks for the spring, but they have not done so. nevertheless
 my heart aches for the poor fellows, for they need a good example, and
 what sort of an example am i? how am i to give them orders? pray
 take them under your charge, paul ivanovitch, for i cannot teach them
 orderliness and method when i myself lack both. as a matter of fact, i
 should have given them their freedom long ago, had there been any use in
 my doing so; for even i can see that peasants must first be afforded the
 means of earning a livelihood before they can live. what they need is a
 stern, yet just, master who shall live with them, day in, day out, and set
 them an example of tireless energy. the present-day russian—i know
 of it myself—is helpless without a driver. without one he falls
 asleep, and the mould grows over him.”
 “yet i cannot understand why he should fall asleep and grow mouldy in that
 fashion,” said platon. “why should he need continual surveillance to keep
 him from degenerating into a drunkard and a good-for-nothing?”
 “the cause is lack of enlightenment,” said chichikov.
 “possibly—only god knows. yet enlightenment has reached us right
 enough. do we not attend university lectures and everything else that is
 befitting? take my own education. i learnt not only the usual things, but
 also the art of spending money upon the latest refinement, the latest
 amenity—the art of familiarising oneself with whatsoever money can
 buy. how, then, can it be said that i was educated foolishly? and my
 comrades’ education was the same. a few of them succeeded in annexing the
 cream of things, for the reason that they had the wit to do so, and the
 rest spent their time in doing their best to ruin their health and
 squander their money. often i think there is no hope for the present-day
 russian. while desiring to do everything, he accomplishes nothing. one day
 he will scheme to begin a new mode of existence, a new dietary; yet before
 evening he will have so over-eaten himself as to be unable to speak or do
 aught but sit staring like an owl. the same with every one.”
 “quite so,” agreed chichikov with a smile. “‘tis everywhere the same
 story.”
 “to tell the truth, we are not born to common sense. i doubt whether
 russia has ever produced a really sensible man. for my own part, if i see
 my neighbour living a regular life, and making money, and saving it, i
 begin to distrust him, and to feel certain that in old age, if not before,
 he too will be led astray by the devil—led astray in a moment. yes,
 whether or not we be educated, there is something we lack. but what that
 something is passes my understanding.”
 on the return journey the prospect was the same as before. everywhere the
 same slovenliness, the same disorder, was displaying itself unadorned: the
 only difference being that a fresh puddle had formed in the middle of the
 village street. this want and neglect was noticeable in the peasants’
 quarters equally with the quarters of the barin. in the village a furious
 woman in greasy sackcloth was beating a poor young wench within an ace of
 her life, and at the same time devoting some third person to the care of
 all the devils in hell; further away a couple of peasants were stoically
 contemplating the virago—one scratching his rump as he did so, and
 the other yawning. the same yawn was discernible in the buildings, for not
 a roof was there but had a gaping hole in it. as he gazed at the scene
 platon himself yawned. patch was superimposed upon patch, and, in place of
 a roof, one hut had a piece of wooden fencing, while its crumbling
 window-frames were stayed with sticks purloined from the barin’s barn.
 evidently the system of upkeep in vogue was the system employed in the
 case of trishkin’s coat—the system of cutting up the cuffs and the
 collar into mendings for the elbows.
 “no, i do not admire your way of doing things,” was chichikov’s unspoken
 comment when the inspection had been concluded and the party had
 re-entered the house. everywhere in the latter the visitors were struck
 with the way in which poverty went with glittering, fashionable profusion.
 on a writing-table lay a volume of shakespeare, and, on an occasional
 table, a carved ivory back-scratcher. the hostess, too, was elegantly and
 fashionably attired, and devoted her whole conversation to the town and
 the local theatre. lastly, the children—bright, merry little things—were
 well-dressed both as regards boys and girls. yet far better would it have
 been for them if they had been clad in plain striped smocks, and running
 about the courtyard like peasant children. presently a visitor arrived in
 the shape of a chattering, gossiping woman; whereupon the hostess carried
 her off to her own portion of the house, and, the children following them,
 the men found themselves alone.
 “how much do you want for the property?” asked chichikov of khlobuev. “i
 am afraid i must request you to name the lowest possible sum, since i find
 the estate in a far worse condition than i had expected to do.”
 “yes, it is in a terrible state,” agreed khlobuev. “nor is that the whole
 of the story. that is to say, i will not conceal from you the fact that,
 out of a hundred souls registered at the last revision, only fifty
 survive, so terrible have been the ravages of cholera. and of these,
 again, some have absconded; wherefore they too must be reckoned as dead,
 seeing that, were one to enter process against them, the costs would end
 in the property having to pass en bloc to the legal authorities. for these
 reasons i am asking only thirty-five thousand roubles for the estate.”
 chichikov (it need hardly be said) started to haggle.
 “thirty-five thousand?” he cried. “come, come! surely you will accept
 twenty-five thousand?”
 this was too much for platon’s conscience.
 “now, now, paul ivanovitch!” he exclaimed. “take the property at the price
 named, and have done with it. the estate is worth at least that amount—so
 much so that, should you not be willing to give it, my brother-in-law and
 i will club together to effect the purchase.”
 “that being so,” said chichikov, taken aback, “i beg to agree to the price
 in question. at the same time, i must ask you to allow me to defer payment
 of one-half of the purchase money until a year from now.”
 “no, no, paul ivanovitch. under no circumstances could i do that. pay me
 half now, and the rest in...  you see, i need the money for
 the redemption of the mortgage.”
 “that places me in a difficulty,” remarked chichikov. “ten thousand
 roubles is all that at the moment i have available.” as a matter of fact,
 this was not true, seeing that, counting also the money which he had
 borrowed of kostanzhoglo, he had at his disposal twenty thousand. his real
 reason for hesitating was that he disliked the idea of making so large a
 payment in a lump sum.
 “i must repeat my request, paul ivanovitch,” said khlobuev, “—namely,
 that you pay me at least fifteen thousand immediately.”
 “the odd five thousand i will lend you,” put in platon to
 chichikov.
 “indeed!” exclaimed chichikov as he reflected: “so he also lends money!”
 in the end chichikov’s dispatch-box was brought from the koliaska, and
 khlobuev received thence ten thousand roubles, together with a promise
 that the remaining five thousand should be forthcoming on the morrow;
 though the promise was given only after chichikov had first proposed that
 three thousand should be brought on the day named, and the rest be left
 over for two or three days longer, if not for a still more protracted
 period. the truth was that paul ivanovitch hated parting with money. no
 matter how urgent a situation might have been, he would still have
 preferred to pay a sum to-morrow rather than to-day. in other words, he
 acted as we all do, for we all like keeping a petitioner waiting. “let him
 rub his back in the hall for a while,” we say. “surely he can bide his
 time a little?” yet of the fact that every hour may be precious to the
 poor wretch, and that his business may suffer from the delay, we take no
 account. “good sir,” we say, “pray come again to-morrow. to-day i have no
 time to spare you.”
 “where do you intend henceforth to live?” inquired platon. “have you any
 other property to which you can retire?”
 “no,” replied khlobuev. “i shall remove to the town, where i possess a
 small villa. that would have been necessary, in any case, for the
 children’s sake. you see, they must have instruction in god’s word, and
 also lessons in music and dancing; and not for love or money can these
 things be procured in the country.
 “nothing to eat, yet dancing lessons for his children!” reflected
 chichikov.
 “an extraordinary man!” was platon’s unspoken comment.
 “however, we must contrive to wet our bargain somehow,” continued
 khlobuev. “hi, kirushka! bring that bottle of champagne.”
 “nothing to eat, yet champagne to drink!” reflected chichikov. as for
 platon, he did not know what to think.
 in khlobuev’s eyes it was de rigueur that he should provide a guest with
 champagne; but, though he had sent to the town for some, he had been met
 with a blank refusal to forward even a bottle of kvass on credit. only the
 discovery of a french dealer who had recently transferred his business
 from st. petersburg, and opened a connection on a system of general
 credit, saved the situation by placing khlobuev under the obligation of
 patronising him.
 the company drank three glassfuls apiece, and so grew more cheerful. in
 particular did khlobuev expand, and wax full of civility and friendliness,
 and scatter witticisms and anecdotes to right and left. what knowledge of
 men and the world did his utterances display! how well and accurately
 could he divine things! with what appositeness did he sketch the
 neighbouring landowners! how clearly he exposed their faults and failings!
 how thoroughly he knew the story of certain ruined gentry—the story
 of how, why, and through what cause they had fallen upon evil days! with
 what comic originality could he describe their little habits and customs!
 in short, his guests found themselves charmed with his discourse, and felt
 inclined to vote him a man of first-rate intellect.
 “what most surprises me,” said chichikov, “is how, in view of your
 ability, you come to be so destitute of means or resources.”
 “but i have plenty of both,” said khlobuev, and with that went on to
 deliver himself of a perfect avalanche of projects. yet those projects
 proved to be so uncouth, so clumsy, so little the outcome of a knowledge
 of men and things, that his hearers could only shrug their shoulders and
 mentally exclaim: “good lord! what a difference between worldly wisdom and
 the capacity to use it!” in every case the projects in question were based
 upon the imperative necessity of at once procuring from somewhere two
 hundred—or at least one hundred—thousand roubles. that done
 (so khlobuev averred), everything would fall into its proper place, the
 holes in his pockets would become stopped, his income would be quadrupled,
 and he would find himself in a position to liquidate his debts in full.
 nevertheless he ended by saying: “what would you advise me to do? i fear
 that the philanthropist who would lend me two hundred thousand roubles or
 even a hundred thousand, does not exist. it is not god’s will that he
 should.”
 “good gracious!” inwardly ejaculated chichikov. “to suppose that god would
 send such a fool two hundred thousand roubles!”
 “however,” went on khlobuev, “i possess an aunt worth three millions—a
 pious old woman who gives freely to churches and monasteries, but finds a
 difficulty in helping her neighbour. at the same time, she is a lady of
 the old school, and worth having a peep at. her canaries alone number four
 hundred, and, in addition, there is an army of pug-dogs, hangers-on, and
 servants. even the youngest of the servants is sixty, but she calls them
 all ‘young fellows,’ and if a guest happens to offend her during dinner,
 she orders them to leave him out when handing out the dishes. there’s a
 woman for you!”
 platon laughed.
 “and what may her family name be?” asked chichikov. “and where does she
 live?”
 “she lives in the county town, and her name is alexandra ivanovna
 khanasarov.”
 “then why do you not apply to her?” asked platon earnestly. “it seems to
 me that, once she realised the position of your family, she could not
 possibly refuse you.”
 “alas! nothing is to be looked for from that quarter,” replied khlobuev.
 “my aunt is of a very stubborn disposition—a perfect stone of a
 woman. moreover, she has around her a sufficient band of favourites
 already. in particular is there a fellow who is aiming for a governorship,
 and to that end has managed to insinuate himself into the circle of her
 kinsfolk. by the way,” the speaker added, turning to platon, “would you do
 me a favour? next week i am giving a dinner to the associated guilds of
 the town.”
 platon stared. he had been unaware that both in our capitals and in our
 provincial towns there exists a class of men whose lives are an enigma—men
 who, though they will seem to have exhausted their substance, and to have
 become enmeshed in debt, will suddenly be reported as in funds, and on the
 point of giving a dinner! and though, at this dinner, the guests will
 declare that the festival is bound to be their host’s last fling, and that
 for a certainty he will be haled to prison on the morrow, ten years or
 more will elapse, and the rascal will still be at liberty, even though, in
 the meanwhile, his debts will have increased!
 in the same way did the conduct of khlobuev’s menage afford a curious
 phenomenon, for one day the house would be the scene of a solemn te deum,
 performed by a priest in vestments, and the next of a stage play performed
 by a troupe of french actors in theatrical costume. again, one day would
 see not a morsel of bread in the house, and the next day a banquet and
 generous largesse given to a party of artists and sculptors. during these
 seasons of scarcity (sufficiently severe to have led any one but khlobuev
 to seek suicide by hanging or shooting), the master of the house would be
 preserved from rash action by his strongly religious disposition, which,
 contriving in some curious way to conform with his irregular mode of life,
 enabled him to fall back upon reading the lives of saints, ascetics, and
 others of the type which has risen superior to its misfortunes. and at
 such times his spirit would become softened, his thoughts full of
 gentleness, and his eyes wet with tears; he would fall to saying his
 prayers, and invariably some strange coincidence would bring an answer
 thereto in the shape of an unexpected measure of assistance. that is to
 say, some former friend of his would remember him, and send him a trifle
 in the way of money; or else some female visitor would be moved by his
 story to let her impulsive, generous heart proffer him a handsome gift; or
 else a suit whereof tidings had never even reached his ears would end by
 being decided in his favour. and when that happened he would reverently
 acknowledge the immensity of the mercy of providence, gratefully tender
 thanksgiving for the same, and betake himself again to his irregular mode
 of existence.
 “somehow i feel sorry for the man,” said platon when he and chichikov had
 taken leave of their host, and left the house.
 “perhaps so, but he is a hopeless prodigal,” replied the other.
 “personally i find it impossible to compassionate such fellows.”
 and with that the pair ceased to devote another thought to khlobuev. in
 the case of platon, this was because he contemplated the fortunes of his
 fellows with the lethargic, half-somnolent eye which he turned upon all
 the rest of the world; for though the sight of distress of others would
 cause his heart to contract and feel full of sympathy, the impression thus
 produced never sank into the depths of his being. accordingly, before many
 minutes were over he had ceased to bestow a single thought upon his late
 host. with chichikov, however, things were different. whereas platon had
 ceased to think of khlobuev no more than he had ceased to think of
 himself, chichikov’s mind had strayed elsewhere, for the reason that it
 had become taken up with grave meditation on the subject of the purchase
 just made. suddenly finding himself no longer a fictitious proprietor, but
 the owner of a real, an actually existing, estate, he became
 contemplative, and his plans and ideas assumed such a serious vein as
 imparted to his features an unconsciously important air.
 “patience and hard work!” he muttered to himself. “the thing will not be
 difficult, for with those two requisites i have been familiar from the
 days of my swaddling clothes. yes, no novelty will they be to me. yet, in
 middle age, shall i be able to compass the patience whereof i was capable
 in my youth?”
 however, no matter how he regarded the future, and no matter from what
 point of view he considered his recent acquisition, he could see nothing
 but advantage likely to accrue from the bargain. for one thing, he might
 be able to proceed so that, first the whole of the estate should be
 mortgaged, and then the better portions of land sold outright. or he might
 so contrive matters as to manage the property for a while (and thus become
 a landowner like kostanzhoglo, whose advice, as his neighbour and his
 benefactor, he intended always to follow), and then to dispose of the
 property by private treaty (provided he did not wish to continue his
 ownership), and still to retain in his hands the dead and abandoned souls.
 and another possible coup occurred to his mind. that is to say, he might
 contrive to withdraw from the district without having repaid kostanzhoglo
 at all! truly a splendid idea! yet it is only fair to say that the idea
 was not one of chichikov’s own conception. rather, it had presented itself—mocking,
 laughing, and winking—unbidden. yet the impudent, the wanton thing!
 who is the procreator of suddenly born ideas of the kind? the thought that
 he was now a real, an actual, proprietor instead of a fictitious—that
 he was now a proprietor of real land, real rights of timber and pasture,
 and real serfs who existed not only in the imagination, but also in
 veritable actuality—greatly elated our hero. so he took to dancing
 up and down in his seat, to rubbing his hands together, to winking at
 himself, to holding his fist, trumpet-wise, to his mouth (while making
 believe to execute a march), and even to uttering aloud such encouraging
 nicknames and phrases as “bulldog” and “little fat capon.” then suddenly
 recollecting that he was not alone, he hastened to moderate his behaviour
 and endeavoured to stifle the endless flow of his good spirits; with the
 result that when platon, mistaking certain sounds for utterances addressed
 to himself, inquired what his companion had said, the latter retained the
 presence of mind to reply “nothing.”
 presently, as chichikov gazed about him, he saw that for some time past
 the koliaska had been skirting a beautiful wood, and that on either side
 the road was bordered with an edging of birch trees, the tenderly-green,
 recently-opened leaves of which caused their tall, slender trunks to show
 up with the whiteness of a snowdrift. likewise nightingales were warbling
 from the recesses of the foliage, and some wood tulips were glowing yellow
 in the grass. next (and almost before chichikov had realised how he came
 to be in such a beautiful spot when, but a moment before, there had been
 visible only open fields) there glimmered among the trees the stony
 whiteness of a church, with, on the further side of it, the intermittent,
 foliage-buried line of a fence; while from the upper end of a village
 street there was advancing to meet the vehicle a gentleman with a cap on
 his head, a knotted cudgel in his hands, and a slender-limbed english dog
 by his side.
 “this is my brother,” said platon. “stop, coachman.” and he descended from
 the koliaska, while chichikov followed his example. yarb and the strange
 dog saluted one another, and then the active, thin-legged, slender-tongued
 azor relinquished his licking of yarb’s blunt jowl, licked platon’s hands
 instead, and, leaping upon chichikov, slobbered right into his ear.
 the two brothers embraced.
 “really, platon,” said the gentleman (whose name was vassili), “what do
 you mean by treating me like this?”
 “how so?” said platon indifferently.
 “what? for three days past i have seen and heard nothing of you! a groom
 from pietukh’s brought your cob home, and told me you had departed on an
 expedition with some barin. at least you might have sent me word as to
 your destination and the probable length of your absence. what made you
 act so? god knows what i have not been wondering!”
 “does it matter?” rejoined platon. “i forgot to send you word, and we have
 been no further than constantine’s (who, with our sister, sends you his
 greeting). by the way, may i introduce paul ivanovitch chichikov?”
 the pair shook hands with one another. then, doffing their caps, they
 embraced.
 “what sort of man is this chichikov?” thought vassili. “as a rule my
 brother platon is not over-nice in his choice of acquaintances.” and,
 eyeing our hero as narrowly as civility permitted, he saw that his
 appearance was that of a perfectly respectable individual.
 chichikov returned vassili’s scrutiny with a similar observance of the
 dictates of civility, and perceived that he was shorter than platon, that
 his hair was of a darker shade, and that his features, though less
 handsome, contained far more life, animation, and kindliness than did his
 brother’s. clearly he indulged in less dreaming, though that was an aspect
 which chichikov little regarded.
 “i have made up my mind to go touring our holy russia with paul
 ivanovitch,” said platon. “perhaps it will rid me of my melancholy.”
 “what has made you come to such a sudden decision?” asked the perplexed
 vassili (very nearly he added: “fancy going travelling with a man whose
 acquaintance you have just made, and who may turn out to be a rascal or
 the devil knows what!” but, in spite of his distrust, he contented himself
 with another covert scrutiny of chichikov, and this time came to the
 conclusion that there was no fault to be found with his exterior).
 the party turned to the right, and entered the gates of an ancient
 courtyard attached to an old-fashioned house of a type no longer built—the
 type which has huge gables supporting a high-pitched roof. in the centre
 of the courtyard two great lime trees covered half the surrounding space
 with shade, while beneath them were ranged a number of wooden benches, and
 the whole was encircled with a ring of blossoming lilacs and cherry trees
 which, like a beaded necklace, reinforced the wooden fence, and almost
 buried it beneath their clusters of leaves and flowers. the house, too,
 stood almost concealed by this greenery, except that the front door and
 the windows peered pleasantly through the foliage, and that here and there
 between the stems of the trees there could be caught glimpses of the
 kitchen regions, the storehouses, and the cellar. lastly, around the whole
 stood a grove, from the recesses of which came the echoing songs of
 nightingales.
 involuntarily the place communicated to the soul a sort of quiet, restful
 feeling, so eloquently did it speak of that care-free period when every
 one lived on good terms with his neighbour, and all was simple and
 unsophisticated. vassili invited chichikov to seat himself, and the party
 approached, for that purpose, the benches under the lime trees; after
 which a youth of about seventeen, and clad in a red shirt, brought
 decanters containing various kinds of kvass (some of them as thick as
 syrup, and others hissing like aerated lemonade), deposited the same upon
 the table, and, taking up a spade which he had left leaning against a
 tree, moved away towards the garden. the reason of this was that in the
 brothers’ household, as in that of kostanzhoglo, no servants were kept,
 since the whole staff were rated as gardeners, and performed that duty in
 rotation—vassili holding that domestic service was not a specialised
 calling, but one to which any one might contribute a hand, and therefore
 one which did not require special menials to be kept for the purpose.
 moreover, he held that the average russian peasant remains active and
 willing (rather than lazy) only so long as he wears a shirt and a
 peasant’s smock; but that as soon as ever he finds himself put into a
 german tailcoat, he becomes awkward, sluggish, indolent, disinclined to
 change his vest or take a bath, fond of sleeping in his clothes, and
 certain to breed fleas and bugs under the german apparel. and it may be
 that vassili was right. at all events, the brothers’ peasantry were
 exceedingly well clad—the women, in particular, having their
 head-dresses spangled with gold, and the sleeves of their blouses
 embroidered after the fashion of a turkish shawl.
 “you see here the species of kvass for which our house has long been
 famous,” said vassili to chichikov. the latter poured himself out a
 glassful from the first decanter which he lighted upon, and found the
 contents to be linden honey of a kind never tasted by him even in poland,
 seeing that it had a sparkle like that of champagne, and also an
 effervescence which sent a pleasant spray from the mouth into the nose.
 “nectar!” he proclaimed. then he took some from a second decanter. it
 proved to be even better than the first. “a beverage of beverages!” he
 exclaimed. “at your respected brother-in-law’s i tasted the finest syrup
 which has ever come my way, but here i have tasted the very finest kvass.”
 “yet the recipe for the syrup also came from here,” said vassili, “seeing
 that my sister took it with her. by the way, to what part of the country,
 and to what places, are you thinking of travelling?”
 “to tell the truth,” replied chichikov, rocking himself to and fro on the
 bench, and smoothing his knee with his hand, and gently inclining his
 head, “i am travelling less on my own affairs than on the affairs of
 others. that is to say, general betristchev, an intimate friend, and, i
 might add, a generous benefactor of mine, has charged me with commissions
 to some of his relatives. nevertheless, though relatives are relatives, i
 may say that i am travelling on my own account as well, in that, in
 addition to possible benefit to my health, i desire to see the world and
 the whirligig of humanity, which constitute, to so speak, a living book, a
 second course of education.”
 vassili took thought. “the man speaks floridly,” he reflected, “yet his
 words contain a certain element of truth.” after a moment’s silence he
 added to platon: “i am beginning to think that the tour might help you to
 bestir yourself. at present you are in a condition of mental slumber. you
 have fallen asleep, not so much from weariness or satiety, as through a
 lack of vivid perceptions and impressions. for myself, i am your complete
 antithesis. i should be only too glad if i could feel less acutely, if i
 could take things less to heart.”
 “emotion has become a disease with you,” said platon. “you seek your own
 troubles, and make your own anxieties.”
 “how can you say that when ready-made anxieties greet one at every step?”
 exclaimed vassili. “for example, have you heard of the trick which
 lienitsin has just played us—of his seizing the piece of vacant land
 whither our peasants resort for their sports? that piece i would not sell
 for all the money in the world. it has long been our peasants’
 play-ground, and all the traditions of our village are bound up with it.
 moreover, for me, old custom is a sacred thing for which i would gladly
 sacrifice everything else.”
 “lienitsin cannot have known of this, or he would not have seized the
 land,” said platon. “he is a newcomer, just arrived from st. petersburg. a
 few words of explanation ought to meet the case.”
 “but he does know of what i have stated; he does know of it. purposely i
 sent him word to that affect, yet he has returned me the rudest of
 answers.”
 “then go yourself and explain matters to him.”
 “no, i will not do that; he has tried to carry off things with too high a
 hand. but you can go if you like.”
 “i would certainly go were it not that i scarcely like to interfere. also,
 i am a man whom he could easily hoodwink and outwit.”
 “would it help you if i were to go?” put in chichikov. “pray
 enlighten me as to the matter.”
 vassili glanced at the speaker, and thought to himself: “what a passion
 the man has for travelling!”
 “yes, pray give me an idea of the kind of fellow,” repeated chichikov,
 “and also outline to me the affair.”
 “i should be ashamed to trouble you with such an unpleasant commission,”
 replied vassili. “he is a man whom i take to be an utter rascal.
 originally a member of a family of plain dvoriane in this province, he
 entered the civil service in st. petersburg, then married some one’s
 natural daughter in that city, and has returned to lord it with a high
 hand. i cannot bear the tone he adopts. our folk are by no means fools.
 they do not look upon the current fashion as the tsar’s ukaz any more than
 they look upon st. petersburg as the church.”
 “naturally,” said chichikov. “but tell me more of the particulars of the
 quarrel.”
 “they are these. he needs additional land and, had he not acted as he has
 done, i would have given him some land elsewhere for nothing; but, as it
 is, the pestilent fellow has taken it into his head to—”
 “i think i had better go and have a talk with him. that might settle the
 affair. several times have people charged me with similar commissions, and
 never have they repented of it. general betristchev is an example.”
 “nevertheless i am ashamed that you should be put to the annoyance of
 having to converse with such a fellow.”
 [at this point there occurs a long hiatus.]
 “and above all things, such a transaction would need to be carried through
 in secret,” said chichikov. “true, the law does not forbid such things,
 but there is always the risk of a scandal.”
 “quite so, quite so,” said lienitsin with head bent down.
 “then we agree!” exclaimed chichikov. “how charming! as i say, my business
 is both legal and illegal. though needing to effect a mortgage, i desire
 to put no one to the risk of having to pay the two roubles on each living
 soul; wherefore i have conceived the idea of relieving landowners of that
 distasteful obligation by acquiring dead and absconded souls who have
 failed to disappear from the revision list. this enables me at once to
 perform an act of christian charity and to remove from the shoulders of
 our more impoverished proprietors the burden of tax-payment upon souls of
 the kind specified. should you yourself care to do business with me, we
 will draw up a formal purchase agreement as though the souls in question
 were still alive.”
 “but it would be such a curious arrangement,” muttered lienitsin, moving
 his chair and himself a little further away. “it would be an arrangement
 which, er—er—”
 “would involve you in no scandal whatever, seeing that the affair would be
 carried through in secret. moreover, between friends who are well-disposed
 towards one another—”
 “nevertheless—”
 chichikov adopted a firmer and more decided tone. “i repeat that there
 would be no scandal,” he said. “the transaction would take place as
 between good friends, and as between friends of mature age, and as between
 friends of good status, and as between friends who know how to keep their
 own counsel.” and, so saying, he looked his interlocutor frankly and
 generously in the eyes.
 nevertheless lienitsin’s resourcefulness and acumen in business matters
 failed to relieve his mind of a certain perplexity—and the less so
 since he had contrived to become caught in his own net. yet, in general,
 he possessed neither a love for nor a talent for underhand dealings, and,
 had not fate and circumstances favoured chichikov by causing lienitsin’s
 wife to enter the room at that moment, things might have turned out very
 differently from what they did. madame was a pale, thin,
 insignificant-looking young lady, but none the less a lady who wore her
 clothes a la st. petersburg, and cultivated the society of persons who
 were unimpeachably comme il faut. behind her, borne in a nurse’s arms,
 came the first fruits of the love of husband and wife. adopting his most
 telling method of approach (the method accompanied with a sidelong
 inclination of the head and a sort of hop), chichikov hastened to greet
 the lady from the metropolis, and then the baby. at first the latter
 started to bellow disapproval, but the words “agoo, agoo, my pet!” added
 to a little cracking of the fingers and a sight of a beautiful seal on a
 watch chain, enabled chichikov to weedle the infant into his arms; after
 which he fell to swinging it up and down until he had contrived to raise a
 smile on its face—a circumstance which greatly delighted the
 parents, and finally inclined the father in his visitor’s favour.
 suddenly, however—whether from pleasure or from some other cause—the
 infant misbehaved itself!
 “my god!” cried madame. “he has gone and spoilt your frockcoat!”
 true enough, on glancing downwards, chichikov saw that the sleeve of his
 brand-new garment had indeed suffered a hurt. “if i could catch you alone,
 you little devil,” he muttered to himself, “i’d shoot you!”
 host, hostess and nurse all ran for eau-de-cologne, and from three sides
 set themselves to rub the spot affected.
 “never mind, never mind; it is nothing,” said chichikov as he strove to
 communicate to his features as cheerful an expression as possible. “what
 does it matter what a child may spoil during the golden age of its
 infancy?”
 to himself he remarked: “the little brute! would it could be devoured by
 wolves. it has made only too good a shot, the cussed young ragamuffin!”
 how, after this—after the guest had shown such innocent affection
 for the little one, and magnanimously paid for his so doing with a
 brand-new suit—could the father remain obdurate? nevertheless, to
 avoid setting a bad example to the countryside, he and chichikov agreed to
 carry through the transaction privately, lest, otherwise, a scandal should
 arise.
 “in return,” said chichikov, “would you mind doing me the following
 favour? i desire to mediate in the matter of your difference with the
 brothers platonov. i believe that you wish to acquire some additional
 land? is not that so?”
 [here there occurs a hiatus in the original.]
 everything in life fulfils its function, and chichikov’s tour in search of
 a fortune was carried out so successfully that not a little money passed
 into his pockets. the system employed was a good one: he did not steal, he
 merely used. and every one of us at times does the same: one man with
 regard to government timber, and another with regard to a sum belonging to
 his employer, while a third defrauds his children for the sake of an
 actress, and a fourth robs his peasantry for the sake of smart furniture
 or a carriage. what can one do when one is surrounded on every side with
 roguery, and everywhere there are insanely expensive restaurants, masked
 balls, and dances to the music of gipsy bands? to abstain when every one
 else is indulging in these things, and fashion commands, is difficult
 indeed!
 chichikov was for setting forth again, but the roads had now got into a
 bad state, and, in addition, there was in preparation a second fair—one
 for the dvoriane only. the former fair had been held for the sale of
 horses, cattle, cheese, and other peasant produce, and the buyers had been
 merely cattle-jobbers and kulaks; but this time the function was to be one
 for the sale of manorial produce which had been bought up by wholesale
 dealers at nizhni novgorod, and then transferred hither. to the fair, of
 course, came those ravishers of the russian purse who, in the shape of
 frenchmen with pomades and frenchwomen with hats, make away with money
 earned by blood and hard work, and, like the locusts of egypt (to use
 kostanzhoglo’s term) not only devour their prey, but also dig holes in the
 ground and leave behind their eggs.
 although, unfortunately, the occurrence of a bad harvest retained many
 landowners at their country houses, the local tchinovniks (whom the
 failure of the harvest did not touch) proceeded to let themselves go—as
 also, to their undoing, did their wives. the reading of books of the type
 diffused, in these modern days, for the inoculation of humanity with a
 craving for new and superior amenities of life had caused every one to
 conceive a passion for experimenting with the latest luxury; and to meet
 this want the french wine merchant opened a new establishment in the shape
 of a restaurant as had never before been heard of in the province—a
 restaurant where supper could be procured on credit as regarded one-half,
 and for an unprecedentedly low sum as regarded the other. this exactly
 suited both heads of boards and clerks who were living in hope of being
 able some day to resume their bribes-taking from suitors. there also
 developed a tendency to compete in the matter of horses and liveried
 flunkeys; with the result that despite the damp and snowy weather
 exceedingly elegant turnouts took to parading backwards and forwards.
 whence these equipages had come god only knows, but at least they would
 not have disgraced st. petersburg. from within them merchants and
 attorneys doffed their caps to ladies, and inquired after their health,
 and likewise it became a rare sight to see a bearded man in a rough fur
 cap, since every one now went about clean-shaven and with dirty teeth,
 after the european fashion.
 “sir, i beg of you to inspect my goods,” said a tradesman as chichikov was
 passing his establishment. “within my doors you will find a large variety
 of clothing.”
 “have you a cloth of bilberry-coloured check?” inquired the person
 addressed.
 “i have cloths of the finest kind,” replied the tradesman, raising his cap
 with one hand, and pointing to his shop with the other. chichikov entered,
 and in a trice the proprietor had dived beneath the counter, and appeared
 on the other side of it, with his back to his wares and his face towards
 the customer. leaning forward on the tips of his fingers, and indicating
 his merchandise with just the suspicion of a nod, he requested the
 gentleman to specify exactly the species of cloth which he required.
 “a cloth with an olive-coloured or a bottle-tinted spot in its pattern—anything
 in the nature of bilberry,” explained chichikov.
 “that being so, sir, i may say that i am about to show you clothes of a
 quality which even our illustrious capitals could not surpass. hi, boy!
 reach down that roll up there—number . no, not that one, fool!
 such fellows as you are always too good for your job. there—hand it
 to me. this is indeed a nice pattern!”
 unfolding the garment, the tradesman thrust it close to chichikov’s nose
 in order that he might not only handle, but also smell it.
 “excellent, but not what i want,” pronounced chichikov. “formerly i was in
 the custom’s department, and therefore wear none but cloth of the latest
 make. what i want is of a ruddier pattern than this—not exactly a
 bottle-tinted pattern, but something approaching bilberry.”
 “i understand, sir. of course you require only the very newest thing. a
 cloth of that kind i do possess, sir, and though excessive in price, it is
 of a quality to match.”
 carrying the roll of stuff to the light—even stepping into the
 street for the purpose—the shopman unfolded his prize with the
 words, “a truly beautiful shade! a cloth of smoked grey, shot with flame
 colour!”
 the material met with the customer’s approval, a price was agreed upon,
 and with incredible celerity the vendor made up the purchase into a
 brown-paper parcel, and stowed it away in chichikov’s koliaska.
 at this moment a voice asked to be shown a black frockcoat.
 “the devil take me if it isn’t khlobuev!” muttered our hero, turning his
 back upon the newcomer. unfortunately the other had seen him.
 “come, come, paul ivanovitch!” he expostulated. “surely you do not intend
 to overlook me? i have been searching for you everywhere, for i have
 something important to say to you.”
 “my dear sir, my very dear sir,” said chichikov as he pressed khlobuev’s
 hand, “i can assure you that, had i the necessary leisure, i should at all
 times be charmed to converse with you.” and mentally he added: “would that
 the evil one would fly away with you!”
 almost at the same time murazov, the great landowner, entered the shop. as
 he did so our hero hastened to exclaim: “why, it is athanasi
 vassilievitch! how are you, my very dear sir?”
 “well enough,” replied murazov, removing his cap (khlobuev and the shopman
 had already done the same). “how, may i ask, are you?”
 “but poorly,” replied chichikov, “for of late i have been troubled with
 indigestion, and my sleep is bad. i do not get sufficient exercise.”
 however, instead of probing deeper into the subject of chichikov’s
 ailments, murazov turned to khlobuev.
 “i saw you enter the shop,” he said, “and therefore followed you, for i
 have something important for your ear. could you spare me a minute or
 two?”
 “certainly, certainly,” said khlobuev, and the pair left the shop
 together.
 “i wonder what is afoot between them,” said chichikov to himself.
 “a wise and noble gentleman, athanasi vassilievitch!” remarked the
 tradesman. chichikov made no reply save a gesture.
 “paul ivanovitch, i have been looking for you everywhere,” lienitsin’s
 voice said from behind him, while again the tradesman hastened to remove
 his cap. “pray come home with me, for i have something to say to you.”
 chichikov scanned the speaker’s face, but could make nothing of it. paying
 the tradesman for the cloth, he left the shop.
 meanwhile murazov had conveyed khlobuev to his rooms.
 “tell me,” he said to his guest, “exactly how your affairs stand. i take
 it that, after all, your aunt left you something?”
 “it would be difficult to say whether or not my affairs are improved,”
 replied khlobuev. “true, fifty souls and thirty thousand roubles came to
 me from madame khanasarova, but i had to pay them away to satisfy my
 debts. consequently i am once more destitute. but the important point is
 that there was trickery connected with the legacy, and shameful trickery
 at that. yes, though it may surprise you, it is a fact that that fellow
 chichikov—”
 “yes, semen semenovitch, but, before you go on to speak of chichikov, pray
 tell me something about yourself, and how much, in your opinion, would be
 sufficient to clear you of your difficulties?”
 “my difficulties are grievous,” replied khlobuev. “to rid myself of them,
 and also to have enough to go on with, i should need to acquire at least a
 hundred thousand roubles, if not more. in short, things are becoming
 impossible for me.”
 “and, had you the money, what should you do with it?”
 “i should rent a tenement, and devote myself to the education of my
 children. not a thought should i give to myself, for my career is over,
 seeing that it is impossible for me to re-enter the civil service and i am
 good for nothing else.”
 “nevertheless, when a man is leading an idle life he is apt to incur
 temptations which shun his better-employed brother.”
 “yes, but beyond question i am good for nothing, so broken is my health,
 and such a martyr i am to dyspepsia.”
 “but how do you propose to live without working? how can a man like you
 exist without a post or a position of any kind? look around you at the
 works of god. everything has its proper function, and pursues its proper
 course. even a stone can be used for one purpose or another. how, then,
 can it be right for a man who is a thinking being to remain a drone?”
 “but i should not be a drone, for i should employ myself with the
 education of my children.”
 “no, semen semenovitch—no: that you would find the hardest task of
 all. for how can a man educate his children who has never even educated
 himself? instruction can be imparted to children only through the medium
 of example; and would a life like yours furnish them with a profitable
 example—a life which has been spent in idleness and the playing of
 cards? no, semen semenovitch. you had far better hand your children over
 to me. otherwise they will be ruined. do not think that i am jesting.
 idleness has wrecked your life, and you must flee from it. can a man live
 with nothing to keep him in place? even a journeyman labourer who earns
 the barest pittance may take an interest in his occupation.”
 “athanasi vassilievitch, i have tried to overcome myself, but what further
 resource lies open to me? can i who am old and incapable re-enter the
 civil service and spend year after year at a desk with youths who are just
 starting their careers? moreover, i have lost the trick of taking bribes;
 i should only hinder both myself and others; while, as you know, it is a
 department which has an established caste of its own. therefore, though i
 have considered, and even attempted to obtain, every conceivable post, i
 find myself incompetent for them all. only in a monastery should i—”
 “nay, nay. monasteries, again, are only for those who have worked. to
 those who have spent their youth in dissipation such havens say what the
 ant said to the dragonfly—namely, ‘go you away, and return to your
 dancing.’ yes, even in a monastery do folk toil and toil—they do not
 sit playing whist.” murazov looked at khlobuev, and added: “semen
 semenovitch, you are deceiving both yourself and me.”
 poor khlobuev could not utter a word in reply, and murazov began to feel
 sorry for him.
 “listen, semen semenovitch,” he went on. “i know that you say your
 prayers, and that you go to church, and that you observe both matins and
 vespers, and that, though averse to early rising, you leave your bed at
 four o’clock in the morning before the household fires have been lit.”
 “ah, athanasi vassilievitch,” said khlobuev, “that is another matter
 altogether. that i do, not for man’s sake, but for the sake of him who has
 ordered all things here on earth. yes, i believe that he at least can feel
 compassion for me, that he at least, though i be foul and lowly, will
 pardon me and receive me when all men have cast me out, and my best friend
 has betrayed me and boasted that he has done it for a good end.”
 khlobuev’s face was glowing with emotion, and from the older man’s eyes
 also a tear had started.
 “you will do well to hearken unto him who is merciful,” he said. “but
 remember also that, in the eyes of the all-merciful, honest toil is of
 equal merit with a prayer. therefore take unto yourself whatsoever task
 you may, and do it as though you were doing it, not unto man, but unto
 god. even though to your lot there should fall but the cleaning of a
 floor, clean that floor as though it were being cleaned for him alone. and
 thence at least this good you will reap: that there will remain to you no
 time for what is evil—for card playing, for feasting, for all the
 life of this gay world. are you acquainted with ivan potapitch?”
 “yes, not only am i acquainted with him, but i also greatly respect him.”
 “time was when ivan potapitch was a merchant worth half a million roubles.
 in everything did he look but for gain, and his affairs prospered
 exceedingly, so much so that he was able to send his son to be educated in
 france, and to marry his daughter to a general. and whether in his office
 or at the exchange, he would stop any friend whom he encountered and carry
 him off to a tavern to drink, and spend whole days thus employed. but at
 last he became bankrupt, and god sent him other misfortunes also. his son!
 ah, well! ivan potapitch is now my steward, for he had to begin life over
 again. yet once more his affairs are in order, and, had it been his wish,
 he could have restarted in business with a capital of half a million
 roubles. ‘but no,’ he said. ‘a steward am i, and a steward will i remain
 to the end; for, from being full-stomached and heavy with dropsy, i have
 become strong and well.’ not a drop of liquor passes his lips, but only
 cabbage soup and gruel. and he prays as none of the rest of us pray, and
 he helps the poor as none of the rest of us help them; and to this he
 would add yet further charity if his means permitted him to do so.”
 poor khlobuev remained silent, as before.
 the elder man took his two hands in his.
 “semen semenovitch,” he said, “you cannot think how much i pity you, or
 how much i have had you in my thoughts. listen to me. in the monastery
 there is a recluse who never looks upon a human face. of all men whom i
 know he has the broadest mind, and he breaks not his silence save to give
 advice. to him i went and said that i had a friend (though i did not
 actually mention your name) who was in great trouble of soul. suddenly the
 recluse interrupted me with the words: ‘god’s work first, and our own
 last. there is need for a church to be built, but no money wherewith to
 build it. money must be collected to that end.’ then he shut to the
 wicket. i wondered to myself what this could mean, and concluded that the
 recluse had been unwilling to accord me his counsel. next i repaired to
 the archimandrite, and had scarce reached his door when he inquired of me
 whether i could commend to him a man meet to be entrusted with the
 collection of alms for a church—a man who should belong to the
 dvoriane or to the more lettered merchants, but who would guard the trust
 as he would guard the salvation of his soul. on the instant thought i to
 myself: ‘why should not the holy father appoint my friend semen
 semenovitch? for the way of suffering would benefit him greatly; and as he
 passed with his ledger from landowner to peasant, and from peasant to
 townsman, he would learn where folk dwell, and who stands in need of
 aught, and thus would become better acquainted with the countryside than
 folk who dwell in cities. and, thus become, he would find that his
 services were always in demand.’ only of late did the governor-general say
 to me that, could he but be furnished with the name of a secretary who
 should know his work not only by the book but also by experience, he would
 give him a great sum, since nothing is to be learned by the former means,
 and, through it, much confusion arises.”
 “you confound me, you overwhelm me!” said khlobuev, staring at his
 companion in open-eyed astonishment. “i can scarcely believe that your
 words are true, seeing that for such a trust an active, indefatigable man
 would be necessary. moreover, how could i leave my wife and children
 unprovided for?”
 “have no fear,” said murazov, “i myself will take them under my care, as
 well as procure for the children a tutor. far better and nobler were it
 for you to be travelling with a wallet, and asking alms on behalf of god,
 then to be remaining here and asking alms for yourself alone. likewise, i
 will furnish you with a tilt-waggon, so that you may be saved some of the
 hardships of the journey, and thus be preserved in good health. also, i
 will give you some money for the journey, in order that, as you pass on
 your way, you may give to those who stand in greater need than their
 fellows. thus, if, before giving, you assure yourself that the recipient
 of the alms is worthy of the same, you will do much good; and as you
 travel you will become acquainted with all men and sundry, and they will
 treat you, not as a tchinovnik to be feared, but as one to whom, as a
 petitioner on behalf of the church, they may unloose their tongues without
 peril.”
 “i feel that the scheme is a splendid one, and would gladly bear my part
 in it were it not likely to exceed my strength.”
 “what is there that does not exceed your strength?” said murazov. “nothing
 is wholly proportionate to it—everything surpasses it. help from
 above is necessary: otherwise we are all powerless. strength comes of
 prayer, and of prayer alone. when a man crosses himself, and cries, ‘lord,
 have mercy upon me!’ he soon stems the current and wins to the shore. nor
 need you take any prolonged thought concerning this matter. all that you
 need do is to accept it as a commission sent of god. the tilt-waggon can
 be prepared for you immediately; and then, as soon as you have been to the
 archimandrite for your book of accounts and his blessing, you will be free
 to start on your journey.”
 “i submit myself to you, and accept the commission as a divine trust.”
 and even as khlobuev spoke he felt renewed vigour and confidence arise in
 his soul, and his mind begin to awake to a sense of hopefulness of
 eventually being able to put to flight his troubles. and even as it was,
 the world seemed to be growing dim to his eyes....
 meanwhile, plea after plea had been presented to the legal authorities,
 and daily were relatives whom no one had before heard of putting in an
 appearance. yes, like vultures to a corpse did these good folk come
 flocking to the immense property which madam khanasarov had left behind
 her. everywhere were heard rumours against chichikov, rumours with regard
 to the validity of the second will, rumours with regard to will number
 one, and rumours of larceny and concealment of funds. also, there came to
 hand information with regard both to chichikov’s purchase of dead souls
