 they prevailed upon him to deliver us into their hands. lycurgus, cruel by
 nature and incapable of keeping his word, was by this time striving to hit
 upon the best method of betraying us, and to that end, he persuaded lycas
 to go for help, while he himself returned to the villa and had us put
 under guard. to the villa he came, and greeted us with a scowl as black as
 any lycas himself had ever achieved, clenching his fists again and again,
 he charged us with having lied about lycas, and, turning ascyltos out, he
 gave orders that we were to be kept confined to the room in which we had
 retired to rest. nor would he hear a word in our defense, from ascyltos,
 but, taking the latter with him, he returned to his estate, reiterating
 his orders relative to our confinement, which was to last until his
 return. on the way back, ascyltos vainly essayed to break down lycurgus’
 determination, but neither prayers nor caresses, nor even tears could move
 him. thereupon my “brother” conceived the design of freeing us from our
 chains, and, antagonized by the stubbornness of lycurgus, he positively
 refused to sleep with him, and through this he was in a better position to
 carry out the plan which he had thought out. when the entire household was
 buried in its first sleep, ascyltos loaded our little packs upon his back
 and slipped out through a breach in the wall, which he had previously
 noted, arriving at the villa with the dawn. he gained entrance without
 opposition and found his way to our room, which the guards had taken the
 precaution to bar. it was easy to force an entrance, as the fastening was
 made of wood, which same he pried off with a piece of iron. the fall of
 the lock roused us, for we were snoring away, in spite of our unfortunate
 situation. on account of the long vigil, the guard was in such a deep
 sleep that we alone were wakened by the crashing fall of the lock, and
 ascyltos, coming in, told us in a few words what he had done for us; but
 as far as that goes, not many were necessary. we were hurriedly dressing,
 when i was seized with the notion of killing the guard and stripping the
 place. this plan i confided to ascyltos, who approved of the looting, but
 pointed out a more desirable solution without bloodshed: knowing all the
 crooks and turns, as he did, he led us to a store-room which he opened. we
 gathered up all that was of value and sallied forth while it was yet early
 in the morning. shunning the public roads; we could not rest until we
 believed ourselves safe from pursuit. ascyltos, when he had caught his
 breath, gloatingly exulted of the pleasure which the looting of a villa
 belonging to lycurgus, a superlatively avaricious man, afforded him: he
 complained, with justice of his parsimony, affirming that he himself had
 received no reward for his k-nightly services, that he had been kept at a
 dry table and on a skimpy ration of food. this lycurgus was so stingy that
 he denied himself even the necessities of life, his immense wealth to the
 contrary notwithstanding.)
 the tortured tantalus still stands, to parch in his shifting pool,
 and starve, when fruit sways just beyond his grasp: the
 image of the miser rich, when his avaricious soul robs him of food
 and drink, in plenty’s clasp.
 (ascyltos was for going to naples that same day, but i protested the
 imprudence of going to any place where they would be on the lookout for
 us. “let’s absent ourselves, for a while, and travel in the country. we
 are well supplied with means.” this advice took his fancy and we set out
 for a part of the country noted for the beauty of its estates, and where
 not a few of our acquaintances were enjoying the sports of the season.
 scarcely had we covered half the distance, however, before it began to
 pour down rain by the bucketful, compelling us to run for the nearest
 village. upon entering the inn, we noticed many other wayfarers, who had
 put up there to escape the storm. the jam prevented our being watched, and
 at the same time made it easier for us to pry about with curious eyes, on
 the alert for something to appropriate. ascyltos, unseen by anyone, picked
 up off the ground a little pouch in which he found some gold pieces. we
 were overjoyed with this auspicious beginning, but, fearing that some one
 would miss the gold, we stealthily slipped out by the back door. a slave,
 who was saddling a horse in the courtyard, suddenly left his work and went
 into the house, as if he had forgotten something, and while he was gone i
 appropriated a superb mantle which was tied fast to the saddle, by untying
 the thongs, then, utilizing a row of outbuildings for cover, we made off
 into the nearest wood. when we had reached the depths of the grove, where
 we were in safety, we thoroughly discussed the surest method of secreting
 our gold, so that we would neither be accused of robbery nor robbed
 ourselves, and we finally decided to sew it into the hem of a ragged
 tunic, which i threw over my shoulders, after having turned the mantle
 over to ascyltos for safekeeping; we then made ready to start for the city
 via the unfrequented roads. we were just about to emerge from the shelter
 of the wood when we heard, from somewhere on our left, “they can’t get
 away, they came into this wood; let’s spread out and beat, and they will
 easily be caught!” on hearing this, we were thrown into such a terrible
 fright that ascyltos and giton dashed away city-ward, through the
 underbrush, and i retreated in such a hurry that the precious tunic
 slipped off my shoulders without my knowing it. at last, completely fagged
 out, and unable to take another step, i lay down under a tree, and there i
 first became aware of the loss of the tunic. chagrin restored my strength
 and i leaped to my feet to look for the treasure, and for a long time i
 beat around in vain. worn out with work and vexation, i forced my way into
 the thickest part of the grove and remained there for four mortal hours,
 but at last, bored to extinction by the horrible solitude, i sought a way
 out. as i went ahead, i caught sight of a peasant; then i had need of all
 my nerve, and it did not fail me. marching boldly up to him, i asked my
 way to the city, complaining that i had been lost in the wood for several
 hours. seeing my condition, he took pity upon me, for i was covered with
 mud and paler than death, and asked me whether i had seen anyone in the
 place. “not a soul,” i replied, whereupon he kindly conducted me to the
 high road, where he met two of his companions, who informed him that they
 had beaten along every path in the forest without having found anything
 except a tunic, which they showed him. as may be readily supposed, i did
 not have the audacity to claim it, though well aware of its value, and my
 chagrin became almost insupportable as i vented many a groaning curse over
 my lost treasure. the peasants paid no attention to me, and i was
 gradually left behind, as my weakness increased my pace decreased. for
 this reason, it was late when i reached the city, and, entering the inn,
 beheld ascyltos, stretched out, half dead, upon a cot. too far gone to
 utter a single syllable, i threw myself upon another. ascyltos became
 greatly excited at not seeing the tunic which he had entrusted to me,
 demanding it insistently, but i was so weak that my voice refused its
 office and i permitted the apathy of my eyes to answer his demand, then,
 by and by, regaining my strength little by little, i related the whole
 affair to ascyltos, in every detail. he thought that i was joking, and
 although my testimony was fortified by a copious flood of tears, it could
 easily be seen that he remained unconvinced, believing that i wanted to
 cheat him out of the gold. giton, who was standing by during all this, was
 as downcast as myself, and the suffering of the lad only served to
 increase my own vexation, but the thing which bothered me most of all, was
 the painstaking search which was being made for us; i told ascyltos of
 this, but he only laughed it off, as he had so happily extricated himself
 from the scrape. he was convinced that, as we were unknown and as no one
 had seen us, we were perfectly safe. we decided, nevertheless, to feign
 sickness, and to keep to our room as long as possible; but, before we knew
 it, our money ran out, and spurred by necessity we were forced to go
 abroad and sell some of our plunder.) 
 twilight was falling, as we entered the market-place, in which we noticed
 a quantity of things for sale, not any of much value, it is true, but such
 as could be disposed of to the best advantage when the semi-darkness would
 serve to hide their doubtful origin. as we had brought our stolen mantle,
 we proceeded to make use of so favorable an opportunity, and, in a
 secluded spot, displayed a corner of it, hoping the splendid garment would
 attract some purchaser. nor was it long before a certain peasant, whose
 face was familiar to my eyes, came up, accompanied by a young woman, and
 began to examine the garment very closely. ascyltos, in turn, cast a
 glance at the shoulders of our rustic customer, and was instantly struck
 dumb with astonishment. nor could i myself look upon this man without some
 emotion, for he seemed to be the identical person who had picked up the
 ragged tunic in the lonely wood, and, as a matter of fact, he was!
 ascyltos, afraid to believe the evidence of his own eyes for fear of doing
 something rash, approached the man, as a prospective buyer, took the hem
 of the tunic from the rustic’s shoulders, and felt it thoroughly. 
 oh wonderful stroke of fortune! the peasant had not yet laid his meddling
 hands upon the seams, but was scornfully offering the thing for sale, as
 though it had been the leavings of some beggar. when ascyltos had assured
 himself that the hoard was intact, and had taken note of the social status
 of the seller, he led me a little aside from the crowd and said, “do you
 know, ‘brother,’ that the treasure about which i was so worked up has come
 back to us? that is the little tunic, and it seems that the gold pieces
 are still untouched. what ought we to do, and how shall we make good our
 claim?” i was overjoyed, not so much at seeing our booty, as i was for the
 reason that fortune had released me from a very ugly suspicion. i was
 opposed to doing anything by devious methods, thinking that should he
 prove unwilling to restore to the proper owner an article not his own, it
 ought to come to a civil action and a judgment secured. 
 not so ascyltos, who was afraid of the law, and demurred, “who knows us
 here? who will place any credence in anything we say? it seems to me that
 it would be better to buy, ours though it is, and we know it, and recover
 the treasure at small cost, rather than to engage in a doubtful lawsuit.”
 of what avail are any laws, where money rules alone, where
 poverty can never win its cases? detractors of the times, who bear
 the cynic’s scrip, are known to often sell the truth, and keep
 their faces! so justice is at public auction bought, the
 knight gives judgement as gold says he ought.
 but, with the exception of a two-as piece with which we had intended
 purchasing peas and lupines, there was nothing to hand; so, for fear our
 loot should escape us in the interim, we resolved to appraise the mantle
 at less, and, through a small sacrifice, secure a greater profit.
 accordingly, we spread it out, and the young woman of the covered head,
 who was standing by the peasant’s side, narrowly inspected the markings,
 seized the hem with both hands, and screamed “thieves!” at the top of her
 voice. we were greatly disconcerted at this and, for fear that inactivity
 on our part should seem to lend color to her charges, we laid hold of the
 dirty ragged tunic, in our turn, and shouted with equal spite, that this
 was our property which they had in their possession; but our cases were by
 no means on an equality, and the hucksters who had crowded around us at
 the uproar, laughed at our spiteful claim, and very naturally, too, since
 one side laid claim to a very valuable mantle, while the other demanded a
 rag which was not worth a good patch. 
 ascyltos, when he had secured silence, adroitly put a stop to their
 laughter by exclaiming, “we can see that each puts the greater value upon
 his own property. let them return our tunic to us, and take back their
 mantle!” this exchange was satisfactory enough to the peasant and the
 young woman, but some night-prowling shyster lawyers, who wished to get
 possession of the mantle for their own profit, demanded that both articles
 be deposited with them, and the judge could look into the case on the
 morrow, for it would appear that the ownership of the articles was not so
 much to the point as was the suspicion of robbery that attached to both
 sides. the question of sequestration arose, and one of the hucksters, i do
 not remember which, but he was bald, and his forehead was covered with
 sebaceous wens, and he sometimes did odd jobs for the lawyers, seized the
 mantle and vowed that he would see to it that it was produced at the
 proper time and place, but it was easily apparent that he desired nothing
 but that the garment should be deposited with thieves, and vanish;
 thinking that we would be afraid to appear as claimants for fear of being
 charged with crime. as far as we were concerned, we were as willing as he,
 and fortune aided the cause of each of us, for the peasant, infuriated at
 our demand that his rags be shown in public, threw the tunic in ascyltos’
 face, released us from responsibility, and demanded that the mantle, which
 was the only object of litigation, be sequestered. as we thought we had
 recovered our treasure, we returned hurriedly to the inn, and fastening
 the door, we had a good laugh at the shrewdness of the hucksters, and not
 less so at that of our enemies, for by it they had returned our money to
 us. (while we were unstitching the tunic to get at the gold pieces, we
 overheard some one quizzing the innkeeper as to what kind of people those
 were, who had just entered his house. alarmed at this inquiry, i went
 down, when the questioner had gone, to find out what was the matter, and
 learned that the praetor’s lictor, whose duty it was to see that the names
 of strangers were entered in his rolls, had seen two people come into the
 inn, whose names were not yet entered, and that was the reason he had made
 inquiry as to their names and means of support. mine host furnished this
 information in such an offhand manner that i became suspicious as to our
 entire safety in his house; so, in order to avoid arrest, we decided to go
 out, and not to return home until after dark, and we sallied forth,
 leaving the management of dinner to giton. as it suited our purpose to
 avoid the public streets, we strolled through the more unfrequented parts
 of the city, and just at dusk we met two women in stolas, in a lonely
 spot, and they were by no means homely. walking softly, we followed them
 to a temple which they entered, and from which we could hear a curious
 humming, which resembled the sound of voices issuing from the depths of a
 cavern. curiosity impelled us also to enter the temple. there we caught
 sight of many women, who resembled bacchantes, each of whom brandished in
 her right hand an emblem of priapus. we were not permitted to see more,
 for as their eyes fell upon us, they raised such a hubbub that the vault
 of the temple trembled. they attempted to lay hands upon us, but we ran
 back to our inn as fast as we could go.) 
 we had just disposed of the supper prepared by giton, when there came a
 timid rapping at the door. we turned pale. “who is there?” we asked. “open
 and you will find out,” came the answer. while we were speaking, the bar
 fell down of its own accord, the doors flew open and admitted our visitor.
 she was the selfsame young lady of the covered head who had but a little
 while before stood by the peasant’s side. “so you thought,” said she,
 “that you could make a fool of me, did you? i am quartilla’s handmaid:
 quartilla, whose rites you interrupted in the shrine. she has come to the
 inn, in person, and begs permission to speak with you. don’t be alarmed!
 she neither blames your mistake nor does she demand punishment; on the
 contrary, she wonders what god has brought such well-bred young gentlemen
 into her neighborhood!” 
 we were still holding our tongues and refraining from any expression of
 opinion, when the lady herself entered the room, attended by a little
 girl. seating herself upon the bed, she wept for a long time. not even
 then did we interject a single word, but waited, all attention, for what
 was to follow these well ordered tears and this show of grief. when the
 diplomatic thunderstorm had passed over, she withdrew her haughty head
 from her mantle and, ringing her hands until the joints cracked, “what is
 the meaning of such audacity?” she demanded; “where did you learn such
 tricks? they are worthy of putting to shame the assurance of all the
 robbers of the past! i pity you, so help me the god of truth, i do; for no
 one can look with impunity upon that which it is unlawful for him to see.
 in our neighborhood, there are so many gods that it is easier to meet one
 than it is to find a man! but do not think that i was actuated by any
 desire for revenge when i came here: i am more moved by your age than i am
 by my own injury, for it is my belief that youthful imprudence led you
 into committing a sacrilegious crime. that very night, i tossed so
 violently in the throes of a dangerous chill that i was afraid i had
 contracted a tertian ague, and in my dreams i prayed for a medicine. i was
 ordered to seek you out, and to arrest the progress of the disease by
 means of an expedient to be suggested by your wonderful penetration! the
 cure does not matter so much, however, for a deeper grief gnaws at my
 vitals and drags me down, almost to the very doors of death itself. i am
 afraid that, with the careless impulsiveness of youth, you may divulge, to
 the common herd, what you witnessed in the shrine of priapus, and reveal
 the rites of the gods to the rabble. on this account, i stretch out my
 suppliant hands to your knees, and beg and pray that you do not make a
 mockery and a joke of our nocturnal rites, nor lay bare the secrets of so
 many years, into which scarcely a thousand persons are initiated.” 
 the tears poured forth again, after this appeal, and, shaken by deep sobs,
 she buried her whole face and breast in my bed; and i, moved by pity and
 by apprehension, begged her to be of good cheer and to make herself
 perfectly easy as to both of those issues, for not only would we not
 betray any secrets to the rabble, but we would also second divine
 providence, at any peril to ourselves, if any god had indicated to her any
 cure for her tertian ague. the woman cheered up at this promise, and
 smothered me with kisses; from tears she passed to laughter, and fell to
 running her fingers through the long hair that hung down about my ears. “i
 will declare a truce with you,” she said, “and withdraw my complaint. but
 had you been unwilling to administer the medicine which i seek, i had a
 troop in readiness for the morrow, which would have exacted satisfaction
 for my injury and reparation for my dignity!
 to be flouted is disgraceful, but to dictate terms, sublime 
 pleased am i to choose what course i will, even sages will retort
 an insult at the proper tune. victor most is he who does not
 kill.”
 then she suddenly clapped her hands, and broke into such a peal of
 laughter that we were alarmed. the maid, who had been the first to arrive,
 did likewise, on one side of us, as also did the little girl who had
 entered with the madame herself. 
 the whole place was filled with mocking laughter, and we, who could see no
 reason for such a change of front, stared blankly at each other and then
 at the women. (then quartilla spoke up, finally,) “i gave orders that no
 mortal man should be admitted into this inn, this day, so that i could
 receive the treatment for my ague without interruption!” ascyltos was, for
 the moment, struck dumb by this admission of quartilla’s, and i turned
 colder than a gallic winter, and could not utter a word; but the personnel
 of the company relieved me from the fear that the worst might be yet to
 come, for they were only three young women, too weak to attempt any
 violence against us, who were of the male sex, at least, even if we had
 nothing else of the man about us, and this was an asset. then, too, we
 were girded higher, and i had so arranged matters that if it came to a
 fight, i would engage quartilla myself, ascyltos the maid, and giton the
 girl. (while i was turning over this plan in my mind, quartilla came to
 close quarters, to receive the treatment for her ague, but having her
 hopes disappointed, she flounced out in a rage and, returning in a little
 while, she had us overpowered by some unknown vagabonds, and gave orders
 for us to be carried away to a splendid palace.) then our determination
 gave place to astonishment, and death, sure and certain, began to obscure
 the eyes of suffering. 
 “pray; madame,” i groaned, “if you have anything worse in store, bring it
 on quickly for we have not committed a crime so heinous as to merit death
 by torture.” the maid, whose name was psyche, quickly spread a blanket
 upon the floor (and) sought to secure an erection by fondling my member,
 which was already a thousand times colder than death. ascyltos, well aware
 by now of the danger of dipping into the secrets of others, covered his
 head with his mantle. (in the meantime,) the maid took two ribbons from
 her bosom and bound our feet with one and our hands with the other.
 (finding myself trussed up in this fashion, i remarked, “you will not be
 able to cure your mistress’ ague in this manner!” “granted,” the maid
 replied, “but i have other and surer remedies at hand,” she brought me a
 vessel full of satyrion, as she said this, and so cheerfully did she
 gossip about its virtues that i drank down nearly all of the liquor, and
 because ascyltos had but a moment before rejected her advances, she
 sprinkled the dregs upon his back, without his knowing it.) when this
 repartee had drawn to a close, ascyltos exclaimed, “don’t i deserve a
 drink?” given away by my laughter, the maid clapped her hands and cried,
 “i put one by you, young man; did you drink so much all by yourself?”
 “what’s that you say?”, quartilla chimed in. “did encolpius drink all the
 satyrion there was in the house?” and she laughed delightfully until her
 sides shook. finally not even giton himself could resist a smile,
 especially when the little girl caught him around the neck and showered
 innumerable kisses upon him, and he not at all averse to it. 
 we would have cried aloud in our misery but there was no one to give us
 any help, and whenever i attempted to shout, “help! all honest citizens,”
 psyche would prick my cheeks with her hairpin, and the little girl would
 intimidate ascyltos with a brush dipped in satyrion. then a catamite
 appeared, clad in a myrtle-colored frieze robe, and girded round with a
 belt. one minute he nearly gored us to death with his writhing buttocks,
 and the next, he befouled us so with his stinking kisses that quartilla,
 with her robe tucked high, held up her whalebone wand and ordered him to
 give the unhappy wretches quarter. both of us then took a most solemn oath
 that so dread a secret should perish with us. several wrestling
 instructors appeared and refreshed us, worn out as we were, by a massage
 with pure oil, and when our fatigue had abated, we again donned our dining
 clothes and were escorted to the next room, in which were placed three
 couches, and where all the essentials necessary to a splendid banquet were
 laid out in all their richness. we took our places, as requested, and
 began with a wonderful first course. we were all but submerged in
 falernian wine. when several other courses had followed, and we were
 endeavoring to keep awake quartilla exclaimed, “how dare you think of
 going to sleep when you know that the vigil of priapus is to be kept?”
 worn out by all his troubles, ascyltos commenced to nod, and the maid,
 whom he had slighted, and of course insulted, smeared lampblack all over
 his face, and painted his lips and shoulders with vermillion, while he
 drowsed. completely exhausted by so many untoward adventures, i, too, was
 enjoying the shortest of naps, the whole household, within and without,
 was doing the same, some were lying here and there asleep at our feet,
 others leaned against the walls, and some even slept head to head upon the
 threshold itself; the lamps, failing because of a lack of oil, shed a
 feeble and flickering light, when two syrians, bent upon stealing an
 amphora of wine, entered the dining-room. while they were greedily pawing
 among the silver, they pulled the amphora in two, upsetting the table with
 all the silver plate, and a cup, which had flown pretty high, cut the head
 of the maid, who was drowsing upon a couch. she screamed at that, thereby
 betraying the thieves and wakening some of the drunkards. the syrians, who
 had come for plunder, seeing that they were about to be detected, were so
 quick to throw themselves down besides a couch and commence to snore as if
 they had been asleep for a long time, that you would have thought they
 belonged there. the butler had gotten up and poured oil in the flickering
 lamps by this time, and the boys, having rubbed their eyes open, had
 returned to their duty, when in came a female cymbal player and the
 crashing brass awoke everybody. 
 the banquet began all over again, and quartilla challenged us to a
 drinking-bout, the crash of the cymbals lending ardor to her revel. a
 catamite appeared, the stalest of all mankind, well worthy of that house.
 heaving a sigh, he wrung his hands until the joints cracked, and spouted
 out the following verses,
"hither, hither quickly gather, pathic companions boon; artfully
 stretch forth your limbs and on with the dance and play! twinkling
 feet and supple thighs and agile buttocks in tune, hands well
 skilled in raising passions, delian eunuchs gay!”
 when he had finished his poetry, he slobbered a most evil-smelling kiss
 upon me, and then, climbing upon my couch, he proceeded with all his might
 and main to pull all of my clothing off. i resisted to the limit of my
 strength. he manipulated my member for a long time, but all in vain. gummy
 streams poured down his sweating forehead, and there was so much chalk in
 the wrinkles of his cheeks that you might have mistaken his face for a
 roofless wall, from which the plaster was crumbling in a rain. 
 driven to the last extremity, i could no longer keep back the tears.
 “madame,” i burst out, “is this the night-cap which you ordered served to
 me?” clapping her hands softly she cried out, “oh you witty rogue, you are
 a fountain of repartee, but you never knew before that a catamite was
 called a k-night-cap, now did you?” then, fearing my companion would come
 off better than i, “madame,” i said, “i leave it to your sense of
 fairness: is ascyltos to be the only one in this dining-room who keeps
 holiday?” “fair enough,” conceded quartilla, “let ascyltos have his
 k-night-cap too!” on hearing that, the catamite changed mounts, and,
 having bestridden my comrade, nearly drove him to distraction with his
 buttocks and his kisses. giton was standing between us and splitting his
 sides with laughter when quartilla noticed him, and actuated by the
 liveliest curiosity, she asked whose boy he was, and upon my answering
 that he was my “brother,” “why has he not kissed me then?” she demanded.
 calling him to her, she pressed a kiss upon his mouth, then putting her
 hand beneath his robe, she took hold of his little member, as yet so
 undeveloped. “this,” she remarked, “shall serve me very well tomorrow, as
 a whet to my appetite, but today i’ll take no common fare after choice
 fish!” 
 she was still talking when psyche, who was giggling, came to her side and
 whispered something in her ear. what it was, i did not catch. “by all
 means,” ejaculated quartilla, “a brilliant idea! why shouldn’t our pretty
 little pannychis lose her maidenhead when the opportunity is so
 favorable?” a little girl, pretty enough, too, was led in at once; she
 looked to be not over seven years of age, and she was the same one who had
 before accompanied quartilla to our room. amidst universal applause, and
 in response to the demands of all, they made ready to perform the nuptial
 rites. i was completely out of countenance, and insisted that such a
 modest boy as giton was entirely unfitted for such a wanton part, and
 moreover, that the child was not of an age at which she could receive that
 which a woman must take. “is that so,” quartilla scoffed, “is she any
 younger than i was, when i submitted to my first man? juno, my patroness,
 curse me if i can remember the time when i ever was a virgin, for i
 diverted myself with others of my own age, as a child then as the years
 passed, i played with bigger boys, until at last i reached my present age.
 i suppose that this explains the origin of the proverb, ‘who carried the
 calf may carry the bull,’ as they say.” as i feared that giton might run
 greater risk if i were absent, i got up to take part in the ceremony.
 psyche had already enveloped the child’s head in the bridal-veil, the
 catamite, holding a torch, led the long procession of drunken women which
 followed; they were clapping their hands, having previously decked out the
 bridal-bed with a suggestive drapery. quartilla, spurred on by the
 wantonness of the others, seized hold of giton and drew him into the
 bridal-chamber. there was no doubt of the boy’s perfect willingness to go,
 nor was the girl at all alarmed at the name of marriage. when they were
 finally in bed, and the door shut, we seated ourselves outside the door of
 the bridal-chamber, and quartilla applied a curious eye to a chink,
 purposely made, watching their childish dalliance with lascivious
 attention. she then drew me gently over to her side that i might share the
 spectacle with her, and when we both attempted to peep our faces were
 pressed against each other; whenever she was not engrossed in the
 performance, she screwed up her lips to meet mine, and pecked at me
 continually with furtive kisses. [a thunderous hammering was heard at the
 door, while all this was going on, and everyone wondered what this
 unexpected interruption could mean, when we saw a soldier, one of the
 night-watch, enter with a drawn sword in his hand, and surrounded by a
 crowd of young rowdies. he glared about him with savage eyes and
 blustering mien, and, catching sight of quartilla, presently, “what’s up
 now, you shameless woman,” he bawled; “what do you mean by making game of
 me with lying promises, and cheating me out of the night you promised me?
 but you won’t get off unpunished! you and that lover of yours are going to
 find out that i’m a man!” at the soldier’s orders, his companion bound
 quartilla and myself together, mouth to mouth, breast to breast, and thigh
 to thigh; and not without a great deal of laughter. then the catamite,
 also at the soldier’s order, began to beslaver me all over with the fetid
 kisses of his stinking mouth, a treatment i could neither fly from, nor in
 any other way avoid. finally, he ravished me, and worked his entire
 pleasure upon me. in the meantime, the satyrion which i had drunk only a
 little while before spurred every nerve to lust and i began to gore
 quartilla impetuously, and she, burning with the same passion,
 reciprocated in the game. the rowdies laughed themselves sick, so moved
 were they by that ludicrous scene, for here was i, mounted by the stalest
 of catamites, involuntarily and almost unconsciously responding with as
 rapid a cadence to him as quartilla did in her wriggling under me. while
 this was going on, pannychis, unaccustomed at her tender years to the
 pastime of venus, raised an outcry and attracted the attention of the
 soldier, by this unexpected howl of consternation, for this slip of a girl
 was being ravished, and giton the victor, had won a not bloodless victory.
 aroused by what he saw, the soldier rushed upon them, seizing pannychis,
 then giton, then both of them together, in a crushing embrace. the virgin
 burst into tears and plead with him to remember her age, but her prayers
 availed her nothing, the soldier only being fired the more by her childish
 charms. 
 pannychis covered her head at last, resolved to endure whatever the fates
 had in store for her. at this instant, an old woman, the very same who had
 tricked me on that day when i was hunting for our lodging, came to the aid
 of pannychis, as though she had dropped from the clouds. with loud cries,
 she rushed into the house, swearing that a gang of footpads was prowling
 about the neighborhood and the people invoked the help of “all honest
 men,” in vain, for the members of the night-watch were either asleep or
 intent upon some carouse, as they were nowhere to be found. greatly
 terrified at this, the soldier rushed headlong from quartilla’s house. his
 companions followed after him, freeing pannychis from impending danger and
 relieving the rest of us from our fear.] (i was so weary of quartilla’s
 lechery that i began to meditate means of escape. i made my intentions
 known to ascyltos, who, as he wished to rid himself of the importunities
 of psyche, was delighted; had not giton been shut up in the
 bridal-chamber, the plan would have presented no difficulties, but we
 wished to take him with us, and out of the way of the viciousness of these
 prostitutes. we were anxiously engaged in debating this very point, when
 pannychis fell out of bed, and dragged giton after her, by her own weight.
 he was not hurt, but the girl gave her head a slight bump, and raised such
 a clamor that quartilla, in a terrible fright, rushed headlong into the
 room, giving us the opportunity of making off. we did not tarry, but flew
 back to our inn where,) throwing ourselves upon the bed, we passed the
 remainder of the night without fear. (sallying forth next day, we came
 upon two of our kidnappers, one of whom ascyltos savagely attacked the
 moment he set eyes upon him, and, after having thrashed and seriously
 wounded him, he ran to my aid against the other. he defended himself so
 stoutly, however, that he wounded us both, slightly, and escaped
 unscathed.) the third day had now dawned, the date set for the free dinner
 (at trimalchio’s,) but battered as we were, flight seemed more to our
 taste than quiet, so (we hastened to our inn and, as our wounds turned out
 to be trifling, we dressed them with vinegar and oil, and went to bed. the
 ruffian whom we had done for, was still lying upon the ground and we
 feared detection.) affairs were at this pass, and we were framing
 melancholy excuses with which to evade the coming revel, when a slave of
 agamemnon’s burst in upon our trembling conclave and said, “don’t you know
 with whom your engagement is today? the exquisite trimalchio, who keeps a
 clock and a liveried bugler in his dining-room, so that he can tell,
 instantly, how much of his life has run out!” forgetting all our troubles
 at that, we dressed hurriedly and ordered giton, who had very willingly
 performed his servile office, to follow us to the bath. 
 having put on our clothes, in the meantime, we commenced to stroll around
 and soon, the better to amuse ourselves, approached the circle of players;
 all of a sudden we caught sight of a bald-headed old fellow, rigged out in
 a russet colored tunic, playing ball with some long haired boys. it was
 not so much the boys who attracted our attention, although they might well
 have merited it, as it was the spectacle afforded by this beslippered
 paterfamilias playing with a green ball. if one but touched the ground, he
 never stooped for it to put it back in play; for a slave stood by with a
 bagful from which the players were supplied. we noted other innovations as
 well, for two eunuchs were stationed at opposite sides of the ring, one of
 whom held a silver chamber-pot, the other counted the balls; not those
 which bounced back and forth from hand to hand, in play, but those which
 fell to the ground. while we were marveling at this display of refinement,
 menelaus rushed up, “he is the one with whom you will rest upon your
 elbow,” he panted, “what you see now, is only a prelude to the dinner.”
 menelaus had scarcely ceased speaking when trimalchio snapped his fingers;
 the eunuch, hearing the signal, held the chamber-pot for him while he
 still continued playing. after relieving his bladder, he called for water
 to wash his hands, barely moistened his fingers, and dried them upon a
 boy’s head. 
 to go into details would take too long. we entered the bath, finally, and
 after sweating for a minute or two in the warm room, we passed through
 into the cold water. but short as was the time, trimalchio had already
 been sprinkled with perfume and was being rubbed down, not with linen
 towels, however, but with cloths made from the finest wool. meanwhile,
 three masseurs were guzzling falernian under his eyes, and when they
 spilled a great deal of it in their brawling, trimalchio declared they
 were pouring a libation to his genius. he was then wrapped in a coarse
 scarlet wrap-rascal, and placed in a litter. four runners, whose liveries
 were decorated with metal plates, preceded him, as also did a wheel-chair
 in which rode his favorite, a withered, blear eyed slave, even more
 repulsive looking than his master. a singing boy approached the head of
 his litter, as he was being carried along, and played upon small pipes the
 whole way, just as if he were communicating some secret to his master’s
 ear. marveling greatly, we followed, and met agamemnon at the outer door,
 to the post of which was fastened a small tablet bearing this inscription:
 in the vestibule stood the porter, clad in green and girded with a
 cherry-colored belt, shelling peas into a silver dish. above the threshold
 was suspended a golden cage, from which a black and white magpie greeted
 the visitors. 
 i almost fell backwards and broke my legs while staring at all this, for
 to the left, as we entered, not far from the porter’s alcove, an enormous
 dog upon a chain was painted upon the wall, and above him this
 inscription, in capitals:
 my companions laughed, but i plucked up my courage and did not hesitate,
 but went on and examined the entire wall. there was a scene in a slave
 market, the tablets hanging from the slaves’ necks, and trimalchio
 himself, wearing his hair long, holding a caduceus in his hand, entering
 rome, led by the hand of minerva. then again the painstaking artist had
 depicted him casting up accounts, and still again, being appointed
 steward; everything being explained by inscriptions. where the walls gave
 way to the portico, mercury was shown lifting him up by the chin, to a
 tribunal placed on high. near by stood fortune with her horn of plenty,
 and the three fates, spinning golden flax. i also took note of a group of
 runners, in the portico, taking their exercise under the eye of an
 instructor, and in one corner was a large cabinet, in which was a very
 small shrine containing silver lares, a marble venus, and a golden casket
 by no means small, which held, so they told us, the first shavings of
 trimalchio’s beard. i asked the hall-porter what pictures were in the
 middle hall. “the iliad and the odyssey,” he replied, “and the
 gladiatorial games given under laenas.” there was no time in which to
 examine them all. 
 we had now come to the dining-room, at the entrance to which sat a factor,
 receiving accounts, and, what gave me cause for astonishment, rods and
 axes were fixed to the door-posts, superimposed, as it were, upon the
 bronze beak of a ship, whereon was inscribed:
 a double lamp, suspended from the ceiling, hung beneath the inscription,
 and a tablet was fixed to each door-post; one, if my memory serves me, was
 inscribed,
 the other bore a painting of the moon in her phases, and the seven
 planets, and the days which were lucky and those which were unlucky,
 distinguished by distinctive studs. we had had enough of these novelties
 and started to enter the dining-room when a slave, detailed to this duty,
 cried out, “right foot first.” naturally, we were afraid that some of us
 might break some rule of conduct and cross the threshold the wrong way;
 nevertheless, we started out, stepping off together with the right foot,
 when all of a sudden, a slave who had been stripped, threw himself at our
 feet, and commenced begging us to save him from punishment, as it was no
 serious offense for which he was in jeopardy; the steward’s clothing had
 been stolen from him in the baths, and the whole value could scarcely
 amount to ten sesterces. so we drew back our right feet and intervened
 with the steward, who was counting gold pieces in the hall, begging him to
 remit the slave’s punishment. putting a haughty face on the matter, “it’s
 not the loss i mind so much,” he said, “as it is the carelessness of this
 worthless rascal. he lost my dinner clothes, given me on my birthday they
 were, by a certain client, tyrian purple too, but it had been washed once
 already. but what does it amount to? i make you a present of the
 scoundrel!” 
 we felt deeply obligated by his great condescension, and the same slave
 for whom we had interceded, rushed up to us as we entered the dining-room,
 and to our astonishment, kissed us thick and fast, voicing his thanks for
 our kindness. “you’ll know in a minute whom you did a favor for,” he
 confided, “the master’s wine is the thanks of a grateful butler!” at
 length we reclined, and slave boys from alexandria poured water cooled
 with snow upon our hands, while others following, attended to our feet and
 removed the hangnails with wonderful dexterity, nor were they silent even
 during this disagreeable operation, but they all kept singing at their
 work. i was desirous of finding out whether the whole household could
 sing, so i ordered a drink; a boy near at hand instantly repeated my order
 in a singsong voice fully as shrill, and whichever one you accosted did
 the same. you would not imagine that this was the dining-room of a private
 gentleman, but rather that it was an exhibition of pantomimes. a very
 inviting relish was brought on, for by now all the couches were occupied
 save only that of trimalchio, for whom, after a new custom, the chief
 place was reserved.
 on the tray stood a donkey made of corinthian bronze, bearing panniers
 containing olives, white in one and black in the other. two platters
 flanked the figure, on the margins of which were engraved trimalchio’s
 name and the weight of the silver in each. dormice sprinkled with
 poppy-seed and honey were served on little bridges soldered fast to the
 platter, and hot sausages on a silver gridiron, underneath which were
 damson plums and pomegranate seeds. 
 we were in the midst of these delicacies when, to the sound of music,
 trimalchio himself was carried in and bolstered up in a nest of small
 cushions, which forced a snicker from the less wary. a shaven poll
 protruded from a scarlet mantle, and around his neck, already muffled with
 heavy clothing, he had tucked a napkin having a broad purple stripe and a
 fringe that hung down all around. on the little finger of his left hand he
 wore a massive gilt ring, and on the first joint of the next finger, a
 smaller one which seemed to me to be of pure gold, but as a matter of fact
 it had iron stars soldered on all around it. and then, for fear all of his
 finery would not be displayed, he bared his right arm, adorned with a
 golden arm-band and an ivory circlet clasped with a plate of shining
 metal. 
 picking his teeth with a silver quill, “friends,” said he, “it was not
 convenient for me to come into the dining-room just yet, but for fear my
 absence should cause you any inconvenience, i gave over my own pleasure:
 permit me, however, to finish my game.” a slave followed with a terebinth
 table and crystal dice, and i noted one piece of luxury that was
 superlative; for instead of black and white pieces, he used gold and
 silver coins. he kept up a continual flow of various coarse expressions.
 we were still dallying with the relishes when a tray was brought in, on
 which was a basket containing a wooden hen with her wings rounded and
 spread out as if she were brooding. two slaves instantly approached, and
 to the accompaniment of music, commenced to feel around in the straw. they
 pulled out some pea-hen’s eggs, which they distributed among the diners.
 turning his head, trimalchio saw what was going on. “friends,” he
 remarked. “i ordered pea-hen’s eggs set under the hen, but i’m afraid
 they’re addled, by hercules i am let’s try them anyhow, and see if they’re
 still fit to suck.” we picked up our spoons, each of which weighed not
 less than half a pound, and punctured the shells, which were made of flour
 and dough, and as a matter of fact, i very nearly threw mine away for it
 seemed to me that a chick had formed already, but upon hearing an old
 experienced guest vow, “there must be something good here,” i broke open
 the shell with my hand and discovered a fine fat fig-pecker, imbedded in a
 yolk seasoned with pepper. 
 having finished his game, trimalchio was served with a helping of
 everything and was announcing in a loud voice his willingness to join
 anyone in a second cup of honied wine, when, to a flourish of music, the
 relishes were suddenly whisked away by a singing chorus, but a small dish
 happened to fall to the floor, in the scurry, and a slave picked it up.
 seeing this, trimalchio ordered that the boy be punished by a box on the
 ear, and made him throw it down again; a janitor followed with his broom
 and swept the silver dish away among the litter. next followed two
 long-haired ethiopians, carrying small leather bottles, such as are
 commonly seen in the hands of those who sprinkle sand in the arena, and
 poured wine upon our hands, for no one offered us water. when complimented
 upon these elegant extras, the host cried out, “mars loves a fair fight:
 and so i ordered each one a separate table: that way these stinking slaves
 won’t make us so hot with their crowding.” some glass bottles carefully
 sealed with gypsum were brought in at that instant; a label bearing this
 inscription was fastened to the neck of each one:
 while we were studying the labels, trimalchio clapped his hands and cried,
 “ah me! to think that wine lives longer than poor little man. let’s fill
 ‘em up! there’s life in wine and this is the real opimian, you can take my
 word for that. i offered no such vintage yesterday, though my guests were
 far more respectable.” we were tippling away and extolling all these
 elegant devices, when a slave brought in a silver skeleton, so contrived
 that the joints and movable vertebra could be turned in any direction. he
 threw it down upon the table a time or two, and its mobile articulation
 caused it to assume grotesque attitudes, whereupon trimalchio chimed in:
 “poor man is nothing in the scheme of things and orcus grips
 us and to hades flings our bones! this skeleton before us here
 is as important as we ever were! let’s live then while we
 may and life is dear.”
 the applause was followed by a course which, by its oddity, drew every
 eye, but it did not come up to our expectations. there was a circular tray
 around which were displayed the signs of the zodiac, and upon each sign
 the caterer had placed the food best in keeping with it. ram’s vetches on
 aries, a piece of beef on taurus, kidneys and lamb’s fry on gemini, a
 crown on cancer, the womb of an unfarrowed sow on virgo, an african fig on
 leo, on libra a balance, one pan of which held a tart and the other a
 cake, a small seafish on scorpio, a bull’s eye on sagittarius, a sea
 lobster on capricornus, a goose on aquarius and two mullets on pisces. in
 the middle lay a piece of cut sod upon which rested a honeycomb with the
 grass arranged around it. an egyptian slave passed bread around from a
 silver oven and in a most discordant voice twisted out a song in the
 manner of the mime in the musical farce called laserpitium. seeing that we
 were rather depressed at the prospect of busying ourselves with such vile
 fare, trimalchio urged us to fall to: “let us fall to, gentlemen, i beg of
 you, this is only the sauce!” 
 while he was speaking, four dancers ran in to the time of the music, and
 removed the upper part of the tray. beneath, on what seemed to be another
 tray, we caught sight of stuffed capons and sows’ bellies, and in the
 middle, a hare equipped with wings to resemble pegasus. at the corners of
 the tray we also noted four figures of marsyas and from their bladders
 spouted a highly spiced sauce upon fish which were swimming about as if in
 a tide-race. all of us echoed the applause which was started by the
 servants, and fell to upon these exquisite delicacies, with a laugh.
 “carver,” cried trimalchio, no less delighted with the artifice practised
 upon us, and the carver appeared immediately. timing his strokes to the
 beat of the music he cut up the meat in such a fashion as to lead you to
 think that a gladiator was fighting from a chariot to the accompaniment of
 a water-organ. every now and then trimalchio would repeat “carver,
 carver,” in a low voice, until i finally came to the conclusion that some
 joke was meant in repeating a word so frequently, so i did not scruple to
 question him who reclined above me. as he had often experienced byplay of
 this sort he explained, “you see that fellow who is carving the meat,
 don’t you? well, his name is carver. whenever trimalchio says carver,
 carve her, by the same word, he both calls and commands!” 
 i could eat no more, so i turned to my whilom informant to learn as much
 as i could and sought to draw him out with far-fetched gossip. i inquired
 who that woman could be who was scurrying about hither and yon in such a
 fashion. “she’s called fortunata,” he replied. “she’s the wife of
 trimalchio, and she measures her money by the peck. and only a little
 while ago, what was she! may your genius pardon me, but you would not have
 been willing to take a crust of bread from her hand. now, without rhyme or
 reason, she’s in the seventh heaven and is trimalchio’s factotum, so much
 so that he would believe her if she told him it was dark when it was broad
 daylight! as for him, he don’t know how rich he is, but this harlot keeps
 an eye on everything and where you least expect to find her, you’re sure
 to run into her. she’s temperate, sober, full of good advice, and has many
 good qualities, but she has a scolding tongue, a very magpie on a sofa,
 those she likes, she likes, but those she dislikes, she dislikes!
 trimalchio himself has estates as broad as the flight of a kite is long,
 and piles of money. there’s more silver plate lying in his steward’s
 office than other men have in their whole fortunes! and as for slaves,
 damn me if i believe a tenth of them knows the master by sight. the truth
 is, that these stand-a-gapes are so much in awe of him that any one of
 them would step into a fresh dunghill without ever knowing it, at a mere
 nod from him!” 
 “and don’t you get the idea that he buys anything; everything is produced
 at home, wool, pitch, pepper, if you asked for hen’s milk you would get
 it. because he wanted his wool to rival other things in quality, he bought
 rams at tarentum and sent ‘em into his flocks with a slap on the arse. he
 had bees brought from attica, so he could produce attic honey at home,
 and, as a side issue, so he could improve the native bees by crossing with
 the greek. he even wrote to india for mushroom seed one day, and he hasn’t
 a single mule that wasn’t sired by a wild ass. do you see all those
 cushions? not a single one but what is stuffed with either purple or
 scarlet wool! he hasn’t anything to worry about! look out how you
 criticise those other fellow-freedmen-friends of his, they’re all well
 heeled. see the fellow reclining at the bottom of the end couch? he’s
 worth his , any day, and he rose from nothing. only a short while
 ago he had to carry faggots on his own back. i don’t know how true it is,
 but they say that he snatched off an incubo’s hat and found a treasure!
 for my part, i don’t envy any man anything that was given him by a god. he
 still carries the marks of his box on the ear, and he isn’t wishing
 himself any bad luck! he posted this notice, only the other day:
 “what do you think of the fellow in the freedman’s place? he has a good
 front, too, hasn’t he? and he has a right to. he saw his fortune
 multiplied tenfold, but he lost heavily through speculation at the last. i
 don’t think he can call his very hair his own, and it is no fault of his
 either, by hercules, it isn’t. there’s no better fellow anywhere; his
 rascally freedmen cheated him out of everything. you know very well how it
 is; everybody’s business is nobody’s business, and once let business
 affairs start to go wrong, your friends will stand from under! look at the
 fix he’s in, and think what a fine trade he had! he used to be an
 undertaker. he dined like a king, boars roasted whole in their shaggy
 bides, bakers’ pastries, birds, cooks and bakers! more wine was spilled
 under his table than another has in his wine cellar. his life was like a
 pipe dream, not like an ordinary mortal’s. when his affairs commenced to
 go wrong, and he was afraid his creditors would guess that he was
 bankrupt, he advertised an auction and this was his placard:
 trimalchio broke in upon this entertaining gossip, for the course had been
 removed and the guests, happy with wine, had started a general
 conversation: lying back upon his couch, “you ought to make this wine go
 down pleasantly,” he said, “the fish must have something to swim in. but i
 say, you didn’t think i’d be satisfied with any such dinner as you saw on
 the top of that tray? ‘is ulysses no better known?’ well, well, we
 shouldn’t forget our culture, even at dinner. may the bones of my patron
 rest in peace, he wanted me to become a man among men. no one can show me
 anything new, and that little tray has proved it. this heaven where the
 gods live, turns into as many different signs, and sometimes into the ram:
 therefore, whoever is born under that sign will own many flocks and much
 wool, a hard head, a shameless brow, and a sharp horn. a great many
 school-teachers and rambunctious butters-in are born under that sign.” we
 applauded the wonderful penetration of our astrologer and he ran on, “then
 the whole heaven turns into a bull-calf and the kickers and herdsmen and
 those who see to it that their own bellies are full, come into the world.
 teams of horses and oxen are born under the twins, and well-hung wenchers
 and those who bedung both sides of the wall. i was born under the crab and
 therefore stand on many legs and own much property on land and sea, for
 the crab is as much at home on one as he is in the other. for that reason,
 i put nothing on that sign for fear of weighing down my own destiny.
 bulldozers and gluttons are born under the lion, and women and fugitives
 and chain-gangs are born under the virgin. butchers and perfumers are born
 under the balance, and all who think that it is their business to
 straighten things out. poisoners and assassins are born under the
 scorpion. cross-eyed people who look at the vegetables and sneak away with
 the bacon, are born under the archer. horny-handed sons of toil are born
 under capricorn. bartenders and pumpkin-heads are born under the
 water-carrier. caterers and rhetoricians are born under the fishes: and so
 the world turns round, just like a mill, and something bad always comes to
 the top, and men are either being born or else they’re dying. as to the
 sod and the honeycomb in the middle, for i never do anything without a
 reason, mother earth is in the centre, round as an egg, and all that is
 good is found in her, just like it is in a honeycomb.” 
 “bravo!” we yelled, and, with hands uplifted to the ceiling, we swore that
 such fellows as hipparchus and aratus were not to be compared with him. at
 length some slaves came in who spread upon the couches some coverlets upon
 which were embroidered nets and hunters stalking their game with
 boar-spears, and all the paraphernalia of the chase. we knew not what to
 look for next, until a hideous uproar commenced, just outside the
 dining-room door, and some spartan hounds commenced to run around the
 table all of a sudden. a tray followed them, upon which was served a wild
 boar of immense size, wearing a liberty cap upon its head, and from its
 tusks hung two little baskets of woven palm fibre, one of which contained
 syrian dates, the other, theban. around it hung little suckling pigs made
 from pastry, signifying that this was a brood-sow with her pigs at suck.
 it turned out that these were souvenirs intended to be taken home. when it
 came to carving the boar, our old friend carver, who had carved the
 capons, did not appear, but in his place a great bearded giant, with bands
 around his legs, and wearing a short hunting cape in which a design was
 woven. drawing his hunting- knife, he plunged it fiercely into the boar’s
 side, and some thrushes flew out of the gash. fowlers, ready with their
 rods, caught them in a moment, as they fluttered around the room and
 trimalchio ordered one to each guest, remarking, “notice what fine acorns
 this forest-bred boar fed on,” and as he spoke, some slaves removed the
 little baskets from the tusks and divided the syrian and theban dates
 equally among the diners. 
 getting a moment to myself, in the meantime, i began to speculate as to
 why the boar had come with a liberty cap upon his head. after exhausting
 my invention with a thousand foolish guesses, i made bold to put the
 riddle which teased me to my old informant. “why, sure,” he replied, “even
 your slave could explain that; there’s no riddle, everything’s as plain as
 day! this boar made his first bow as the last course of yesterday’s dinner
 and was dismissed by the guests, so today he comes back as a freedman!” i
 damned my stupidity and refrained from asking any more questions for fear
 i might leave the impression that i had never dined among decent people
 before. while we were speaking, a handsome boy, crowned with vine leaves
 and ivy, passed grapes around, in a little basket, and impersonated
 bacchus-happy, bacchus-drunk, and bacchus-dreaming, reciting, in the
 meantime, his master’s verses, in a shrill voice. trimalchio turned to him
 and said, “dionisus, be thou liber,” whereupon the boy immediately
 snatched the cap from the boar’s head, and put it upon his own. at that
 trimalchio added, “you can’t deny that my father’s middle name was liber!”
 we applauded trimalchio’s conceit heartily, and kissed the boy as he went
 around. trimalchio retired to the close-stool, after this course, and we,
 having freedom of action with the tyrant away, began to draw the other
 guests out. after calling for a bowl of wine, dama spoke up, “a day’s
 nothing at all: it’s night before you can turn around, so you can’t do
 better than to go right to the dining-room from your bed. it’s been so
 cold that i can hardly get warm in a bath, but a hot drink’s as good as an
 overcoat: i’ve had some long pegs, and between you and me, i’m a bit
 groggy; the booze has gone to my head.” 
 here seleucus took up the tale. “i don’t bathe every day,” he confided, “a
 bath uses you up like a fuller: water’s got teeth and your strength wastes
 away a little every day; but when i’ve downed a pot of mead, i tell the
 cold to suck my cock! i couldn’t bathe today anyway, because i was at a
 funeral; dandy fellow, he was too, good old chrysanthus slipped his wind!
 why, only the other day he said good morning’ to me, and i almost think
 i’m talking to him now! gawd’s truth, we’re only blown-up bladders
 strutting around, we’re less than flies, for they have some good in them,
 but we’re only bubbles. and supposing he had not kept to such a low diet!
 why, not a drop of water or a crumb of bread so much as passed his lips
 for five days; and yet he joined the majority! too many doctors did away
 with him, or rather, his time had come, for a doctor’s not good for
 anything except for a consolation to your mind! he was well carried out,
 anyhow, in the very bed he slept in during his lifetime. and he was
 covered with a splendid pall: the mourning was tastefully managed; he had
 freed some slaves; even though his wife was sparing with her tears: and
 what if he hadn’t treated her so well! but when you come to women, women
 all belong to the kite species: no one ought to waste a good turn upon one
 of them; it’s just like throwing it down a well! an old love’s like a
 cancer!” 
 he was becoming very tiresome, and phileros cried out, “let’s think about
 the living! he has what was coming to him, he lived respectably, and
 respectably he died. what’s he got to kick about’? he made his pile from
 an as, and would pick a quadrans out of a dunghill with his teeth, any old
 time. and he grew richer and richer, of course: just like a honeycomb. i
 expect that he left all of a hundred thousand, by hercules, i do! all in
 cold cash, too; but i’ve eaten dog’s tongue and must speak the truth: he
 was foul-mouthed, had a ready tongue, he was a trouble maker and no man.
 now his brother was a good fellow, a friend to his friend, free-handed,
 and he kept a liberal table. he picked a loser at the start, but his first
 vintage set him upon his legs, for he sold his wine at the figure he
 demanded, and, what made him hold his head higher still, he came into a
 legacy from which he stole more than had been left to him. then that fool
 friend of yours, in a fit of anger at his brother, willed his property
 away to some son-of-a-bitch or other, who he was, i don’t know, but when a
 man runs away from his own kin, he has a long way to go! and what’s more,
 he had some slaves who were ear-specialists at the keyhole, and they did
 him a lot of harm, for a man won’t prosper when he believes, on the spot,
 every tale that he hears; a man in business, especially. still, he had a
 good time as long as he lived: for happy’s the fellow who gets the gift,
 not the one it was meant for. he sure was fortune’s son! lead turned to
 gold in his hands. it’s easy enough when everything squares up and runs on
 schedule. how old would you think he was? seventy and over, but he was as
 tough as horn, carried his age well, and was as black as a crow. i knew
 the fellow for years and years, and he was a lecher to the very last. i
 don’t believe that even the dog in his house escaped his attentions, by
 hercules, i don’t; and what a boy-lover he was! saw a virgin in every one
 he met! not that i blame him though, for it’s all he could take with him.”
 phileros had his say and ganymedes exclaimed, “you gabble away about
 things that don’t concern heaven or earth: and none of you cares how the
 price of grain pinches. i couldn’t even get a mouthful of bread today, by
 hercules, i couldn’t. how the drought does hang on! we’ve had famine for a
 year. if the damned aediles would only get what’s coming to them. they
 graft with the bakers, scratch-my-arse-and-i’ll-scratch-yours! that’s the
 way it always is, the poor devils are out of luck, but the jaws of the
 capitalists are always keeping the saturnalia. if only we had such
 lion-hearted sports as we had when i first came from asia! that was the
 life! if the flour was not the very best, they would beat up those
 belly-robbing grafters till they looked like jupiter had been at them. how
 well i remember safinius; he lived near the old arch, when i was a boy.
 for a man, he was one hot proposition! wherever he went, the ground
 smoked! but he was square, dependable, a friend to a friend, you could
 safely play mora with him, in the dark. but how he did peel them in the
 town hall: he spoke no parables, not he! he did everything straight from
 the shoulder and his voice roared like a trumpet in the forum. he never
 sweat nor spat. i don’t know, but i think he had a strain of the asiatic
 in him. and how civil and friendly-like he was, in returning everyone’s
 greeting; called us all by name, just like he was one of us! and so
 provisions were cheap as dirt in those days. the loaf you got for an as,
 you couldn’t eat, not even if someone helped you, but you see them no
 bigger than a bull’s eye now, and the hell of it is that things are
 getting worse every day; this colony grows backwards like a calf’s tall!
 why do we have to put up with an aedile here, who’s not worth three
 caunian figs and who thinks more of an as than of our lives? he has a good
 time at home, and his daily income’s more than another man’s fortune. i
 happen to know where he got a thousand gold pieces. if we had any nuts,
 he’d not be so damned well pleased with himself! nowadays, men are lions
 at home and foxes abroad. what gets me is, that i’ve already eaten my old
 clothes, and if this high cost of living keeps on, i’ll have to sell my
 cottages! what’s going to happen to this town, if neither gods nor men
 take pity on it? may i never have any luck if i don’t believe all this
 comes from the gods! for no one believes that heaven is heaven, no one
 keeps a fast, no one cares a hang about jupiter: they all shut their eyes
 and count up their own profits. in the old days, the married women, in
 their stolas, climbed the hill in their bare feet, pure in heart, and with
 their hair unbound, and prayed to jupiter for rain! and it would pour down
 in bucketfuls then or never, and they’d all come home, wet as drowned
 rats. but the gods all have the gout now, because we are not religious;
 and so our fields are burning up!” 
 “don’t be so down in the mouth,” chimed in echion, the ragman; “if it
 wasn’t that it’d be something else, as the farmer said, when he lost his
 spotted pig. if a thing don’t happen today, it may tomorrow. that’s the
 way life jogs along. you couldn’t name a better country, by hercules, you
 couldn’t, if only the men had any brains. she’s in hot water right now,
 but she ain’t the only one. we oughtn’t to be so particular; heaven’s as
 far away everywhere else. if you were somewhere else, you’d swear that
 pigs walked around here already roasted. think of what’s coming! we’ll
 soon have a fine gladiator show to last for three days, no training-school
 pupils; most of them will be freedmen. our titus has a hot head and plenty
 of guts and it will go to a finish. i’m well acquainted with him, and
 he’ll not stand for any frame-ups. it will be cold steel in the best
 style, no running away, the shambles will be in the middle of the
 amphitheatre where all the crowd can see. and what’s more, he has the
 coin, for he came into thirty million when his father had the bad luck to
 die. he could blow in four hundred thousand and his fortune never feel it,
 but his name would live forever. he has some dwarfs already, and a woman
 to fight from a chariot. then, there’s glyco’s steward; he was caught
 screwing glyco’s wife. you’ll see some battle between jealous husbands and
 favored lovers. anyhow, that cheap screw of a glyco condemned his steward
 to the beasts and only published his own shame. how could the slave go
 wrong when he only obeyed orders? it would have been better if that
 she-piss- pot, for that’s all she’s fit for, had been tossed by the bull,
 but a fellow has to beat the saddle when he can’t beat the jackass. how
 could glyco ever imagine that a sprig of hermogenes’ planting could turn
 out well? why, hermogenes could trim the claws of a flying hawk, and no
 snake ever hatched out a rope yet! and look at glyco! he’s smoked himself
 out in fine shape, and as long as he lives, he’ll carry that stain! no one
 but the devil himself can wipe that out, but chickens always come home to
 roost. my nose tells me that mammaea will set out a spread: two bits
 apiece for me and mine! and he’ll nick norbanus out of his political pull
 if he does; you all know that it’s to his interest to hump himself to get
 the best of him. and honestly, what did that fellow ever do for us? he
 exhibited some two cent gladiators that were so near dead they’d have
 fallen flat if you blew your breath at them. i’ve seen better thugs sent
 against wild beasts! and the cavalry he killed looked about as much like
 the real thing as the horsemen on the lamps; you would have taken them for
 dunghill cocks! one plug had about as much action as a jackass with a
 pack-saddle; another was club-footed; and a third who had to take the
 place of one that was killed, was as good as dead, and hamstrung into the
 bargain. there was only one that had any pep, and he was a thracian, but
 he only fought when we egged him on. the whole crowd was flogged
 afterwards. how the mob did yell ‘lay it on!’ they were nothing but
 runaways. and at that he had the nerve to say, ‘i’ve given you a show.’
 ‘and i’ve applauded,’ i answered; ‘count it up and you’ll find that i gave
 more than i got! one hand washes the other.’” 
 “agamemnon, your looks seem to say, what’s this boresome nut trying to
 hand us?’ well, i’m talking because you, who can talk book-foolishness,
 won’t. you don’t belong to our bunch, so you laugh in your sleeve at the
 way us poor people talk, but we know that you’re only a fool with a lot of
 learning. well, what of it? some day i’ll get you to come to my country
 place and take a look at my little estate. we’ll have fresh eggs and
 spring chicken to chew on when we get there; it will be all right even if
 the weather has kept things back this year. we’ll find enough to satisfy
 us, and my kid will soon grow up to be a pupil of yours; he can divide up
 to four, now, and you’ll have a little servant at your side, if he lives.
 when he has a minute to himself, he never takes his eyes from his tablets;
 he’s smart too, and has the right kind of stuff in him, even if he is
 crazy about birds. i’ve had to kill three of his linnets already. i told
 him that a weasel had gotten them, but he’s found another hobby, now he
 paints all the time. he’s left the marks of his heels on his greek
 already, and is doing pretty well with his latin, although his master’s
 too easy with him; won’t make him stick to one thing. he comes to me to
 get me to give him something to write when his master don’t want to work.
 then there’s another tutor, too, no scholar, but very painstaking, though;
 he can teach you more than he knows himself. he comes to the house on
 holidays and is always satisfied with whatever you pay him. some little
 time ago, i bought the kid some law books; i want him to have a smattering
 of the law for home use. there’s bread in that! as for literature, he’s
 got enough of that in him already; if he begins to kick, i’ve concluded
 that i’ll make him learn some trade; the barber’s, say, or the
 auctioneer’s, or even the lawyer’s. that’s one thing no one but the devil
 can do him out of! ‘believe what your daddy says, primigenius,’ i din into
 his ears every day, ‘whenever you learn a thing, it’s yours. look at
 phileros the attorney; he’d not be keeping the wolf from the door now if
 he hadn’t studied. it’s not long since he had to carry his wares on his
 back and peddle them, but he can put up a front with norbanus himself now!
 learning’s a fine thing, and a trade won’t starve.’” 
 twaddle of this sort was being bandied about when trimalchio came in;
 mopping his forehead and washing his hands in perfume, he said, after a
 short pause, “pardon me, gentlemen, but my stomach’s been on strike for
 the past few days and the doctors disagreed about the cause. but
 pomegranate rind and pitch steeped in vinegar have helped me, and i hope
 that my belly will get on its good behavior, for sometimes there’s such a
 rumbling in my guts that you’d think a bellowing bull was in there. so if
 anyone wants to do his business, there’s no call to be bashful about it.
 none of us was born solid! i don’t know of any worse torment than having
 to hold it in, it’s the one thing jupiter himself can’t hold in. so you’re
 laughing, are you, fortunata? why, you’re always keeping me awake at night
 yourself. i never objected yet to anyone in my dining-room relieving
 himself when he wanted to, and the doctors forbid our holding it in.
 everything’s ready outside, if the call’s more serious, water,
 close-stool, and anything else you’ll need. believe me, when this rising
 vapor gets to the brain, it puts the whole body on the burn. many a one
 i’ve known to kick in just because he wouldn’t own up to the truth.” we
 thanked him for his kindness and consideration, and hid our laughter by
 drinking more and oftener. we had not realized that, as yet, we were only
 in the middle of the entertainment, with a hill still ahead, as the saying
 goes. the tables were cleared off to the beat of music, and three white
 hogs, muzzled, and wearing bells, were brought into the dining-room. the
 announcer informed us that one was a two-year-old, another three, and the
 third just turned six. i had an idea that some rope-dancers had come in
 and that the hogs would perform tricks, just as they do for the crowd on
 the streets, but trimalchio dispelled this illusion by asking, “which one
 will you have served up immediately, for dinner? any country cook can
 manage a dunghill cock, a pentheus hash, or little things like that, but
 my cooks are well used to serving up calves boiled whole, in their
 cauldrons!” then he ordered a cook to be called in at once, and without
 awaiting our pleasure, he directed that the oldest be butchered, and
 demanded in a loud voice, “what division do you belong too?” when the
 fellow made answer that he was from the fortieth, “were you bought, or
 born upon my estates?” trimalchio continued. “neither,” replied the cook,
 “i was left to you by pansa’s will.” “see to it that this is properly
 done,” trimalchio warned, “or i’ll have you transferred to the division of
 messengers!” and the cook, bearing his master’s warning in mind, departed
 for the kitchen with the next course in tow. 
 trimalchio’s threatening face relaxed and he turned to us, “if the wine
 don’t please you,” he said, “i’ll change it; you ought to do justice to it
 by drinking it. i don’t have to buy it, thanks to the gods. everything
 here that makes your mouths water, was produced on one of my country
 places which i’ve never yet seen, but they tell me it’s down terracina and
 tarentum way. i’ve got a notion to add sicily to my other little holdings,
 so in case i want to go to africa, i’ll be able to sail along my own
 coasts. but tell me the subject of your speech today, agamemnon, for,
 though i don’t plead cases myself, i studied literature for home use, and
 for fear you should think i don’t care about learning, let me inform you
 that i have three libraries, one greek and the others latin. give me the
 outline of your speech if you like me.”
 “a poor man and a rich man were enemies,” agamemmon began, when: “what’s a
 poor man?” trimalchio broke in. “well put,” agamemnon conceded and went
 into details upon some problem or other, what it was i do not know.
 trimalchio instantly rendered the following verdict, “if that’s the case,
 there’s nothing to dispute about; if it’s not the case, it don’t amount to
 anything anyhow.” these flashes of wit, and others equally scintillating,
 we loudly applauded, and he went on: “tell me, my dearest agamemnon, do
 you remember the twelve labors of hercules or the story of ulysses, how
 the cyclops threw his thumb out of joint with a pig-headed crowbar? when i
 was a boy, i used to read those stories in homer. and then, there’s the
 sibyl: with my own eyes i saw her, at cumae, hanging up in a jar; and
 whenever the boys would say to her ‘sibyl, sibyl, what would you?’ she
 would answer, ‘i would die.’” 
 before he had run out of wind, a tray upon which was an enormous hog was
 placed upon the table, almost filling it up. we began to wonder at the
 dispatch with which it had been prepared and swore that no cock could have
 been served up in so short a time; moreover, this hog seemed to us far
 bigger than the boar had been. trimalchio scrutinized it closely and “what
 the hell,” he suddenly bawled out, “this hog hain’t been gutted, has it?
 no, it hain’t, by hercules, it hain’t! call that cook! call that cook in
 here immediately!” when the crestfallen cook stood at the table and owned
 up that he had forgotten to bowel him, “so you forgot, did you?”
 trimalchio shouted, “you’d think he’d only left out a bit of pepper and
 cummin, wouldn’t you? off with his clothes!” the cook was stripped without
 delay, and stood with hanging head, between two torturers. we all began to
 make excuses for him at this, saying, “little things like that are bound
 to happen once in a while, let us prevail upon you to let him off; if he
 ever does such a thing again, not a one of us will have a word to say in
 his behalf.” but for my part, i was mercilessly angry and could not help
 leaning over towards agamemnon and whispering in his ear, “it is easily
 seen that this fellow is criminally careless, is it not? how could anyone
 forget to draw a hog? if he had served me a fish in that fashion i
 wouldn’t overlook it, by hercules, i wouldn’t.” but that was not
 trimalchio’s way: his face relaxed into good humor and he said, “since
 your memory’s so short, you can gut him right here before our eyes!” the
 cook put on his tunic, snatched up a carving knife, with a trembling hand,
 and slashed the hog’s belly in several places. sausages and meat-
 puddings, widening the apertures, by their own weight, immediately tumbled
 out. 
 the whole household burst into unanimous applause at this; “hurrah for
 gaius,” they shouted. as for the cook, he was given a drink and a silver
 crown and a cup on a salver of corinthian bronze. seeing that agamemnon
 was eyeing the platter closely, trimalchio remarked, “i’m the only one
 that can show the real corinthian!” i thought that, in his usual
 purse-proud manner, he was going to boast that his bronzes were all
 imported from corinth, but he did even better by saying, “wouldn’t you
 like to know how it is that i’m the only one that can show the real
 corinthian? well, it’s because the bronze worker i patronize is named
 corinthus, and what’s corinthian unless it’s what a corinthus makes? and,
 so you won’t think i’m a blockhead, i’m going to show you that i’m well
 acquainted with how corinthian first came into the world. when troy was
 taken, hannibal, who was a very foxy fellow and a great rascal into the
 bargain, piled all the gold and silver and bronze statues in one pile and
 set ‘em afire, melting these different metals into one: then the metal
 workers took their pick and made bowls and dessert dishes and statuettes
 as well. that’s how corinthian was born; neither one nor the other, but an
 amalgam of all. but i prefer glass, if you don’t mind my saying so; it
 don’t stink, and if it didn’t break, i’d rather have it than gold, but
 it’s cheap and common now.” 
 “but there was an artisan, once upon a time, who made a glass vial that
 couldn’t be broken. on that account he was admitted to caesar with his
 gift; then he dashed it upon the floor, when caesar handed it back to him.
 the emperor was greatly startled, but the artisan picked the vial up off
 the pavement, and it was dented, just like a brass bowl would have been!
 he took a little hammer out of his tunic and beat out the dent without any
 trouble. when he had done that, he thought he would soon be in jupiter’s
 heaven, and more especially when caesar said to him, ‘is there anyone else
 who knows how to make this malleable glass? think now!’ and when he denied
 that anyone else knew the secret, caesar ordered his head chopped off,
 because if this should get out, we would think no more of gold than we
 would of dirt.” 
 “and when it comes to silver, i’m a connoisseur; i have goblets as big as
 wine-jars, a hundred of ‘em more or less, with engraving that shows how
 cassandra killed her sons, and the dead boys are lying so naturally that
 you’d think ‘em alive. i own a thousand bowls which mummius left to my
 patron, where daedalus is shown shutting niobe up in the trojan horse, and
 i also have cups engraved with the gladiatorial contests of hermeros and
 petraites: they’re all heavy, too. i wouldn’t sell my taste in these
 matters for any money!” a slave dropped a cup while he was running on in
 this fashion. glaring at him, trimalchio said, “go hang yourself, since
 you’re so careless.” the boy’s lip quivered and he immediately commenced
 to beg for mercy. “why do you pray to me?” trimalchio demanded, at this:
 “i don’t intend to be harsh with you, i’m only warning you against being
 so awkward.” finally, however, we got him to give the boy a pardon and no
 sooner had this been done than the slave started running around the room
 crying, “out with the water and in with the wine!” we all paid tribute to
 this joke, but agamemnon in particular, for he well knew what strings to
 pull in order to secure another invitation to dinner. tickled by our
 flattery, and mellowed by the wine, trimalchio was just about drunk. “why
 hasn’t one of you asked my fortunata to dance?” he demanded, “there’s no
 one can do a better cancan, believe me,” and he himself raised his arms
 above his head and favored us with an impersonation of syrus the actor;
 the whole household chanting:
 oh bravo
 oh bravissimo
 in chorus, and he would have danced out into the middle of the room before
 us all, had not fortunata whispered in his ear, telling him, i suppose,
 that such low buffoonery was not in keeping with his dignity. but nothing
 could be so changeable as his humor, for one minute he stood in awe of
 fortunata, but his natural propensities would break out the next. 
 but his passion for dancing was interrupted at this stage by a
 stenographer who read aloud, as if he were reading the public records, “on
 the seventh of the kalends of july, on trimalchio’s estates near cumae,
 were born thirty boys and forty girls: five hundred pecks of wheat were
 taken from the threshing floors and stored in the granaries: five hundred
 oxen were put to yoke: the slave mithridates was crucified on the same
 date for cursing the genius of our master, gaius: on said date ten million
 sesterces were returned to the vaults as no sound investment could be
 found: on said date, a fire broke out in the gardens at pompeii, said fire
 originating in the house of nasta, the bailiff.” “what’s that?” demanded
 trimalchio. “when were the gardens at pompeii bought for me?” “why, last
 year,” answered the stenographer, “for that reason the item has not
 appeared in the accounts.” trimalchio flew into a rage at this. “if i’m
 not told within six months of any real estate that’s bought for me,” he
 shouted, “i forbid it’s being carried to my account at all!” next, the
 edicts of his aediles were read aloud, and the wills of some of his
 foresters in which trimalchio was disinherited by a codicil, then the
 names of his bailiffs, and that of a freedwoman who had been repudiated by
 a night watchman, after she had been caught in bed with a bath attendant,
 that of a porter banished to baioe, a steward who was standing trial, and
 lastly the report of a decision rendered in the matter of a lawsuit,
 between some valets. when this was over with, some rope dancers came in
 and a very boresome fool stood holding a ladder, ordering his boy to dance
 from rung to rung, and finally at the top, all this to the music of
 popular airs; then the boy was compelled to jump through blazing hoops
 while grasping a huge wine jar with his teeth. trimalchio was the only one
 who was much impressed by these tricks, remarking that it was a thankless
 calling and adding that in all the world there were just two things which
 could give him acute pleasure, rope-dancers and horn blowers; all other
 entertainments were nothing but nonsense. “i bought a company of
 comedians,” he went on, “but i preferred for them to put on atellane
 farces, and i ordered my flute-player to play latin airs only.” 
 while our noble gaius was still talking away, the boy slipped and fell,
 alighting upon trimalchio’s arm. the whole household cried out, as did
 also the guests, not that they bore such a coarse fellow any good will, as
 they would gladly have seen his neck broken, but because such an unlucky
 ending to the dinner might make it necessary for them to go into mourning
 over a total stranger. as for trimalchio, he groaned heavily and bent over
 his arm as though it had been injured: doctors flocked around him, and
 fortunata was among the very first, her hair was streaming and she held a
 cup in her hand and screamed out her grief and unhappiness. as for the boy
 who had fallen, he was crawling at our feet, imploring pardon. i was
 uneasy for fear his prayers would lead up to some ridiculous theatrical
 climax, for i had not yet been able to forget that cook who had forgotten
 to bowel that hog, and so, for this reason, i began to scan the whole
 dining-room very closely, to see if an automaton would come out through
 the wall; and all the more so as a slave was beaten for having bound up
 his master’s bruised arm in white wool instead of purple. nor was my
 suspicion unjustified, for in place of punishment, trimalchio ordered that
 the boy be freed, so that no one could say that so exalted a personage had
 been injured by a slave. 
 we applauded his action and engaged in a discussion upon the instability
 of human affairs, which many took sides. “a good reason,” declared
 trimalchio, “why such an occasion shouldn’t slip by without an epigram.”
 he called for his tablets at once, and after racking his brains for a
 little while, he got off the following:
 the unexpected will turn up; our whole lives fortune bungles
 up. falernian, boy, hand round the cup.
 this epigram led up to a discussion of the poets, and for a long time, the
 greatest praise was bestowed upon mopsus the thracian, until trimalchio
 broke in with: “professor, i wish you’d tell me how you’d compare cicero
 and publilius. i’m of the opinion that the first was the more eloquent,
 but that the last moralizes more beautifully, for what can excel these
 lines?
 insatiable luxury crumbles the walls of war; to satiate
 gluttony, peacocks in coops are brought arrayed in gold plumage
 like babylon tapestry rich. numidian guinea-fowls, capons, all
 perish for thee: and even the wandering stork, welcome guest that
 he is, the emblem of sacred maternity, slender of leg and
 gloctoring exile from winter, herald of spring, still, finds his
 last nest in the--cauldron of gluttony base. india surrenders her
 pearls; and what mean they to thee? that thy wife decked with
 sea-spoils adorning her breast and her head on the couch of a
 stranger lies lifting adulterous legs? the emerald green, the
 glass bauble, what mean they to thee? or the fire of the ruby?
 except that pure chastity shine from the depth of the jewels: in
 garments of woven wind clad our brides might as well take their
 stand, their game naked to stalk, as seek it in gossamer tissue
 transparent as air.”
 “what should we say was the hardest calling, after literature?” he asked.
 “that of the doctor or that of the money-changer, i would say: the doctor,
 because he has to know what poor devils have got in their insides, and
 when the fever’s due: but i hate them like the devil, for my part, because
 they’re always ordering me on a diet of duck soup: and the
 money-changer’s, because he’s got to be able to see the silver through the
 copper plating. when we come to the dumb beasts, the oxen and sheep are
 the hardest worked, the oxen, thanks to whose labor we have bread to chew
 on, the sheep, because their wool tricks us out so fine. it’s the greatest
 outrage under the sun for people to eat mutton and then wear a tunic. then
 there’s the bee: in my opinion, they’re divine insects because they puke
 honey, though there are folks that claim that they bring it from jupiter,
 and that’s the reason they sting, too, for wherever you find a sweet,
 you’ll find a bitter too.” he was just putting the philosophers out of
 business when lottery tickets were passed around in a cup. a slave boy
 assigned to that duty read aloud the names of the souvenirs: “silver
 s--ham,” a ham was brought in with some silver vinegar cruets on top of
 it; “cervical"--something soft for the neck--a piece of the
 cervix--neck--of a sheep was brought in; “serisapia"--after wit--“and
 contumelia"--insult--we were given must wafers and an apple-melon--and a
 phallus--contus--; “porri"--leeks--“and persica,” he picked up a whip and
 a knife; “passeres"--sparrows” and a fly--trap,” the answer was
 raisins--uva passa--and attic honey; “cenatoria"--a dinner toga--“and
 forensia"--business dress--he handed out a piece of meat--suggestive of
 dinner--and a note-book--suggestive of business--; “canale"--chased by a
 dog--“and pedale"--pertaining to the foot--, a hare and a slipper were
 brought out; “lamphrey"--murena--“and a letter,” he held up a
 mouse--mus--and a frog--rana--tied together, and a bundle of
 beet--beta--the greek letter beta--. we laughed long and loud, there were
 a thousand of these jokes, more or less, which have now escaped my memory.
 but ascyltos threw off all restraint and ridiculed everything; throwing up
 his hands, he laughed until the tears ran down his cheeks. at last, one of
 trimalchio’s fellow-freedmen, the one who had the place next to me, flew
 into a rage, “what’s the joke, sheep’s-head,” he bawled, “don’t our host’s
 swell entertainment suit you? you’re richer than he is, i suppose, and
 used to dining better! as i hope the guardian spirit of this house will be
 on my side, i’d have stopped his bleating long ago if i’d been sitting
 next to him. he’s a peach, he is, laughing at others; some vagabond or
 other from who-knows-where, some night-pad who’s not worth his own piss:
 just let me piss a ring around him and he wouldn’t know where to run to! i
 ain’t easy riled, no, by hercules, i ain’t, but worms breed in tender
 flesh. look at him laugh! what the hell’s he got to laugh at? is his
 family so damned fine-haired? so you’re a roman knight! well, i’m a king’s
 son! how’s it come that you’ve been a slave, you’ll ask because i put
 myself into service because i’d rather be a roman citizen than a
 tax-paying provincial. and now i hope that my life will be such that no
 one can jeer at me. i’m a man among men! i take my stroll bareheaded and
 owe no man a copper cent. i never had a summons in my life and no one ever
 said to me, in the forum, pay me what you owe me. i’ve bought a few acres
 and saved up a few dollars and i feed twenty bellies and a dog. i ransomed
 my bedfellow so no one could wipe his hands on her bosom; a thousand
 dinars it cost me, too. i was chosen priest of augustus without paying the
 fee, and i hope that i won’t need to blush in my grave after i’m dead. but
 you’re so busy that you can’t look behind you; you can spot a louse on
 someone else, all right, but you can’t see the tick on yourself. you’re
 the only one that thinks we’re so funny; look at your professor, he’s
 older than you are, and we’re good enough for him, but you’re only a brat
 with the milk still in your nose and all you can prattle is ‘ma’ or ‘mu,’
 you’re only a clay pot, a piece of leather soaked in water, softer and
 slipperier, but none the better for that. you’ve got more coin than we
 have, have you? then eat two breakfasts and two dinners a day. i’d rather
 have my reputation than riches, for my part, and before i make an end of
 this--who ever dunned me twice? in all the forty years i was in service,
 no one could tell whether i was free or a slave. i was only a long-haired
 boy when i came to this colony and the town house was not built then. i
 did my best to please my master and he was a digniferous and majestical
 gentleman whose nail-parings were worth more than your whole carcass. i
 had enemies in his house, too, who would have been glad to trip me up, but
 i swam the flood, thanks to his kindness. those are the things that try
 your mettle, for it’s as easy to be born a gentleman as to say, ‘come
 here.’ well, what are you gaping at now, like a billy-goat in a
 vetch-field?” 
 giton, who had been standing at my feet, and who had for some time been
 holding in his laughter, burst into an uproarious guffaw, at this last
 figure of speech, and when ascyltos’ adversary heard it, he turned his
 abuse upon the boy. “what’s so funny, you curly-headed onion,” he
 bellowed, “are the saturnalia here, i’d like to know? is it december now?
 “when did you pay your twentieth? what’s this to you, you gallows-bird,
 you crow’s meat? i’ll call the anger of jupiter down on you and that
 master of yours, who don’t keep you in better order. if i didn’t respect
 my fellow-freedmen, i’d give you what is coming to you right here on the
 spot, as i hope to get my belly full of bread, i would. we’ll get along
 well enough, but those that can’t control you are fools; like master like
 man’s a true saying. i can hardly hold myself in and i’m not hot-headed by
 nature, but once let me get a start and i don’t care two cents for my own
 mother. all right, i’ll catch you in the street, you rat, you toadstool.
 may i never grow an inch up or down if i don’t push your master into a
 dunghill, and i’ll give you the same medicine, i will, by hercules, i
 will, no matter if you call down olympian jupiter himself! i’ll take care
 of your eight inch ringlets and your two cent master into the bargain.
 i’ll have my teeth into you, either you’ll cut out the laughing, or i
 don’t know myself. yes, even if you had a golden beard. i’ll bring the
 wrath of minerva down on you and on the fellow that first made a come-here
 out of you. no, i never learned geometry or criticism or other foolishness
 like that, but i know my capital letters and i can divide any figure by a
 hundred, be it in asses, pounds or sesterces. let’s have a show-down, you
 and i will make a little bet, here’s my coin; you’ll soon find out that
 your father’s money was wasted on your education, even if you do know a
 little rhetoric. how’s this--what part of us am i? i come far, i come
 wide, now guess me! i’ll give you another. what part of us runs but never
 moves from its place? what part of us grows but always grows less? but you
 scurry around and are as flustered and fidgeted as a mouse in a piss-pot.
 shut up and don’t annoy your betters, who don’t even know that you’ve been
 born. don’t think that i’m impressed by those boxwood armlets that you did
 your mistress out of. occupo will back me! let’s go into the forum and
 borrow money, then you’ll see whether this iron ring means credit! bah! a
 draggled fox is a fine sight, ain’t it’? i hope i never get rich and die
 decently so that the people will swear by my death, if i don’t hound you
 everywhere with my toga turned inside out. and the fellow that taught you
 such manners did a good job too, a chattering ape, all right, no
 schoolmaster. we were better taught. ‘is everything in its place?’ the
 master would ask; go straight home and don’t stop and stare at everything
 and don’t be impudent to your elders. don’t loiter along looking in at the
 shops. no second raters came out of that school. i’m what you see me and i
 thank the gods it’s all due to my own cleverness.” 
 ascyltos was just starting in to answer this indictment when trimalchio,
 who was delighted with his fellow-freedman’s tirade, broke in, “cut out
 the bickering and let’s have things pleasant here. let up on the young
 fellow, hermeros, he’s hot-blooded, so you ought to be more reasonable.
 the loser’s always the winner in arguments of this kind. and as for you,
 even when you were a young punk you used to go ‘co-co co-co,’ like a hen
 after a rooster, but you had no pep. let’s get to better business and
 start the fun all over again and watch the homerists.” a troupe filed in,
 immediately, and clashed spears against shields. trimalchio sat himself up
 on his cushion and intoned in latin, from a book, while the actors, in
 accordance with their conceited custom, recited their parts in the greek
 language. there came a pause, presently, and “you don’t any of you know
 the plot of the skit they’re putting on, do you?” he asked, “diomedes and
 ganymede were two brothers, and helen was their sister; agamemnon ran away
 with her and palmed off a doe on diana, in her place, so homer tells how
 the trojans and parentines fought among themselves. of course agamemnon
 was victorious, and gave his daughter iphigenia, to achilles, for a wife:
 this caused ajax to go mad, and he’ll soon make the whole thing plain to
 you.” the homerists raised a shout, as soon as trimalchio had done
 speaking, and, as the whole familia stepped back, a boiled calf with a
 helmet on its head was brought in on an enormous platter. ajax followed
 and rushed upon it with drawn sword, as if he were insane, he made passes
 with the flat, and again with the edge, and then, collecting the slices,
 he skewered them, and, much to our astonishment, presented them to us on
 the point of his sword. 
 but we were not given long in which to admire the elegance of such
 service, for all of a sudden the ceiling commenced to creak and then the
 whole dining-room shook. i leaped to my feet in consternation, for fear
 some rope-walker would fall down, and the rest of the company raised their
 faces, wondering as much as i what new prodigy was to be announced from on
 high. then lo and behold! the ceiling panels parted and an enormous hoop,
 which appeared to have been knocked off a huge cask, was lowered from the
 dome above; its perimeter was hung with golden chaplets and jars of
 alabaster filled with perfume. we were asked to accept these articles as
 souvenirs. when my glance returned to the table, i noticed that a dish
 containing cakes had been placed upon it, and in the middle an image of
 priapus, made by the baker, and he held apples of all varieties and
 bunches of grapes against his breast, in the conventional manner. we
 applied ourselves wholeheartedly to this dessert and our joviality was
 suddenly revived by a fresh diversion, for, at the slightest pressure, all
 the cakes and fruits would squirt a saffron sauce upon us, and even
 spurted unpleasantly into our faces. being convinced that these perfumed
 dainties had some religious significance, we arose in a body and shouted,
 “hurrah for the emperor, the father of his country!” however, as we
 perceived that even after this act of veneration, the others continued
 helping themselves, we filled our napkins with the apples. i was
 especially keen on this, for i thought i could never put enough good
 things into giton’s lap. three slaves entered, in the meantime, dressed in
 white tunics well tucked up, and two of them placed lares with amulets
 hanging from their necks, upon the table, while the third carried round a
 bowl of wine and cried, “may the gods be propitious!” one was called
 cerdo--business--, trimalchio informed us, the other lucrio--luck--and the
 third felicio--profit--and, when all the rest had kissed a true likeness
 of trimalchio, we were ashamed to pass it by. 
 after they had all wished each other sound minds and good health,
 trimalchio turned to niceros. “you used to be better company at dinner,”
 he remarked, “and i don’t know why you should be dumb today, with never a
 word to say. if you wish to make me happy, tell about that experience you
 had, i beg of you.” delighted at the affability of his friend, “i hope i
 lose all my luck if i’m not tickled to death at the humor i see you in,”
 niceros replied. “all right, let’s go the limit for a good time, though
 i’m afraid these scholars’ll laugh at me, but i’ll tell my tale and they
 can go as far as they like. what t’hell do i care who laughs? it’s better
 to be laughed at than laughed down.” these words spake the hero, and began
 the following tale: “we lived in a narrow street in the house gavilla now
 owns, when i was a slave. there, by the will of the gods, i fell in love
 with the wife of terentius, the innkeeper; you knew melissa of tarentum,
 that pretty round-checked little wench. it was no carnal passion, so hear
 me, hercules, it wasn’t; i was not in love with her physical charms. no,
 it was because she was such a good sport. i never asked her for a thing
 and had her deny me; if she had an as, i had half. i trusted her with
 everything i had and never was done out of anything. her husband up and
 died on the place, one day, so i tried every way i could to get to her,
 for you know friends ought to show up when anyone’s in a pinch. 
 “it so happened that our master had gone to capua to attend to some odds
 and ends of business and i seized the opportunity, and persuaded a guest
 of the house to accompany me as far as the fifth mile-stone. he was a
 soldier, and as brave as the very devil. we set out about cock-crow, the
 moon was shining as bright as midday, and came to where the tombstones
 are. my man stepped aside amongst them, but i sat down, singing, and
 commenced to count them up. when i looked around for my companion, he had
 stripped himself and piled his clothes by the side of the road. my heart
 was in my mouth, and i sat there while he pissed a ring around them and
 was suddenly turned into a wolf! now don’t think i’m joking, i wouldn’t
 lie for any amount of money, but as i was saying, he commenced to howl
 after he was turned into a wolf, and ran away into the forest. i didn’t
 know where i was for a minute or two, then i went to his clothes, to pick
 them up, and damned if they hadn’t turned to stone! was ever anyone nearer
 dead from fright than me? then i whipped out my sword and cut every shadow
 along the road to bits, till i came to the house of my mistress. i looked
 like a ghost when i went in, and i nearly slipped my wind. the sweat was
 pouring down my crotch, my eyes were staring, and i could hardly be
 brought around. my melissa wondered why i was out so late. “oh, if you’d
 only come sooner,” she said, “you could have helped us: a wolf broke into
 the folds and attacked the sheep, bleeding them like a butcher. but he
 didn’t get the laugh on me, even if he did get away, for one of the slaves
 ran his neck through with a spear!” i couldn’t keep my eyes shut any
 longer when i heard that, and as soon as it grew light, i rushed back to
 our gaius’ house like an innkeeper beaten out of his bill, and when i came
 to the place where the clothes had been turned into stone, there was
 nothing but a pool of blood! and moreover, when i got home, my soldier was
 lying in bed, like an ox, and a doctor was dressing his neck! i knew then
 that he was a werewolf, and after that, i couldn’t have eaten a crumb of
 bread with him, no, not if you had killed me. others can think what they
 please about this, but as for me, i hope your geniuses will all get after
 me if i lie.” 
 we were all dumb with astonishment, when “i take your story for granted,”
 said trimalchio, “and if you’ll believe me, my hair stood on end, and all
 the more, because i know that niceros never talks nonsense: he’s always
 level-headed, not a bit gossipy. and now i’ll tell you a hair-raiser
 myself, though i’m like a jackass on a slippery pavement compared to him.
 when i was a long-haired boy, for i lived a chian life from my youth up,
 my master’s minion died. he was a jewel, so hear me hercules, he was,
 perfect in every facet. while his sorrow-stricken mother was bewailing his
 loss, and the rest of us were lamenting with her, the witches suddenly
 commenced to screech so loud that you would have thought a hare was being
 run down by the hounds! at that time, we had a cappadocian slave, tall,
 very bold, and he had muscle too; he could hold a mad bull in the air! he
 wrapped a mantle around his left arm, boldly rushed out of doors with
 drawn sword, and ran a woman through the middle about here, no harm to
 what i touch. we heard a scream, but as a matter of fact, for i won’t lie
 to you, we didn’t catch sight of the witches themselves. our simpleton
 came back presently, and threw himself upon the bed. his whole body was
 black and blue, as if he had been flogged with whips, and of course the
 reason of that was she had touched him with her evil hand! we shut the
 door and returned to our business, but when the mother put her arms around
 the body of her son, it turned out that it was only a straw bolster, no
 heart, no guts, nothing! of course the witches had swooped down upon the
 lad and put the straw changeling in his place! believe me or not, suit
 yourselves, but i say that there are women that know too much, and
 night-hags, too, and they turn everything upside down! and as for the
 long-haired booby, he never got back his own natural color and he died,
 raving mad, a few days later.” 
 though we wondered greatly, we believed none the less implicitly and,
 kissing the table, we besought the night-hags to attend to their own
 affairs while we were returning home from dinner. as far as i was
 concerned, the lamps already seemed to burn double and the whole
 dining-room was going round, when “see here, plocamus,” trimalchio spoke
 up, “haven’t you anything to tell us? you haven’t entertained us at all,
 have you? and you used to be fine company, always ready to oblige with a
 recitation or a song. the gods bless us, how the green figs have fallen!”
 “true for you,” the fellow answered, “since i’ve got the gout my sporting
 days are over; but in the good old times when i was a young spark, i
 nearly sang myself into a consumption. how i used to dance! and take my
 part in a farce, or hold up my end in the barber shops! who could hold a
 candle to me except, of course, the one and only apelles?” he then put his
 hand to his mouth and hissed out some foul gibberish or other, and said
 afterwards that it was greek. trimalchio himself then favored us with an
 impersonation of a man blowing a trumpet, and when he had finished, he
 looked around for his minion, whom he called croesus, a blear-eyed slave
 whose teeth were very disagreeably discolored. he was playing with a
 little black bitch, disgustingly fat, wrapping her up in a leek-green
 scarf and teasing her with a half-loaf of bread which he had put on the
 couch; and when from sheer nausea, she refused it, he crammed it down her
 throat. this sight put trimalchio in mind of his own dog and he ordered
 scylax, “the guardian of his house and home,” to be brought in. an
 enormous dog was immediately led in upon a chain and, obeying a kick from
 the porter, it lay down beside the table. thereupon trimalchio remarked,
 as he threw it a piece of white bread, “no one in all my house loves me
 better than scylax.” enraged at trimalchio’s praising scylax so warmly,
 the slave put the bitch down upon the floor and sicked her on to fight.
 scylax, as might have been expected from such a dog, made the whole room
 ring with his hideous barking and nearly shook the life out of the little
 bitch which the slave called pearl. nor did the uproar end in a dog fight,
 a candelabrum was upset upon the table, breaking the glasses and
 spattering some of the guests with hot oil. as trimalchio did not wish to
 seem concerned at the loss, he kissed the boy and ordered him to climb
 upon his own back. the slave did not hesitate but, mounting his
 rocking-horse, he beat trimalchio’s shoulders with his open palms, yelling
 with laughter, “buck! buck! how many fingers do i hold up!” when
 trimalchio had, in a measure, regained his composure, which took but a
 little while, he ordered that a huge vessel be filled with mixed wine, and
 that drinks be served to all the slaves sitting around our feet, adding as
 an afterthought, “if anyone refuses to drink, pour it on his head:
 business is business, but now’s the time for fun.” 
 the dainties that followed this display of affability were of such a
 nature that, if any reliance is to be placed in my word, the very mention
 of them makes me sick at the stomach. instead of thrushes, fattened
 chickens were served, one to each of us, and goose eggs with pastry caps
 on them, which same trimalchio earnestly entreated us to eat, informing us
 that the chickens had all been boned. just at that instant, however, a
 lictor knocked at the dining-room door, and a reveler, clad in white
 vestments, entered, followed by a large retinue. startled at such pomp, i
 thought that the praetor had arrived, so i put my bare feet upon the floor
 and started to get up, but agamemnon laughed at my anxiety and said, “keep
 your seat, you idiot, it’s only habinnas the sevir; he’s a stone mason,
 and if report speaks true, he makes the finest tombstones imaginable.”
 reassured by this information, i lay back upon my couch and watched
 habinnas’ entrance with great curiosity. already drunk and wearing several
 wreaths, his forehead smeared with perfume which ran down into his eyes,
 he advanced with his hands upon his wife’s shoulders, and, seating himself
 in the praetor’s place, he called for wine and hot water. delighted with
 his good humor, trimalchio called for a larger goblet for himself, and
 asked him, at the same time, how he had been entertained. “we had
 everything except yourself, for my heart and soul were here, but it was
 fine, it was, by hercules. scissa was giving a novendial feast for her
 slave, whom she freed on his death-bed, and it’s my opinion she’ll have a
 large sum to split with the tax gatherers, for the dead man was rated at
 ,, but everything went off well, even if we did have to pour half our
 wine on the bones of the late lamented.” 
 “but,” demanded trimalchio, “what did you have for dinner’?” “i’ll tell
 you if i can,” answered he, “for my memory’s so good that i often forget
 my own name. let’s see, for the first course, we had a hog, crowned with a
 wine cup and garnished with cheese cakes and chicken livers cooked well
 done, beets, of course, and whole-wheat bread, which i’d rather have than
 white, because it puts strength into you, and when i take a crap
 afterwards, i don’t have to yell. following this, came a course of tarts,
 served cold, with excellent spanish wine poured over warm honey; i ate
 several of the tarts and got the honey all over myself. then there were
 chick-peas and lupines, all the smooth-shelled nuts you wanted, and an
 apple apiece, but i got away with two, and here they are, tied up in my
 napkin; for i’ll have a row on my hands if i don’t bring some kind of a
 present home to my favorite slave. oh yes, my wife has just reminded me,
 there was a haunch of bear-meat as a side dish, scintilla ate some of it
 without knowing what it was, and she nearly puked up her guts when she
 found out. but as for me, i ate more than a pound of it, for it tasted
 exactly like wild boar and, says i, if a bear eats a man, shouldn’t that
 be all the more reason for a man to eat a bear? the last course was soft
 cheese, new wine boiled thick, a snail apiece, a helping of tripe, liver
 pate, capped eggs, turnips and mustard. but that’s enough. pickled olives
 were handed around in a wooden bowl, and some of the party greedily
 snatched three handfuls, we had ham, too, but we sent it back.” 
 “but why isn’t fortunata at the table, gaius? tell me.” “what’s that,”
 trimalchio replied; “don’t you know her better than that? she wouldn’t
 touch even a drop of water till after the silver was put away and the
 leftovers divided among the slaves.” “i’m going to beat it if she don’t
 take her place,” habinnas threatened, and started to get up; and then, at
 a signal, the slaves all called out together “fortunata,” four times or
 more.
 she appeared, girded round with a sash of greenish yellow, below which a
 cherry-colored tunic could be seen, and she had on twisted anklets and
 sandals worked in gold. then, wiping her hands upon a handkerchief which
 she wore around her neck, she seated herself upon the couch, beside
 scintilla, habinnas’ wife, and clapping her hands and kissing her, “my
 dear,” she gushed, “is it really you?” fortunata then removed the
 bracelets from her pudgy arms and held them out to the admiring scintilla,
 and by and by she took off her anklets and even her yellow hair-net, which
 was twenty-four carats fine, she would have us know! trimalchio, who was
 on the watch, ordered every trinket to be brought to him. “you see these
 things, don’t you?” he demanded; “they’re what women fetter us with.
 that’s the way us poor suckers are done! these ought to weigh six pounds
 and a half. i have an arm-band myself, that don’t weigh a grain under ten
 pounds; i bought it out of mercury’s thousandths, too.” finally, for fear
 he would seem to be lying, he ordered the scales to be brought in and
 carried around to prove the weights. and scintilla was no better. she took
 off a small golden vanity case which she wore around her neck, and which
 she called her lucky box, and took from it two eardrops, which, in her
 turn, she handed to fortunata to be inspected. “thanks to the generosity
 of my husband,” she smirked, “no woman has better.” “what’s that?”
 habinnas demanded. “you kept on my trail to buy that glass bean for you;
 if i had a daughter, i’ll be damned if i wouldn’t cut off her little ears.
 we’d have everything as cheap as dirt if there were no women, but we have
 to piss hot and drink cold, the way things are now.” the women, angry
 though they were, were laughing together, in the meantime, and exchanging
 drunken kisses, the one running on about her diligence as a housekeeper,
 and the other about the infidelities and neglect of her husband. habinnas
 got up stealthily, while they were clinging together in this fashion and,
 seizing fortunata by the feet, he tipped her over backwards upon the
 couch. “let go!” she screeched, as her tunic slipped above her knees;
 then, after pulling down her clothing, she threw herself into scintilla’s
 lap, and hid, with her handkerchief, a face which was none the more
 beautiful for its blushes. 
 after a short interval, trimalchio gave orders for the dessert to be
 served, whereupon the slaves took away all the tables and brought in
 others, and sprinkled the floor with sawdust mixed with saffron and
 vermilion, and also with powdered mica, a thing i had never seen done
 before. when all this was done trimalchio remarked, “i could rest content
 with this course, for you have your second tables, but, if you’ve
 something especially nice, why bring it on.” meanwhile an alexandrian
 slave boy, who had been serving hot water, commenced to imitate a
 nightingale, and when trimalchio presently called out, “change your tune,”
 we had another surprise, for a slave, sitting at habinnas’ feet, egged on,
 i have no doubt, by his own master, bawled suddenly in a singsong voice,
 “meanwhile aeneas and all of his fleet held his course on the billowy
 deep”; never before had my ears been assailed by a sound so discordant,
 for in addition to his barbarous pronunciation, and the raising and
 lowering of his voice, he interpolated atellane verses, and, for the first
 time in my life, virgil grated on my nerves. when he had to quit, finally,
 from sheer want of breath, “did he ever have any training,” habinnas
 exclaimed, “no, not he! i educated him by sending him among the grafters
 at the fair, so when it comes to taking off a barker or a mule driver,
 there’s not his equal, and the rogue’s clever, too, he’s a shoemaker, or a
 cook, or a baker a regular jack of all trades. but he has two faults, and
 if he didn’t have them, he’d be beyond all price: he snores and he’s been
 circumcised. and that’s the reason he never can keep his mouth shut and
 always has an eye open. i paid three hundred dinars for him.” 
 “yes,” scintilla broke in, “and you’ve not mentioned all of his
 accomplishments either; he’s a pimp too, and i’m going to see that he’s
 branded,” she snapped. trimalchio laughed. “there’s where the cappadocian
 comes out,” he said; “never cheats himself out of anything and i admire
 him for it, so help me hercules, i do. no one can show a dead man a good
 time. don’t be jealous, scintilla; we’re next to you women, too, believe
 me. as sure as you see me here safe and sound, i used to play at thrust
 and parry with mamma, my mistress, and finally even my master got
 suspicious and sent me back to a stewardship; but keep quiet, tongue, and
 i’ll give you a cake.” taking all this as praise, the wretched slave
 pulled a small earthen lamp from a fold in his garment, and impersonated a
 trumpeter for half an hour or more, while habinnas hummed with him,
 holding his finger pressed to his lips. finally, the slave stepped out
 into the middle of the floor and waved his pipes in imitation of a
 flute-player; then, with a whip and a smock, he enacted the part of a
 mule-driver. at last habinnas called him over and kissed him and said, as
 he poured a drink for him, “you get better all the time, massa. i’m going
 to give you a pair of shoes.” had not the dessert been brought in, we
 would never have gotten to the end of these stupidities. thrushes made of
 pastry and stuffed with nuts and raisins, quinces with spines sticking out
 so that they looked like sea-urchins. all this would have been endurable
 enough had it not been for the last dish that was served; so revolting was
 this, that we would rather have died of starvation than to have even
 touched it. we thought that a fat goose, flanked with fish and all kinds
 of birds, had been served, until trimalchio spoke up. “everything you see
 here, my friends,” said he, “was made from the same stuff.” with my usual
 keen insight, i jumped to the conclusion that i knew what that stuff was
 and, turning to agamemnon, i said, “i shall be greatly surprised, if all
 those things are not made out of excrement, or out of mud, at the very
 least: i saw a like artifice practiced at rome during the saturnalia.”
 i had not done speaking, when trimalchio chimed in, “as i hope to grow
 fatter in fortune but not in figure, my cook has made all this out of a
 hog! it would be simply impossible to meet up with a more valuable fellow:
 he’d make you a fish out of a sow’s coynte, if that’s what you wanted, a
 pigeon out of her lard, a turtle-dove out of her ham, and a hen out of a
 knuckle of pork: that’s why i named him daedalus, in a happy moment. i
 brought him a present of knives, from rome, because he’s so smart; they’re
 made of noric steel, too.” he ordered them brought in immediately, and
 looked them over, with admiration, even giving us the chance to try their
 edges upon our cheeks. then all of a sudden two slaves came in, carrying
 on as if they had been fighting at the fountain, at least; each one had a
 water-jar hanging from a yoke around his neck. trimalchio arbitrated their
 difference, but neither would abide by his decision, and each one smashed
 the other’s jar with a club. perturbed at the insolence of these drunken
 ruffians, we watched both of them narrowly, while they were fighting, and
 then, what should come pouring out of the broken jars but oysters and
 scallops, which a slave picked up and passed around in a dish. the
 resourceful cook would not permit himself to be outdone by such
 refinements, but served us with snails on a silver gridiron, and sang
 continually in a tremulous and very discordant voice. i am ashamed to have
 to relate what followed, for, contrary to all convention, some long-haired
 boys brought in unguents in a silver basin and anointed the feet of the
 reclining guests; but before doing this, however, they bound our thighs
 and ankles with garlands of flowers. they then perfumed the wine-mixing
 vessel with the same unguent and poured some of the melted liquid into the
 lamps. fortunata had, by this time, taken a notion that she wanted to
 dance, and scintilla was doing more hand-clapping than talking, when
 trimalchio called out, “philargyrus, and you too, carrio, you can both
 come to the table; even if you are green faction fans, and tell your
 bedfellow, menophila, to come too.” what would you think happened then? we
 were nearly crowded off the couches by the mob of slaves that crowded into
 the dining-room and almost filled it full. as a matter of fact, i noticed
 that our friend the cook, who had made a goose out of a hog, was placed
 next to me, and he stunk from sauces and pickle. not satisfied with a
 place at the table, he immediately staged an impersonation of ephesus the
 tragedian, and then he suddenly offered to bet his master that the greens
 would take first place in the next circus games. 
 trimalchio was hugely tickled at this challenge. “slaves are men, my
 friends,” he observed, “but that’s not all, they sucked the same milk that
 we did, even if hard luck has kept them down; and they’ll drink the water
 of freedom if i live: to make a long story short, i’m freeing all of them
 in my will. to philargyrus, i’m leaving a farm, and his bedfellow, too.
 carrio will get a tenement house and his twentieth, and a bed and
 bedclothes to boot. i’m making fortunata my heir and i commend her to all
 my friends. i announce all this in public so that my household will love
 me as well now as they will when i’m dead.” they all commenced to pay
 tribute to the generosity of their master, when he, putting aside his
 trifling, ordered a copy of his will brought in, which same he read aloud
 from beginning to end, to the groaning accompaniment of the whole
 household. then, looking at habinnas, “what say you, my dearest friend,”
 he entreated; “you’ll construct my monument in keeping with the plans i’ve
 given you, won’t you? i earnestly beg that you carve a little bitch at the
 feet of my statue, some wreaths and some jars of perfume, and all of the
 fights of petraites. then i’ll be able to live even after i’m dead, thanks
 to your kindness. see to it that it has a frontage of one hundred feet and
 a depth of two hundred. i want fruit trees of every kind planted around my
 ashes; and plenty of vines, too, for it’s all wrong for a man to deck out
 his house when he’s alive, and then have no pains taken with the one he
 must stay in for a longer time, and that’s the reason i particularly
 desire that this notice be added:
 “in any case, i’ll see to it through a clause in my will, that i’m not
 insulted when i’m dead. and for fear the rabble comes running up into my
 monument, to crap, i’ll appoint one of my freedmen custodian of my tomb. i
 want you to carve ships under full sail on my monument, and me, in my
 robes of office, sitting on my tribunal, five gold rings on my fingers,
 pouring out coin from a sack for the people, for i gave a dinner and two
 dinars for each guest, as you know. show a banquet-hall, too, if you can,
 and the people in it having a good time. on my right, you can place a
 statue of fortunata holding a dove and leading a little bitch on a leash,
 and my favorite boy, and large jars sealed with gypsum, so the wine won’t
 run out; show one broken and a boy crying over it. put a sun-dial in the
 middle, so that whoever looks to see what time it is must read my name
 whether he wants to or not. as for the inscription, think this over
 carefully, and see if you think it’s appropriate:
 when he had repeated these words, trimalchio began to weep copiously,
 fortunata was crying already, and so was habinnas, and at last, the whole
 household filled the dining-room with their lamentations, just as if they
 were taking part in a funeral. even i was beginning to sniffle, when
 trimalchio said, “let’s live while we can, since we know we’ve all got to
 die. i’d rather see you all happy, anyhow, so let’s take a plunge in the
 bath. you’ll never regret it. i’ll bet my life on that, it’s as hot as a
 furnace!” “fine business,” seconded habinnas, “there’s nothing suits me
 better than making two days out of one,” and he got up in his bare feet to
 follow trimalchio, who was clapping his hands. i looked at ascyltos. “what
 do you think about this?” i asked. “the very sight of a bath will be the
 death of me.” “let’s fall in with his suggestion,” he replied, “and while
 they are hunting for the bath we will escape in the crowd.” giton led us
 out through the porch, when we had reached this understanding, and we came
 to a door, where a dog on a chain startled us so with his barking that
 ascyltos immediately fell into the fish-pond. as for myself, i was tipsy
 and had been badly frightened by a dog that was only a painting, and when
 i tried to haul the swimmer out, i was dragged into the pool myself. the
 porter finally came to our rescue, quieted the dog by his appearance, and
 pulled us, shivering, to dry land. giton had ransomed himself by a very
 cunning scheme, for what we had saved for him, from dinner, he threw to
 the barking brute, which then calmed its fury and became engrossed with
 the food. but when, with chattering teeth, we besought the porter to let
 us out at the door, “if you think you can leave by the same door you came
 in at,” he replied, “you’re mistaken: no guest is ever allowed to go out
 through the same door he came in at; some are for entrance, others for
 exit.” 
 what were we miserable wretches to do, shut up in this newfangled
 labyrinth. the idea of taking a hot bath had commenced to grow in favor,
 so we finally asked the porter to lead us to the place and, throwing off
 our clothing, which giton spread out in the hall to dry, we went in. it
 was very small, like a cold water cistern; trimalchio was standing upright
 in it, and one could not escape his disgusting bragging even here. he
 declared that there was nothing nicer than bathing without a mob around,
 and that a bakery had formerly occupied this very spot. tired out at last,
 he sat down, but when the echoes of the place tempted him, he lifted his
 drunken mouth to the ceiling, and commenced murdering the songs of
 menacrates, at least that is what we were told by those who understood his
 language. some of the guests joined hands and ran around the edge of the
 pool, making the place ring with their boisterous peals of laughter;
 others tried to pick rings up from the floor, with their hands tied behind
 them, or else, going down upon their knees, tried to touch the ends of
 their toes by bending backwards. we went down into the pool while the rest
 were taking part in such amusements. it was being heated for trimalchio.
 when the fumes of the wine had been dissipated, we were conducted into
 another dining-room where fortunata had laid out her own treasures; i
 noticed, for instance, that there were little bronze fishermen upon the
 lamps, the tables were of solid silver, the cups were porcelain inlaid
 with gold; before our eyes wine was being strained through a straining
 cloth. “one of my slaves shaves his first beard today,” trimalchio
 remarked, at length, “a promising, honest, thrifty lad; may he have no bad
 luck, so let’s get our skins full and stick around till morning.” 
 he had not ceased speaking when a cock crowed! alarmed at this omen,
 trimalchio ordered wine thrown under the table and told them to sprinkle
 the lamps with it; and he even went so far as to change his ring from his
 left hand to his right. “that trumpeter did not sound off without a
 reason,” he remarked; “there’s either a fire in the neighborhood, or else
 someone’s going to give up the ghost. i hope it’s none of us! whoever
 brings that jonah in shall have a present.” he had no sooner made this
 promise, than a cock was brought in from somewhere in the neighborhood and
 trimalchio ordered the cook to prepare it for the pot. that same versatile
 genius who had but a short time before made birds and fish out of a hog,
 cut it up; it was then consigned to the kettle, and while daedalus was
 taking a long hot drink, fortunata ground pepper in a boxwood mill. when
 these delicacies had been consumed, trimalchio looked the slaves over.
 “you haven’t had anything to eat yet, have you?” he asked. “get out and
 let another relay come on duty.” thereupon a second relay came in.
 “farewell, gaius,” cried those going off duty, and “hail, gaius,” cried
 those coming on. our hilarity was somewhat dampened soon after, for a boy,
 who was by no means bad looking, came in among the fresh slaves.
 trimalchio seized him and kissed him lingeringly, whereupon fortunata,
 asserting her rights in the house, began to rail at trimalchio, styling
 him an abomination who set no limits to his lechery, finally ending by
 calling him a dog. trimalchio flew into a rage at her abuse and threw a
 wine cup at her head, whereupon she screeched, as if she had had an eye
 knocked out and covered her face with her trembling hands. scintilla was
 frightened, too, and shielded the shuddering woman with her garment. an
 officious slave presently held a cold water pitcher to her cheek and
 fortunata bent over it, sobbing and moaning. but as for trimalchio, “what
 the hell’s next?” he gritted out, “this syrian dancing-whore don’t
 remember anything! i took her off the auction block and made her a woman
 among her equals, didn’t i? and here she puffs herself up like a frog and
 pukes in her own nest; she’s a blockhead, all right, not a woman. but
 that’s the way it is, if you’re born in an attic you can’t sleep in a
 palace i’ll see that this booted cassandra’s tamed, so help me my genius,
 i will! and i could have married ten million, even if i did only have two
 cents: you know i’m not lying! ‘let me give you a tip,’ said agatho, the
 perfumer to the lady next door, when he pulled me aside: ‘don’t let your
 line die out!’ and here i’ve stuck the ax into my own leg because i was a
 damned fool and didn’t want to seem fickle. i’ll see to it that you’re
 more careful how you claw me up, sure as you’re born, i will! that you may
 realize how seriously i take what you’ve done to me-- habinnas, i don’t
 want you to put her statue on my tomb for fear i’ll be nagged even after
 i’m dead! and furthermore, that she may know i can repay a bad turn, i
 won’t have her kissing me when i’m laid out!” 
 when trimalchio had launched this thunderbolt, habinnas commenced to beg
 him to control his anger. “there’s not one of us but goes wrong
 sometimes,” argued he; “we’re not gods, we’re men.” scintilla also cried
 out through her tears, calling him “gaius,” and entreating him by his
 guardian angel to be mollified. trimalchio could restrain the tears no
 longer. “habinnas,” he blubbered, “as you hope to enjoy your money, spit
 in my face if i’ve done anything wrong. i kissed him because he’s very
 thrifty, not because he’s a pretty boy. he can recite his division table
 and read a book at sight: he bought himself a thracian uniform from his
 savings from his rations, and a stool and two dippers, with his own money,
 too. he’s worth my attention, ain’t he? but fortunata won’t see it! ain’t
 that the truth, you high-stepping hussy’? let me beg you to make the best
 of what you’ve got, you shekite, and don’t make me show my teeth, my
 little darling, or you’ll find out what my temper’s like! believe me, when
 once i’ve made up my mind, i’m as fixed as a spike in a beam! but let’s
 think of the living. i hope you’ll all make yourselves at home, gentlemen:
 i was in your fix myself once; but rose to what i am now by my own merit.
 it’s the brains that makes the man, all the rest’s bunk. i buy well, i
 sell well, someone else will tell you a different story, but as for
 myself, i’m fairly busting with prosperity. what, grunting-sow, still
 bawling? i’ll see to it that you’ve something to bawl for, but as i
 started to say, it was my thrift that brought me to my fortune. i was just
 as tall as that candlestick when i came over from asia; every day i used
 to measure myself by it, and i would smear my lips with oil so my beard
 would sprout all the sooner. i was my master’s ‘mistress’ for fourteen
 years, for there’s nothing wrong in doing what your master orders, and i
 satisfied my mistress, too, during that time, you know what i mean, but
 i’ll say no more, for i’m not one of your braggarts!” 
 “at last it came about by the will of the gods that i was master in the
 house, and i had the real master under my thumb then. what is there left
 to tell? i was made co-heir with caesar and came into a senator’s fortune.
 but nobody’s ever satisfied with what he’s got, so i embarked in business.
 i won’t keep you long in suspense; i built five ships and loaded them with
 wine--worth its weight in gold, it was then--and sent them to rome. you’d
 think i’d ordered it so, for every last one of them foundered; it’s a
 fact, no fairy tale about it, and neptune swallowed thirty million
 sesterces in one day! you don’t think i lost my pep, do you? by hercules,
 no! that was only an appetizer for me, just as if nothing at all had
 happened. i built other and bigger ships, better found, too, so no one
 could say i wasn’t game. a big ship’s a big venture, you know. i loaded
 them up with wine again, bacon, beans, capuan perfumes, and slaves:
 fortunata did the right thing in this affair, too, for she sold every
 piece of jewelry and all her clothes into the bargain, and put a hundred
 gold pieces in my hand. they were the nest-egg of my fortune. a thing’s
 soon done when the gods will it; i cleared ten million sesterces by that
 voyage, all velvet, and bought in all the estates that had belonged to my
 patron, right away. i built myself a house and bought cattle to resell,
 and whatever i touched grew just like a honeycomb. i chucked the game when
 i got to have an income greater than all the revenues of my own country,
 retired from business, and commenced to back freedmen. i never liked
 business anyhow, as far as that goes, and was just about ready to quit
 when an astrologer, a greek fellow he was, and his name was serapa,
 happened to light in our colony, and he slipped me some information and
 advised me to quit. he was hep to all the secrets of the gods: told me
 things about myself that i’d forgotten, and explained everything to me
 from needle and thread up; knew me inside out, he did, and only stopped
 short of telling me what i’d had for dinner the day before. you’d have
 thought he’d lived with me always!” 
 “habinnas, you were there, i think, i’ll leave it to you; didn’t he
 say--’you took your wife out of a whore-house’? you’re as lucky in your
 friends, too, no one ever repays your favor with another, you own broad
 estates, you nourish a viper under your wing, and--why shouldn’t i tell
 it--i still have thirty years, four months, and two days to live! i’ll
 also come into another bequest shortly. that’s what my horoscope tells me.
 if i can extend my boundaries so as to join apulia, i’ll think i’ve
 amounted to something in this life! i built this house with mercury on the
 job, anyhow; it was a hovel, as you know, it’s a palace now! four
 dining-rooms, twenty bed-rooms, two marble colonnades, a store-room
 upstairs, a bed-room where i sleep myself, a sitting-room for this viper,
 a very good room for the porter, a guest-chamber for visitors. as a matter
 of fact, scaurus, when he was here, would stay nowhere else, although he
 has a family place on the seashore. i’ll show you many other things, too,
 in a jiffy; believe me, if you have an as, you’ll be rated at what you
 have. so your humble servant, who was a frog, is now a king. stychus,
 bring out my funereal vestments while we wait, the ones i’ll be carried
 out in, some perfume, too, and a draught of the wine in that jar, i mean
 the kind i intend to have my bones washed in.” 
 it was not long before stychus brought a white shroud and a
 purple-bordered toga into the dining-room, and trimalchio requested us to
 feel them and see if they were pure wool. then, with a smile, “take care,
 stychus, that the mice don’t get at these things and gnaw them, or the
 moths either. i’ll burn you alive if they do. i want to be carried out in
 all my glory so all the people will wish me well.” then, opening a jar of
 nard, he had us all anointed. “i hope i’ll enjoy this as well when i’m
 dead,” he remarked, “as i do while i’m alive.” he then ordered wine to be
 poured into the punch-bowl. “pretend,” said he, “that you’re invited to my
 funeral feast.” the thing had grown positively nauseating, when
 trimalchio, beastly drunk by now, bethought himself of a new and singular
 diversion and ordered some horn- blowers brought into the dining-room.
 then, propped up by many cushions, he stretched himself out upon the
 couch. “let on that i’m dead,” said he, “and say something nice about me.”
 the horn-blowers sounded off a loud funeral march together, and one in
 particular, a slave belonging to an undertaker, made such a fanfare that
 he roused the whole neighborhood, and the watch, which was patrolling the
 vicinity, thinking trimalchio’s house was afire, suddenly smashed in the
 door and rushed in with their water and axes, as is their right, raising a
 rumpus all their own. we availed ourselves of this happy circumstance and,
 leaving agamemnon in the lurch, we took to our heels, as though we were
 running away from a real conflagration. 
 there was no torch to light the way for us, as we wandered around, nor did
 the silence of midnight give promise of our meeting any wayfarer with a
 light; in addition to this, we were drunk and unfamiliar with the
 district, which would confuse one, even in daylight, so for the best part
 of a mortal hour we dragged our bleeding feet over all the flints and
 pieces of broken tile, till we were extricated, at last, by giton’s
 cleverness. this prudent youngster had been afraid of going astray on the
 day before, so he had taken care to mark all the pillars and columns with
 chalk. these marks stood out distinctly, even through the pitchy night,
 and by their brilliant whiteness pointed out the way for us as we wandered
 about. nevertheless, we had no less cause for being in a sweat even when
 we came to our lodging, for the old woman herself had been sitting and
 swilling so long with her guests that even if one had set her afire, she
 would not have known it. we would have spent the night on the door-sill
 had not trimalchio’s courier come up in state, with ten wagons; he
 hammered on the door for a short time, and then smashed it in, giving us
 an entrance through the same breach. (hastening to the sleeping-chamber, i
 went to bed with my “brother” and, burning with passion as i was, after
 such a magnificent dinner, i surrendered myself wholly to sexual
 gratification.)
 oh goddesses and gods, that purple night how soft the couch!
 and we, embracing tight; with every wandering kiss our souls would
 meet! farewell all mortal woes, to die were sweet
 but my self-congratulation was premature, for i was overcome with wine,
 and when my unsteady hands relaxed their hold, ascyltos, that
 never-failing well-spring of iniquity, stole the boy away from me in the
 night and carried him to his own bed, where he wallowed around without
 restraint with a “brother” not his own, while the latter, not noticing the
 fraud, or pretending not to notice it, went to sleep in a stranger’s arms,
 in defiance of all human rights. awaking at last, i felt the bed over and
 found that it had been despoiled of its treasure: then, by all that lovers
 hold dear, i swear i was on the verge of transfixing them both with my
 sword and uniting their sleep with death. at last, however, i adopted a
 more rational plan; i spanked giton into wakefulness, and, glaring at
 ascyltos, “since you have broken faith by this outrage,” i gritted out,
 with a savage frown, “and severed our friendship, you had better get your
 things together at once, and pick up some other bottom for your
 abominations!” he raised no objection to this, but after we had divided
 everything with scrupulous exactitude, “come on now,” he demanded, “and
 we’ll divide the boy!” 
 i thought this was a parting joke till he whipped out his sword, with a
 murderous hand. “you’ll not have this prize you’re brooding over, all to
 yourself! since i’ve been rejected, i’ll have to cut off my share with
 this sword.” i followed suit, on my side, and, wrapping a mantle around my
 left arm, i put myself on guard for the duel. the unhappy boy, rendered
 desperate by our unreasoning fury, hugged each of us tightly by the knee,
 and in tears he humbly begged that this wretched lodging-house should not
 witness a theban duel, and that we would not pollute--with mutual
 bloodshed the sacred rites of a friendship that was, as yet, unstained.
 “if a crime must be committed,” he wailed, “here is my naked throat, turn
 your swords this way and press home the points. i ought, to be the one to
 die, i broke the sacred pledge of friendship.” we lowered our points at
 these entreaties. “i’ll settle this dispute,” ascyltos spoke up, “let the
 boy follow whomsoever he himself wishes to follow. in that way, he, at
 least, will have perfect freedom in choosing a ‘brother’.” imagining that
 a relationship of such long standing had passed into a tie of blood, i was
 not at all uneasy, so i snatched at this proposition with precipitate
 eagerness, and submitted the dispute to the judge. he did not deliberate
 long enough to seem even to hesitate, for he got up and chose ascyltos for
 a “brother,” as soon as the last syllable had passed my lips! at this
 decision i was thunder-struck, and threw myself upon the bed, unarmed and
 just as i stood. had i not begrudged my enemy such a triumph, i would have
 laid violent hands upon myself. flushed with success, ascyltos marched out
 with his prize, and abandoned, in a strange town, a comrade in the depths
 of despair; one whom, but a little while before, he had loved most
 unselfishly, one whose destiny was so like his own.
 as long as is expedient, the name of friendship lives, just
 as in dicing, fortune smiles or lowers; when good luck beckons,
 then your friend his gleeful service gives but basely flies when
 ruin o’er you towers. the strollers act their farces upon the
 stage, each one his part, the father, son, the rich man, all
 are here, but soon the page is turned upon the comic actor’s art,
 the masque is dropped, the make-ups disappear!
 nevertheless, i did not indulge myself very long in tears, being afraid
 that menelaus, the tutor, might drop in upon me all alone in the
 lodging-house, and catch me in the midst of my troubles, so i collected my
 baggage and, with a heavy heart, sneaked off to an obscure quarter near
 the seashore. there, i kept to my room for three days. my mind was
 continually haunted by my loneliness and desertion, and i beat my breast,
 already sore from blows. “why could not the earth have opened and
 swallowed me,” i wailed aloud, between the many deep-drawn groans, “or the
 sea, which rages even against the guiltless? did i flee from justice,
 murder my ghost, and cheat the arena, in order that, after so many proofs
 of courage, i might be left lying here deserted, a beggar and an exile, in
 a lodging-house in a greek town? and who condemned me to this desolation’?
 a boy stained by every form of vice, who, by his own confession, ought to
 be exiled: free, through vice, expert in vice, whose favors came through a
 throw of the dice, who hired himself out as a girl to those who knew him
 to be a boy! and as to the other, what about him? in place of the manly
 toga, he donned the woman’s stola when he reached the age of puberty: he
 resolved, even from his mother’s womb, never to become a man; in the
 slave’s prison he took the woman’s part in the sexual act, he changed the
 instrument of his lechery when he double-crossed me, abandoned the ties of
 a long-standing friendship, and, shame upon him, sold everything for a
 single night’s dalliance, like any other street-walker! now the lovers lie
 whole nights, locked in each other’s arms, and i suppose they make a
 mockery of my desolation when they are resting up from the exhaustion
 caused by their mutual excesses. but not with impunity! if i don’t avenge
 the wrong they have done me. in their guilty blood, i’m no free man!”
 i girded on my sword, when i had said these words, and, fortifying my
 strength with a heavy meal, so that weakness would not cause me to lose
 the battle, i presently sallied forth into the public streets and rushed
 through all the arcades, like a maniac. but while, with my face savagely
 convulsed in a frown, i was meditating nothing but bloodshed and
 slaughter, and was continually clapping my hand to the hilt of my sword,
 which i had consecrated to this, i was observed by a soldier, that is, he
 either was a real soldier, or else he was some night-prowling thug, who
 challenged me. “halt! who goes there? what legion are you from? who’s your
 centurion?” “since when have men in your outfit gone on pass in white
 shoes?” he retorted, when i had lied stoutly about both centurion and
 legion. both my face and my confusion proved that i had been caught in a
 lie, so he ordered me to surrender my arms and to take care that i did not
 get into trouble. i was held up, as a matter of course, and, my revenge
 balked, i returned to my lodging-house and, recovering by degrees from my
 fright, i began to be grateful to the boldness of the footpad. it is not
 wise to place much reliance upon any scheme, because fortune has a method
 of her own. 
 (nevertheless, i found it very difficult to stifle my longing for revenge,
 and after tossing half the night in anxiety, i arose at dawn and, in the
 hope of mitigating my mental sufferings and of forgetting my wrongs, i
 took a walk through all the public arcades and) entered a picture-gallery,
 which contained a wonderful collection of pictures in various styles. i
 beheld works from the hand of zeuxis, still undimmed by the passage of the
 years, and contemplated, not without a certain awe, the crude drawings of
 protogenes, which equalled the reality of nature herself; but when i stood
 before the work of apelles, the kind which the greeks call
 “monochromatic,” verily, i almost worshipped, for the outlines of the
 figures were drawn with such subtlety of touch, and were so life-like in
 their precision, that you would have thought their very souls were
 depicted. here, an eagle was soaring into the sky bearing the shepherd of
 mount ida to heaven; there, the comely hylas was struggling to escape from
 the embrace of the lascivious naiad. here, too, was apollo, cursing his
 murderous hand and adorning his unstrung lyre with the flower just
 created. standing among these lovers, which were only painted, “it seems
 that even the gods are wracked by love,” i cried aloud, as if i were in a
 wilderness. “jupiter could find none to his taste, even in his own heaven,
 so he had to sin on earth, but no one was betrayed by him! the nymph who
 ravished hylas would have controlled her passion had she thought hercules
 was coming to forbid it. apollo recalled the spirit of a boy in the form
 of a flower, and all the lovers of fable enjoyed love’s embraces without a
 rival, but i took as a comrade a friend more cruel than lycurgus!” but at
 that very instant, as i was telling my troubles to the winds, a
 white-haired old man entered the picture-gallery; his face was care-worn,
 and he seemed, i know not why, to give promise of something great,
 although he bestowed so little care upon his dress that it was easily
 apparent that he belonged to that class of literati which the wealthy hold
 in contempt. “i am a poet,” he remarked, when he had approached me and
 stood at my side, “and one of no mean ability, i hope, that is, if
 anything is to be inferred from the crowns which gratitude can place even
 upon the heads of the unworthy! then why, you demand, are you dressed so
 shabbily? for that very reason; love or art never yet made anyone rich.”
 the trader trusts his fortune to the sea and takes his gains,
  the warrior, for his deeds, is girt with
 gold; the wily sycophant lies drunk on purple counterpanes, 
 young wives must pay debauchees or they’re cold. but solitary,
 shivering, in tatters genius stands 
 invoking a neglected art, for succor at its hands.
 “it is certainly true that a man is hated when he declares himself an
 enemy to all vice, and begins to follow the right road in life, because,
 in the first place, his habits are different from those of other people;
 for who ever approved of anything to which he took exceptions? then, they
 whose only ambition is to pile up riches, don’t want to believe that men
 can possess anything better than that which they have themselves;
 therefore, they use every means in their power to so buffet the lovers of
 literature that they will seem in their proper place--below the
 moneybags.” “i know not why it should be so,” (i said with a sigh), “but
 poverty is the sister of genius.” (“you have good reason,” the old man
 replied, “to deplore the status of men of letters.” “no,” i answered,
 “that was not the reason for my sigh, there is another and far weightier
 cause for my grief.” then, in accordance with the human propensity of
 pouring one’s personal troubles into another’s ears, i explained my
 misfortune to him, and dwelt particularly upon ascyltos’ perfidy.) “oh how
 i wish that this enemy who is the cause of my enforced continence could be
 mollified,” (i cried, with many a groan,) “but he is an old hand at
 robbery, and more cunning than the pimps themselves!” (my frankness
 pleased the old man, who attempted to comfort me and, to beguile my
 sorrow, he related the particulars of an amorous intrigue in which he
 himself had played a part.) 
 “when i was attached to the quaestor’s staff, in asia, i was quartered
 with a family at pergamus. i found things very much to my liking there,
 not only on account of the refined comfort of my apartments, but also
 because of the extreme beauty of my host’s son. for the latter reason, i
 had recourse to strategy, in order that the father should never suspect me
 of being a seducer. so hotly would i flare up, whenever the abuse of
 handsome boys was even mentioned at the table, and with such
 uncompromising sternness would i protest against having my ears insulted
 by such filthy talk, that i came to be looked upon, especially by the
 mother, as one of the philosophers. i was conducting the lad to the
 gymnasium before very long, and superintending his conduct, taking
 especial care, all the while, that no one who could debauch him should
 ever enter the house. then there came a holiday, the school was closed,
 and our festivities had rendered us too lazy to retire properly, so we lay
 down in the dining-room. it was just about midnight, and i knew he was
 awake, so i murmured this vow, in a very low voice, ‘oh lady venus, could
 i but kiss this lad, and he not know it, i would give him a pair of
 turtle-doves tomorrow!’ on hearing the price offered for this favor, the
 boy commenced to snore! then, bending over the pretending sleeper, i
 snatched a fleeting kiss or two. satisfied with this beginning, i arose
 early in the morning, brought a fine pair of turtle-doves to the eager
 lad, and absolved myself from my vow.” 
 “next night, when the same opportunity presented itself, i changed my
 petition, ‘if i can feel him all over with a wanton hand,’ i vowed, ‘and
 he not know it, i will give him two of the gamest fighting-cocks, for his
 silence.’ the lad nestled closer to me of his own accord, on hearing this
 offer, and i truly believe that he was afraid that i was asleep. i made
 short work of his apprehensions on that score, however, by stroking and
 fondling his whole body. i worked myself into a passionate fervor that was
 just short of supreme gratification. then, when day dawned, i made him
 happy with what i had promised him. when the third night gave me my
 chance, i bent close to the ear of the rascal, who pretended to be asleep.
 ‘immortal gods,’ i whispered, ‘if i can take full and complete
 satisfaction of my love, from this sleeping beauty, i will tomorrow
 present him with the best macedonian pacer in the market, in return for
 this bliss, provided that he does not know it.’ never had the lad slept so
 soundly! first i filled my hands with his snowy breasts, then i pressed a
 clinging kiss upon his mouth, but i finally focused all my energies upon
 one supreme delight! early in the morning, he sat up in bed, awaiting my
 usual gift. it is much easier to buy doves and game-cocks than it is to
 buy a pacer, as you know, and aside from that, i was also afraid that so
 valuable a present might render my motive subject to suspicion, so, after
 strolling around for some hours, i returned to the house, and gave the lad
 nothing at all except a kiss. he looked all around, threw his arms about
 my neck. ‘tell me, master,’ he cried, ‘where’s the pacer?’ (‘the
 difficulty of getting one fine enough has compelled me to defer the
 fulfillment of my promise,’ i replied, ‘but i will make it good in a few
 days.’ the lad easily understood the true meaning of my answer, and his
 countenance betrayed his secret resentment.)” 
 “(in the meantime,) by breaking this vow, i had cut myself off from the
 avenue of access which i had contrived, but i returned to the attack, all
 the same, when the opportunity came. in a few days, a similar occasion
 brought about the very same conditions as before, and the instant i heard
 his father snoring, i began pleading with the lad to receive me again into
 his good graces, that is to say, that he ought to suffer me to satisfy
 myself with him, and he in turn could do whatever his own distended member
 desired. he was very angry, however, and would say nothing at all except,
 ‘either you go to sleep, or i’ll call father!’ but no obstacle is so
 difficult that depravity cannot twist around it and even while he
 threatened ‘i’ll call father,’ i slipped into his bed and took my pleasure
 in spite of his half-hearted resistance. nor was he displeased with my
 improper conduct for, although he complained for a while, that he had been
 cheated and made a laughing- stock, and that his companions, to whom he
 had bragged of his wealthy friend, had made sport of him. ‘but you’ll see
 that i’ll not be like you,’ he whispered; ‘do it again, if you want to!’
 all misunderstandings were forgotten and i was readmitted into the lad’s
 good graces. then i slipped off to sleep, after profiting by his
 complaisance. but the youth, in the very flower of maturity, and just at
 the best age for passive pleasure, was by no means satisfied with only one
 repetition, so he roused me out of a heavy sleep. ‘isn’t there something
 you’d like to do?’ he whispered! the pastime had not begun to cloy, as
 yet, and, somehow or other, what with panting and sweating and wriggling,
 he got what he wanted and, worn out with pleasure, i dropped off to sleep
 again. less than an hour had passed when he began to punch me with his
 hand. ‘why are we not busy,’ he whispered! i flew into a violent rage at
 being disturbed so many times, and threatened him in his own words,
 ‘either you go to sleep, or i’ll call father!’” 
 heartened up by this story, i began to draw upon his more comprehensive
 knowledge as to the ages of the pictures and as to certain of the stories
 connected with them, upon which i was not clear; and i likewise inquired
 into the causes of the decadence of the present age, in which the most
 refined arts had perished, and among them painting, which had not left
 even the faintest trace of itself behind. “greed of money,” he replied,
 “has brought about these unaccountable changes. in the good old times,
 when virtue was her own reward, the fine arts flourished, and there was
 the keenest rivalry among men for fear that anything which could be of
 benefit to future generations should remain long undiscovered. then it was
 that democritus expressed the juices of all plants and spent his whole
 life in experiments, in order that no curative property should lurk
 unknown in stone or shrub. that he might understand the movements of
 heaven and the stars, eudoxus grew old upon the summit of a lofty
 mountain: three times did chrysippus purge his brain with hellebore, that
 his faculties might be equal to invention. turn to the sculptors if you
 will; lysippus perished from hunger while in profound meditation upon the
 lines of a single statue, and myron, who almost embodied the souls of men
 and beasts in bronze, could not find an heir. and we, sodden with wine and
 women, cannot even appreciate the arts already practiced, we only
 criticise the past! we learn only vice, and teach it, too. what has become
 of logic? of astronomy? where is the exquisite road to wisdom? who even
 goes into a temple to make a vow, that he may achieve eloquence or bathe
 in the fountain of wisdom? and they do not pray for good health and a
 sound mind; before they even set foot upon the threshold of the temple,
 one promises a gift if only he may bury a rich relative; another, if he
 can but dig up a treasure, and still another, if he is permitted to amass
 thirty millions of sesterces in safety! the senate itself, the exponent of
 all that should be right and just, is in the habit of promising a thousand
 pounds of gold to the capitol, and that no one may question the propriety
 of praying for money, it even decorates jupiter himself with spoils’. do
 not hesitate, therefore, at expressing your surprise at the deterioration
 of painting, since, by all the gods and men alike, a lump of gold is held
 to be more beautiful than anything ever created by those crazy little
 greek fellows, apelles and phydias!” 
 “but i see that your whole attention is held by that picture which
 portrays the destruction of troy, so i will attempt to unfold the story in
 verse:
and now the tenth harvest beheld the beleaguered of troia worn
 out with anxiety, fearing: the honor of calchas the prophet, hung
 wavering deep in the blackest despair. apollo commanded! the
 forested peaks of mount ida were felled and dragged down; the hewn
 timbers were fitted to fashion a war-horse. unfilled is a cavity
 left, and this cavern, roofed over, capacious enough for a camp.
 here lie hidden the raging impetuous valor of ten years of warfare.
 malignant greek troops pack the recess, lurk in their own offering.
 alas my poor country! we thought that their thousand grim war-ships
 were beaten and scattered, our arable lands freed from warfare!
 th’ inscription cut into the horse, and the crafty behavior of
 sinon, his mind ever powerful for evil, affirmed it. delivered from
 war, now the crowd, carefree, hastens to worship and pours from the
 portals. their cheeks wet with weeping, the joy of their tremulous
 souls brings to eyes tears which terror had banished. laocoon,
 priest unto neptune, with hair loosed, an outcry evoked from the
 mob: he drew back his javelin and launched it! the belly of wood
 was his target. the weapon recoiled, for the fates stayed his hand,
 and this artifice won us. his feeble hand nerved he anew, and the
 lofty sides sounded, his two-edged ax tried them severely. the
 young troops in ambush gasped. and as long as the reverberations
 re-echoed the wooden mass breathed out a fear that was not of its
 own. imprisoned, the warriors advance to take troia a captive and
 finish the struggle by strategem new and unheard of. behold! other
 portents: where tenedos steep breaks the ocean where great surging
 billows dash high; to be broken, and leap back to form a deep
 hollow of calm, and resemble the plashing of oars, carried far
 through the silence of night, as when ships pass and drive through
 the calm as it smashes against their fir bows. then backward we
 look: towards the rocks the tide carries two serpents that coil and
 uncoil as they come, and their breasts, which are swollen aside
 dash the foam, as the bows of tall ships; and the ocean is lashed
 by their tails, their manes, free on the water, as savage as even
 their eyes: now a blinding beam kindles the billows, the sea with
 their hissing is sibilant! all stare in terror! laocoon’s twin sons
 in phrygian raiment are standing with priests wreathed for
 sacrifice. them did the glistening serpents enfold in their coils!
 with their little hands shielding their faces, the boys, neither
 thinking of self, but each one of his brother! fraternal love’s
 sacrifice! death himself slew those poor children by means of their
 unselfish fear for each other! the father, a helper too feeble, now
 throws himself prone on their bodies: the serpents, now glutted
 with death, coil around him and drag him to earth! and the priest,
 at his altar a victim, lies beating the ground. thus the city of
 troy, doomed to sack and destruction, first lost her own gods by
 profaning their shrines and their worship. the full moon now lifted
 her luminous beam and the small stars led forth, with her torch all
 ablaze; when the greeks drew the bolts and poured forth their
 warriors, on priam’s sons, buried in darkness and sodden with wine.
 first the leaders made trial of their weapons just as the horse,
 when unhitched from thessalian neck-yoke, first tosses his head and
 his mane, ere to pasture he rushes. they draw their swords,
 brandish their shields and rush into the battle. one slays the
 wine-drunken trojans, prolonging their dreams to death, which ends
 all. still another takes brands from the altars, and calls upon
 troy’s sacred temples to fight against trojans.”
 some of the public, who were loafing in the portico, threw stones at the
 reciting eumolpus and he, taking note of this tribute to his genius,
 covered his head and bolted out of the temple. fearing they might take me
 for a poet, too, i followed after him in his flight and came to the
 seashore, where we stopped as soon as we were out of range. “tell me,” i
 demanded, “what are you going to do about that disease of yours? you’ve
 loafed with me less than two hours, and you’ve talked more often like a
 poet than you have like a human being! for this reason, i’m not at all
 surprised that the rabble chases you with rocks. i’m going to load my
 pockets with stones, too, and whenever you begin to go out of your head,
 i’m going to let blood out of it!” his expression changed. “my dear young
 man,” said he, “today is not the first time i have had such compliments
 showered upon me; the audience always applauds me in this fashion, when i
 go into the theatre to recite anything, but i’ll abstain from this sort of
 diet for the whole day, for fear of having trouble with you.” “good,” i
 replied, “we’ll dine together if you’ll swear off crankiness for the day.”
 (so saying,) i gave the housekeeper the orders for our little supper (and
 we went straight off to the baths.) 
 (there) i catch sight of giton laden with towels and scrapers, leaning,
 downhearted and embarrassed, against the wall. you could see that he did
 not serve of his own free will. then, that i might assure myself that i
 saw aright, “take pity on me, brother,” he cried, turning towards me a
 face lighted up with joy, “there are no arms here, i can speak freely take
 me away from that bloody robber, and punish your penitent judge as
 severely as you like. to have perished, should you wish it, will be a
 consolation great enough in my misery!” fearing some one might overhear
 our plans, i bade him hush his complaints and, leaving eumolpus
 behind--for he was reciting a poem in the bath--i pull giton down a dark
 and dirty passage, after me, and fly with all speed to my lodgings.
 arriving there, i slam the door shut, embrace him convulsively, and press
 my face against his which is all wet with tears. for a long time, neither
 of us could find his voice, and as for the lad, his shapely bosom was
 heaving continuously with choking sobs. “oh the disgraceful inconsistency
 of it all,” i cried, “for i love you still, although you abandoned me, and
 no scar from that gaping wound is left upon this breast! what can you say
 that will justify you in yielding your love to a stranger? did i merit
 such an affront’?” he held his head higher when he found that he was
 loved.
 for one to love, and at the same time, blame, that were a
 labor hercules to tame! conflicting passions yield in cupid’s
 name.
 (“and furthermore,” i went on), “i was not the one that laid the cause of
 our love before another judge, but i will complain no more, i will
 remember nothing, if you will prove your penitence by keeping faith.” he
 wiped his face upon his mantle, while i poured out these words, with
 groans and tears. “encolpius,” said he, “i beseech you, i appeal to your
 honest recollection, did i leave you, or did you throw me over? for my
 part, i admit, and openly at that, that i sought, refuge with the
 stronger, when i beheld two armed men.” i kissed that, bosom, so full of
 prudence, threw my arms around his neck and pressed him tightly against my
 breast, that he might see unmistakably that he had gotten back into my
 good graces, and that our friendship lived again in perfect confidence.
 night had fallen by this time, and the woman to whom i had given my order
 had prepared supper, when eumolpus knocked at the door. “how many of you
 are there?” i called out, and as i spoke, i peeped cautiously through a
 chink in the door to see if ascyltos had come with him; then, as i
 perceived that he was the only guest, i quickly admitted him. he threw
 himself upon the pallet and caught sight of giton, waiting table,
 whereupon, he nodded his head, “i like your ganymede,” he remarked, “this
 day promises a good ending!” i did not take kindly to such an inquisitive
 beginning, fearing that i had let another ascyltos into my lodging.
 eumolpus stuck to his purpose. “i like you better than the whole bathful,”
 he remarked, when the lad had served him with wine, then he thirstily
 drained the cup dry and swore that never before had he tasted a wine with
 such a satisfying tang to it. “while i was bathing,” he went on, “i was
 almost beaten up for trying to recite a poem to the people sitting around
 the basin, and when i had been thrown out of the baths, just like i was
 out of the theatre, i hunted through every nook and cranny of the
 building, calling ‘encolpius, encolpius,’ at the top of my voice. a naked
 youth at the other end, who had lost his clothes, was bawling just as
 loudly and no less angrily for giton! as for myself, the slaves took me
 for a maniac, and mimicked me in the most insolent manner, but a large
 crowd gathered around him, clapping its hands in awe-struck admiration,
 for so heavy and massive were his private parts, that you would have
 thought that the man himself was but an appendage of his own member! oh
 such a man! he could do his bit all right! i haven’t a doubt but that he
 could begin on the day before and never finish till the day after the
 next! and he soon found a friend, of course: some roman knight or other, i
 don’t know his name, but he bears a bad reputation, so they say, threw his
 own mantle around the wanderer and took him off home with himself, hoping,
 i suppose, to have the sole enjoyment of so huge a prize. but i couldn’t
 get my own clothing back from the officious bath attendant till i found
 some one who could identify me, which only goes to show that it is more
 profitable to rub up the member than it is to polish the mind!” while
 eumolpus was relating all this, i changed countenance continually, elated,
 naturally, at the mishaps of my enemy, and vexed at his good fortune; but
 i controlled my tongue nevertheless, as if i knew nothing about the
 episode, and read aloud the bill of fare. (hardly had i finished, when our
 humble meal was served. the food was plain but succulent and nutritious,
 and the famished scholar eumolpus, fell to ravenously.)
 kind providence unto our needs has tempered its decrees 
 and met our wants, our carping plaints to still green herbs, and
 berries hanging on their rough and brambly sprays 
 suffice our hunger’s gnawing pangs to kill. what fool would thirst
 upon a river’s brink? or stand and freeze 
 in icy blasts, when near a cozy fire? the law sits armed outside
 the door, adulterers to seize,  the chaste
 bride, guiltless, gratifies desire. all nature lavishes her wealth
 to meet our just demands; but, spurred by lust of pride, we stop
 at naught to gain our ends!
 (our philosopher began to moralize, when he had gorged himself, leveling
 many critical shafts at those who hold every-day things in contempt,
 esteeming nothing except what is rare.) 
 (“to their perverted taste,” he went on,) everything one may have lawfully
 is held cheap and the appetite, tickled only by forbidden indulgences,
 delights in what is most difficult to obtain.
 the pheasant from colchis, the wild-fowl from african shores,
 because they are dainties, the parvenu’s palate adores the
 white-feathered goose, and the duck in his bright-colored plumes 
 must nourish the rabble; they’re common, so them fashion dooms! 
 the wrasse brought from dangerous syrtis is much more esteemed 
 when fishing-boats founder! and even the mullet is deemed, no
 matter how heavy, a weight on the market! the whore displaces the
 wife; and in perfumes, the cinnamon more is esteemed than the
 rose! so whatever we have, we despise, and whatever we have not,
 we think a superlative prize!”
 “is this the way in which you keep your promise not to recite a single
 verse today?” i demanded; “bear in mind your promise and spare us, at
 least, for we have thrown no rocks at you yet. if a single one of those
 fellows drinking under this very roof were to smell out a poet in their
 midst, he would arouse the whole neighborhood and involve all of us in the
 same misunderstanding!” giton, who was one of the gentlest of lads, took
 me to task for having spoken in that manner, denying that i did rightly in
 criticising my elders and at the same time forgetting my duties as host by
 offering an affront to one whom i had invited out of kindness. and much
 more, full of moderation and propriety, which was in exquisite keeping
 with his good looks. 
 “happy the mother,” cried eumolpus, “who bore such a son as you! may your
 fortune be in keeping with your merit! beauty and wisdom are rarely found
 mixed! and that you may not think that all your words are wasted, know
 that you have found a lover! i will fill my verses with your praise! i
 will act as your guardian and your tutor, following you even when you bid
 me stay behind! nor can encolpius take offense, he loves another.” the
 soldier who took my sword from me did eumolpus a good turn, too;
 otherwise, the rage which i had felt against ascyltos would have been
 quenched in the blood of eumolpus. seeing what was in the wind, giton
 slipped out of the room, pretending he was going after water, and by this
 diplomatic retreat he put an end to my fury. then, as my anger cooled,
 little by little, “eumolpus,” i said, “rather than have you entertain
 designs of such a nature, i would even prefer to have you spouting poetry!
 i am hot-tempered and you are lecherous; see how uncongenial two such
 dispositions must be! take me for a maniac, humor my malady: in other
 words, get out quick!” taken completely aback by this onslaught, eumolpus
 crossed the threshold of the room without stopping to ask the reason for
 my wrath, and immediately slammed the door shut, penning me in, as i was
 not looking for any move of that kind then, having quickly removed the
 key, he hurried away in search of giton. finding that i was locked in, i
 decided to hang myself, and had already fastened my belt to the bedstead
 which stood alongside of the wall, and was engaged in fastening the noose
 around my neck, when the doors were unlocked and eumolpus came in with
 giton, recalling me to light when i was just about to turn the fatal
 goal-post! giton was greatly wrought up and his grief turned to fury:
 seizing me with both hands, he threw me upon the bed. “if you think,
 encolpius,” he shrieked, “that you can contrive to die before i do, you’re
 wrong! i thought of suicide first. i hunted for a sword in ascyltos’
 house: i would have thrown myself from a precipice if i had not found you!
 you know that death is never far from those who seek him, so take your
 turn and witness the spectacle you wished to see!” so saying, he snatched
 a razor from eumolpus’ servant, slashed his throat, once, twice, and fell
 down at our feet! i uttered a loud cry, rushed to him as he fell, and
 sought the road to death by the same steel; giton, however, showed not the
 faintest trace of any wound, nor was i conscious of feeling any pain. the
 razor, it turned out, was untempered and dull and was used to imbue boy
 apprentices with the confidence of the experienced barber. hence it was in
 a sheath and, for the reason given above, the servant was not alarmed when
 the blade was snatched nor did eumolpus break in upon this farcical death
 scene. 
 the landlord made his appearance with a part of our little supper, while
 this lover’s comedy was being enacted and, taking in the very disorderly
 spectacle which we presented, lying there and wallowing as we were, “are
 you drunk,” he demanded, “or are you runaway slaves, or both? who turned
 up that bed there? what’s the meaning of all these sneaking preparations?
 you didn’t want to pay the room-rent, you didn’t, by hercules, you didn’t;
 you wanted to wait till night and run away into the public streets, but
 that won’t go here! this is no widow’s joint, i’ll show you that; not yet
 it ain’t! this place belongs to marcus manicius!” “so you threaten, do
 you’?” yelled eumolpus, giving the fellow a resounding slap in the face.
 at this, the latter threw a small earthenware pitcher, which had been
 emptied by the draughts of successive guests, at eumolpus’ head, and cut
 open the forehead of his cursing adversary: then he skipped out of the
 room. infuriated at such an insult. eumolpus snatched up a wooden
 candlestick, ran in pursuit of his retreating foeman, and avenged his
 broken head with a shower of blows. the entire household crowded around,
 as did a number of drunken lodgers, but i seized this opportunity of
 retaliating and locked eumolpus out, retorting his own trick upon the
 quarrelsome fellow, and found myself without a rival, as it were, able to
 enjoy my room and my night’s pleasure as well. in the meantime, eumolpus,
 locked out as he was, was being very roughly handled by the cooks and
 scullions of the establishment; one aimed a spitful of hissing-hot guts at
 his eyes; another grabbed a two-tined fork in the pantry and put himself
 on guard. but worst of all, a blear-eyed old hag, girded round with a
 filthy apron, and wearing wooden clogs which were not mates, dragged in an
 immense dog on a chain, and “sicked” him upon eumolpus, but he beat off
 all attacks with his candlestick. 
 we took in the entire performance through a hole in the folding-doors:
 this had been made but a short time before, when the handle had been
 broken and jerked out, and i wished him joy of his beating. giton,
 however, forgetting everything except his own compassion, thought we ought
 to open the door and succor eumolpus, in his peril; but being still angry,
 i could not restrain my hand; clenching my fist, i rapped his pitying head
 with my sharp knuckles. in tears, he sat upon the bed, while i applied
 each eye in turn, to the opening, filling myself up as with a dainty dish,
 with eumolpus’ misfortunes, and gloating over their prolongation, when
 bargates, agent for the building, called from his dinner, was carried into
 the midst of the brawl by two chair-men, for he had the gout. he carried
 on for some time against drunkards and fugitive slaves, in a savage tone
 and with a barbarous accent, and then, looking around and catching sight
 of eumolpus, “what,” he exclaimed, “are you here, nay prince of poets? and
 these damned slaves don’t scatter at once and stop their brawling!” (then,
 whispering in eumolpus’ ear,) “my bedfellow’s got an idea that she’s
 finer-haired than i am; lampoon her in a poem, if you think anything of
 me, and make ‘er ashamed.” 
 eumolpus was speaking privately with bargates, when a crier attended by a
 public slave entered the inn, accompanied by a medium-sized crowd of
 outsiders. waving a torch that gave out more smoke than light, he
 announced: “strayed from the baths, a short time ago, a boy about sixteen
 years of age, curly headed, a minion, handsome, answers to the name of
 giton. one thousand sesterces reward will be paid to anyone bringing him
 back or giving information as to his whereabouts.” ascyltos, dressed in a
 tunic of many colors, stood not far from the crier, holding out a silver
 tray upon which was piled the reward, as evidence of good faith. i ordered
 giton to get under the bed immediately, telling him to stick his hands and
 feet through the rope netting which supported the mattress, and, just as
 ulysses of old had clung to the ram, so he, stretched out beneath the
 mattress, would evade the hands of the hunters. and giton did not hesitate
 at obeying this order, but fastened his hands in the netting for a moment,
 outdoing ulysses in his own cunning! for fear of leaving room for
 suspicion, i piled covers upon my pallet, leaving the impression of a
 single person of my own stature. meanwhile ascyltos, in company with the
 magistrate’s servant, had ransacked all the rooms and had come at last to
 mine, where he entertained greater hopes of success, because he found the
 doors carefully barred. the public slave loosened the bolts by inserting
 the edge of his ax in the chink. i threw myself at ascyltos’ feet, begging
 him, by the memory of our friendship and our companionship in suffering,
 to show me my “brother,” safe and sound, and furthermore, that my
 simulated prayers might carry conviction, i added, “i know very well,
 ascyltos, that you have come here seeking my life. if not, why the axes?
 “well, fatten your grudge, then! here’s my neck! pour out that blood you
 seek to shed under pretext of a search!” ascyltos repelled this suspicion,
 affirming that he sought nothing except his own fugitive and desired the
 death of neither man nor suppliant, and least of all did he wish to harm
 one whom, now that their quarrel was over, he regarded as his dearest
 friend. 
 the public servant, however, was not derelict in the performance of his
 duty for, snatching a cane from the innkeeper, he poked underneath the
 bed, ransacking every corner, even to the cracks in the wall. twisting his
 body out of reach, and cautiously drawing a full breath, giton pressed his
 mouth against the very bugs themselves. (the pair had scarcely left the
 room) when eumolpus burst in in great excitement, for the doors had been
 broken and could keep no one out. “the thousand sesterces are mine,” he
 shouted, “i’ll follow that crier out and tell him giton is in your power,
 and it will serve you right, too!” seeing that his mind was made up, i
 embraced his knees and besought him not to kill a dying man. “you might
 have some reason for being excited,” i said, “if you could produce the
 missing boy, but you cannot, as the thing stands now, for he escaped into
 the crowd and i have not even a suspicion as to where he has gone! get the
 lad back, eumolpus, for heaven’s sake, even if you do restore him to
 ascyltos!” i had just succeeded in persuading him to believe all this when
 giton, nearly suffocated from holding his breath, suddenly sneezed three
 times, and shook the bed. eumolpus turned at the commotion. “hello,
 giton,” he exclaimed, “glad to see you!” then he turned back the mattress
 and discovered an ulysses who even a ravenous cyclops might have spared;
 thereupon, he faced me, “you robber,” said he, “what does all this mean?
 you hadn’t the nerve to tell me the truth even when you were caught! if
 the god, that umpires human affairs hadn’t forced a sign from this boy as
 he hung there, i would be wandering from one pot-house to another, like a
 fool!” (but) giton was far more tactful than i: first of all, he dressed
 the cut upon eumolpus’ forehead, with spider’s web soaked in oil; he then
 exchanged the poet’s torn clothing for his own cloak; this done, he
 embraced the old gentleman, who was already somewhat mollified, and
 poulticed him with kisses. “dearest of fathers,” he cried, “we are
 entirely in your hands! in yours alone! if you love your giton, do your
 best to save him. would that some cruel flame might devour me, alone, or
 that the wintry sea might swallow me, for i am the cause for all these
 crimes. two enemies would be reconciled if i should perish!” (moved by our
 troubles, but particularly stirred by giton’s caresses, “you are fools,”
 exclaimed eumolpus, “you certainly are: here you are gifted with talents
 enough to make your fortunes and you still lead a life of misery, and
 every day you bring new torments upon yourselves, as the fruits of your
 own acts!)” 
 “i have always and everywhere lived such a life that each passing day was
 spent as though that light would never return; (that is, in tranquillity!
 put aside those thoughts which worry you, if you wish to follow my lead.
 ascyltos persecutes you here; get out of his way. i am about to start for
 foreign parts, you may come with me. i have taken a berth on a vessel
 which will probably weigh anchor this very night. i am well known on
 board, and we shall be well received.)
 leave then thy home and seek a foreign shore brave youth;
 for thee thy destiny holds more: to no misfortune yield! the
 danube far shall know thy spirit, and the polar star, and
 placid nile, and they who dwell in lands where sunrise starts, or
 they where sunset ends! a new ulysses treads on foreign sands.”
 (to me, this advice seemed both sound and practical, because it would free
 me from any annoyance by ascyltos, and because it gave promise of a
 happier life. i was overcome by the kindly sympathy of eumolpus, and was
 especially sorry for the latest injury i had done him. i began to repent
 my jealousy, which had been the cause of so many unpleasant happenings)
 and with many tears, i begged and pled with him to admit me into favor, as
 lovers cannot control their furious jealousy, and vowing, at the same
 time, that i would not by word or deed give him cause for offense in the
 future. and he, like a learned and cultivated gentleman, ought to remove
 all irritation from his mind, and leave no trace of it behind. the snows
 belong upon the ground in wild and uncultivated regions, but where the
 earth has been beautified by the conquest of the plough, the light snow
 melts away while you speak of it. and so it is with anger in the heart; in
 savage minds it lingers long, it glides quickly away from the cultured.
 “that you may experience the truth of what you say,” exclaimed eumolpus,
 “see! i end my anger with a kiss. may good luck go with us! get your
 baggage together and follow me, or go on ahead, if you prefer.” while he
 was speaking, a knock sounded at the door, and a sailor with a bristling
 beard stood upon the threshold. “you’re hanging in the wind, eumolpus,”
 said he, “as if you didn’t know that son-of-a-bitch of a skipper!” without
 further delay we all got up. eumolpus ordered his servant, who had been
 asleep for some time, to bring his baggage out. giton and i pack together
 whatever we have for the voyage and, after praying to the stars, we went
 aboard. 
 (we picked out a retired spot on the poop and eumolpus dozed off, as it
 was not yet daylight. neither giton nor myself could get a wink of sleep,
 however. anxiously i reflected that i had received eumolpus as a comrade,
 a rival more formidable than ascyltos, and that thought tortured me. but
 reason soon put my uneasiness to flight.) “it is unfortunate,” (said i to
 myself,) “that the lad has so taken our friend’s fancy, but what of it? is
 not nature’s every masterpiece common to all? the sun shines upon all
 alike! the moon with her innumerable train of stars lights even the wild
 beasts to their food. what can be more beautiful than water?
 “yet it flows for common use. shall love alone, then, be stolen, rather
 than be regarded as a prize to be won? no, indeed i desire no possession
 unless the world envies me for possessing it. a solitary old man can
 scarcely become a serious rival; even should he wish to take advantage, he
 would lose it through lack of breath.” when, but without any confidence, i
 had arrived at these conclusions, and beguiled my uneasy spirit, i covered
 my head with my tunic and began to feign sleep, when all of a sudden, as
 though fortune were bent upon annihilating my peace of mind, a voice upon
 the ship’s deck gritted out something like this--“so he fooled me after
 all."--as this voice, which was a man’s, and was only too familiar, struck
 my ears, my heart fluttered. and then a woman, equally furious, spat out
 more spitefully still--“if only some god would put giton into my hands,
 what a fine time i would give that runaway.” --stunned by these unexpected
 words, we both turned pale as death. i was completely terrified, and, as
 though i were enveloped in some turbulent nightmare, was a long time
 finding my voice, but at last, with trembling hands, i tugged at the hem
 of eumolpus’ clothing, just as he was sinking into slumber. “father,” i
 quavered, “on your word of honor, can you tell me whose ship this is, and
 whom she has aboard?” peeved at being disturbed, “so,” he snapped, “this
 was the reason you wished to have us quartered in the most inaccessible
 spot on deck, was it? so we could get no rest! what good will it do you
 when i’ve informed you that lycas of tarentum is master of this ship and
 that he carries tryphaena as an exile to tarentum?” 
 i shivered, horror-struck, at this thunderbolt and, beating my throat, “oh
 destiny,” i wailed, “you’ve vanquished me completely, at last!” as for
 giton, he fell in a faint upon my bosom and remained unconscious for quite
 a while, until a sweat finally relieved our tension, whereupon, hugging
 eumolpus around the knees, “take pity upon the perishing,” i besought him,
 “in the name of our common learning, aid us! death himself hangs over us,
 and he will come as a relief unless you help us!” overwhelmed by this
 implication, eumolpus swore by all the gods and goddesses that he knew
 nothing of what had happened, nor had he had any ulterior purpose in mind,
 but that he had brought his companions upon this voyage which he himself
 had long intended taking, with the most upright intentions and in the best
 of good faith. “but,” demanded he, “what is this ambush? who is this
 hannibal who sails with us? lycas of tarentum is a most respectable
 citizen and the owner, not only of this ship, which he commands in person,
 but of landed estates as well as commercial houses under the management of
 slaves. he carries a cargo consigned to market. he is the cyclops, the
 arch-pirate, to whom we owe our passage! and then, besides himself, there
 is tryphaena, a most charming woman, travelling about here and there in
 search of pleasure.” “but,” objected giton, “they are the very ones we are
 most anxious to avoid,” whereupon he explained to the astonished eumolpus
 the reasons for their enmity and for the danger which threatened us. so
 muddled did he become, at what had been told him, that he lost the power
 of thinking, and requested each of us to offer his own opinion. “just
 imagine,” said he, “that we are trapped in the cyclops’ cave: some way out
 must be found, unless we bring about a shipwreck, and free ourselves from
 all dangers!” “bribe the pilot, if necessary, and persuade him to steer
 the ship into some port,” volunteered giton; “tell him your brother’s
 nearly dead from seasickness: your woebegone face and streaming tears will
 lend color to your deception, and the pilot may be moved to mercy and
 grant your prayer.” eumolpus denied the practicability of this. “it is
 only with difficulty,” affirmed he, “that large ships are warped into
 landlocked harbors, nor would it appear probable that my brother could
 have been taken so desperately in so short a time. and then, lycas will be
 sure to want to visit a sick passenger, as part of his duties! you can see
 for yourselves what a fine stroke it would be, bringing the captain to his
 own runaways! but, supposing that the ship could be put off her course,
 supposing that lycas did not hold sick-call, how could we leave the ship
 in such a manner as not to be stared at by all the rest? with muffled
 heads? with bare? if muffled, who would not want to lend the sick man a
 hand? if bare, what would it mean if not proscribing ourselves?” 
 “why would it not be better to take refuge in boldness,” i asked, “slide
 down a rope into the ship’s boat, cut the painter, and leave the rest to
 luck’? and furthermore, i would not involve eumolpus in this adventure,
 for what is the good of getting an innocent man into troubles with which
 he has no concern? i shall be well content if chance helps us into the
 boat.” “not a bad scheme,” eumolpus agreed, “if it could only be carried
 out: but who could help seeing you when you start? especially the man at
 the helm, who stands watch all night long and observes even the motions of
 the stars. but it could be done in spite of that, when he dozed off for a
 second, that is, if you chose some other part of the ship from which to
 start: as it is, it must be the stern, you must even slip down the rudder
 itself, for that is where the painter that holds the boat in tow is made
 fast. and there is still something else, encolpius. i am surprised that it
 has not occurred to you that one sailor is on watch, lying in the boat,
 night and day. you couldn’t get rid of that watchman except by cutting his
 throat or throwing him overboard by force. consult your own courage as to
 whether that can be done or not. and as far as my coming with you is
 concerned, i shirk no danger which holds out any hopes of success, but to
 throw away life without a reason, as if it were a thing of no moment, is
 something which i do not believe that even you would sanction--see what
 you think of this: i will wrap you up in two hide baggage covers, tie you
 up with thongs, and stow you among my clothing, as baggage, leaving the
 ends somewhat open, of course, so you can breathe and get your food. then
 i will raise a hue and cry because my slaves have thrown themselves into
 the sea, fearing worse punishment; and when the ship makes port, i will
 carry you out as baggage without exciting the slightest suspicion!” “oh!
 so you would bundle us up like we were solid,” i sneered; “our bellies
 wouldn’t make trouble for us, of course, and we’ll never sneeze nor snore!
 and all because a similar trick turned out successfully before! think the
 matter over! being tied up could be endured for one day, but suppose it
 might have to be for longer? what if we should be becalmed? what if we
 were struck by a storm from the wrong quarter of the heavens? what could
 we do then? even clothes will cut through at the wrinkles when they are
 tied up too long, and paper in bundles will lose its shape. do you imagine
 that we, who are young and unused to hardship, could endure the filthy
 rags and lashings necessary to such an operation, as statues do? no!
 that’s settled! some other road to safety must be found! i have thought up
 a scheme, see what you think of it! eumolpus is a man of letters. he will
 have ink about him, of course. with this remedy, then, let’s change our
 complexions, from hair to toe-nails! then, in the guise of ethiopian
 slaves, we shall be ready at hand to wait upon you, light-hearted as
 having escaped the torturer, and, with our altered complexions, we can
 impose upon our enemies!” “yes, indeed,” sneered giton, “and be sure and
 circumcise us, too, so we will be taken for jews, pierce our ears so we
 will look like arabs, chalk our faces so that gaul will take us for her
 own sons; as if color alone could change one’s figure! as if many other
 details did not require consideration if a passable imposture is to
 result! even granting that the stained face can keep its color for some
 time, suppose that not a drop of water should spot the skin, suppose that
 the garment did not stick to the ink, as it often does, where no gum is
 used, tell me! we can’t make our lips so hideously thick, can we? we can’t
 kink our hair with a curling-iron, can we? we can’t harrow our foreheads
 with scars, can we? we can’t force our legs out into the form of a bow or
 walk with our ankle-bones on the ground, can we? can we trim our beards
 after the foreign style? no! artificial color dirties the body without
 changing it. listen to the plan which i have thought out in my
 desperation; let’s tie our garments around our heads and throw ourselves
 into the deep!” 
 “gods and men forbid that you should make so base an ending of your
 lives,” cried eumolpus. “no! it will be better to do as i direct. as you
 may gather, from his razor, my servant is a barber: let him shave your
 heads and eyebrows, too, and quickly at that! i will follow after him, and
 i will mark my inscription so cleverly upon your foreheads that you will
 be mistaken for slaves who have been branded! the same letters will serve
 both to quiet the suspicions of the curious and to conceal, under
 semblance of punishment, your real features!” we did not delay the
 execution of this scheme but, sneaking stealthily to the ship’s side, we
 submitted our heads and eyebrows to the barber, that he might shave them
 clean. eumolpus covered our foreheads completely, with large letters and,
 with a liberal hand, spread the universally known mark of the fugitive
 over the face of each of us. as luck would have it, one of the passengers,
 who was terribly seasick, was hanging over the ship’s side easing his
 stomach. he saw the barber busy at his unseasonable task by the light of
 the moon and, cursing the omen which resembled the last offering of a crew
 before shipwreck, he threw himself into his bunk. pretending not to hear
 his puking curses, we reverted to our melancholy train of thought and,
 settling ourselves down in silence, we passed the remaining hours of the
 night in fitful slumber. (on the following morning eumolpus entered lycas’
 cabin as soon as he knew that tryphaena was out of bed and, after some
 conversation upon the happy voyage of which the fine weather gave promise,
 lycas turned to tryphaena and remarked:) 
 “priapus appeared to me in a dream and seemed to say--know that encolpius,
 whom you seek, has, by me, been led aboard your ship!” tryphaena trembled
 violently, “you would think we had slept together,” she cried, “for a bust
 of neptune, which i saw in the gallery at baiae, said to me, in my
 dream--you will find giton aboard lycas’ ship!” “from which you can see
 that epicurus was a man inspired,” remarked eumolpus; “he passed sentence
 upon mocking phantasms of that kind in a very witty manner.
 dreams that delude the mind with flitting shades by neither
 powers of air nor gods, are sent: each makes his own! and when
 relaxed in sleep the members lie, the mind, without restraint
 can flit, and re-enact by night, the deeds that occupied the
 day. the warrior fierce, who cities shakes and towns destroys by
 fire maneuvering armies sees, and javelins, and funerals of
 kings and bloody fields. the cringing lawyer dreams of
 courts and trials, the miser hides his hoard, new treasures finds:
 the hunter’s horn and hounds the forests wake, the
 shipwrecked sailor from his hulk is swept. or, washed aboard, just
 misses perishing. adultresses will bribe, and harlots write 
 to lovers: dogs, in dreams their hare still course; and old wounds
 ache most poignantly in dreams!”
 “still, what’s to prevent our searching the ship?” said lycas, after he
 had expiated tryphaena’s dream, “so that we will not be guilty of
 neglecting the revelations of providence?” “and who were the rascals who
 were being shaved last night by the light of the moon?” chimed in hesus,
 unexpectedly, for that was the name of the fellow who had caught us at our
 furtive transformation in the night. “a rotten thing to do, i swear! from
 what i hear, it’s unlawful for any living man aboard ship to shed hair or
 nails, unless the wind has kicked up a heavy sea.” 
 lycas was greatly disturbed by this information, and flew into a rage. “so
 someone aboard my ship cut off his hair, did he?” he bawled, “and at dead
 of night, too! bring the offenders aft on deck here, and step lively, so
 that i can tell whom to punish, from their heads, that the ship may be
 freed from the curse!” “i ordered it done,” eumolpus broke in, “and i
 didn’t order it as an unlucky omen, either, seeing that i had to be aboard
 the same vessel: i did it because the scoundrels had long matted hair, i
 ordered the filth cleared off the wretches because i did not wish to even
 seem to make a prison out of your ship: besides, i did not want the seared
 scars of the letters to be hidden in the least, by the interference of the
 hair; as they ought to be in plain sight, for everyone to read, and at
 full length, too. in addition to their other misdemeanors, they blew in my
 money on a street-walker whom they kept in common; only last night i
 dragged them away from her, reeking with wine and perfumes, as they were,
 and they still stink of the remnants of my patrimony!” thereupon, forty
 stripes were ordered for each of us, that the tutelary genius of the ship
 might be propitiated. and they were not long about it either. eager to
 propitiate the tutelary genius with our wretched blood, the savage sailors
 rushed upon us with their rope’s ends. for my part, i endured three lashes
 with spartan fortitude, but at the very first blow, giton set up such a
 howling that his all too familiar voice reached the ears of tryphaena; nor
 was she the only one who was in a flutter, for, attracted by this familiar
 voice, all the maids rushed to where he was being flogged. giton had
 already moderated the ardor of the sailors by his wonderful beauty, he
 appealed to his torturers without uttering a word. “it’s giton! it’s
 giton!” the maids all screamed in unison. “hold your hands, you brutes;
 help, madame, it’s giton!” tryphaena turned willing ears, she had
 recognized that voice herself, and flew to the boy. lycas, who knew me as
 well as if he had heard my voice, now ran up; he glanced at neither face
 nor hands, but directed his eyes towards parts lower down; courteously he
 shook hands with them, “how do you do, encolpius,” he said. let no one be
 surprised at ulysses’ nurse discovering, after twenty years, the scar that
 established his identity, since this man, so keenly observant, had, in
 spite of the most skillful disguise of every feature and the obliteration
 of every identifying mark upon my body, so surely hit upon the sole means
 of identifying his fugitive! deceived by our appearance, tryphaena wept
 bitterly, believing that the marks upon our foreheads were, in truth, the
 brands of prisoners: she asked us gently, into what slave’s prison we had
 fallen in our wanderings, and whose cruel hands had inflicted this
 punishment. still, fugitives whose members had gotten them into trouble
 certainly deserved some punishment. 
 in a towering passion, lycas leaped forward, “oh you silly woman,” he
 shouted, “as if those scars were made by the letters on the branding-iron!
 if only they had really blotched up their foreheads with those
 inscriptions, it would be some satisfaction to us, at least; but as it is,
 we are being imposed upon by an actor’s tricks, and hoaxed by a fake
 inscription!” tryphaena was disposed to mercy, as all was not lost for her
 pleasures, but lycas remembered the seduction of his wife and the insults
 to which he had been subjected in the portico of the temple of hercules:
 “tryphaena,” he gritted out, his face convulsed with savage passion, “you
 are aware, i believe, that the immortal gods have a hand in human affairs:
 what did they do but lead these scoundrels aboard this ship in ignorance
 of the owner and then warn each of us alike, by a coincidence of dreams,
 of what they had done? can you then see how it would be possible to let
 off those whom a god has, himself, delivered up to punishment? i am not a
 cruel man; what moves me is this: i am afraid i shall have to endure
 myself whatever i remit to them!” at this superstitious plea tryphaena
 veered around; denying that she would plead for quarter, she was even
 anxious to help along the fulfillment of this retribution, so entirely
 just: she had herself suffered an insult no less poignant than had lycas,
 for her chastity had been called in question before a crowd.
 primeval fear created gods on earth when from the sky the
 lightning-flashes rent with flame the ramparts of the world, and
 smitten athos blazed! then, phoebus, sinking to the earth, his
 course complete, and waning luna, offerings received. the changing
 seasons of the year the superstition spread throughout the world;
 and ignorance and awe, the toiling boor, to ceres, from his
 harvest, the first fruits compelled to yield and bacchus with the
 fruitful vine to crown. then pales came into her own, the
 shepherd’s gains to share. beneath the waves of every sea swims
 neptune. pallas guards the shops, and those impelled by avarice or
 guilt, create new gods!
 (lycas, as he perceived that tryphaena was as eager as himself for
 revenge, gave orders for our punishment to be renewed and made more
 drastic, whereupon eumolpus endeavored to appease him as follows,) 
 (“lycas,” said he, “these unfortunates upon whom you intend to wreak your
 vengeance, implore your compassion and) have chosen me for this task. i
 believe that i am a man, by no means unknown, and they desire that,
 somehow, i will effect a reconciliation between them and their former
 friends. surely you do not imagine that these young men fell into such a
 snare by accident, when the very first thing that concerns every
 prospective passenger is the name of the captain to whom he intrusts his
 safety! be reasonable, then; forego your revenge and permit free men to
 proceed to their destination without injury. when penitence manages to
 lead their fugitives back, harsh and implacable masters restrain their
 cruelty, and we are merciful to enemies who have surrendered. what could
 you ask, or wish for, more? these well-born and respectable young men be
 suppliant before your eyes and, what ought to move you more strongly
 still, were once bound to you by the ties of friendship. if they had
 embezzled your money or repaid your faith in them with treachery, by
 hercules, you have ample satisfaction from the punishment already
 inflicted! look! can you read slavery on their foreheads, and see upon the
 faces of free men the brand-marks of a punishment which was
 self-inflicted!” lycas broke in upon this plea for mercy, “don’t try to
 confuse the issue,” he said, “let every detail have its proper attention
 and first of all, why did they strip all the hair off their heads, if they
 came of their own free will? a man meditates deceit, not satisfaction,
 when he changes his features! then again, if they sought reconciliation
 through a mediator, why did you do your best to conceal them while
 employed in their behalf? it is easily seen that the scoundrels fell into
 the toils by chance and that you are seeking some device by which you
 could sidestep the effects of our resentment. and be careful that you do
 not spoil your case by over-confidence when you attempt to sow prejudice
 among us by calling them well-born and respectable! what should the
 injured parties do when the guilty run into their own punishment? and
 inasmuch as they were our friends, by that, they deserve more drastic
 punishment still, for whoever commits an assault upon a stranger, is
 termed a robber; but whoever assaults a friend, is little better than a
 parricide!” “i am well aware,” eumolpus replied, to rebut this damning
 harangue, “that nothing can look blacker against these poor young men than
 their cutting off their hair at night. on this evidence, they would seem
 to have come aboard by accident, not voluntarily. oh how i wish that the
 explanation could come to your ears just as candidly as the thing itself
 happened! they wanted to relieve their heads of that annoying and useless
 weight before they came aboard, but the unexpected springing up of the
 wind prevented the carrying out of their wishes, and they did not imagine
 that it mattered where they began what they had decided to do, because
 they were unacquainted with either the omens or the law of seafaring men.”
 “but why should they shave themselves like suppliants?” demanded lycas,
 “unless, of course, they expected to arouse more sympathy as bald-pates.
 what’s the use of seeking information through a third person, anyway? you
 scoundrel, what have you to say for yourself? what salamander singed off
 your eyebrows? you poisoner, what god did you vow your hair to? answer!”
 i was stricken dumb, and trembled from fear of punishment, nor could i
 find anything to say, out of countenance as i was and hideous, for to the
 disgrace of a shaven poll was added an equal baldness in the matter of
 eyebrows; the case against me was only too plain, there was not a thing to
 be said or done! finally, a damp sponge was passed over my tear-wet face,
 and thereupon, the smut dissolved and spread over my whole countenance,
 blotting out every feature in a sooty cloud. anger turned into loathing.
 swearing that he would permit no one to humiliate well-born young men
 contrary to right and law, eumolpus checked the threats of the savage
 persecutors by word and by deed. his hired servant backed him up in his
 protest, as did first one and then another of the feeblest of the seasick
 passengers, whose participation served rather to inflame the disagreement
 than to be of help to us. for myself i asked no quarter, but i shook my
 fists in tryphaena’s face, and told her in a loud voice that unless she
 stopped hurting giton, i would use every ounce of my strength against her,
 reprobate woman that she was, the only person aboard the ship who deserved
 a flogging. lycas was furiously angry at my hardihood, nor was he less
 enraged at my abandoning my own cause, to take up that of another, in so
 wholehearted a manner. inflamed as she was by this affront, tryphaena was
 as furious as he, so the whole ship’s company was divided into two
 factions. on our side, the hired barber armed himself with a razor and
 served out the others to us; on their side, tryphaena’s retainers prepared
 to battle with their bare fists, nor was the scolding of female warriors
 unheard in the battle-line. the pilot was neutral, but he declared that
 unless this madness, stirred up by the lechery of a couple of vagabonds,
 died down, he would let go the helm! the fury of the combatants continued
 to rage none the less fiercely, nevertheless, they fighting for revenge,
 we for life. many fell on each side, though none were mortally wounded,
 and more, bleeding from wounds, retreated, as from a real battle, but the
 fury of neither side abated. at last the gallant giton turned the menacing
 razor against his own virile parts, and threatened to cut away the cause
 of so many misfortunes. this was too much for tryphaena; she prevented the
 perpetration of so horrid a crime by the out and out promise of quarter.
 time and time again, i lifted the barber’s blade to my throat, but i had
 no more intention of killing myself than had giton of doing what he
 threatened, but he acted out the tragic part more realistically than i, as
 it was, because he knew that he held in his hand the same razor with which
 he had already cut his throat. the lines still stood at the ready, and it
 was plain to be seen that this would be no everyday affair, when the
 pilot, with difficulty, prevailed upon tryphaena to undertake the office
 of herald, and propose a truce; so, when pledges of good faith had been
 given and received, in keeping with the ancient precedent she snatched an
 olive-branch from the ship’s figurehead and, holding it out, advanced
 boldly to parley.
 “what fury,” she exclaims, “turns peace to war? what evil deed
 was by these hands committed? trojan hero there is none 
 absconding in this ship with bride of atreus’ cuckold seed nor
 crazed medea, stained by life’s blood of her father’s son! but
 passion scorned, becomes a power: alas! who courts his end by
 drawing sword amidst these waves? why die before our time? strive
 not with angry seas to vie and to their fury lend your rage by
 piling waves upon its savage floods sublime !”
 the woman poured out this rhapsody in a loud excited voice, the
 battle-line wavered for an instant, then all hands were recalled to peace
 and terminated the war. eumolpus, our commander, took advantage of the
 psychological moment of their repentance and, after administering a
 stinging rebuke to lycas, signed a treaty of peace which was drawn up as
 follows: “it is hereby solemnly agreed on your part, tryphaena, that you
 do forego complaint of any wrong done you by giton; that you do not bring
 up anything that has taken place prior to this date, that you do not seek
 to revenge anything that has taken place prior to this date, that you do
 not take steps to follow it up in any other manner whatsoever; that you do
 not command the boy to perform anything to him repugnant; that you do
 neither embrace nor kiss the said giton; that you do not enfold said giton
 in the sexual embrace, except under immediate forfeiture of one hundred
 denarii. item, it is hereby agreed on your part, lycas, that you do
 refrain from annoying encolpius with abusive word or reproachful look;
 that you do not seek to ascertain where he sleep at night; or, if you do
 so seek, that you forfeit two hundred denarii immediately for each and
 every such offense.” the treaty was signed upon these terms, and we laid
 down our arms. it seemed well to wipe out the past with kisses, after we
 had taken oath, for fear any vestige of rancor should persist in our
 minds. factious hatreds died out amidst universal good-fellowship, and a
 banquet, served on the field of battle, crowned our reconciliation with
 joviality. the whole ship resounded with song and, as a sudden calm had
 caused her to lose headway, one tried to harpoon the leaping fish, another
 hauled in the struggling catch on baited hooks. then some sea-birds
 alighted upon the yard-arms and a skillful fowler touched them with his
 jointed rods: they were brought down to our hands, stuck fast to the limed
 segments. the breeze caught up the down, but the wing and tail feathers
 twisted spirally as they fell into the sea-foam. lycas was already
 beginning to be on good terms with me, and tryphaena had just sprinkled
 giton with the last drops in her cup, when eumolpus, who was himself
 almost drunk, was seized with the notion of satirizing bald pates and
 branded rascals, but when he had exhausted his chilly wit, he returned at
 last to his poetry and recited this little elegy upon hair:
 “gone are those locks that to thy beauty lent such lustrous charm
 and blighted are the locks of spring by bitter winter’s sway;
 thy naked temples now in baldness mourn their vanished form, 
 and glistens now that poor bare crown, its hair all worn away oh!
 faithless inconsistency! the gods must first resume the charms
 that first they granted youth, that it might lovelier bloom! 
 poor wretch, but late thy locks did brighter glister than those of
 great apollo or his sister! now, smoother is thy crown than
 polished grasses or rounded mushrooms when a shower passes! 
 in fear thou fliest the laughter-loving lasses. that thou may’st
 know that death is on his way, know that thy head is partly dead
 this day!”
 it is my opinion that he intended favoring us with more of the same kind
 of stuff, sillier than the last, but tryphaena’s maid led giton away below
 and fitted the lad out in her mistress’ false curls; then producing some
 eyebrows from a vanity box, she skillfully traced out the lines of the
 lost features and restored him to his proper comeliness. recognizing the
 real giton, tryphaena was moved to tears, and then for the first time she
 gave the boy a real love-kiss. i was overjoyed, now that the lad was
 restored to his own handsome self, but i hid my own face all the more
 assiduously, realizing that i was disfigured by no ordinary hideousness
 since not even lycas would bestow a word upon me. the maid rescued me from
 this misfortune finally, however, and calling me aside, she decked me out
 with a head of hair which was none the less becoming; my face shone more
 radiantly still, as a matter of fact, for my curls were golden! but in a
 little while, eumolpus, mouthpiece of the distressed and author of the
 present good understanding, fearing that the general good humor might flag
 for lack of amusement, began to indulge in sneers at the fickleness of
 women: how easily they fell in love; how readily they forgot even their
 own sons! no woman could be so chaste but that she could be roused to
 madness by a chance passion! nor had he need to quote from old tragedies,
 or to have recourse to names, notorious for centuries; on the contrary, if
 we cared to hear it, he would relate an incident which had occurred within
 his own memory, whereupon, as we all turned our faces towards him and gave
 him our attention, he began as follows: 
 “there was a certain married lady at ephesus, once upon a time, so noted
 for her chastity that she even drew women from the neighboring states to
 come to gaze upon her! when she carried out her husband she was by no
 means content to comply with the conventional custom and follow the
 funeral cortege with her hair down, beating her naked breast in sight of
 the onlookers! she followed the corpse, even into the tomb; and when the
 body had been placed in the vault, in accordance with the greek custom,
 she began to stand vigil over it, weeping day and night! neither parents
 nor relations could divert her from punishing herself in this manner and
 from bringing on death by starvation. the magistrates, the last resort,
 were rebuffed and went away, and the lady, mourned by all as an unusual
 example, dragged through the fifth day without nourishment. a most
 faithful maid was in attendance upon the poor woman; she either wept in
 company with the afflicted one or replenished the lamp which was placed in
 the vault, as the occasion required. throughout the whole city there was
 but one opinion, men of every calling agreed that here shone the one
 solitary example of chastity and of love! in the meantime the governor of
 the province had ordered some robbers crucified near the little vault in
 which the lady was bewailing her recent loss. on the following night, a
 soldier who was standing guard over the crosses for fear someone might
 drag down one of the bodies for burial, saw a light shining brightly among
 the tombs, and heard the sobs of someone grieving. a weakness common to
 mankind made him curious to know who was there and what was going on, so
 he descended into the tomb and, catching sight of a most beautiful woman,
 he stood still, afraid at first that it was some apparition or spirit from
 the infernal regions; but he finally comprehended the true state of
 affairs as his eye took in the corpse lying there, and as he noted the
 tears and the face lacerated by the finger-nails, he understood that the
 lady was unable to endure the loss of the dear departed. he then brought
 his own scanty ration into the vault and exhorted the sobbing mourner not
 to persevere in useless grief, or rend her bosom with unavailing sobs; the
 same end awaited us all, the same last resting place: and other platitudes
 by which anguished minds are recalled to sanity. but oblivious to
 sympathy, she beat and lacerated her bosom more vehemently than before
 and, tearing out her hair, she strewed it upon the breast of the corpse.
 notwithstanding this, the soldier would not leave off, but persisted in
 exhorting the unfortunate lady to eat, until the maid, seduced by the
 smell of the wine, i suppose, was herself overcome and stretched out her
 hand to receive the bounty of their host. refreshed by food and drink, she
 then began to attack the obstinacy of her mistress. ‘what good will it do
 you to die of hunger?’ she asked, ‘or to bury yourself alive’? or to
 surrender an uncondemned spirit before the fates demand it? ‘think you the
 ashes or sepultured dead can feel aught of thy woe! would you recall the
 dead from the reluctant fates? why not shake off this womanish weakness
 and enjoy the blessings of light while you can? the very corpse lying
 there ought to convince you that your duty is to live!’ when pressed to
 eat or to live, no one listens unwillingly, and the lady, thirsty after an
 abstinence of several days, finally permitted her obstinacy to be
 overcome; nor did she take her fill of nourishment with less avidity than
 had the maid who had surrendered first.” 
 “but to make a long story short, you know the temptations that beset a
 full stomach: the soldier laid siege to her virtue with the selfsame
 blandishments by which he had persuaded her that she ought to live. nor,
 to her modest eye, did the young man seem uncouth or wanting in address.
 the maid pled in his behalf and kept repeating:
 why will you fight with a passion that to you is pleasure, 
 remembering not in whose lands you are taking your leisure?
 “but why should i keep you longer in suspense? the lady observed the same
 abstinence when it came to this part of her body, and the victorious
 soldier won both of his objectives; so they lay together, not only that
 night, in which they pledged their vows, but also the next, and even the
 third, shutting the doors of the vault, of course, so that anyone,
 acquaintance or stranger, coming to the tomb, would be convinced that this
 most virtuous of wives had expired upon the body of her husband. as for
 the soldier, so delighted was he with the beauty of his mistress and the
 secrecy of the intrigue, that he purchased all the delicacies his pay
 permitted and smuggled them into the vault as soon as darkness fell.
 meanwhile, the parents of one of the crucified criminals, observing the
 laxness of the watch, dragged the hanging corpse down at night and
 performed the last rite. the soldier was hoodwinked while absent from his
 post of duty, and when on the following day he caught sight of one of the
 crosses without its corpse, he was in terror of punishment and explained
 to the lady what had taken place: he would await no sentence of
 court-martial, but would punish his neglect of duty with his own sword!
 let her prepare a place for one about to die, let that fatal vault serve
 both the lover and the husband! ‘not that,’ cried out the lady, no less
 merciful than chaste, ‘the gods forbid that i should look at the same time
 upon the corpses of the two men dearest to me; i would rather hang the
 dead than slay the living!’ so saying, she gave orders for the body of her
 husband to be lifted out of the coffin and fastened upon the vacant cross!
 the soldier availed himself of the expedient suggested by this very
 ingenious lady and next day everyone wondered how a dead man had found his
 way to the cross!” 
 the sailors received this tale with roars of laughter, and tryphaena
 blushed not a little and laid her face amorously upon giton’s neck. but
 lycas did not laugh; “if that governor had been a just man,” said he,
 shaking his head angrily, “he would have ordered the husband’s body taken
 down and carried back into the vault, and crucified the woman.” no doubt
 the memory of hedyle haunted his mind, and the looting of his ship in that
 wanton excursion. but the terms of the treaty permitted the harboring of
 no old grudges and the joy which filled our hearts left no room for anger.
 tryphaena was lying in giton’s lap by this time, covering his bosom with
 kisses one minute and rearranging the curls upon his shaven head the next.
 uneasy and chagrined at this new league, i took neither food nor drink but
 looked askance at them both, with grim eyes. every kiss was a wound to me,
 every artful blandishment which the wanton woman employed, and i could not
 make up my mind as to whether i was more angered at the boy for having
 supplanted me with my mistress, or at my mistress for debauching the boy:
 both were hateful to my sight, and more galling than my late servitude.
 and to make the matter all the more aggravating, tryphaena would not even
 greet me as an acquaintance, whom she had formerly received as a lover,
 while giton did not think me worthy of a “here’s-to-you” in ordinary
 civility, nor even speak to me in the course of the common conversation; i
 suppose he was afraid of reopening a tender scar at the moment when a
 return to her good graces had commenced to draw it together. tears of
 vexation dropped upon my breast and the groan i smothered in a sigh nearly
 wracked my soul.
 the vulture tearing; at the liver’s deep and vital parts, 
 that wracks our breasts and rends our very heartstrings is not
 that bird the charming poet sings with all his arts; ‘t’is
 jealousy or hate that human hearts stings.
 (in spite of my ill-humor, lycas saw how well my golden curls became me
 and, becoming enamoured anew, began winking his wanton eyes at me and)
 sought admission to my good graces upon a footing of pleasure, nor did he
 put on the arrogance of a master, but spoke as a friend asking a favor;
 (long and ardently he tried to gain his ends, but all in vain, till at
 last, meeting with a decisive repulse, his passion turned to fury and he
 tried to carry the place by storm; but tryphaena came in unexpectedly and
 caught him in his wanton attempt, whereupon he was greatly upset and
 hastily adjusted his clothing and bolted out of the cabin. tryphaena was
 fired with lust at this sight, “what was lycas up to?” she demanded. “what
 was he after in that ardent assault?” she compelled me to explain, burned
 still more hotly at what she heard, and, recalling memories of our past
 familiarities, she desired me to renew our old amour, but i was worn out
 with so much venery and slighted her advances. she was burning up with
 desire by this time, and threw her arms around me in a frenzied embrace,
 hugging me so tightly that i uttered an involuntary cry of pain. one of
 her maids rushed in at this and, thinking that i was attempting to force
 from her mistress the very favor which i had refused her, she sprang at us
 and tore us apart. thoroughly enraged at the disappointment of her
 lecherous passion, tryphaena upbraided me violently, and with many threats
 she hurried out to find lycas for the purpose of exasperating him further
 against me and of joining forces with him to be revenged upon me. now you
 must know that i had formerly held a very high place in this
 waiting-maid’s esteem, while i was prosecuting my intrigue with her
 mistress, and for that reason she took it very hard when she surprised me
 with tryphaena, and sobbed very bitterly. i pressed her earnestly to tell
 me the reason for her sobs) {and after pretending to be reluctant she
 broke out:} “you will think no more of her than of a common prostitute if
 you have a drop of decent blood in your veins! you will not resort to that
 female catamite, if you are a man!” {this disturbed my mind but} what
 exercised me most was the fear that eumolpus would find out what was going
 on and, being a very sarcastic individual, might revenge my supposed
 injury in some poetic lampoon, (in which event his ardent zeal would
 without doubt expose me to ridicule, and i greatly dreaded that. but while
 i was debating with myself as to the best means of preventing him from
 getting at the facts, who should suddenly come in but the man himself; and
 he was not uninformed as to what had taken place, for tryphaena had
 related all the particulars to giton and had tried to indemnify herself
 for my repulse, at the expense of my little friend. eumolpus was furiously
 angry because of all this, and all the more so as lascivious advances were
 in open violation of the treaty which had been signed. the minute the old
 fellow laid eyes upon me, he began bewailing my lot and ordered me to tell
 him exactly what had happened. as he was already well informed, i told him
 frankly of lycas’ lecherous attempt and of tryphaena’s wanton assault.
 when he had heard all the facts,) eumolpus swore roundly (that he would
 certainly avenge us, as the gods were just and would not suffer so many
 villainies to go unpunished.) 
 we were still discussing this and other matters when the sea grew rough,
 and clouds, gathering from every quarter, obscured with darkness the light
 of day. the panic- stricken sailors ran to their stations and took in sail
 before the squall was upon them, but the gale did not drive the waves in
 any one direction and the helmsman lost his bearings and did not know what
 course to steer. at one moment the wind would set towards sicily, but the
 next, the north wind, prevailing on the italian coast, would drive the
 unlucky vessel hither and yon; and, what was more dangerous than all the
 rain-squalls, a pall of such black density blotted out the light that the
 helmsman could not even see as far forward as the bow. at last, as the
 savage fury of the sea grew more malignant, the trembling lycas stretched
 out his hands to me imploringly. “save us from destruction, encolpius,” he
 shouted; “restore that sacred robe and holy rattle to the ship! be
 merciful, for heaven’s sake, just as you used to be!” he was still
 shouting when a windsquall swept him into the sea; the raging elements
 whirled him around and around in a terrible maelstrom and sucked him down.
 tryphaena, on the other hand, was seized by her faithful servants, placed
 in a skiff, along with the greater part of her belongings, and saved from
 certain death. embracing giton, i wept aloud: “did we deserve this from
 the gods,” i cried, “to be united only in death? no! malignant fortune
 grudges even that. look! in an instant the waves will capsize the ship!
 think! in an instant the sea will sever this lover’s embrace! if you ever
 loved encolpius truly, kiss him while yet you may and snatch this last
 delight from impending dissolution!” even as i was speaking, giton removed
 his garment and, creeping beneath my tunic, he stuck out his head to be
 kissed; then, fearing some more spiteful wave might separate us as we
 clung together, he passed his belt around us both. “if nothing else,” he
 cried, “the sea will at least bear us longer, joined together, and if, in
 pity, it casts us up upon the same shore, some passerby may pile some
 stones over us, out of common human kindness, or the last rites will be
 performed by the drifting sand, in spite of the angry waves.” i submit to
 this last bond and, as though i were laid out upon my death-bed, await an
 end no longer dreaded. meanwhile, accomplishing the decrees of the fates,
 the storm stripped the ship of all that was left; no mast, no helm, not a
 rope nor an oar remained on board her; she was only a derelict, heavy and
 water-logged, drifting before the waves. some fishermen hastily put off in
 their little boats to salvage their booty, but, seeing men alive and ready
 to defend their property, they changed their predatory designs into offers
 of help. 
 just then, amid that clamor of voices we heard a peculiar noise, and from
 beneath the captain’s cabin there came a bellowing as of some wild beast
 trying to get out. we then followed up the sound and discovered eumolpus,
 sitting there scribbling verses upon an immense sheet of parchment!
 astounded that he could find time to write poetry at death’s very door, we
 hauled him out, in spite of his protests, and ordered him to return to his
 senses, but he flew into a rage at being interrupted; “leave me alone
 until i finish this sentence,” he bawled; “the poem labors to its birth.”
 ordering giton to come to close quarters and help me drag the bellowing
 bard ashore, i laid hands upon the lunatic. when this job had at last been
 completed, we came, wet and wretched, to a fisherman’s hut and refreshed
 ourselves somewhat with stores from the wreck, spoiled though they were by
 salt water, and passed a night that was almost interminable. as we were
 holding a council, next day, to determine to what part of the country we
 had best proceed, i suddenly caught sight of a human body, turning around
 in a gentle eddy and floating towards the shore. stricken with melancholy,
 i stood still and began to brood, with wet eyes, upon the treachery of the
 sea. “and perhaps,” said i, “a wife, safe in some far-away country of the
 earth, awaits this man, or a son who little dreams of storms or wrecks; or
 perhaps he left behind a father, whom he kissed good-by at parting! such
 is the end of mortal’s plans, such is the outcome of great ambitions! see
 how man rides the waves!” until now, i had been sorrowing for a mere
 stranger, but a wave turned the face, which had undergone no change,
 towards the shore, and i recognized lycas; so evil- tempered and so
 unrelenting but a short time before, now cast up almost at my feet! i
 could no longer restrain the tears, at this; i beat my breast again and
 yet again, with my hands. “where is your evil temper now?” i cried. “where
 is your unbridled passion? you be there, a prey to fish and wild beasts,
 you who boasted but a little while ago of the strength of your command.
 now you have not a single plank left of your great ship! go on, mortals;
 set your hearts upon the fulfillment of great ambitions: go on, schemers,
 and in your wills control for a thousand years the disposal of the wealth
 you got by fraud! only yesterday this man audited the accounts of his
 family estate, yea, even reckoned the day he would arrive in his native
 land and settled it in his mind! gods and goddesses, how far he lies from
 his appointed destination! but the waves of the sea are not alone in thus
 keeping faith with mortal men: the warrior’s weapons fail him; the citizen
 is buried beneath the ruins of his own penates, when engaged in paying his
 vows to the gods; another falls from his chariot and dashes out his ardent
 spirit; the glutton chokes at dinner; the niggard starves from abstinence.
 give the dice a fair throw and you will find shipwreck everywhere! ah, but
 one overwhelmed by the waves obtains no burial! as though it matters in
 what manner the body, once it is dead, is consumed: by fire, by flood, by
 time! do what you will, these all achieve the same end. ah, but the beasts
 will mangle the body! as though fire would deal with it any more gently;
 when we are angry with our slaves that is the punishment which we consider
 the most severe. what folly it is, then, to do everything we can to
 prevent the grave from leaving any part of us behind {when the fates will
 look out for us, event against our wills.} (after these reflections we
 made ready to pay the last rites to the corpse,) and lycas was burned upon
 a funeral pyre raised by the hands of enemies, while eumolpus, fixing his
 eyes upon the far distance to gain inspiration, composed an epitaph for
 the dead man:
 we set out upon our intended journey, after this last office had been
 wholeheartedly performed, and, in a little while, arrived, sweating, at
 the top of a mountain, from which we made out, at no great distance, a
 town, perched upon the summit of a lofty eminence. wanderers as we were,
 we had no idea what town it could be, until we learned from a caretaker
 that it was crotona, a very ancient city, and once the first in italy.
 when we earnestly inquired, upon learning this, what men inhabited such
 historic ground, and the nature of the business in which they were
 principally engaged, now that their wealth had been dissipated by the oft
 recurring wars, “my friends,” replied he, “if you are men of business,
 change your plans and seek out some other conservative road to a
 livelihood, but if you can play the part of men of great culture, always
 ready with a lie, you are on the straight road to riches: the study of
 literature is held in no estimation in that city, eloquence has no niche
 there, economy and decent standards of morality come into no reward of
 honor there; you must know that every man whom you will meet in that city
 belongs to one of two factions; they either ‘take-in,’ or else they are
 ‘taken-in.’ no one brings up children in that city, for the reason that no
 one who has heirs is invited to dinner or admitted to the games; such an
 one is deprived of all enjoyments and must lurk with the rabble. on the
 other hand, those who have never married a wife, or those who have no near
 relatives, attain to the very highest honors; in other words, they are the
 only ones who are considered soldierly, or the bravest of the brave, or
 even good. you will see a town which resembles the fields in time of
 pestilence,” he continued, “in which there is nothing but carcasses to be
 torn at and carrion crows tearing at them.” 
 eumolpus, who had a deeper insight, turned this state of affairs over in
 his mind and declared that he was not displeased with a prospect of that
 kind. i thought the old fellow was joking in the care-free way of poets,
 until he complained, “if i could only put up a better front! i mean that i
 wish my clothing was in better taste, that my jewelry was more expensive;
 all this would lend color to my deception: i would not carry this scrip,
 by hercules, i would not i would lead you all to great riches!” for my
 part, i undertook to supply whatever my companion in robbery had need of,
 provided he would be satisfied with the garment, and with whatever spoils
 the villa of lycurgus had yielded when we robbed it; as for money against
 present needs, the mother of the gods would see to that, out of regard to
 her own good name! “well, what’s to prevent our putting on an
 extravaganza?” demanded eumolpus. “make me the master if the business
 appeals to you.” no one ventured to condemn a scheme by which he could
 lose nothing, and so, that the lie would be kept safe among us all, we
 swore a solemn oath, the words of which were dictated by eumolpus, to
 endure fire, chains, flogging, death by the sword, and whatever else
 eumolpus might demand of us, just like regular gladiators! after the oath
 had been taken, we paid our respects to our master with pretended
 servility, and were informed that eumolpus had lost a son, a young man of
 great eloquence and promise, and that it was for this reason the poor old
 man had left his native land that he might not see the companions and
 clients of his son, nor even his tomb, which was the cause of his daily
 tears. to this misfortune a recent shipwreck had been added, in which he
 had lost upwards of two millions of sesterces; not that he minded the loss
 but, destitute of a train of servants he could not keep up his proper
 dignity! furthermore, he had, invested in africa, thirty millions of
 sesterces in estates and bonds; such a horde of his slaves was scattered
 over the fields of numidia that he could have even sacked carthage! we
 demanded that eumolpus cough frequently, to further this scheme, that he
 have trouble with his stomach and find fault with all the food when in
 company, that he keep talking of gold and silver and estates, the incomes
 from which were not what they should be, and of the everlasting
 unproductiveness of the soil; that he cast up his accounts daily, that he
 revise the terms of his will monthly, and, for fear any detail should be
 lacking to make the farce complete, he was to use the wrong names whenever
 he wished to summon any of us, so that it would be plain to all that the
 master had in mind some who were not present. when everything had been
 thus provided for, we offered a prayer to the gods “that the matter might
 turn out well and happily,” and took to the road. but giton could not bear
 up under his unaccustomed load, and the hired servant corax, a shirker of
 work, often put down his own load and cursed our haste, swearing that he
 would either throw his packs away or run away with his load. “what do you
 take me for, a beast of burden?” he grumbled, “or a scow for carrying
 stone? i hired out to do the work of a man, not that of a pack-horse, and
 i’m as free as you are, even if my father did leave me poor!” not
 satisfied with swearing, he lifted up his leg from time to time and filled
 the road with an obscene noise and a filthy stench. giton laughed at his
 impudence and imitated every explosion with his lips, {but eumolpus
 relapsed into his usual vein, even in spite of this.} 
 “young men,” said he, “many are they who have been seduced by poetry; for,
 the instant a man has composed a verse in feet, and has woven a more
 delicate meaning into it by means of circumlocutions, he straightway
 concludes that he has scaled helicon! take those who are worn out by the
 distressing detail of the legal profession, for example: they often seek
 sanctuary in the tranquillity of poetry, as a more sheltered haven,
 believing themselves able more easily to compose a poem than a rebuttal
 charged with scintillating epigrams! but a more highly cultivated mind
 loves not this conceited affectation, nor can it either conceive or bring
 forth, unless it has been steeped in the vast flood of literature. every
 word that is what i would call ‘low,’ ought to be avoided, and phrases far
 removed from plebeian usage should be chosen. let ‘ye rabble rout avaunt,’
 be your rule. in addition, care should be exercised in preventing the
 epigrams from standing out from the body of the speech; they should gleam
 with the brilliancy woven into the fabric. homer is an example, and the
 lyric poets, and our roman virgil, and the exquisite propriety of horace.
 either the others did not discover the road that leads to poetry, or,
 having seen, they feared to tread it. whoever attempts that mighty theme,
 the civil war, for instance, will sink under the load unless he is
 saturated with literature. events, past and passing, ought not to be
 merely recorded in verse, the historian will deal with them far better; by
 means of circumlocutions and the intervention of the immortals, the free
 spirit, wracked by the search for epigrams having a mythological illusion,
 should plunge headlong and appear as the prophecy of a mind inspired
 rather than the attested faith of scrupulous exactitude in speech. this
 hasty composition may please you, even though it has not yet received its
 final polishing:” 
 “the conquering roman now held the whole world in his sway, 
 the ocean, the land; where the sun shone by day or the moon 
 gleamed by night: but unsated was he. and the seas were roiled by
 the weight of his deep-laden keels; if a bay lay hidden beyond, or
 a land which might yield yellow gold ‘twas held as a foe. while
 the struggle for treasure went on the fates were preparing the
 horrors and scourges of war. amusements enjoyed by the vulgar no
 longer can charm nor pleasures worn threadbare by use of the
 plebeian mob. the bronzes of corinth are praised by the soldier at
 sea; and glittering gems sought in earth, vie with purple of tyre;
 numidia curses her here, there, the exquisite silks of
 china; arabia’s people have stripped their own fields. behold
 other woes and calamities outraging peace! wild beasts, in the
 forest are hunted, for gold; and remote african hammon is covered
 by beaters, for fear some beast that slays men with his teeth
 shall escape, for by that his value to men is enhanced! the
 vessels receive strange ravening monsters; the tiger behind gilded
 bars and pacing his cage is transported to rome, that his jaws
 may drip with the life blood of men to the plaudits of men 
 oh shame! to point out our impending destruction; the crime of
 persia enacted anew; in his puberty’s bloom the man child is
 kidnapped; surrenders his powers to the knife, is forced to the
 calling of venus; delayed and hedged round the hurrying passage of
 life’s finest years is held back and nature seeks nature but finds
 herself not. everywhere these frail-limbed and mincing
 effeminates, flowing of locks, bedecked with an infinite number of
 garments of silk whose names ever change, the wantons and lechers
 to snare, are eagerly welcomed! from african soil now behold 
 the citron-wood tables; their well-burnished surface reflects our
 tyrian purples and slaves by the horde, and whose spots resemble
 the gold that is cheaper than they and ensnare extravagance.
 sterile and ignobly prized is the wood but round it is gathered a
 company sodden with wine; and soldiers of fortune whose weapons
 have rusted, devour the spoils of the world. art caters to
 appetite. wrasse from sicily brought to their table, alive in his
 own sea water. the oysters from lucrine’s shore torn, at the feast
 are served to make famous the host; and the appetite, cloyed,
 to tempt by extravagance. phasis has now been despoiled of
 birds, its littoral silent, no sound there is heard save only the
 wind as it rustles among the last leaves. corruption no less vile
 is seen in the campus of mars, our quirites are bribed; and for
 plunder and promise of gain their votes they will alter. the
 people is venal; corrupt the senate; support has its price! and
 the freedom and worth of age is decayed, scattered largesse now
 governs their power; corrupted by gold, even dignity lies in the
 dust. cato defeated and hooted by mobs, but the victor is
 sadder, ashamed to have taken the rods from a cato: in this lay
 the shame of the nation and character’s downfall, ‘twas not the
 defeat of a man! no! the power and the glory of rome were brought
 low; represented in him was the honor of sturdy republican rome.
 so, abandoned and wretched, the city has purchased dishonor: has
 purchased herself! despoiled by herself, no avenger to wipe out
 the stigma twin maelstroms of debt and of usury suck down the
 commons. no home with clear title, no citizen free from a
 mortgage, but as some slow wasting disease all unheralded fastens
 its hold on the vitals, destroying the vigor of manhood, so,
 fear of the evils impending, impels them to madness. despair turns
 to violence, luxury’s ravages needs must repaired be by bloodshed,
 for indigence safely can venture. can art or sane reason rouse
 wallowing rome from the offal and break the voluptuous slumber in
 which she is sunken? or must it be fury and war and the blood-lust
 of daggers?”
 “three chieftains did fortune bring forth, whom the fury of
 battles destroyed; and interred, each one under a mountain of
 weapons; the parthian has crassus, pompeius the great by the
 waters of egypt lies. julius, ungrateful rome stained with his
 life blood. and earth has divided their ashes, unable to suffer
 the weight of so many tombs. these are the wages of glory! 
 there lies between naples and great puteoli, a chasm deep cloven,
 and cocytus churns there his current; the vapor in fury escapes
 from the gorge with that lethal spray laden. no green in the
 aututun is there, no grass gladdens the meadow, the supple twigs
 never resound with the twittering singing of birds in the
 springtime. but chaos, volcanic black boulders of pumice lie happy
 within their drear setting of cypress. amidst these infernal
 surroundings the ruler of hades uplifted his head by the funeral
 flames silhouetted and sprinkled with white from the ashes of
 corpses; and challenged winged fortune in words such as these: ‘oh
 thou fickle controller of things upon earth and in heaven,
 security’s foeman, oh chance! oh thou lover eternally faithful to
 change, and possession’s betrayer, dost own thyself crushed by the
 power of rome? canst not raise up the tottering mass to its
 downfall its strength the young manhood of rome now despises, and
 staggers in bearing the booty heaped up by its efforts: behold how
 they lavish their spoils! wealth run mad now brings down their
 destruction. they build out of gold and their palaces reach to the
 heavens; the sea is expelled by their moles and their pastures are
 oceans; they war against nature in changing the state of creation.
 they threaten my kingdom! earth yawns with their tunnels deep
 driven to furnish the stone for their madmen’s foundations;
 already the mountains are hollowed and now but re-echoing caverns;
 while man quarries marble to serve his vainglorious purpose 
 the spirits infernal confess that they hope to win heaven! arise,
 then, o chance, change thy countenance peaceful to warlike and
 harry the romans, consign to my kingdom the fallen. ah, long is it
 now since my lips were with blood cooled and moistened, nor has my
 tisiphone bathed her blood-lusting body since sulla’s sword drank
 to repletion and earth’s bristling harvest grew ripe upon blood
 and thrust up to the light of the sunshine!’”
 “he spake ... and attempted to clasp the right hand of fortuna,
 but ruptured the crust of the earth, deeply cloven, asunder. 
 then from her capricious heart fortune made answer: ‘o father whom
 cocytus’ deepest abysses obey, if to forecast the future i may,
 without fear, thy petition shall prosper; for no less consuming
 the anger that wars in this bosom, the flame no less poignant,
 that burns to my marrow all favors i gave to the bulwarks of rome,
 now, i hate them. my gifts i repent! the same god who built up
 their dominion shall bring down destruction upon it. in burning
 their manhood my heart shall delight and its blood-lust shall
 slake with their slaughter. now philippi’s field i can see strewn
 with dead of two battles and thessaly’s funeral pyres and iberia
 mourning. already the clangor of arms thrills my ears, and rings
 loudly: thou, lybian nile, i can see now thy barriers groaning
 and actium’s gulf and apollo’s darts quailing the warriors! 
 then, open thy thirsty dominions and summon fresh spirits; for
 scarce will the ferryman’s strength be sufficient to carry the
 souls of the dead in his skiff: ‘tis a fleet that is needed! thou,
 pallid tisiphone, slake with wide ruin, thy thirsting and tear
 ghastly wounds: mangled earth sinks to hell and the spirits.’”
 “but scarce had she finished, when trembled the clouds; and a
 gleaming bright flash of jove’s lightning transfixed them with
 flame and was gone. the lord of the shades blanched with fear, at
 this bolt of his brother’s, sank back, and drew closely together
 the gorge in earth’s bosom. by auspices straightway the slaughter
 of men and the evils impending are shown by the gods. here, the
 titan unsightly blood red, veils his face with a twilight; on
 strife fratricidal already he gazed, thou hadst thought! there,
 silvery cynthia obscuring her face at the full, denied light to
 the outrage. the mountain crests riven by rock-slides roll
 thundering downward and wandering rivers, to rivulets shrunk,
 writhed no longer familiar marges between. with the clangor of
 armor the heavens resound; from the stars wafts the thrill of a
 trumpet sounding the call to arms. aetna, now roused to eruption
 unwonted, darts flashes of flame to the clouds. flitting phantoms
 appear midst the tombs and unburied bones, gibbering menace 
 a comet, strange stars in its diadem, leads a procession and
 reddens the skies with its fire. showers of blood fall from heaven 
 these portents the deity shortly fulfilled! for now caesar forsook
 vacillation and, spurred by the love of revenge, sheathed the
 gallic sword; brandished the brand that proclaimed civil warfare. 
 there, high in the alps, where the crags, by a greek god once trodden,
 slope down and permit of approach, is a spot ever sacred to
 hercules’ altar; the winter with frozen snow seals it and rears to
 the heavens a summit eternally hoary, as though the sky there had
 slipped down: no warmth from the sunbeams, no breath from the
 springtime can soften the pile’s wintry rigor nor slacken the
 frost chains that bind; and its menacing shoulders the weight of
 the world could sustain. with victorious legions these crests
 caesar trod and selected a camp. gazing downwards on italy’s
 plains rolling far, from the top of the mountain, he lifted both
 hands to the heavens, his voice rose in prayer: ‘omnipotent jove,
 and thou, refuge of saturn whose glory was brightened by feats of
 my armies and crowned with my triumphs, bear witness! unwillingly
 summon i mars to these armies, unwillingly draw i the sword! but
 injustice compels me. while enemy blood dyes the rhine and the
 alps are held firmly repulsing a second assault of the gauls on
 our city, she dubs me an outcast! and victory makes me an exile!
 to triumphs three score, and defeats of the germans, my treason
 i trace! how can they fear my glory or see in my battles a
 menace? but hirelings, and vile, to whom my rome is but a 
 stepmother! methinks that no craven this sword arm shall hamper 
 and take not a stroke in repost. on to victory, comrades, while
 anger seethes hot. with the sword we will seek a decision the doom
 lowering down is a peril to all, and the treason. my gratitude owe
 i to you, not alone have i conquered! since punishment waits by
 our trophies and victory merits disgrace, then let chance cast the
 lots. raise the standard of battle; again take your swords. well i
 know that my cause is accomplished amidst such armed warriors i
 know that i cannot be beaten.’ while yet the words echoed, from
 heaven the bird of apollo vouchsafed a good omen and beat with his
 pinions the ether. from out of the left of a gloomy grove strange
 voices sounded and flame flashed thereafter! the sun gleamed with
 brighter refulgence unwonted, his face in a halo of golden flame
 shining.”
 “by omens emboldened, to follow, the battle-flags, caesar 
 commanded; and boldly led on down the perilous pathway. the
 footing, firm-fettered by frost chains and ice, did not hinder at
 first, but lay silent, the kindly cold masking its grimness; but,
 after the squadrons of cavalry shattered the clouds, bound by ice,
 and the trembling steeds crushed in the mail of the rivers, then,
 melted the snows! and soon torrents newborn, from the heights of 
 the mountains rush down: but these also, as if by commandment grow
 rigid, and, turn into ice, in their headlong rush downwards! now,
 that which rushed madly a moment before, must be hacked through! 
 but now, it was treacherous, baffling their steps and their footing
 deceiving; and men, horses, arms, fall in heaps, in confusion.
 and see! now the clouds, by an icy gale smitten, their burden
 discharge! lo! the gusts of the whirlwind swirl fiercely about
 them; the sky in convulsions, with swollen hail buffets them
 sorely. already the clouds themselves rupture and smother their
 weapons, an avalanche icy roars down like a billow of ocean; 
 earth lay overwhelmed by the drifts of the snow and the planets of
 heaven are blotted from sight; overwhelmed are the rivers that
 cling to their banks, but unconquered is caesar! his javelin he
 leans on and scrunches with firm step a passage the bristling grim
 ice fields across! as, spurred on by the lust, of adventure 
 amphitryon’s offspring came striding the caucasus slopes down; or
 jupiter’s menacing mien as, from lofty olympus he leaped, the
 doomed giants to crush and to scatter their weapons. while caesar
 in anger the swelling peaks treads down, winged rumor in terror
 flies forth and on beating wings seeks the high summit of palatine
 tall: every image she rocks with her message announcing this
 thunderbolt roman! already, the ocean is tossing his fleets! now
 his cavalry, reeking with german gore, pours from the alps!
 slaughter, bloodshed, and weapons the red panorama of war is
 unrolled to their vision! by terror their hearts are divided: two
 counsels perplex them! one chooses by land to seek flight: to
 another, the water appeals, and the sea than his own land is
 safer! another will stand to his arms and advantage extort from
 fate’s mandate. the depth of their fear marks the length of their
 flight! in confusion the people itself--shameful spectacle--driven
 by terror is led to abandon the city. rome glories in fleeing!
 the quirites from battle blench! cowed by the breath of a rumor
 relinquished their firesides to mourning! one citizen, palsied
 with terror, his children embraces: another, his penates 
 conceals in his bosom; then, weeping, takes leave of his threshold 
 and slaughters the distant invader--with curses! their spouses 
 some clasp to their sorrow-wracked bosoms! youths carry their fathers
 bowed down with old age, uninured to the bearing of burdens. 
 they seize what they dread to lose most. inexperience drags all 
 its chattels to camp and to battle: as, when powerful auster piles
 up the churned waters and tumbles them: never a yard-arm nor
 rudder to answer the hand, here, one fashions a life-raft of pine
 planks, another steers into some bay on a lee shore, another will
 crack on and run from the gale and to fortune trust all! but why
 sorrow for trifles? the consuls, with pompey the great--he, the
 terror of pontus, of savage hydaspes explorer, the reef that
 wrecked pirates, caused jove to turn livid, when thrice was a
 triumph decreed him, whom pontus’ vexed water and pacified billows
 of bosphorus worshipped! disgraceful their flight! title and glory
 forsaking! now fortune capricious looks down on the back of great
 pompey retreating in terror!”
 “so great a misfortune disrupted the concord of heaven and
 gods swelled the rout in their panic! behold through creation the
 gentle divinities flee from the ravening earth; in their loathing
 they turn from humanity, doomed to destruction! and first of all,
 peace, with her snowy white arms, hides her visage defeated, her
 helmet beneath and, abandoning earth, flees to seek out the realm
 of implacable dis, as a refuge meek faith her companion, and
 justice with locks loosely flowing, and concord, in tears, and her
 raiment in tatters, attend her. the minions of pluto pour forth
 from the portals of darkness that yawn: the serpent-haired fury,
 bellona the savage, megoera with firebrands, destruction, and
 treachery, livid death’s likeness! among them is frenzy, as, free,
 with her lashings snapped short, she now raises her gory head,
 shielding her features deep scarred by innumerous wounds ‘neath
 her helmet blood-clotted. her left arm she guards with a
 battle-scarred shield scored by weapons, and numberless
 spear-heads protrude from its surface: her right hand a flaming
 torch brandishes, kindling a flame that will burn up the world!
 now the gods are on earth and the skies note their absence; the
 planets disordered their orbits attempt! into factions the heavens
 divide; first dione espouses the cause of her caesar. minerva next
 steps to her side and the great son of ares, his mighty spear
 brandishing! phoebus espouses the cause of great pompey: his
 sister and mercury also and hercules like unto him in his travels
 and labors. the trumpets call! discord her stygian head lifts to
 heaven her tresses disheveled, her features with clotted blood
 covered, tears pour from her bruised eyes, her iron fangs thick
 coated with rust, her tongue distils poison, her features are
 haloed with serpents, her hideous bosom is visible under her
 tatters, a torch with a blood red flame waves from her tremulous
 right hand. emerging from cocytus dark and from tartarus murky
 she strode to the crests of the apennines noble, the prospect
 of earth to survey, spread before her the world panorama its
 shores and the armies that march on its surface: these words then 
 burst out of her bosom malignant: ‘to arms, now, ye nations, while
 anger seethes hot, seize your arms, set the torch to the cities, 
 who skulks now is lost; neither woman nor child nor the aged bowed
 down with their years shall find quarter: the whole world will tremble
 and rooftrees themselves shall crash down and take part in the
 struggle. marcellus, hold firm for the law! and thou, curio,
 madden the rabble! thou, lentulus, strive not to check valiant
 ares! thou, cesar divine, why delayest thou now thine invasion?
 why smash not the gates, why not level the walls of the cities,
 their treasures to pillage? thou, magnus, dost not know the secret
 of holding the hills of rome? take thou the walls of dyrrachium,
 let thessaly’s harbors be dyed with the blood of the romans!’
 on earth was obeyed every detail of discord’s commandment.”
 when eumolpus had, with great volubility, poured out this flood of words,
 we came at last to crotona. here we refreshed ourselves at a mean inn, but
 on the following day we went in search of more imposing lodgings and fell
 in with a crowd of legacy hunters who were very curious as to the class of
 society to which we belonged and as to whence we had come. thereupon, in
 accord with our mutual understanding, such ready answers did we make as to
 who we might be or whence we had come that we gave them no cause for
 doubt. they immediately fell to wrangling in their desire to heap their
 own riches upon eumolpus and every fortune-hunter solicited his favor with
 presents. 
 for a long time affairs at crotona ran along in this manner and eumolpus,
 flushed with success so far forgot the former state of his fortunes that
 he even bragged to his followers that no one could hold out against any
 wish of his, and that any member of his suite who committed a crime in
 that city would, through the influence of his friends, get off unpunished.
 but, although i daily crammed my bloated carcass to overflowing with good
 things, and began more and more to believe that fortune had turned away
 her face from keeping watch upon me, i frequently meditated, nevertheless,
 upon my present state and upon its cause. “suppose,” thought i, “some wily
 legacy hunter should dispatch an agent to africa and catch us in our lie?
 or even suppose the hireling servant, glutted with prosperity, should tip
 off his cronies or give the whole scheme away out of spite? there would be
 nothing for it but flight and, in a fresh state of destitution, a
 recalling of poverty which had been driven off. gods and goddesses, how
 ill it fares with those living outside the law; they are always on the
 lookout for what is coming to them!” (turning these possibilities over in
 my mind i left the house, in a state of black melancholy, hoping to revive
 my spirits in the fresh air, but scarcely had i set foot upon the public
 promenade when a girl, by no means homely, met me, and, calling me
 polyaenos, the name i had assumed since my metamorphosis, informed me that
 her mistress desired leave to speak with me. “you must be mistaken,” i
 answered, in confusion, “i am only a servant and a stranger, and am by no
 means worthy of such an honor.”) 
 (“you yourself,” she replied, “are the one to whom i was sent but,)
 because you are well aware of your good looks, you are proud and sell your
 favors instead of giving them. what else can those wavy well-combed locks
 mean or that face, rouged and covered with cosmetics, or that languishing,
 wanton expression in your eyes? why that gait, so precise that not a
 footstep deviates from its place, unless you wish to show off your figure
 in order to sell your favors? look at me, i know nothing about omens and i
 don’t study the heavens like the astrologers, but i can read men’s
 intentions in their faces and i know what a flirt is after when i see him
 out for a stroll; so if you’ll sell us what i want there’s a buyer ready,
 but if you will do the graceful thing and lend, let us be under
 obligations to you for the favor. and as for your confession that you are
 only a common servant, by that you only fan the passion of the lady who
 burns for you, for some women will only kindle for canaille and cannot
 work up an appetite unless they see some slave or runner with his clothing
 girded up: a gladiator arouses one, or a mule-driver all covered with
 dust, or some actor posturing in some exhibition on the stage. my mistress
 belongs to this class, she jumps the fourteen rows from the stage to the
 gallery and looks for a lover among the gallery gods at the back.” puffed
 up with this delightful chatter. “come now, confess, won’t you,” i
 queried, “is this lady who loves me yourself?” the waiting maid smiled
 broadly at this blunt speech. “don’t have such a high opinion of
 yourself,” said she, “i’ve never given in to any servant yet; the gods
 forbid that i should ever throw my arms around a gallows-bird. let the
 married women see to that and kiss the marks of the scourge if they like:
 i’ll sit upon nothing below a knight, even if i am only a servant.” i
 could not help marveling, for my part, at such discordant passions, and i
 thought it nothing short of a miracle that this servant should possess the
 hauteur of the mistress and the mistress the low tastes of the wench!
 each one will find what suits his taste, one thing is not for all,
 one gathers roses as his share, another thorns enthrall.
 after a little more teasing, i requested the maid to conduct her mistress
 to a clump of plane trees. pleased with this plan, the girl picked up the
 skirt of her garment and turned into a laurel grove that bordered the
 path. after a short delay she brought her mistress from her hiding-place
 and conducted her to my side; a woman more perfect than any statue. there
 are no words with which to describe her form and anything i could say
 would fall far short. her hair, naturally wavy, flowed completely over her
 shoulders; her forehead was low and the roots of her hair were brushed
 back from it; her eyebrows, running from the very springs of her cheeks,
 almost met at the boundary line between a pair of eyes brighter than stars
 shining in a moonless night; her nose was slightly aquiline and her mouth
 was such an one as praxiteles dreamed diana had. her chin, her neck, her
 hands, the gleaming whiteness of her feet under a slender band of gold;
 she turned parian marble dull! then, for the first time, doris’ tried
 lover thought lightly of doris!
 oh jove, what’s come to pass that thou, thine armor cast away
 art mute in heaven; and but an idle tale? at such a time the
 horns should sprout, the raging bull hold sway, or they white hair
 beneath swan’s down conceal here’s dana’s self! but touch that
 lovely form thy limbs will melt beneath thy passions’ storm!
 she was delighted and so be witchingly did she smile that i seemed to see
 the full moon showing her face from behind a cloud. then, punctuating her
 words with her fingers, “dear boy, if you are not too critical to enjoy a
 woman of wealth who has but this year known her first man, i offer you a
 sister,” said she. “you have a brother already, i know, for i didn’t
 disdain to ask, but what is to prevent your adopting a sister, too? i will
 come in on the same footing only deem my kisses worthy of recognition and
 caress me at your own pleasure!” “rather let me implore you by your
 beauty,” i replied. “do not scorn to admit an alien among your worshipers:
 if you permit me to kneel before your shrine you will find me a true
 votary and, that you may not think i approach this temple of love without
 a gift, i make you a present of my brother!” “what,” she exclaimed, “would
 you really sacrifice the only one without whom you. could not live’? the
 one upon whose kisses your happiness depends. him whom you love as i would
 have you love me?” such sweetness permeated her voice as she said this, so
 entrancing was the sound upon the listening air that you would have
 believed the sirens’ harmonies were floating in the breeze. i was struck
 with wonder and dazzled by i know not what light that shone upon me,
 brighter than, the whole heaven, but i made bold to inquire the name of my
 divinity. “why, didn’t my maid tell you that i am called circe?” she
 replied. “but i am not the sun-child nor has my mother ever stayed the
 revolving world in its course at her pleasure; but if the fates bring us
 two together i will owe heaven a favor. i don’t know what it is, but some
 god’s silent purpose is beneath this. circe loves not polyaenos without
 some reason; a great torch is always flaming when these names meet! take
 me in your arms then, if you will; there’s no prying stranger to fear, and
 your ‘brother’ is far away from this spot!” so saying, circe clasped me in
 arms that were softer than down and drew me to the ground which was
 covered with colored flowers.
 with flowers like these did mother earth great ida’s summit strew
 when jupiter, his heart aflame, enjoyed his lawful love; 
 there glowed the rose, the flowering rush, the violet’s deep blue, 
 from out green meadows snow-white lilies laughed. then from above, 
 this setting summoned venus to the green and tender sod, bright
 day smiled kindly on the secret amour of the god.
 side by side upon the grassy plot we lay, exchanging a thousand kisses,
 the prelude to more poignant pleasure, (but alas! my sudden loss of vigor
 disappointed circe!) 
 (infuriated at this affront,) “what’s the matter,” demanded she; “do my
 kisses offend you? is my breath fetid from fasting? is there any evil
 smelling perspiration in my armpits? or, if it’s nothing of this kind, are
 you afraid of giton?” under her eyes, i flushed hotly and, if i had any
 virility left, i lost it then; my whole body seemed to be inert. “my
 queen,” i cried, “do not mock me in my humiliation. i am bewitched!”
 (circe’s anger was far from being appeased by such a trivial excuse;
 turning her eyes contemptuously away from me, she looked at her maid,)
 “tell me, chrysis, and tell me truly, is there anything repulsive about
 me? anything sluttish? have i some natural blemish that disfigures my
 beauty? don’t deceive your mistress! i don’t know what’s the matter with
 us, but there must be something!” then she snatched a mirror from the
 silent maid and after scrutinizing all the looks and smiles which pass
 between lovers, she shook out her wrinkled earth-stained robe and flounced
 off into the temple of venus (nearby.) and here was i, like a convicted
 criminal who had seen some horrible nightmare, asking myself whether the
 pleasure out of which i had been cheated was a reality or only a dream.
 as when, in the sleep-bringing night dreams sport with the
 wandering eyes, and earth, spaded up, yields to light her
 gold that by day she denies, the stealthy hand snatches the
 spoils; the face with cold sweat is suffused and fear grips
 him tight in her toils lest robbers the secret have used and
 shake out the gold from his breast. but, when they depart from his
 brain, these enchantments by which he’s obsessed, and truth
 comes again with her train restoring perspective and pain, 
 the phantasm lives to the last, the mind dwells with shades of the
 past.
 (the misfortune seemed to me a dream, but i imagined that i must surely be
 under a spell of enchantment and, for a long time, i was so devoid of
 strength that i could not get to my feet. but finally my mental depression
 began to abate, little by little my strength came back to me, and i
 returned home: arrived there, i feigned illness and threw myself upon my
 couch. a little late: giton, who had heard of my indisposition, entered
 the room in some concern. as i wished to relieve his mind i informed him
 that i had merely sought my pallet to take a rest, telling him much other
 gossip but not a word about my mishap as i stood in great fear of his
 jealousy and, to lull any suspicion which he might entertain, i drew him
 to my side and endeavoured to give him some proofs of my love but all my
 panting and sweating were in vain. he jumped up in a rage and accused my
 lack of virility and change of heart, declaring that he had for a long
 time suspected that i had been expending my vigor and breath elsewhere.
 “no! no! darling,” i replied, “my love for you has always been the same,
 but reason prevails now over love and wantonness.”) “and for the socratic
 continence of your love, i thank you in his name,” (he replied
 sarcastically,) “alcibiades was never more spotless when he left his
 master’s bed!” 
 “believe me, ‘brother,’ when i tell you that i do not know whether i am a
 man or not,” (i vainly protested;) “i do not feel like one, if i am! dead
 and buried lies that part in which i was once an achilles!” (giton, seeing
 that i was completely enervated, and) fearing that it might give cause for
 scandal if he were caught in this quiet place with me, tore himself away
 and fled into an inner part of the house. (he had just gone when) chrysis
 entered the room and handed me her mistress’s tablets, in which were
 written the following words:
 were i a wanton, i should complain of my disappointment, but as it is i
 am beholden to your impotence, for by it i dallied the longer in the
 shadow of pleasure. still, i would like to know how you are and whether
 you got home upon your own legs, for the doctors say that one cannot
 walk without nerves! young man, i advise you to beware of paralysis for
 i never in my life saw a patient in such great danger; you’re as good as
 dead, i’m sure! what if the same numbness should attack your hands and
 knees? you would have to send for the funeral trumpeters! still, even if
 i have been affronted, i will not begrudge a prescription to one as sick
 as you! ask giton if you would like to recover. i am sure you will get
 back your strength if you will sleep without your “brother” for three
 nights. so far as i am concerned, i am not in the least alarmed about.
 finding someone to whom i shall be as pleasing as i was to you; my
 mirror and my reputation do not lie.
 farewell (if
 you can).
 “such things will happen,” said chrysis, when she saw that i had read
 through the entire inditement, “and especially in this city, where the
 women can lure the moon from the sky! but we’ll find a cure for your
 trouble. just return a diplomatic answer to my mistress and restore her
 self-esteem by frank courtesy for, truth to tell, she has never been
 herself from the minute she received that affront.” i gladly followed the
 maid’s advice and wrote upon the tablets as follows: 
 dear lady, i confess that i have often given cause for offense, for i am
 only a man, and a young one, too, but i never committed a deadly crime
 until today! you have my confession of guilt, i deserve any punishment
 you may see fit to prescribe. i betrayed a trust, i murdered a man, i
 violated a temple: demand my punishment for these crimes. should it be
 your pleasure to slay me i will come to you with my sword; if you are
 content with a flogging i will run naked to my mistress; only bear in
 mind that it was not myself but my tools that failed me. i was a
 soldier, and ready, but i had no arms. what threw me into such disorder
 i do not know, perhaps my imagination outran my lagging body, by
 aspiring to too much it is likely that i spent my pleasure in delay; i
 cannot imagine what the trouble was. you bid me beware of paralysis; as
 if a disease which prevented my enjoying you could grow worse! but my
 apology amounts briefly to this; if you will grant me an opportunity of
 repairing my fault, i will give you satisfaction.
 farewell
 after dismissing chrysis with these fair promises, i paid careful
 attention to my body which had so evilly served me and, omitting the bath,
 i annointed myself, in moderation, with unguents and placed myself upon a
 more strengthening diet such as onions and snail’s heads without
 condiments, and i also drank more sparingly of wine; then, taking a short
 walk before settling down to sleep, i went to bed without giton. so
 anxious was i to please her that i feared the outcome if my “brother” lay
 tickling my side. 
 finding myself vigorous in mind and body when i arose next morning, i went
 down to the same clump of plane trees, though i dreaded the spot as one of
 evil omen, and commenced to wait for chrysis to lead me on my way. i took
 a short stroll and had just seated myself where i had sat the day before,
 when she came under the trees, leading a little old woman by the hand.
 “well, mr. squeamish,” she chirped, when she had greeted me, “have you
 recovered your appetite?” in the meantime, the old hag: a
 wine-soaked crone with twitching lips 
 brought out a twisted hank of different colored yarns and put it about my
 neck; she then kneaded dust and spittle and, dipping her middle finger
 into the mixture, she crossed my forehead with it, in spite of my
 protests.
 as long as life remains, there’s hope; thou rustic god, oh
 hear our prayer, great priapus, i thee invoke, temper our
 arms to dare!
 when she had made an end of this incantation she ordered me to spit three
 times, and three times to drop stones into my bosom, each stone she
 wrapped up in purple after she had muttered charms over it; then,
 directing her hands to my privates, she commenced to try out my virility.
 quicker than thought the nerves responded to the summons, filling the
 crone’s hand with an enormous erection! skipping for joy, “look, chrysis,
 look,” she cried out, “see what a hare i’ve started, for someone else to
 course!” (this done, the old lady handed me over to chrysis, who was
 greatly delighted at the recovery of her mistress’s treasure; she hastily
 conducted me straight to the latter, introducing me into a lovely nook
 that nature had furnished with everything which could delight the eye.)
 shorn of its top, the swaying pine here casts a summer shade
 and quivering cypress, and the stately plane and berry-laden
 laurel. a brook’s wimpling waters strayed lashed into foam, but
 dancing on again and rolling pebbles in their chattering flow.
 ‘twas love’s own nook, as forest nightingale and urban
 procne undertook to bear true witness; hovering, the gleaming
 grass above and tender violets; wooing with song, their stolen
 love.
 fanning herself with a branch of flowering myrtle, she lay, stretched out
 with her marble neck resting upon a golden cushion. when she caught sight
 of me she blushed faintly; she recalled yesterday’s affront, i suppose. at
 her invitation, i sat down by her side, as soon as the others had gone;
 whereupon she put the branch of myrtle over my face and emboldened, as if
 a wall had been raised between us, “well, mr. paralytic,” she teased,
 “have you brought all of yourself along today?” “why ask me,” i replied,
 “why not try me instead?” and throwing myself bodily into her arms, i
 revelled in her kisses with no witchcraft to stop me. 
 the loveliness of her form drew, me to her and summoned me to love. our
 lips were pressed together in a torrent of smacking kisses, our groping
 hands had discovered every trick of excitation, and our bodies, clasped in
 a mutual embrace, had fused our souls into one, (and then, in the very
 midst of these ravishing preliminaries my nerves again played me false and
 i was unable to last until the instant of supreme bliss.) lashed to fury
 by these inexcusable affronts, the lady at last ran to avenge herself and,
 calling her house servants, she gave orders for me to be hoisted upon
 their shoulders and flogged; then, still unsatisfied with the drastic
 punishment she had inflicted upon me, she called all the spinning women
 and scrubbing wenches in the house and ordered them to spit upon me. i
 covered my face with my hands but i uttered no complaint as i well knew
 what i deserved and, overwhelmed with blows and spittle, i was driven from
 the house. proselenos was kicked out too, chrysis was beaten, and all the
 slaves grumbled among themselves and wondered what had upset their
 mistress’s good humor. i took heart after having given some thought to my
 misfortunes and, artfully concealing the marks of the blows for fear that
 eumolpus would make merry over my mishaps or, worse yet, that giton might
 be saddened by my disgrace, i did the only thing i could do to save my
 self-respect, i pretended that i was sick and went to bed. there, i turned
 the full fury of my resentment against that recreant which had been the
 sole cause of all the evil accidents which had befallen me.
 three times i grasped the two-edged blade the recreant to
 cut away; three times by fear my hand was stayed and palsied
 terror said me nay that which i might have done before ‘twas
 now impossible to do; for, cold with fear, the wretch withdrew
 into a thousand-wrinkled mare, and shrank in shame before my
 gaze nor would his head uncover more. but though the scamp
 in terror skulked, with words i flayed him as he sulked.
 raising myself upon my elbow i rebuked the shirker in some such terms as
 these: “what have you to say for yourself, you disgrace to gods and men,”
 i demanded, “for your name must never be mentioned among refined people.
 did i deserve to be lifted up to heaven and then dragged down to hell by
 you? was it right for you to slander my flourishing and vigorous years and
 land me in the shadows and lassitude of decrepit old age? give me some
 sign, however faint, i beg of you, that you have returned to life!” i
 vented my anger in words such as these.
 his eyes were fixed, and with averted look he stood, less
 moved by any word of mine than weeping willows bending o’er a
 brook or drooping poppies as at noon they pine.
 when i had made an end of this invective, so out of keeping with good
 taste, i began to do penance for my soliloquy and blushed furtively
 because i had so far forgotten my modesty as to invoke in words that part
 of my body which men of dignity do not even recognize. then, rubbing my
 forehead for a long time, “why have i committed an indiscretion in
 relieving my resentment by natural abuse,” i mused, “what does it amount
 to? are we not accustomed to swear at every member of the human body, the
 belly, throat, or even the head when it aches, as it often does? did not
 ulysses wrangle with his own heart? do not the tragedians ‘damn their
 eyes’ just as if they could hear?
 “gouty patients swear at their feet, rheumatics at their hands, blear-eyed
 people at their eyes, and do not those who often stub their toes blame
 their feet for all their pain?
 “why will our catos with their frowning brows condemn a work
 of fresh simplicity’? a cheerful kindness my pure speech endows;
 what people do, i write, to my capacity. for who knows not
 the pleasures venus gives? who will not in a warm bed tease his
 members? great epicurus taught a truth that lives; love and
 enjoy life! all the rest is embers.
 “nothing can be more insincere than the silly prejudices of mankind, and
 nothing sillier than the morality of bigotry,” 
 i called giton when i had finished my meditation: “tell me, little
 brother,” i demanded, “tell me, on your honor: did ascyltos stay awake
 until he had exacted his will of you, the night he stole you away from me?
 or was he content to spend the night like a chaste widow?” wiping his eyes
 the lad, in carefully chosen words took oath that ascyltos had used no
 force against him. (the truth of the matter is, that i was so distraught
 with my own misfortunes that i knew not what i was saying. “why recall
 past memories which can only cause pain,” said i to myself. i then
 directed all my energies towards the recovery of my lost manhood. to
 achieve this i was ready even to devote myself to the gods; accordingly, i
 went out to invoke the aid of priapus.) {putting as good a face upon the
 matter as i could} i knelt upon the threshold of his shrine and invoked
 the god in the following verses:
 “of bacchus and the nymphs, companion boon, whom fair dione
 set o’er forests wide as god: whom lesbos and green thasos own
 for deity, whom lydians, far and wide adore through all the
 seasons of the year; whose temple in his own hypaepa placed, 
 thou dryad’s joy and bacchus’, hear my prayer! to thee i come, by
 no dark blood disgraced, no shrine, in wicked lust have i
 profaned; when i was poor and worn with want, i sinned not
 by intent, a pauper’s sin’s not banned as of another! unto thee i
 pray lift thou the load from off my tortured mind, forgive a
 light offense! when fortune smiles i’ll not thy glory shun and
 leave behind thy worship! unto thee, a goat that feels his
 primest vigor, father of the flocks shall come! and suckling pigs,
 the tender young of some fine grunting sow! new wine, in crocks
 shall foam! thy grateful praises shall be sung by youths who
 thrice shall dance around thy shrine happy, in youth and full of
 this year’s wine!”
 while i was engaged in this diplomatic effort in behalf of the affected
 member, a hideous crone with disheveled hair, and clad in black garments
 which were in great: disorder, entered the shrine and, laying hands upon
 me, led me {thoroughly frightened,} out into the portico. 
 “what witches” (she cried,) “have devoured your manhood? what filth did
 you tread upon at some crossroads, in the dark? not even by the boy could
 you do your duty but, weak and effeminate, you are worn out like a
 cart-horse at a hill, you have lost both labor and sweat! not content with
 getting yourself into trouble, you have stirred up the wrath of the gods
 against me {and i will make you smart for it.”} she then led me,
 unresisting, back into the priestess’s room, pushed me down upon the bed,
 snatched a cane that hung upon the door, and gave me another thrashing: i
 remained silent and, had the cane not splintered at the first stroke,
 thereby diminishing the force of the blow, she might easily have broken my
 arms or my head. i groaned dismally, and especially when she manipulated
 my member and, shedding a flood of tears, i covered my head with my right
 arm and huddled down upon the pillow. nor did she weep less bitterly:
the sailor, naked from his foundered barque, some shipwrecked
 mariner seeks out to hear his woe; when hail beats down a farmer’s
 crop, his cark seeks consolation from another, too. death
 levels caste and sufferers unites, and weeping parents are as one
 in grief; we also will beseech the starry heights, united
 prayers climb best, is the belief.
 she seated herself upon the other side of the bed and in quavering tones
 commenced to accuse the delays of old age. at last the priestess came in.
 “why,” she cried, “what has brought you into my cell as if you were
 visiting a newly made grave? and on a feast-day, too, when even mourners
 ought to smile!” “oenothea,” the old hag replied, “this young man here was
 born under an unlucky star: he can’t dispose of his goods to either boy or
 girl. such an unfortunate fellow you never saw. he has no tool at all,
 only a piece of leather soaked in water! i wish you would tell me what you
 think of a man who could get up from circe’s bed without having tasted
 pleasure!” on hearing these words, oenothea sat down between us and, after
 shaking her head for a while, “i’m the only one that knows how to cure
 that disease,” said she, “and for fear you think i’m talking to hear
 myself talk, i’ll just have the young fellow sleep with me for a night,
 and if i don’t make it as hard as horn!
 all that you see in the world must give heed to my mandates; 
 blossoming earth, when i will it, must languish, a desert.’ riches
 pour forth, when i will it, from crags and grim boulders waters
 will spurt that will rival the nile at its flooding seas calm
 their billows before me, gales silence their howlings, hearing my
 step! and the rivers sink into their channels; dragons, hyrcanian
 tigers stand fast at my bidding! why should i tell you of small
 things? the image of luna drawn by my spells must descend, and
 apollo, atremble backs up his horses and turns from his course at
 my order! such is the power of my word! by the rites of a virgin
 quenched is the raging of bulls; and the sun’s daughter circe
 changed and transfigured the crew of the wily ulysses. 
 proteus changes his form when his good pleasure dictates, i, who
 am skilled in these arts, can the shrubs of mount ida plant in the
 ocean; turn rivers to flow up the mountains!”
 at this declaration, which was so awe-inspiring, i shuddered in terror,
 and commenced to scrutinize the crone more narrowly. “come now,” said
 oenothea, “obey my orders,” and, carefully wiping her hands, she bent over
 the cot and kissed me, once, twice! on the middle of the altar oenothea
 placed an old table, upon which she heaped live coals, then with melted
 pitch she repaired a goblet which had become cracked through age. next she
 replaced, in the smoke-stained wall, a peg which had come out when she
 took down the wooden goblet. then, having donned a mantle, in the shape of
 a piece of square-cut cloth, she set a huge kettle upon the hearth and at
 the same time speared with a fork a cloth hanging upon the meathooks, and
 lifted it down. it contained some beans which had been laid away for
 future use, and a very small and stale piece of pig’s cheek, scored with a
 thousand slashes. when she had untied the string which fastened the cloth,
 she poured some of the beans upon the table and ordered me to shell them
 quickly and carefully. i obey her mandate and with careful fingers
 separate the beans from the filthy pods which contain them; but she,
 accusing my clumsiness, hastily snatched them and, skillfully tearing off
 the pods with her teeth, spat them upon the ground, where they looked like
 dead flies. i wondered, then, at the ingenuity of poverty and its
 expedients for emergency. (so ardent a follower of this virtue did the
 priestess seem that it was reflected in everything around her. her
 dwelling, in particular, was a very shrine of poverty.)
 no indian ivory set in gold gleamed here, no trodden marble
 glistened here; no earth mocked for its gifts; but ceres’ festive
 grove: with willow wickerwork ‘twas set around, new cups of
 clay by revolutions shaped of lowly wheel. for honey soft, a bowl;
 platters of green bark wickerwork, a jar stained by the
 lifeblood of the god of wine; the walls around with chaff and
 spattered clay were covered. flanging from protruding nails 
 were slender stalks of the green rush; and then suspended from the
 smoky beam, the stores of this poor cottage. service berries soft,
 entwined in fragrant wreaths hung down, dried savory and
 raisins by the bunch. an hostess here like she on attic soil,
 of hecate’s pure worship worthy she! whose fame kallimachos
 so grandly sang ‘twill live forever through the speaking years.
 in the meantime, (having shelled the beans,) she took a mouthful of the
 meat and with the fork was replacing the pig’s cheek, which was coeval
 with herself, upon the meat-hook, when the rotten stool, which she was
 using to augment her height, broke down under the old lady’s weight and
 let her fall upon the hearth. the neck of the pot was broken, putting out
 the fire, which was just getting a good start, her elbow was burned by a
 flaming brand, and her whole face was covered by the ashes raised by her
 fall. i jumped up in dismay and, not without laughing, helped the old lady
 to her feet. she hastily scurried out into the neighborhood to replenish
 the fire, for fear anything should delay the sacrifice. i was on my way to
 the door of the cell when lo! and behold! three sacred geese which were
 accustomed, i suppose, to demand their feed from the old woman at midday,
 made a rush at me and, surrounding me, made me nervous with their
 abominable rabid cackling. one tore at my tunic, another undid the lacings
 of my sandals and tugged at them, but one in particular, the ringleader
 and moving spirit of this savage attack, did not hesitate to worry at my
 leg with his serrated bill. unable to see the joke, i twisted off one of
 the legs of the little table and, thus armed, began to belabor the
 pugnacious brute. nor did i rest content with a light blow, i avenged
 myself by the death of the goose.
 ‘twas thus, i ween, the birds of stymphalus to heaven fled,
 by herakles impelled; the harpies, too, whose reeking pinions held
 that poison which the feast of phineus contaminated. all the
 air above with their unwonted lamentations shook, the
 heavens in uproar and confusion move {the stars, in dread, their
 orbits then forsook!}
 by this time the two remaining geese had picked up the beans which had
 been scattered all over the floor and bereft, i suppose, of their leader,
 had gone back into the temple; and i, well content with my revenge and my
 booty, threw the dead goose behind the cot and bathed the trifling wound
 in my leg with vinegar: then, fearing a scolding, i made up my mind to run
 away and, collecting together all my belongings, started to leave the
 house. i had not yet stepped over the threshold of the cell, however, when
 i caught sight of oenothea returning with an earthen vessel full of live
 coals. thereupon i retraced my steps and, throwing off my garments, i took
 my stand just inside the door, as if i were awaiting her return. she
 banked her fire with broken reeds, piled some pieces of wood on top, and
 began to excuse her delay on the ground that her friend would not permit
 her to leave until after the customary three drinks had been taken. “but
 what were you up to in my absence?” she demanded. “where are the beans?”
 thinking that i had done a thing worthy of all praise, i informed her of
 the battle in all its details and, that she might not be downcast any
 longer, i produced the dead goose in payment for her loss. when the old
 lady laid eyes upon that, she raised such a clamor that you would have
 thought that the geese had invaded the room again. confounded and
 thunderstruck at the novelty of my crime, i asked her why she was so angry
 and why she pitied the goose rather than myself. 
 but, beating her palms together, “you villain, are you so brazen that you
 can speak?” she shrieked. “don’t you know what a serious crime you’ve
 committed? you have slaughtered the delight of priapus, a goose, the very
 darling of married women! and for fear you think that nothing serious has
 happened, if the magistrates find this out you’ll go to the cross! until
 this day my dwelling has been inviolate and you have polluted it with
 blood! you have conducted yourself in such a manner that any enemy i have
 can turn me out of the priesthood!”
 she spoke, and from her trembling head she tore the snow-white
 hair, and scratched her cheeks: her
 eyes shed floods of tears. as when a torrent headlong rushes down
 the valleys drear, its icy fetters
 gone when sprint appears, and strikes the frozen shackles from
 rejuvenated earth so down her face
 the tears in torrents swept and
 wracking sobs convulsed her as she wept.
 “please don’t make such a fuss,” i said, “i’ll give you an ostrich in
 place of your goose!” while she sat upon the cot and, to my stupefaction,
 bewailed the death of the goose, proselenos came in with the materials for
 the sacrifice. seeing the dead goose and inquiring the cause of her grief,
 she herself commenced to weep more violently still and to commiserate me,
 as if i had slain my own father, instead of a public goose. growing tired
 of this nonsense at last, “see here,” said i, “could i not purchase
 immunity for a price, even though i had assaulted you’? even though i had
 murdered a man? look here! i’m laying down two gold pieces, you can buy
 both gods and geese with them!” “forgive me, young man,” said oenothea,
 when she caught sight of the gold, “i am anxious upon your account; that
 is a proof of love, not of malignity. let us take such precautions that
 not a soul will find this out. as for you, pray to the gods to forgive
 your sacrilege!”
 the rich man can sail in a favoring gale and
 snap out his course at his pleasure; a dance espouse, no acrisius
 will rail, his credence by hers he
 will measure; write verse, or declaim; snap the finger of scorn
 at the world, yet still win all his
 cases, the rabble will drink in his words with concern 
 when a cato austere it displaces. at
 law, his “not proven,” or “proved,” he can have with
 servius or labeo vieing; with gold at command anything he may
 crave is his without asking or
 sighing. the universe bows at his slightest behest, for
 jove is a prisoner in his treasure chest.
 in the meantime, she scurried around and put a jar of wine under my hands
 and, when my fingers had all been spread out evenly, she purified them
 with leeks and parsley. then, muttering incantations, she threw hazel-nuts
 into the wine and drew her conclusions as they sank or floated; but she
 did not hoodwink me, for those with empty shells, no kernel and full of
 air, would of course float, while those that were heavy and full of sound
 kernel would sink to the bottom. {she then turned her attention to the
 goose,} and, cutting open the breast, she drew out a very fat liver from
 which she foretold my future. then, for fear any trace of the crime should
 remain, she cut the whole goose up, stuck the pieces upon spits, and
 served up a very delectable dinner for me, whom, but a moment before, she
 had herself condemned to death, in her own words! meanwhile, cups of
 unmixed wine went merrily around (and the crones greedily devoured the
 goose which they had but so lately lamented. when the last morsel had
 disappeared, oenothea, half-drunk by this time, looked at me and said, “we
 must now go through with the mysteries, so that you may get back your
 virility.”) 
 (as she said this oenothea brought) out a leathern dildo which, when she
 had smeared it with oil, ground pepper, and pounded nettle seed, she
 commenced to force, little by little, up my anus. the merciless old virago
 then anointed the insides of my thighs with the same decoction; finally
 mixing nasturtium juice with elixir of southern wood, she gave my genitals
 a bath and, picking up a bunch of green nettles, she commenced to strike
 me gently all over my belly below the navel. {the nettles stung me
 horribly and i suddenly took to my heels, with the old hags in full
 pursuit.} although they were befuddled with wine and lust they followed
 the right road and chased me through several wards, screaming “stop
 thief.” i made good my escape, however, although every toe was bleeding as
 the result of my headlong flight. (i got home as quickly as i could and,
 worn out with fatigue, i sought my couch, but i could not snatch a wink of
 sleep for the evil adventures which had befallen me kept running through
 my brain and, brooding upon them, i came to the conclusion that no one
 could be so abjectly unfortunate. “has fortune, always inimical to me,
 stood in need of the pangs of love, that she might torture me more cruelly
 still,” i cried out; “unhappy wretch that i am! fortune and love have
 joined forces to bring about my ruin. cruel eros himself had never dealt
 leniently with me, loved or lover i am put to the torture! take the case
 of chrysis: she loves me desperately, never leaves off teasing me, she who
 despised me as a servant, because, when she was acting as her mistress’s
 go-between, i was dressed in the garments of a slave: she, i say) that
 same chrysis, who looked with contempt upon your former lowly lot, is now
 bent upon following it up even at the peril of her life; (she swore that
 she would never leave my side on the day when she told me of the violence
 of her passion: but circe owns me, heart and soul, all others i despise.
 who could be lovelier than she?) what loveliness had ariadne or leda to
 compare with hers? what had helen to compare with her, what has venus? if
 paris himself had seen her with her dancing eyes, when he acted as umpire
 for the quarreling goddesses, he would have given up helen and the
 goddesses for her! if i could only steal a kiss, if only i might put my
 arms around that divine, that heavenly bosom, perhaps the virility would
 come back to this body and the parts, flaccid from witchcraft would, i
 believe, come into their own. contempt cannot tire me out: what if i was
 flogged; i will forget it! what if i was thrown out! i will treat it as a
 joke! only let me be restored to her good graces!
 at rest on my pallet, night’s silence had scarce settled down
 to soothe me, and eyes heavy-laden with slumber to lull when
 torturing amor laid hold of me, seizing my hair and dragging me,
 wounding me, ordered a vigil till dawn. ‘oh heart of stone, how
 canst thou lie here alone?’ said the god, ‘thou joy of a thousand
 sweet mistresses, how, oh my slave?’ in disarrayed nightrobe i
 leap to bare feet and essay to follow all paths; but a road can
 discover by none. one moment i hasten; the next it is torture to
 move, it irks me again to turn back, shame forbids me to halt
 and stand in the midst of the road. lo! the voices of men, 
 the roar of the streets, and the songs of the birds, and the bark 
 of vigilant watch-dogs are hushed! alone, i of all society dread
 both my slumber and couch, and obey great lord of the passions,
 thy mandate which on me was laid.”
 (such thoughts as these, of lovely circe’s charms so wrought upon my mind
 that) i disordered my bed by embracing the image, as it were, of my
 mistress, (but my efforts were all wasted.) this obstinate (affliction
 finally wore out my patience, and i cursed the hostile deity by whom i was
 bewitched. i soon recovered my composure, however, and, deriving some
 consolation from thinking of the heroes of old, who had been persecuted by
 the anger of the gods, i broke out in these lines:)
 hostile gods and implacable rate not me alone pursue; 
 herakles once suffered the weight of heaven’s displeasure too 
 driven from the inachian coast: laomedon of old sated two of the
 heavenly host: in pelias, behold juno’s power to avenge an
 affront; and telephus took arms knowing not he must bear the
 brunt; ulysses feared the storms angry neptune decreed as his due.
 now, me to overwhelm outraged priapus ever pursues on land and
 nereus’ realm.
 (tortured by these cares i spent the whole night in anxiety, and at dawn,
 giton, who had found out that i had slept at home, entered the room and
 bitterly accused me of leading a licentious life; he said that the whole
 household was greatly concerned at what i had been doing, that i was so
 rarely present to attend to my duties, and that the intrigue in which i
 was engaged would very likely bring about my ruin. i gathered from this
 that he had been well informed as to my affairs, and that someone had been
 to the house inquiring for me. thereupon,) i began to ply giton with
 questions as to whether anyone had made inquiry for me; “not today,” he
 replied, “but yesterday a woman came in at the door, not bad looking,
 either, and after talking to me for quite a while, and wearing me out with
 her far-fetched conversation, finally ended by saying that you deserved
 punishment, and that you would receive the scourging of a slave if the
 injured party pressed his complaint.” (this news afflicted me so bitterly
 that i levelled fresh recriminations against fortune, and) i had not yet
 finished grumbling when chrysis came in and, throwing herself upon me,
 embraced me passionately. “i have you,” she cried, “just as i hoped i
 would; you are my heart’s desire, my joy, you can never put out this flame
 of mine unless you quench it in my blood!” (i was greatly embarrassed by
 this wantonness of chrysis and had recourse to flattery in order that i
 might rid myself of her, as i feared that her passionate outcries would
 reach the ears of eumolpus who, in the arrogance of success, had put on
 the manner of the master. so on this account, i did everything i could
 think of to calm chrysis. i feigned love, whispered compliments, in short,
 so skillfully did i dissimulate that she believed i was love’s own
 captive. i showed her what pressing peril overhung us should she be caught
 in that room with me, as eumolpus was only too ready to punish the
 slightest offense. on hearing this, she left me hurriedly, and all the
 more quickly, as she caught sight of giton, who had only left me a little
 before she had come in, on his way to my room. she was scarcely gone when)
 one of the newly engaged servants rushed in and informed me that the
 master was furiously angry with me because of my two days’ absence from
 duty; i would do well, therefore, to prepare some plausible excuse, as it
 was not likely that his angry passion would be placated until someone had
 been flogged. (seeing that i was so vexed and disheartened, giton said not
 a word about the woman, contenting himself with speaking of eumolpus, and
 advising me that it would be better to joke with him than to treat the
 matter seriously. i followed this lead and appeared before the old fellow,
 with so merry a countenance that, instead of showing severity, he received
 me with good humor and rallied me upon the success of my love affairs,
 praising the elegance of my figure which made me such a favorite with the
 ladies. “i know very well,” he went on, “that a lovely woman is dying for
 love of you, encolpius, and this may come in handy for us, so play your
 part and i’ll play mine, too!”) 
 (he was still speaking, when in came a) matron of the most exclusive
 social set, philumene by name, who had often, when young, extorted many a
 legacy by means of her charms, but an old woman now, the flower of her
 beauty faded, she threw her son and daughter in the way of childless old
 men and through this substitution she contrived to continue her
 established policy. she came to eumolpus, both to commend her children to
 his practical judgment and to entrust herself and her hopes to his good
 nature, he being the only one in all the world who could daily instruct
 young children in healthy precepts. in short, she left her children in
 eumolpus’ house in order that they might hear the words that dropped from
 his lips, as this was the only legacy she could leave to them. nor did she
 do otherwise than as she had promised, but left in his bed chamber a very
 beautiful daughter and her brother, a lad, and pretended that she herself
 was compelled to go out to a temple to offer up her vows. eumolpus, who
 was so continent that even i was a boy in his eyes, lost no time in
 inviting the damsel to sacrifice to the aversa venus; but, as he had told
 everyone that he was gouty and that his back was weak, and as he stood in
 danger of upsetting the whole farce if he did not carefully live up to the
 pretence, he therefore, that the imposture might be kept up, prevailed
 upon the young lady to seat herself upon that goodness which had been
 commended to her, and ordered corax to crawl under the bed upon which he
 himself was lying and after bracing himself by putting his hands upon the
 floor, to hoist his master up and down with his own back. corax carried
 out the order in full and skillfully seconded the wriggling of the girl
 with a corresponding seesaw. then, when the crisis was about due,
 eumolpus, in a ringing voice, called out to corax to increase the cadence.
 and thus the old lecher, suspended between his servant and his mistress,
 enjoyed himself just as if he were in a swing. time and again eumolpus
 repeated this performance, to the accompaniment of ringing laughter in
 which he himself joined. at last, fearing i might lose an opportunity
 through lack of application, i also made advances to the brother who was
 enjoying the gymnastics of his sister through the keyhole, to see if he
 would prove amenable to assault. nor did this well trained lad reject my
 advances; but alas! i discovered that the god was still my enemy.
 (however, i was not so blue over this failure as i had been over those
 before, and my virility returned a little later and, suddenly finding
 myself in better fettle i cried out,) “great are the gods who have made me
 whole again! in his loving kindness, mercury, who conducts and reconducts
 the souls, has restored to me that which a hostile hand had cut away.
 look! you will find that i am more graciously endowed than was
 protestilaus or any other of the heroes of old!” so saying, i lifted up my
 tunic and showed eumolpus that i was whole. at first he was startled,
 then, that he might believe his own eyes, he handled this pledge of the
 good will of the gods with both hands. (our good humor was revived by this
 blessing and we laughed at the diplomacy of philumene and at the skill
 with which her children plied their calling, little likely to profit them
 much with us, however, as it was only in hopes of coming into a legacy
 that she had abandoned the boy and girl to us. meditating upon this
 unscrupulous method of getting around childless old men, i began to take
 thought of the present state of our own affairs and made use of the
 occasion to warn eumolpus that he might be bitten in biting the biters.
 “everything that we do,” i said, “should be dictated by prudence.)
 socrates, {whose judgment was riper than that} of the gods or of men used
 to boast that he had never looked into a tavern nor believed the evidence
 of his own eyes in any crowded assembly which was disorderly: so nothing
 is more in keeping than always conversing with wisdom.
 live coals are more readily held in men’s mouths than a secret!
 whatever you talk of at home will fly forth in an instant, 
 become a swift rumor and beat at the walls of your city. nor is it
 enough that your confidence thus has been broken, as rumor but
 grows in the telling and strives to embellish. the covetous
 servant who feared to make public his knowledge a hole in the
 ground dug, and therein did whisper his secret that told of a
 king’s hidden ears: this the earth straightway echoed, and
 rustling reeds added that midas was king in the story.
 “every word of this is true,” i insisted, “and no one deserves to get into
 trouble more quickly than he who covets the goods of others! how could
 cheats and swindlers live unless they threw purses or little bags clinking
 with money into the crowd for bait? just as dumb brutes are enticed by
 food, human beings are not to be caught unless they have something in the
 way of hope at which to nibble! (that was the reason that the crotonians
 gave us such a satisfactory reception, but) the ship does not arrive, from
 africa, with your money and your slaves, as you promised. the patience of
 the fortune-hunters is worn out and they have already cut down their
 liberality so that, either i am mistaken, or else our usual luck is about
 to return to punish you!” 
 (“i have thought up a scheme,” replied eumolpus, “which will embarrass our
 fortune-hunting friends sorely,” and as he said this, he drew his tablets
 from his wallet and read his last wishes aloud, as follows:) “all who are
 down for legacies under my will, my freedmen only excepted, shall come
 into what i bequeath them subject to this condition, that they do cut my
 body into pieces and devour said pieces in sight of the crowd: {nor need
 they be inordinately shocked} for among some peoples, the law ordaining
 that the dead shall be devoured by their relatives is still in force; nay,
 even the sick are often abused because they render their own flesh worse!
 i admonish my friends, by these presents, lest they refuse what i command,
 that they devour my carcass with as great relish as they damned my soul!”
 (eumolpus had just started reading the first clauses when several of his
 most intimate friends entered the room and catching sight of the tablets
 in his hand in which was contained his last will and testament, besought
 him earnestly to permit them to hear the contents. he consented
 immediately and read the entire instrument from first to last. but when
 they had heard that extraordinary stipulation by which they were under the
 necessity of devouring his carcass, they were greatly cast down, but) his
 reputation for enormous wealth dulled the eyes and brains of the wretches,
 (and they were such cringing sycophants that they dared not complain of
 the outrage in his hearing. one there was, nevertheless, named) gorgias,
 who was willing to comply, (provided he did not have too long to wait! to
 this, eumolpus made answer:) “i have no fear that your stomach will turn,
 it will obey orders; if, for one hour of nausea you promise it a plethora
 of good things: just shut your eyes and pretend that it’s not human guts
 you’ve bolted, but ten million sesterces! and beside, we will find some
 condiment which will disguise the taste! no flesh is palatable of itself,
 it must be seasoned by art and reconciled to the unwilling stomach. and,
 if you desire to fortify the plan by precedents, the saguntines ate human
 flesh when besieged by hannibal, and they had no legacy in prospect! in
 stress of famine, the inhabitants of petelia did the same and gained
 nothing from the diet except that they were not hungry! when numantia was
 taken by scipio, mothers, with the half-eaten bodies of their babes in
 their bosoms, were found! (therefore, since it is only the thought of
 eating human flesh that makes you squeamish, you must try to overcome your
 aversion, with all your heart, so that you may come into the immense
 legacies i have put you down for!” so carelessly did eumolpus reel off
 these extravagances that the fortune-hunters began to lose faith in the
 validity of his promises and subjected our words and actions to a closer
 scrutiny immediately; their suspicions grew with their experience and they
 came to the conclusion that we were out and out grafters, and thereupon
 those who had been put to the greatest expense for our entertainment
 resolved to seize us and take it out in just revenge; but chrysis, who was
 privy to all their scheming, informed me of the designs which the
 crotonians had hatched; and when i heard this news, i was so terrified
 that i fled instantly, with giton, and left eumolpus to his fate. i
 learned, a few days later, that the crotonians, furious because the old
 fox had lived so long and so sumptuously at the public expense, had put
 him to death in the massilian manner. that you may comprehend what this
 means, know that) whenever the massilians were ravaged by the plague, one
 of the poor would offer himself to be fed for a whole year upon choice
 food at public charge; after which, decked out with olive branches and
 sacred vestments, he was led out through the entire city, loaded with
 imprecations so that he might take to himself the evils from which the
 city suffered, and then thrown headlong (from the cliff.) 
 there are two basic instincts in the character of the normal individual;
 the will to live, and the will to propagate the species. it is from the
 interplay of these instincts that prostitution took origin, and it is for
 this reason that this profession is the oldest in human experience, the
 first offspring, as it were, of savagery and of civilization. when fate
 turns the leaves of the book of universal history, she enters, upon the
 page devoted thereto, the record of the birth of each nation in its
 chronological order, and under this record appears the scarlet entry to
 confront the future historian and arrest his unwilling attention; the only
 entry which time and even oblivion can never efface.
 if, prior to the time of augustus caesar, the romans had laws designed to
 control the social evil, we have no knowledge of them, but there is
 nevertheless no lack of evidence to prove that it was only too well known
 among them long before that happy age (livy i, ; ii, ); and the
 peculiar story of the bacchanalian cult which was brought to rome by
 foreigners about the second century b.c. (livy xxxix, -), and the
 comedies of plautus and terence, in which the pandar and the harlot are
 familiar characters. cicero, pro coelio, chap. xx, says: “if there is
 anyone who holds the opinion that young men should be interdicted from
 intrigues with the women of the town, he is indeed austere! that,
 ethically, he is in the right, i cannot deny: but nevertheless, he is at
 loggerheads not only with the licence of the present age, but even with
 the habits of our ancestors and what they permitted themselves. for when
 was this not done? when was it rebuked? when found fault with?” the
 floralia, first introduced about  b.c., had a powerful influence in
 giving impetus to the spread of prostitution. the account of the origin of
 this festival, given by lactantius, while no credence is to be placed in
 it, is very interesting. “when flora, through the practice of
 prostitution, had come into great wealth, she made the people her heir,
 and bequeathed a certain fund, the income of which was to be used to
 celebrate her birthday by the exhibition of the games they call the
 floralia” (instit. divin. xx, ). in chapter x of the same book, he
 describes the manner in which they were celebrated: “they were solemnized
 with every form of licentiousness. for in addition to the freedom of
 speech that pours forth every obscenity, the prostitutes, at the
 importunities of the rabble, strip off their clothing and act as mimes in
 full view of the crowd, and this they continue until full satiety comes to
 the shameless lookers-on, holding their attention with their wriggling
 buttocks.” cato, the censor, objected to the latter part of this
 spectacle, but, with all his influence, he was never able to abolish it;
 the best he could do was to have the spectacle put off until he had left
 the theatre. within  years after the introduction of this festival, p.
 scipio africanus, in his speech in defense of tib. asellus, said: “if you
 elect to defend your profligacy, well and good. but as a matter of fact,
 you have lavished, on one harlot, more money than the total value, as
 declared by you to the census commissioners, of all the plenishing of your
 sabine farm; if you deny my assertion i ask who dare wager , sesterces
 on its untruth? you have squandered more than a third of the property you
 inherited from your father and dissipated it in debauchery” (aulus
 gellius, noctes atticae, vii, ). it was about this time that the oppian
 law came up for repeal. the stipulations of this law were as follows: no
 woman should have in her dress above half an ounce of gold, nor wear a
 garment of different colors, nor ride in a carriage in the city or in any
 town, or within a mile of it, unless upon occasion of a public sacrifice.
 this sumptuary law was passed during the public distress consequent upon
 hannibal’s invasion of italy. it was repealed eighteen years afterward,
 upon petition of the roman ladies, though strenuously opposed by cato
 (livy , ; tacitus, annales, , ). the increase of wealth among the
 romans, the spoils wrung from their victims as a portion of the price of
 defeat, the contact of the legions with the softer, more civilized, more
 sensuous races of greece and asia minor, laid the foundations upon which
 the social evil was to rise above the city of the seven hills, and finally
 crush her. in the character of the roman there was but little of
 tenderness. the well-being of the state caused him his keenest anxiety.
 one of the laws of the twelve tables, the “coelebes prohibito,” compelled
 the citizen of manly vigor to satisfy the promptings of nature in the arms
 of a lawful wife, and the tax on bachelors is as ancient as the times of
 furius camillus. “there was an ancient law among the romans,” says dion
 cassius, lib. xliii, “which forbade bachelors, after the age of
 twenty-five, to enjoy equal political rights with married men. the old
 romans had passed this law in hope that, in this way, the city of rome,
 and the provinces of the roman empire as well, might be insured an
 abundant population.” the increase, under the emperors, of the number of
 laws dealing with sex is an accurate mirror of conditions as they altered
 and grew worse. the “jus trium librorum,” under the empire, a privilege
 enjoyed by those who had three legitimate children, consisting, as it did,
 of permission to fill a public office before the twenty-fifth year of
 one’s age, and in freedom from personal burdens, must have had its origin
 in the grave apprehensions for the future, felt by those in power. the
 fact that this right was sometimes conferred upon those who were not
 legally entitled to benefit by it, makes no difference in this inference.
 scions of patrician families imbibed their lessons from the skilled
 voluptuaries of greece and the levant and in their intrigues with the
 wantons of those climes, they learned to lavish wealth as a fine art. upon
 their return to rome they were but ill-pleased with the standard of
 entertainment offered by the ruder and less sophisticated native talent;
 they imported greek and syrian mistresses. ‘wealth increased, its message
 sped in every direction, and the corruption of the world was drawn into
 italy as by a load-stone. the roman matron had learned how to be a mother,
 the lesson of love was an unopened book; and, when the foreign hetairai
 poured into the city, and the struggle for supremacy began, she soon
 became aware of the disadvantage under which she contended. her natural
 haughtiness had caused her to lose valuable time; pride, and finally
 desperation drove her to attempt to outdo her foreign rivals; her native
 modesty became a thing of the past, her roman initiative, unadorned by
 sophistication, was often but too successful in outdoing the greek and
 syrian wantons, but without the appearance of refinement which they always
 contrived to give to every caress of passion or avarice. they wooed
 fortune with an abandon that soon made them the objects of contempt in the
 eyes of their lords and masters. “she is chaste whom no man has
 solicited,” said ovid (amor. i, , line ). martial, writing about ninety
 years later says: “sophronius rufus, long have i been searching the city
 through to find if there is ever a maid to say ‘no’; there is not one.”
 (ep. iv, .) in point of time, a century separates ovid and martial; from
 a moral standpoint, they are as far apart as the poles. the revenge, then,
 taken by asia, gives a startling insight into the real meaning of
 kipling’s poem, “the female of the species is more deadly than the male.”
 in livy (xxxiv, ) we read: (cato is speaking), “all these changes, as day
 by day the fortune of the state is higher and more prosperous and her
 empire grows greater, and our conquests extend over greece and asia, lands
 replete with every allurement of the senses, and we appropriate treasures
 that may well be called royal,--all this i dread the more from my fear
 that such high fortune may rather master us, than we master it.” within
 twelve years of the time when this speech was delivered, we read in the
 same author (xxxix, ), “for the beginnings of foreign luxury were brought
 into the city by the asiatic army”; and juvenal (sat. iii, ), “quirites,
 i cannot bear to see rome a greek city, yet how small a fraction of the
 whole corruption is found in these dregs of achaea? long since has the
 syrian orontes flowed into the tiber and brought along with it the syrian
 tongue and manners and cross-stringed harp and harper and exotic timbrels
 and girls bidden stand for hire at the circus.” still, from the facts
 which have come down to us, we cannot arrive at any definite date at which
 houses of ill fame and women of the town came into vogue at rome. that
 they had long been under police regulation, and compelled to register with
 the aedile, is evident from a passage in tacitus: “for visitilia, born of
 a family of praetorian rank, had publicly notified before the aediles, a
 permit for fornication, according to the usage that prevailed among our
 fathers, who supposed that sufficient punishment for unchaste women
 resided in the very nature of their calling.” no penalty attached to
 illicit intercourse or to prostitution in general, and the reason appears
 in the passage from tacitus, quoted above. in the case of married women,
 however, who contravened the marriage vow there were several penalties.
 among them, one was of exceptional severity, and was not repealed until
 the time of theodosius: “again he repealed another regulation of the
 following nature; if any should have been detected in adultery, by this
 plan she was not in any way reformed, but rather utterly given over to an
 increase of her ill behaviour. they used to shut the woman up in a narrow
 room, admitting any that would commit fornication with her, and, at the
 moment when they were accomplishing their foul deed, to strike bells, that
 the sound might make known to all, the injury she was suffering. the
 emperor hearing this, would suffer it no longer, but ordered the very
 rooms to be pulled down” (paulus diaconus, hist. miscel. xiii, ). rent
 from a brothel was a legitimate source of income (ulpian, law as to female
 slaves making claim to heirship). procuration also, had to be notified
 before the aedile, whose special business it was to see that no roman
 matron became a prostitute. these aediles had authority to search every
 place which had reason to fear anything, but they themselves dared not
 engage in any immorality there; aulus gellius, noct. attic. iv, , where
 an action at law is cited, in which the aedile hostilius had attempted to
 force his way into the apartments of mamilia, a courtesan, who thereupon,
 had driven him away with stones. the result of the trial is as follows:
 “the tribunes gave as their decision that the aedile had been lawfully
 driven from that place, as being one that he ought not to have visited
 with his officer.” if we compare this passage with livy, xl, , we find
 that this took place in the year  b c. caligula inaugurated a tax upon
 prostitutes (vectigal ex capturis), as a state impost: “he levied new and
 hitherto unheard of taxes; a proportion of the fees of prostitutes;--so
 much as each earned with one man. a clause was also added to the law
 directing that women who had practiced harlotry and men who had practiced
 procuration should be rated publicly; and furthermore, that marriages
 should be liable to the rate” (suetonius, calig. xi). alexander severus
 retained this law, but directed that such revenue be used for the upkeep
 of the public buildings, that it might not contaminate the state treasure
 (lamprid. alex. severus, chap. ). this infamous tax was not abolished
 until the time of theodosius, but the real credit is due to a wealthy
 patrician, florentius by name, who strongly censured this practice, to the
 emperor, and offered his own property to make good the deficit which would
 appear upon its abrogation (gibbon, vol. , p. , note). with the
 regulations and arrangements of the brothels, however, we have information
 which is far more accurate. these houses (lupanaria, fornices, et cet.)
 were situated, for the most part, in the second district of the city
 (adler, description of the city of rome, pp.  et seq.), the
 coelimontana, particularly in the suburra that bordered the town walls,
 lying in the carinae,--the valley between the coelian and esquiline hills.
 the great market (macellum magnum) was in this district, and many
 cook-shops, stalls, barber shops, et cet. as well; the office of the
 public executioner, the barracks for foreign soldiers quartered at rome;
 this district was one of the busiest and most densely populated in the
 entire city. such conditions would naturally be ideal for the owner of a
 house of ill fame, or for a pandar. the regular brothels are described as
 having been exceedingly dirty, smelling of the gas generated by the flame
 of the smoking lamp, and of the other odors which always haunted these ill
 ventilated dens. horace, sat. i, , , “on the other hand, another will
 have none at all except she be standing in the evil smelling cell (of the
 brothel)”; petronius, chap. xxii, “worn out by all his troubles, ascyltos
 commenced to nod, and the maid, whom he had slighted, and, of course,
 insulted, smeared lamp-black all over his face”; priapeia, xiii, ,
 “whoever likes may enter here, smeared with the black soot of the
 brothel”; seneca, cont. i, , “you reek still of the soot of the brothel.”
 the more pretentious establishments of the peace ward, however, were
 sumptuously fitted up. hair dressers were in attendance to repair the
 ravages wrought in the toilette, by frequent amorous conflicts, and
 aquarioli, or water boys attended at the door with bidets for ablution.
 pimps sought custom for these houses and there was a good understanding
 between the parasites and the prostitutes. from the very nature of their
 calling, they were the friends and companions of courtesans. such
 characters could not but be mutually necessary to each other. the harlot
 solicited the acquaintance of the client or parasite, that she might the
 more easily obtain and carry on intrigues with the rich and dissipated.
 the parasite was assiduous in his attention to the courtesan, as procuring
 through her means, more easy access to his patrons, and was probably
 rewarded by them both, for the gratification which he obtained for the
 vices of the one and the avarice of the other. the licensed houses seem to
 have been of two kinds: those owned and managed by a pandar, and those in
 which the latter was merely an agent, renting rooms and doing everything
 in his power to supply his renters with custom. the former were probably
 the more respectable. in these pretentious houses, the owner kept a
 secretary, villicus puellarum, or superintendent of maids; this official
 assigned a girl her name, fixed the price to be demanded for her favors,
 received the money and provided clothing and other necessities: “you stood
 with the harlots, you stood decked out to please the public, wearing the
 costume the pimp had furnished you”; seneca, controv. i, . not until this
 traffic had become profitable, did procurers and procuresses (for women
 also carried on this trade) actually keep girls whom they bought as
 slaves: “naked she stood on the shore, at the pleasure of the purchaser;
 every part of her body was examined and felt. would you hear the result of
 the sale? the pirate sold; the pandar bought, that he might employ her as
 a prostitute”; seneca, controv. lib. i, . it was also the duty of the
 villicus, or cashier, to keep an account of what each girl earned: “give
 me the brothel-keeper’s accounts, the fee will suit” (ibid.)
 when an applicant registered with the aedile, she gave her correct name,
 her age, place of birth, and the pseudonym under which she intended
 practicing her calling. (plautus, poen.)
 if the girl was young and apparently respectable, the official sought to
 influence her to change her mind; failing in this, he issued her a license
 (licentia stupri), ascertained the price she intended exacting for her
 favors, and entered her name in his roll. once entered there, the name
 could never be removed, but must remain for all time an insurmountable bar
 to repentance and respectability. failure to register was severely
 punished upon conviction, and this applied not only to the girl but to the
 pandar as well. the penalty was scourging, and frequently fine and exile.
 notwithstanding this, however, the number of clandestine prostitutes at
 rome was probably equal to that of the registered harlots. as the
 relations of these unregistered women were, for the most part, with
 politicians and prominent citizens it was very difficult to deal with them
 effectively: they were protected by their customers, and they set a price
 upon their favors which was commensurate with the jeopardy in which they
 always stood. the cells opened upon a court or portico in the pretentious
 establishments, and this court was used as a sort of reception room where
 the visitors waited with covered head, until the artist whose
 ministrations were particularly desired, as she would of course be
 familiar with their preferences in matters of entertainment, was free to
 receive them. the houses were easily found by the stranger, as an
 appropriate emblem appeared over the door. this emblem of priapus was
 generally a carved figure, in wood or stone, and was frequently painted to
 resemble nature more closely. the size ranged from a few inches in length
 to about two feet. numbers of these beginnings in advertising have been
 recovered from pompeii and herculaneum, and in one case an entire
 establishment, even to the instruments used in gratifying unnatural lusts,
 was recovered intact. in praise of our modern standards of morality, it
 should be said that it required some study and thought to penetrate the
 secret of the proper use of several of these instruments. the collection
 is still to be seen in the secret museum at naples. the mural decoration
 was also in proper keeping with the object for which the house was
 maintained, and a few examples of this decoration have been preserved to
 modern times; their luster and infamous appeal undimmed by the passage of
 centuries.
 over the door of each cell was a tablet (titulus) upon which was the name
 of the occupant and her price; the reverse bore the word “occupata” and
 when the inmate was engaged the tablet was turned so that this word was
 out. this custom is still observed in spain and italy. plautus, asin. iv,
 i, , speaks of a less pretentious house when he says: “let her write on
 the door that she is ‘occupata.’” the cell usually contained a lamp of
 bronze or, in the lower dens, of clay, a pallet or cot of some sort, over
 which was spread a blanket or patch-work quilt, this latter being
 sometimes employed as a curtain, petronius, chap .
 the arches under the circus were a favorite location for prostitutes;
 ladies of easy virtue were ardent frequenters of the games of the circus
 and were always ready at hand to satisfy the inclinations which the
 spectacles aroused. these arcade dens were called “fornices,” from which
 comes our generic fornication. the taverns, inns, lodging houses, cook
 shops, bakeries, spelt-mills and like institutions all played a prominent
 part in the underworld of rome. let us take them in order:
 lupanaria--wolf dens, from lupa, a wolf. the derivation, according to
 lactantius, is as follows: “for she (lupa, i. e., acca laurentia) was the
 wife of faustulus, and because of the easy rate at which her person was
 held at the disposal of all, was called, among the shepherds, ‘lupa,’ that
 is, harlot, whence also ‘lupanar,’ a brothel, is so called.” it may be
 added, however, that there is some diversity of opinion upon this matter.
 it will be discussed more fully under the word “lupa.”
 fornix--an arch. the arcades under the theatres.
 pergulae--balconies, where harlots were shown.
 stabulae--inns, but frequently houses of prostitution.
 diversorium--a lodging house; house of assignation.
 tugurium--a hut. a very low den.
 turturilla--a dove cote; frequently in male part.
 casuaria--road houses; almost invariably brothels.
 tabernae--bakery shops.
 the taverns were generally regarded by the magistrates as brothels and the
 waitresses were so regarded by the law (codex theodos. lx, tit. , ed.
 ritter; ulpian liiii, , de ritu nupt.). the barmaid (copa), attributed
 to virgil, proves that even the proprietress had two strings to her bow,
 and horace, sat. lib. i, v, , in describing his excursion to brundisium,
 narrates his experience, or lack of it, with a waitress in an inn. this
 passage, it should be remarked, is the only one in all his works in which
 he is absolutely sincere in what he says of women. “here like a triple
 fool i waited till midnight for a lying jade till sleep overcame me,
 intent on venery; in that filthy vision the dreams spot my night clothes
 and my belly, as i lie upon my back.” in the aeserman inscription
 (mommsen, inscr. regn. neap. , which is number  in orelli-henzen)
 we have another example of the hospitality of these inns, and a dialogue
 between the hostess and a transient. the bill for the services of a girl
 amounted to  asses. this inscription is of great interest to the
 antiquary, and to the archoeologist. that bakers were not slow in
 organizing the grist mills is shown by a passage from paulus diaconus,
 xiii, : “as time went on, the owners of these turned the public corn
 mills into pernicious frauds. for, as the mill stones were fixed in places
 under ground, they set up booths on either side of these chambers and
 caused harlots to stand for hire in them, so that by these means they
 deceived very many,--some that came for bread, others that hastened
 thither for the base gratification of their wantonness.” from a passage in
 festus, it would seem that this was first put into practice in
 campania:--“harlots were called ‘aelicariae’, ‘spelt-mill girls, in
 campania, being accustomed to ply for gain before the mills of the
 spelt-millers.” “common strumpets, bakers’ mistresses, refuse the
 spelt-mill girls,” says plautus, i, ii, .
 there are few languages which are richer in pornographic terminology than
 the latin.
 meretrix--nomus marcellus has pointed out the difference between this
 class of prostitutes and the prostibula. “this is the difference between a
 meretrix (harlot) and a prostibula (common strumpet): a meretrix is of a
 more honorable station and calling; for meretrices are so named a merendo
 (from earning wages) because they plied their calling only by night;
 prostibulu because they stand before the stabulum (stall) for gain both by
 day and night.”
 prostibula--she who stands in front of her cell or stall.
 proseda--she who sits in front of her cell or stall. she who later became
 the empress theodora belonged to this class, if any credit is to be given
 to procopius.
 nonariae--she that is forbidden to appear before the ninth hour.
 mimae--mime players. they were almost invariably prostitutes.
 cymbalistriae--cymbal players. they were almost invariably prostitutes.
 ambubiae--singing girls. they were almost invariably prostitutes.
 citharistriae--harpists. they were almost invariably prostitutes.
 scortum--a strumpet. secrecy is implied, but the word has a broad usage.
 scorta erratica | clandestine strumpets who were street walkers.
 secuteleia |
 busturiae--tomb frequenters and hangers-on at funerals.
 copae--bar maids.
 delicatae--kept mistresses.
 famosae--soiled doves from respectable families.
 doris--harlots of great beauty. they wore no clothing.
 lupae--she wolves. some authorities affirm that this name was given them
 because of a peculiar wolflike cry they uttered, and others assert that
 the generic was bestowed upon then because their rapacity rivalled that
 of the wolf. servius, however, in his commentary on virgil, has assigned
 a much more improper and filthy reason for the name; he alludes to the
 manner in which the wolf who mothered rotnulus and reinus licked their
 bodies with her tongue, and this hint is sufficient to confirm him in
 his belief that the lupa; were not less skilled in lingual gymnastics.
 see lemaire’s virgil, vol. vi, p. ; commentary of servius on aeneid,
 lib. viii, .
 aelicariae--bakers’ girls.
 noctiluae--night walkers.
 blitidae--a very low class deriving their name from a cheap drink sold
 in the dens they frequented.
 forariae--country girls who frequented the roads.
 gallinae--thieving prostitutes, because after the manner of hens,
 prostitutes take anything and scatter everything.
 diobolares--two obol girls. so called from their price.
 amasiae, also in the diminutive--girls devoted to venus. their best
 expression in modern society would be the “vamps.”
 amatrix--female lover, frequently in male part.
 amica--female friend, frequently a tribad.
 quadrantariae--the lowest class of all. their natural charms were no
 longer merchantable. she of whom catullus speaks in connection with the
 lofty souled descendants of remus was of this stripe.
 from many passages in the ancient authors it is evident that harlots stood
 naked at the doors of their cells: “i saw some men prowling stealthily
 between the rows of name-boards and naked prostitutes,” petronius, chap.
 . “she entered the brothel, cozy with its crazy-quilt, and the empty
 cell--her own. then, naked she stands, with gilded nipples, beneath the
 tablet of the pretended lysisca,” juvenal, sat. vi,  et seq. in some
 cases they had recourse to a gossamer tissue of silk gauze, as was
 formerly the custom in paris, chicago, and san francisco. “the matron has
 no softer thigh nor has she a more beautiful leg,” says horace, sat. i,
 ii, “though the setting be one of pearls and emeralds (with all due
 respect to thy opinion, cerinthus), the togaed plebeian’s is often the
 finer, and, in addition, the beauties of figure are not camouflaged; that
 which is for sale, if honest, is shown openly, whereas deformity seeks
 concealment. it is the custom among kings that, when buying horses, they
 inspect them in the open, lest, as is often the case, a beautiful head is
 sustained by a tender hoof and the eager purchaser may be seduced by
 shapely hocks, a short head, or an arching neck. are these experts right
 in this? thou canst appraise a figure with the eyes of lynceus and
 discover its beauties; though blinder than hypoesea herself thou canst see
 what deformities there are. ah, what a leg! what arms! but how thin her
 buttocks are, in very truth what a huge nose she has, she’s short-waisted,
 too, and her feet are out of proportion! of the matron, except for the
 face, nothing is open to your scrutiny unless she is a catia who has
 dispensed with her clothing so that she may be felt all over thoroughly,
 the rest will be hidden. but as for the other, no difficulty there!
 through the coan silk it is as easy for you to see as if she were naked,
 whether she has an unshapely leg, whether her foot is ugly; her waist you
 can examine with your eyes. as for the price exacted, it ranged from a
 quadrans to a very high figure. in the inscription to which reference has
 already been made, the price was eight asses. an episode related in the
 life of apollonius of tyre furnishes additional information upon this
 subject. the lecher who deflowered a harlot was compelled to pay a much
 higher price for alleged undamaged goods than was asked of subsequent
 purchasers.
 “master,” cries the girl, throwing herself at his feet, “pity my
 maidenhood, do not prostitute this body under so ugly a name.” the
 superintendent of maids replies, “let the maid here present be dressed up
 with every care, let a name-ticket be written for her, and the fellow who
 deflowers tarsia shall pay half a libra; afterwards she shall be at the
 service of the public for one solidus per head.”
 the passage in petronius (chap. viii) and that in juvenal (sat. vi, )
 are not to be taken literally. “aes” in the latter should be understood to
 mean what we would call “the coin,” and not necessarily coin of low
 denomination. 
 the origin of this vice (all peoples, savage and civilized, have been
 infected with it) is lost in the mists which shroud antiquity. the old
 testament contains many allusions to it, and sodom was destroyed because a
 long-suffering deity could not find ten men in the entire city who were
 not addicted to its practice. so saturated was this city of the ancient
 world with the vice that the very name of the city or the adjective
 denoting citizenship in that city have transmitted the stigma to modern
 times. that the fathers of israel were quick to perceive the tortuous
 ramifications of this vice is proved by a passage in deuteronomy, chap.
 , verse .: “the woman shall not wear that which pertaineth to a man,
 neither shall a man put on a woman’s garment: for all that do so are
 abominations unto the lord thy god.” here we have the first regulation
 against fetishism and the perverted tendencies of gynandry and androgeny.
 inasmuch as our concern with this subject has to do with the roman world
 alone, a lengthy discussion of the early, manifestations of this vice
 would be out of place here; nevertheless, a brief sketch should be given
 to serve as a foundation to such discussion and to aid sociologists who
 will find themselves more and more concerned with the problem in view of
 the conditions in european society, induced by the late war. their problem
 will, however, be more intimately concerned with homosexuality as it is
 manifested among women!
 from remotest antiquity down to the present time, oriental nations have
 been addicted to this practice and it is probably from this source that
 the plague spread among the greeks. i do not assert that they were
 ignorant of this form of indulgence prior to their association with the
 persians, for nature teaches the sage as well as the savage. meier, the
 author of the article “paederastia” in ersch and grueber’s encyclopedia
 () is of the opinion that the vice had its origin among the boeotians,
 and john addington symonds in his essay on greek love concurs in this
 view. as the two scholars worked upon the same material from different
 angles, and as the english writer was unacquainted with the german
 savant’s monograph until after burton had written his terminal essay, it
 follows that the conclusions arrived at by these two scholars must be
 worthy of credence. the greeks contemporary with the homeric poems were
 familiar with paederasty, and there is reason to believe that it had been
 known for ages, even then. greek literature, from homer to the anthology
 teems with references to the vice and so common was it among them that
 from that fact it derived its generic; “greek love.” so malignant is
 tradition that the greeks of the present time still suffer from the
 stigma, as is well illustrated by the proverb current among sailors:
 “englisha man he catcha da boy, johnnie da greek he catcha da blame.” the
 romans are supposed to have received their first introduction to
 paederasty and homosexuality generally, from the etruscans or from the
 greek colonists in italy, but suidas (tharnyris) charges the inhabitants
 of italy; with the invention of this vice and it would appear from
 athenaeus (deiphnos. lib. xiii) that the native peoples of italy and the
 greek colonists as well were addicted to the most revolting practices with
 boys. the case of laetorius (valerius maximus vi, , ) proves that as
 early as  b. c., the romans were no strangers to it and also that it
 was not common among them, at that time.
 as the character of the primitive roman was essentially different from
 that of the contemporary greek, and as his struggle for existence was
 severe in the extreme, there was little moral obliquity during the first
 two hundred and fifty years. the “coelibes prohibeto” of the twelve tables
 was also a powerful influence in preserving chastity. by the time of
 plautus, however, the practice of paederasty was much more general, as is
 clearly proved by the many references which are found in his comedies
 (cist. iv, sc. , line ) and passim. by the year  b. c., the vice had
 so ravaged the populace that the lex scantinia was passed to control it,
 but legislation has never proved a success in repressing vice and the
 effectiveness of this law was no exception to the rule. conditions grew
 steadily worse with the passage of time and the extension of the roman
 power served to inoculate the legionaries with the vices of their victims.
 the destruction of corinth may well have avenged itself in this manner.
 the accumulation of wealth and spoils gave the people more leisure,
 increased their means of enjoyment, and educated their taste in luxuries.
 the influx of slaves and voluptuaries from the levant aided in the
 dissemination of the vices of the orient among the ruder romans. as the
 first taste of blood arouses the tiger, so did the limitless power of the
 republic and empire react to the insinuating precepts of older and more
 corrupt civilizations. the fragments of lucilius make mention of the
 “cinaedi,” in the sense that they were dancers, and in the earlier ages,
 they were. cicero, in the second philippic calls antonius a catamite; but
 in republican rome, it is to catullus that we must turn to find the most
 decisive evidence of their almost universal inclination to sodomy. the
 first notice of this passage in its proper significance is found in the
 burmann petronius (ed. ): here, in a note on the correct reading of
 “intertitulos, nudasque meretrices furtim conspatiantes,” the ancient
 reading would seem to have been “internuculos nudasque meretrices furtim
 conspatiantes” (and i am not at all certain but that it is to be
 preferred). burmann cites the passage from catullus (epithalamium of
 manlius and julia); burmann sees the force of the passage but does not
 grasp its deeper meaning. marchena seems to have been the first scholar to
 read between the lines. see his third note.
 a few years later, john colin dunlop, the author of a history of roman
 literature which ought to be better known among the teaching fraternity,
 drew attention to the same passage. so striking is his comment that i will
 transcribe it in full. “it,” the poem, “has also been highly applauded by
 the commentators; and more than one critic has declared that it must have
 been written by the hands of venus and the graces. i wish, however, they
 had excepted from their unqualified panegyrics the coarse imitation of the
 fescennine poems, which leaves in our minds a stronger impression of the
 prevalence and extent of roman vices, than any other passage in the latin
 classics. martial, and catullus himself, elsewhere, have branded their
 enemies; and juvenal in bursts of satiric indignation, has reproached his
 countrymen with the most shocking crimes. but here, in a complimentary
 poem to a patron and intimate friend, these are jocularly alluded to as
 the venial indulgences of his earliest youth” (vol. i, p. , second
 edition).
 this passage clearly points to the fact that it was the common custom
 among the young roman patricians to have a bed-fellow of the same sex.
 cicero, in speaking of the acquittal of clodius (letters to atticus, lib.
 i, ), says, “having bought up and debauched the tribunal”; charges that
 the judges were promised the favors of the young gentlemen and ladies of
 rome, in exchange for their services in the matter of clodius’ trial.
 manutius, in a note on this passage says, “bought up, because the judges
 took their pay and held clodius innocent and absolved him: debauched,
 because certain women and youths of noble birth were introduced by night
 to not a few of them (there were  judges) as additional compensation for
 their attention to duty” (variorum notes to cicero, vol. ii, pp. -).
 in the priapeia, the wayfarer is warned by priapus to refrain from
 stealing fruit under penalty of being assaulted from the rear, and the god
 adds that, should this punishment hold no terrors, there is still the
 possibility that his mentule may be used as a club by the irate landowner.
 again, in catullus, , the roman paederasty shows itself “caelius loves
 aufilenus and quintus loves aufilena--madly.” as we approach the christian
 era the picture darkens. gibbon (vol. i, p. ) remarks, in a note, that
 “of the first fifteen emperors, claudius was the only one whose taste in
 love was entirely correct,” but claudius was a moron.
 we come now to the bathing establishments. their history in every country
 is the same, in one respect: the spreading and fostering of prostitution
 and paederastia. cicero (pro coelio) accuses clodia of having deliberately
 chosen the site of her gardens with the purpose of having a look at the
 young fellows who came to the tiber to swim. catullus (xxxiii) speaks of
 the cimaedi who haunt the bathing establishments: suetonius (tib.  and
 ) records the desperate expedients to which tiberius had recourse to
 regain his exhausted virility: the scene in petronius (chap. ). martial
 (lib. i, )
 “you invite no man but your bathing companion, cotta, only the baths
 supply you with a guest. i used to wonder why you never invited me, now i
 know that you did not like the look of me naked.” juvenal (ix,  et
 seq.), “destiny rules over mankind; the parts concealed by the front of
 the tunic are controlled by the fates; when virro sees you naked and in
 burning and frequent letters presses his ardent suit, with lips foaming
 with desire; nothing will serve you so well as the unknown measure of a
 long member.” lampridius (heliogab. v), “at rome, his principal concern
 was to have emissaries everywhere, charged with seeking out men with huge
 members; that they might bring them to him so that he could enjoy their
 impressive proportions.” the quotations given above furnish a sufficient
 commentary upon the bathing establishments and the reasons for lighting
 them. in happier times, they were badly lighted as the apertures were
 narrow and could admit but little light. seneca (epist. ) describes the
 bath of scipio: “in this bath of scipio there were tiny chinks, rather
 than windows, cut through the stone wall so as to admit light without
 detriment to the shelter afforded; but men nowadays call them
 ‘baths-for-night-moths.’” under the empire, however, the bathing
 establishments were open to the eye of the passer-by; lighted, as they
 were by immense windows. seneca (epist. ), “but nowadays, any which are
 disposed in such a way as to let the sunlight enter all day long, through
 immense windows; men call baths-for-night-moths; if they are not sunburned
 as they wash, if they cannot look out on the fields and sea from the
 pavement. sweet clean baths have been introduced, but the populace is only
 the more foul.” in former times, youth and age were not permitted to bathe
 together (valer. max. ii, .), women and men used the same establishments,
 but at different hours; later, however, promiscuous bathing was the order
 of the day and men and women came more and more to observe that precept,
 “noscetur e naso quanta sit hasta viro,” which joan of naples had always
 in mind. long-nosed men were followed into the baths and were the
 recipients of admiration wherever they were. as luxury increased, these
 establishments were fitted up with cells and attendants of both sexes,
 skilled in massage, were always kept upon the premises, in the double
 capacity of masseurs and prostitutes (martial, iii, , ); (juvenal, vi,
 ), “the artful masseur presses the clitoris with his fingers and makes
 the upper part of his mistress thigh resound under his hands.” the
 aquarioli or water boys also included pandering in their tour of duty
 (juvenal, sat. vi, ) “some water carrier will come, hired for the
 purpose,” and many roman ladies had their own slaves accompany them to the
 baths to assist in the toilette: (martial, vii, .) “a slave girt about
 the loins with a pouch of black leather stands by you whenever you are
 washed all over with warn water,” here, the mistress is taking no chances,
 her rights are as carefully guarded as though the slave were infibulated
 in place of having his generous virility concealed within a leather pouch.
 (claudianus, , ) “he combed his mistress’ hair, and often, when she
 bathed, naked, he would bring water, to his lady, in a silver ewer.”
 several of the emperors attempted to correct these evils by executive
 order and legislation, hadrian (spartianus, life of hadrian, chap. ) “he
 assigned separate baths for the two sexes”; marcus aurelius (capitolinus,
 life of marcus antoninus, chap. ) “he abolished the mixed baths and
 restrained the loose habits of the roman ladies and the young nobles,” and
 alexander severus (lampridius, life of alex. severus, chap. .) “he
 forbade the opening of mixed baths at rome, a practice which, though
 previously prohibited, heliogabalus had allowed to be observed,” but,
 notwithstanding their absolute authority, their efforts along those lines
 met with little better success than have those of more recent times. the
 pages of martial and juvenal reek with the festering sores of the society
 of that period, but charidemus and hedylus still dishonor the cities of
 the modern world. tatian, writing in the second century, says (orat. ad
 graecos): “paederastia is practiced by the barbarians generally, but is
 held in pre-eminent esteem by the romans, who endeavor to get together
 troupes of boys, as it were of brood mares,” and justin martyr (apologia,
 ), has this to say: “first, because we behold nearly all men seducing to
 fornication, not merely girls, but males also. and just as our fathers are
 spoken of as keeping herds of oxen, or goats, or sheep, or brood mares, so
 now they keep boys, solely for the purpose of shameful usage, treating
 them as females, or androgynes, and doing unspeakable acts. to such a
 pitch of pollution has the multitude throughout the whole people come!”
 another sure indication of the prevalence of the vice of sodomy is to be
 found in juvenal, sat. ii, -, “but your fundament is smooth and the
 swollen haemorrhoids are incised, the surgeon grinning the while,” just as
 the physician of the nineties grinned when some young fool came to him
 with a blennorrhoeal infection! the ancient jest which accounts for the
 shaving of the priest’s crown is an inferential substantiation of the fact
 that the evils of antiquity, like the legal codes, have descended through
 the generations; survived the middle ages, and been transmitted to the
 modern world. a perusal of the raggionamente of pietro aretino will
 confirm this statement, in its first premise, and the experiences of sir
 richard burton in the india of napier, and harry franck’s, in spain, in
 the present century, and those of any intelligent observer in the orient,
 today, will but bear out this hypothesis. the native population of manila
 contains more than its proportion of catamites, who seek their sponsors in
 the botanical gardens and on the luneta. the native quarters of the
 chinese cities have their “houses” where boys are kept, just as the
 egyptian mignons stood for hire in the lupanaria at rome. a scene in
 sylvia scarlett could be duplicated in any large city of europe or
 america; there is no necessity of appeal to krafft-ebbing or havelock
 ellis. but there is still another and surer method of gauging the extent
 of paederastic perversion at rome, and that is the richness of the latin
 vocabulary in terms and words bearing upon this repulsive subject. there
 are, in the latin language, no less than one hundred and fifteen words and
 expressions in general usage.
 but it is in martial that we are able to sense the abandoned and cynical
 attitude of the roman public toward this vice: the epigram upon cantharus,
 xi, , is an excellent example. in commentating upon the meticulous care
 with which cantharus avoided being spied upon by irreverent witnesses, the
 poet sarcastically remarks that such precautions would never enter the
 head of anyone were it merely a question of having a boy or a woman, and
 he mentions them in the order in which they are set forth here. no one
 dreads the limelight like the utter debauchee, as has been remarked by
 seneca. we find a parallel in the old days in shanghai, before the
 depredations of the american hetairai had aroused the hostility of the
 american judge, in -. men of unquestioned respectability and austere
 asceticism were in the habit of making periodic trips to this pornographic
 mecca for the reason that they could there be accommodated with the
 simultaneous ministrations of two or even three soiled doves of the stripe
 of her of whom martial (ix, ) makes caustic mention:
 “i passed the whole night with a lascivious girl whose naughtiness none
 could surpass. tired of a thousand methods of indulgence, i begged the
 boyish favor: she granted my prayers before they were finished, before
 even the first words were out of my mouth. smiling and blushing, i
 besought her for something worse still; she voluptuously promised it at
 once. but to me, she was chaste. but, aeschylus, she will not be so to
 you; take the boon if you want it, but she will attach a condition.” in
 all that could pertain to accomplished skill in their profession, the
 “limit was the ceiling,” they were there to serve, and serve they did, as
 long as the recipient of their ministrations was willing to pay or as long
 as his chits were good. with them, secrecy was the watchword. tiberius,
 probably more sinned against than sinning (he has had an able defender in
 beasley) is charged, by suetonius, with the invention of an amplification
 and refinement of this vice. the performers were called “spinthriae,” a
 word which signified “bracelet.” these copulators could be of both sexes
 though the true usage of the word allowed but one, and that the male. they
 formed a chain, each link of which was an individual in sexual contact
 with one or two other links: in this diversion, the preference seems to
 have been in favor of odd numbers (martial, xii, , ), where the chain
 consisted of five links, and ausonius, epigram , where it consisted of
 three. 
chapter . gladiator obscene:--
 the arena of his activities is, however, that of venus and not mars.
 petronius is fond of figurative language, and in several other passages,
 he has made use of the slang of the arena: (chap.  ), “i used to fence
 with my mistress herself, until even the master grew suspicious”; and
 again, in chapter , he says: “then, too, we were girded higher, and i
 had so arranged matters that if we came to close quarters, i myself would
 engage quartilla, ascyltos the maid, and giton the girl.”
 dufour, in commentating upon this expression, histoire de la prostitution,
 vol. iii, pp.  and , remarks: it is necessary to see in petronius the
 abominable role which the “obscene gladiator” played; but the latin itself
 is clear enough to describe all the secrets of the roman debauch. “for
 some women,” says petronius, in another passage, “will only kindle for
 canaille and cannot work up an appetite unless they see some slave or
 runner with his clothing girded up: a gladiator arouses one, or a mule
 driver, all covered with dust, or some actor posturing in some exhibition
 on the stage. my mistress belongs to this class, she jumps the fourteen
 rows from the stage to the gallery and looks for a lover among the gallery
 gods at the back.”
 on “cum fortiter faceres,” compare line  of the oxford fragment of the
 sixth satire of juvenal; “hic erit in lecto fortissimus,” which housman
 has rendered “he is a valiant mattress-knight.” 
 “in our neighborhood there are so many gods that it is easier to meet one
 of them than it is to find a man.”
 quartilla is here smarting under the sting of some former lover’s
 impotence. her remark but gives color to the charge that, owing to the
 universal depravity of rome and the smaller cities, men were so worn out
 by repeated vicious indulgences that it was no easy matter for a woman to
 obtain satisfaction at their hands.
 “galla, thou hast already led to the nuptial couch six or seven catamites;
 thou went seduced by their delicate coiffure and combed beards. thou hast
 tried the loins and the members, resembling soaked leather, which could
 not be made to stand by all the efforts of the wearied hand; the pathic
 husband and effeminate bed thou desertest, but still thou fallest into
 similar couches. seek out some one rough and unpolished as the curii and
 fabii, and savage in his uncouth rudeness; you will find one, but even
 this puritanical crew has its catamites. galla, it is difficult to marry a
 real man.” martial, vii, .
 “no faith is to be placed in appearances. what neighborhood does not reek
 with filthy practices’?” juvenal, sat. ii, .
 “while you have a wife such as a lover hardly dare hope for in his wildest
 prayers; rich, well born, chaste, you, bassus, expend your energies on
 boys whom you have procured with your wife’s dowry; and thus does that
 penis, purchased for so many thousands, return worn out to its mistress,
 nor does it stand when she rouses it by soft accents of love, and delicate
 fingers. have some sense of shame or let us go into court. this penis is
 not yours, bassus, you have sold it.” martial, xii, .
 “polytimus is very lecherous on women, hypnus is slow to admit he is my
 ganymede; secundus has buttocks fed upon acorns. didymus is a catamite but
 pretends not to be. amphion would have made a capital girl. my friend, i
 would rather have their blandishments, their naughty airs, their annoying
 impudence, than a wife with ,, sesterces.” martial xii, .
 but the crowning piece of infamy is to be found in martial’s three
 epigrams upon his wife. they speak as distinctly as does the famous
 passage in catullus’ epithalamium of manilius and julia, or vibia, as
 later editors have it.
 “wife, away, or conform to my habits. i am no curius, numa, or tatius. i
 like to have the hours of night prolonged in luscious cups. you drink
 water and are ever for hurrying from the table with a sombre mien; you
 like the dark, i like a lamp to witness my pleasures, and to tire my loins
 in the light of dawn. drawers and night gowns and long robes cover you,
 but for me no girl can be too naked. for me be kisses like the cooing
 doves; your kisses are like those you give your grandmother in the
 morning. you do not condescend to assist in the performance by your
 movements or your sighs or your hand; (you behave) as if you were taking
 the sacrament. the phrygian slaves masturbated themselves behind the couch
 whenever hector’s wife rode st. george; and, however much ulysses snored,
 the chaste penelope always had her hand there. you forbid my sodomising
 you. cornelia granted this favor to gracchus; julia to pompey, porcia to
 brutus. juno was jupiter’s ganymede before the dardan boy mixed the
 luscious cup. if you are so devoted to propriety--be a lucretia to your
 heart’s content all day, i want a lais at night.” xi, .
 “since your husband’s mode of life and his fidelity are known to you, and
 no woman usurps your rights, why are you so foolish as to be annoyed by
 his boys, (as if they were his mistresses), with whom love is a transient
 and fleeting affair? i will prove to you that you gain more by the boys
 than your lord: they make your husband keep to one woman. they give what a
 wife will not give. ‘i grant that favor,’ you say, ‘sooner than that my
 husband’s love should wander from my bed.’ it is not the same thing. i
 want the fig of chios, not a flavorless fig; and in you this chian fig is
 flavorless. a woman of sense and a wife ought to know her place. let the
 boys have what concerns them, and confine yourself to what concerns you.”
 xii, .
 “wife, you scold me with a harsh voice when i’m caught with a boy, and
 inform me that you too have a bottom. how often has juno said the same to
 the lustful thunderer? and yet he sleeps with the tall ganymede. the
 tirynthian hero put down his bow and sodomised hylas. do you think that
 megaera had no buttocks? daphne inspired phoebus with love as she fled,
 but that flame was quenched by the oebalian boy. however much briseis lay
 with her bottom turned toward him, the son of aeacus found his beardless
 friend more congenial to his tastes. forbear then, to give masculine names
 to what you have, and, wife, think that you have two vaginas.” xi, 
 “quartilla applied a curious eye to a chink, purposely made, watching
 their childish dalliance with lascivious attention.”
 martial, xi, , makes mention of the fact that patrons of houses of ill
 fame had reason to beware of needle holes in the walls, through which
 their misbehaviour could be appreciatively scrutinized by outsiders; and
 in the passage of our author we find yet another instance of the same
 kind. one is naturally led to recall the “peep-houses” which were a
 feature of city life in the nineties. there was a notorious one in
 chicago, and another in san francisco. a beautiful girl, exquisitely
 dressed, would entice the unwary stranger into her room: there the couple
 would disrobe and the hero was compelled to have recourse to the “right of
 capture,” before executing the purpose for which he entered the house. the
 entertainment usually cost him nothing beyond a moderate fee and a couple
 of bottles of beer, or wine, if he so desired. the “management” secured
 its profit from a different and more prurient source. the male actor in
 this drama was sublimely ignorant of the fact that the walls were
 plentifully supplied with “peep-holes” through which appreciative
 onlookers witnessed his corybantics at one dollar a head. there would
 sometimes be as many as twenty such witnesses at a single performance.
chapter . silver skeleton, et seq.
 philosophic dogmas concerning the brevity and uncertainty of life were
 ancient even in the time of herodotus. they have left their mark upon our
 language in the form of more than one proverb, but in none is this so
 patent as “the skeleton at the feast.” in chapter lxxviii of euterpe, we
 have an admirable citation. in speaking of the egyptians, he says: “at
 their convivial banquets, among the wealthy classes, when they have
 finished supper, a man carries round in a coffin the image of a dead body
 carved in wood, made as life-like as possible in color and workmanship,
 and in size generally about one or two cubits in length; and showing this
 to each of the company, he says: ‘look upon this, then drink and enjoy
 yourself; for when dead you will be like this.’ this is the practice they
 have at their drinking parties.” according to plutarch, (isis and osiris,
 chapter .) the greeks adopted this egyptian custom, and there is, of
 course, little doubt that the romans took it from the greeks. the aim of
 this custom was, according to scaliger, to bring the diners to enjoy the
 sweets of life while they were able to feel enjoyment, and thus to abandon
 themselves to pleasure before death deprived them of everything. the
 verses which follow bring this out beautifully. in the copa of virgil we
 find the following:
 “wine there! wine and dice! tomorrow’s fears shall fools alone benumb! by
 the ear death pulls me. ‘live!’ he whispers softly, ‘live! i come.’”
 the practical philosophy of the indefatigable roues sums itself up in this
 sentence uttered by trimalchio. the verb “vivere” has taken a meaning very
 much broader and less special, than that which it had at the time when it
 signified only the material fact of existence. the voluptuaries of old
 rome were by no means convinced that life without license was life. the
 women of easy virtue, living within the circle of their friendships, after
 the fashion best suited to their desires, understood that verb only after
 their own interpretation, and the philologists soon reconciled themselves
 to the change. in this sense it was that varro employed “vivere,” when he
 said: “young women, make haste to live, you whom adolescence permits to
 enjoy, to eat, to love, and to occupy the chariot of venus (veneris tenere
 bigas).”
 but a still better example of the extension in the meaning of this word is
 to be found in an inscription on the tomb of a lady of pleasure. this
 inscription was composed by a voluptuary of the school of petronius.
 in this inscription, it is almost impossible to translate the last three
 words. “while we live, let us live,” is inadequate, to say the least. so
 far did this doctrine go that latterly it was deemed necessary to have a
 special goddess as a patron. that goddess, if we may rely upon the
 authority of festus, took her name “vitula” from the word “vita” or from
 the joyous life over which she was to preside. 
 “at the corners of the tray we also noted four figures of marsyas and from
 their bladders spouted a highly seasoned sauce upon fish which were
 swimming about as if in a tide-race.”
 german scholars have adopted the doctrine that marsyas belonged to that
 mythological group which they designate as “schlauch-silen” or, as we
 would say in english, “wineskin-bearing silenuses.” their hypothesis seems
 to be based upon the discovery of two beautiful bas-reliefs of the age of
 vespasian, which were excavated near the rostra vetera in the forum. sir
 theodore martin has a note on these bas-reliefs which i quote in extenso:
 “in the forum stood a statue of marsyas, apollo’s ill-starred rival. it
 probably bore an expression of pain, which horace humorously ascribes to
 dislike of the looks of the younger novius, who is conjectured to have
 been of the profession and nature of shylock. a naked figure carrying a
 wineskin, which appears upon each of two fine bas-reliefs of the time of
 vespasian found near the rostra vetera in the forum during the excavations
 conducted within the last few years by signor pietro rosa, and which now
 stand in the forum, is said, by archaeologists, to represent marsyas. why
 they arrive at this conclusion, except as arguing, from the spot where
 these bas-reliefs were found, that they were meant to perpetuate the
 remembrance of the old statue of marsyas, is certainly not very apparent
 from anything in the figure itself.” martin’s horace, vol. , pp -.
 hence german philologists render “utriculis” by the german equivalent for
 “wineskins.”
 “the romans,” says weitzius, “had two sources of water-supply, through
 underground channels, and through channels supported by arches. as
 adjuncts to these channels there were cisterns (or castella, as they were
 called). from these reservoirs the water was distributed to the public
 through routes more or less circuitous and left the cisterns through
 pipes, the diameter of which was reckoned in either twelfths or sixteenths
 of a roman foot. at the exits of the pipes were placed stones or stone
 figures, the water taking exit from these figures either by the mouth,
 private parts or elsewhere, and falling either to the ground or into some
 stone receptacle such as a basket. various names were given these
 statuettes: marsyae, satyri, atlantes, hermae, chirones, silani, tulii.”
 no one who has been through the secret museum at naples will find much
 difficulty in recalling a few of these heavily endowed examples to mind,
 and our author, in choosing marsyae, adds a touch of sarcastic realism,
 for statues of marysas were often set up in free cities, symbolical, as it
 were, of freedom. in such a setting as the present, they would be the very
 acme of propriety.
 “the figures,” says gonzala de salas, “formerly placed at fountains, and
 from which water took exit either from the mouth or from some other part,
 took their forms from the several species of satyrs. the learned wouweren
 has commented long and learnedly upon this passage, and his emendation
 ‘veretriculis’ caused me to laugh heartily. and as a matter of fact, i
 affirm that such a meaning is easily possible.” professor e. p. crowell,
 the first american scholar to edit petronius, gravely states in his
 preface that “the object of this edition is to provide for class-room use
 an expurgated text,” and i note that he has tactfully omitted the
 “wineskins” from his edition.
 in this connection the last sentence in the remarks of wouweren, alluded
 to above, is strangely to the point. after stating his emendation of
 “veretriculis or veretellis” for “utriculis,” he says: “unless someone
 proves that images of marsyas were fashioned in the likeness of
 bag-pipers,” a fine instance of clarity of vision for so dark an age.
 “drawing his hunting-knife, he plunged it fiercely into the boar’s side,
 and some thrushes flew out of the gash.”
 in the winter of  a dinner was given in a new york studio. this
 dinner, locally known as the “girl in the pie dinner,” was based upon
 petronius, martial, and the thirteenth book of athenaeus. in the summer of
 , i had the questionable pleasure of interviewing the chef-caterer who
 got it up, and he was, at the time, engaged in trying to work out another
 masterpiece to be given in california. the studio, one of the most
 luxurious in the world, was transformed for the occasion into a veritable
 rose grotto, the statuary was pompeian, and here and there artistic
 posters were seen which were nothing if not reminiscent of boulevard
 clichy and montmartre in the palmiest days. four negro banjo players and
 as many jubilee singers titillated the jaded senses of the guests in a
 manner achieved by the infamous saxophone syncopating jazz of the barbary
 coast of our times. the dinner was over. the four and one half bottles of
 champagne allotted to each silenus had been consumed, and a well-defined
 atmosphere of bored satiety had begun to settle down when suddenly the
 old-fashioned lullaby “four and twenty blackbirds” broke forth from the
 banjoists and singers. four waiters came in bearing a surprisingly
 monstrous object, something that resembled an impossibly large pie. they,
 placed it carefully in the center of the table. the negro chorus swelled
 louder and louder--“four and twenty blackbirds baked in a pie.”
 the diners, startled into curiosity and then into interest, began to poke
 their noses against this gigantic creation of the baker. in it they
 detected a movement not unlike a chick’s feeble pecking against the shell
 of an egg. a quicker movement and the crust ruptured at the top.
 a flash of black gauze and delicate flesh showed within. a cloud of
 frightened yellow canaries flew out and perched on the picture frames and
 even on the heads and shoulders of the guests.
 but the lodestone which drew and held the eyes of all the revellers was an
 exquisitely slender, girlish figure amid the broken crust of the pie. the
 figure was draped with spangled black gauze, through which the girl’s
 marble white limbs gleamed like ivory seen through gauze of gossamer
 transparency. she rose from her crouching posture like a wood nymph
 startled by a satyr, glanced from one side to the other, and stepped
 timidly forth to the table. 
chapter . contumelia--contus and
 melon (malum).
 all translators have rendered “contus” by “pole,” notwithstanding the fact
 that the word is used in a very different sense in priapeia, x, :
 “traiectus conto sic extendere pedali,” and contrary to the tradition
 which lay behind the gift of an apple or the acceptance of one. the truth
 of this may be established by many passages in the ancient writers.
 in the “clouds” of aristophanes, just discourse, in prescribing the rules
 and proprieties which should in govern the education and conduct of the
 healthy young man says:
 “you shall rise up from your seat upon your elders’ approach; you shall
 never be pert to your parents or do any other unseemly act under the
 pretence of remodelling the image of modesty. you will not rush off to the
 dancing-girl’s house, lest while you gaze upon her charms, some whore
 should pelt you with an apple and ruin your reputation.”
 “this were gracious to me as in the story old to the maiden fleet of foot
 was the apple golden fashioned which unloosed her girdle long-time girt.”
 catullus ii.
 “i send thee these verses recast from battiades, lest thou shouldst credit
 thy words by chance have slipped from my mind, given o’er to the wandering
 winds, as it was with that apple, sent as furtive love token by the wooer,
 which out-leaped from the virgin’s chaste bosom: for, placed by the
 hapless girl ‘neath her soft vestment, and forgotten--when she starts at
 her mother’s approach, out ‘tis shaken: and down it rolls headlong to the
 ground, whilst a tell-tale flush mantles the cheek of the distressed
 girl.” catullus xv.
 “but i know what is going on, and i intend presently to tell my master;
 for i do not want to show myself less grateful than the dogs which bark in
 defence of those who feed and take care of them. an adulterer is laying
 siege to the household--a young man from elis, one of the olympian
 fascinators; he sends neatly folded notes every day to our master’s wife,
 together with faded bouquets and half-eaten apples.” alciphron, iii, .
 the words are put into the mouth of a rapacious parasite who feels that
 the security of his position in the house is about to be shaken.
 “i didn’t mind your kissing cymbalium half-a-dozen times, you only
 disgraced yourself; but--to be always winking at pyrallis, never to drink
 without lifting the cup to her, and then to whisper to the boy, when you
 handed it to him, not to fill it for anyone but her--that was too much!
 and then--to bite a piece off an apple, and when you saw that duphilus was
 busy talking to thraso, to lean forward and throw it right into her lap,
 without caring whether i saw it or not; and she kissed it and put it into
 her bosom under her girdle! it was scandalous! why do you treat me like
 this?” lucian, dial. hetairae, . these words are spoken by another
 apostle of direct speech; a jealous prostitute who is furiously angry with
 her lover, and in no mood to mince matters in the slightest.
 aristxnetus, xxv, furnishes yet another excellent illustration. the
 prostitute philanis, in writing to a friend of the same ancient
 profession, accuses her sister of alienating her lover’s affections. i
 avail myself of sheridan’s masterly version.
 as yesterday i went to dine with pamphilus, a swain of mine, i
 took my sister, little heeding the net i for myself was spreading
 though many circumstances led to prove she’d mischief in her head.
 for first her dress in every part was studied with the nicest art
 deck’d out with necklaces and rings, and twenty other foolish
 things; and she had curl’d and bound her hair with more
 than ordinary care and then, to show her youth the more, a
 light, transparent robe she wore-- from head to heel she seemed
 t’admire in raptures all her fine attire: and often turn’d
 aside to view if others gazed with rapture too. at dinner,
 grown more bold and free, she parted pamphilus and me; for
 veering round unheard, unseen, she slily drew her chair between.
 then with alluring, am’rous smiles and nods and other wanton wiles,
 the unsuspecting youth insnared, and rivall’d me in his regard.--
 next she affectedly would sip the liquor that had touched his lip.
 he, whose whole thoughts to love incline, and heated with th’
 enliv’ning wine, with interest repaid her glances, and
 answer’d all her kind advances. thus sip they from the goblet’s
 brink each other’s kisses while they drink; which with the
 sparkling wine combin’d, quick passage to the heart did find.
 then pamphilus an apple broke, and at her bosom aim’d the stroke,
 while she the fragment kiss’d and press’d, and hid it wanton in her
 breast. but i, be sure, was in amaze, to see my sister’s
 artful ways: “these are returns,” i said, “quite fit to me,
 who nursed you when a chit. for shame, lay by this envious art;
 is this to act a sister’s part?" but vain were words, entreaties
 vain, the crafty witch secured my swain. by heavens, my sister
 does me wrong; but oh! she shall not triumph long. well venus
 knows i’m not in fault ‘twas she who gave the first assault
 and since our peace her treach’ry broke, let me return her stroke
 for stroke. she’ll quickly feel, and to her cost, not all
 their fire my eyes have lost and soon with grief shall she resign
 six of her swains for one of mine." 
 the myth of cydippe and acontius is still another example, as is the
 legend of atalanta and hippomenes or meilanion, to which suetonius
 (tiberius, chap. ) has furnished such an unexpected climax. the emperor
 theodosius ordered the assassination of a gallant who had given the queen
 an apple. as beliefs of this type are an integral part of the character of
 the lower orders, i am certain that the passage in petronius is not devoid
 of sarcasm; and if such is the case, “contus” cannot be rendered “pole.”
 the etymology of the word contumely is doubtful but i am of the opinion
 that the derivation suggested here is not unsound. a recondite rendering
 of “contus” would surely give a sharper point to the joke and furnish the
 riddle with the sting of an epigram. 
 “you will see a town that resembles the fields in time of pestilence.”
 in tracing this savage caricature, petronius had in mind not crotona
 alone; he refers to conditions in the capital of the empire. the
 descriptions which other authors have set down are equally remarkable for
 their powerful coloring, and they leave us with an idea of rome which is
 positively astounding in its unbridled luxury. ‘we will rest content with
 offering to our readers the following portrayal, quoted from ammianus
 marcellinus, lib. xiv, chap. , and lib. xxviii, chap. . will not presume
 to attempt any translation after having read gibbon’s version of the
 combination of these two chapters.
 “the greatness of rome was founded on the rare and almost incredible
 alliance of virtue and of fortune. the long period of her infancy was
 employed in a laborious struggle against the tribes of italy, the
 neighbors and enemies of the rising city. in the strength and ardor of
 youth she sustained the storms of war, carried her victorious arms beyond
 the seas and the mountains, and brought home triumphal laurels from every
 country of the globe. at length, verging towards old age, and sometimes
 conquering by the terror only of her name, she sought the blessings of
 ease and tranquillity. the venerable city, which had trampled on the necks
 of the fiercest nations, and established a system of laws, the perpetual
 guardians of justice and freedom, was content, like a wise and wealthy
 parent, to devolve on the caesars, her favorite sons, the care of
 governing her ample patrimony. a secure and profound peace, such as had
 been once enjoyed in the reign of numa, succeeded to the tumults of a
 republic; while rome was still adored as the queen of the earth, and the
 subject nations still reverenced the name of the people and the majesty of
 the senate. but this native splendor is degraded and sullied by the
 conduct of some nobles, who, unmindful of their own dignity, and of that
 of their country, assume an unbounded license of vice and folly. they
 contend with each other in the empty vanity of titles and surnames, and
 curiously select or invent the most lofty and sonorous
 appellations--reburrus or fabunius, pagonius or tarrasius--which may
 impress the ears of the vulgar with astonishment and respect. from a vain
 ambition of perpetuating their memory, they affect to multiply their
 likeness in statues of bronze and marble; nor are they satisfied unless
 those statues are covered with plates of gold, an honorable distinction,
 first granted to achilius the consul, after he had subdued by his arms and
 counsels the power of king antiochus. the ostentation of displaying, of
 magnifying perhaps, the rent-roll of the estates which they possess in all
 the provinces, from the rising to the setting sun, provokes the just
 resentment of every man who recollects that their poor and invincible
 ancestors were not distinguished from the meanest of the soldiers by the
 delicacy of their food or the splendor of their apparel. but the modern
 nobles measure their rank and consequence according to the loftiness of
 their chariots and the weighty magnificence of their dress. their long
 robes of silk and purple float in the wind; and as they are agitated, by
 art or accident, they occasionally discover the under-garments, the rich
 tunics, embroidered with the figures of various animals. followed by a
 train of fifty servants, and tearing up the pavement, they move along the
 streets with the same impetuous speed as if they travelled with
 post-horses, and the example of the senators is boldly imitated by the
 matrons and ladies, whose covered carriages are continually driving round
 the immense space of the city and suburbs. whenever these persons of high
 distinction condescend to visit the public baths, they assume, on their
 entrance, a tone of loud and insolent command, and appropriate to their
 own use the conveniences which were designed for the roman people. if, in
 these places of mixed and general resort, they meet any of the infamous
 ministers of their pleasures, they express their affection by a tender
 embrace, while they proudly decline the salutations of their
 fellow-citizens, who are not permitted to aspire above the honor of
 kissing their hands or their knees. as soon as they have indulged
 themselves in the refreshment of the bath, they resume their rings and the
 other ensigns of their dignity, select from their private wardrobe of the
 finest linen, such as might suffice for a dozen persons, the garments the
 most agreeable to their fancy, and maintain till their departure the same
 haughty demeanor which perhaps might have been excused in the great
 marcellus after the conquest of syracuse. sometimes, indeed, these heroes
 undertake more arduous achievements. they visit their estates in italy,
 and procure themselves, by the toil of servile hands, the amusements of
 the chase. if at any time, but more especially on a hot day, they have
 courage to sail in their galleys from the lucrine lake to their elegant
 villas on the seacoast of puteoli and the caieta, they compare their own
 expeditions to the marches of caesar and alexander. yet should a fly
 presume to settle on the silken folds of their gilded umbrellas, should a
 sunbeam penetrate through some unguarded and imperceptible chink, they
 deplore their intolerable hardships, and lament in affected language that
 they were not born in the land of the cimmerians, the regions of eternal
 darkness. in these journeys into the country the whole body of the
 household marches with their master. in the same order as the cavalry and
 infantry, the heavy and the light armed troops, the advanced guard and the
 rear, are marshalled by the skill of their military leaders, so the
 domestic officers, who bear a rod as an ensign of authority, distribute
 and arrange the numerous train of slaves and attendants. the baggage and
 wardrobe move in the front, and are immediately followed by a multitude of
 cooks and inferior ministers employed in the service of the kitchens and
 of the table. the main body is composed of a promiscuous crowd of slaves,
 increased by the accidental concourse of idle or dependent plebeians. the
 rear is closed by the favorite band of eunuchs, distributed from age to
 youth, according to the order of seniority. their numbers and their
 deformity excite the horror of the indignant spectators, who are ready to
 execrate the memory of semiramis for the cruel art which she invented of
 frustrating the purposes of nature, and of blasting in the bud the hopes
 of future generations. in the exercise of domestic jurisdiction the nobles
 of rome express an exquisite sensibility for any personal injury, and a
 contemptuous indifference for the rest of the human species. when they
 have called for warm water, if a slave has been tardy in his obedience, he
 is instantly chastised with three hundred lashes; but should the same
 slave commit a wilful murder, the master will mildly observe that he is a
 worthless fellow, but that, if he repeats the offense, he shall not escape
 punishment. hospitality was formerly the virtue of the romans; and every
 stranger who could plead either merit or misfortune was relieved or
 rewarded by their generosity. at present, if a foreigner, perhaps of no
 contemptible rank, is introduced to one of the proud and wealthy senators,
 he is welcomed indeed in the first audience with such warm professions and
 such kind inquiries that he retires enchanted with the affability of his
 illustrious friend, and full of regret that he had so long delayed his
 journey to rome, the native seat of manners as well as of empire. secure
 of a favorable reception, he repeats his visit the ensuing day, and is
 mortified by the discovery that his person, his name, and his country are
 already forgotten. if he still has resolution to persevere, he is
 gradually numbered in the train of dependents, and obtains the permission
 to pay his assiduous and unprofitable court to a haughty patron, incapable
 of gratitude or friendship, who scarcely deigns to remark his presence,
 his departure, or his return. whenever the rich prepare a solemn and
 popular entertainment, whenever they celebrate with profuse and pernicious
 luxury their private banquets, the choice of the guests is the subject of
 anxious deliberation. the modest, the sober, and the learned are seldom
 preferred; and the nomenclators, who are commonly swayed by interested
 motives, have the address to insert in the list of invitations the obscure
 names of the most worthless of mankind. but the frequent and familiar
 companions of the great are those parasites who practice the most useful
 of all arts, the art of flattery; who eagerly applaud each word and every
 action of their immortal patron, gaze with rapture on his marble columns
 and variegated pavements, and strenuously praise the pomp and elegance
 which he is taught to consider as a part of his personal merit. at the
 roman tables the birds, the dormice, or the fish, which appear of an
 uncommon size, are contemplated with curious attention; a pair of scales
 is accurately applied to ascertain their real weight; and, while the more
 rational guests are disgusted by the vain and tedious repetition, notaries
 are summoned to attest by an authentic record the truth of such a
 marvellous event. another method of introduction into the houses and
 society of the great is derived from the profession of gaming, or, as it
 is more politely styled, of play. the confederates are united by a strict
 and indissoluble bond of friendship, or rather of conspiracy; a superior
 degree of skill in the tesserarian art is a sure road to wealth and
 reputation. a master of that sublime science who in a supper or an
 assembly is placed below a magistrate displays in his countenance the
 surprise and indignation which cato might be supposed to feel when he was
 refused the praetorship by the votes of a capricious people. the
 acquisition of knowledge seldom engages the curiosity of the nobles, who
 abhor the fatigue and disdain the advantages of study; and the only books
 which they peruse are the satires of juvenal and the verbose and fabulous
 histories of marius maximus. the libraries which they have inherited from
 their fathers are secluded, like dreary sepulchres, from the light of day.
 but the costly instruments of the theatre-flutes, and enormous lyres, and
 hydraulic organs--are constructed for their use; and the harmony of vocal
 and instrumental music is incessantly repeated in the palaces of rome. in
 those palaces sound is preferred to sense, and the care of the body to
 that of the mind. it is allowed as a salutary maxim that the light and
 frivolous suspicion of a contagious malady is of sufficient weight to
 excuse the visits of the most intimate friends and even the servants who
 are dispatched to make the decent inquiries are not suffered to return
 home till they have undergone the ceremony of a previous ablution. yet
 this selfish and unmanly delicacy occasionally yields to the more
 imperious passion of avarice. the prospect of gain will urge a rich and
 gouty senator as far as spoleto; every sentiment of arrogance and dignity
 is subdued by the hopes of an inheritance, or even of a legacy; and a
 wealthy childless citizen is the most powerful of the romans. the art of
 obtaining the signature of a favorable testament, and sometimes of
 hastening the moment of its execution, is perfectly understood; and it has
 happened that in the same house, though in different apartments, a husband
 and a wife, with the laudable design of overreaching each other, have
 summoned their respective lawyers to declare at the same time their mutual
 but contradictory intentions. the distress which follows and chastises
 extravagant luxury often reduces the great to the use of the most
 humiliating expedients. when they desire to borrow, they employ the base
 and supplicating style of the slave in the comedy; but when they are
 called upon to pay, they assume the royal and tragic declamation of the
 grandsons of hercules. if the demand is repeated, they readily procure
 some trusty sycophant, instructed to maintain a charge of poison or magic
 against the insolent creditor, who is seldom released from prison till he
 has signed a discharge for the whole debt. these vices, which degrade the
 moral character of the romans, are mixed with a puerile superstition that
 disgraces their understanding. they listen with confidence to the
 predictions of haruspices, who pretend to read in the entrails of victims
 the signs of future greatness and prosperity; and there are many who do
 not presume either to bathe or to dine, or to appear in public, till they
 have diligently consulted, according to the rules of astrology, the
 situation of mercury and the aspect of the moon. it is singular enough
 that this vain credulity may often be discovered among the profane
 sceptics who impiously doubt or deny the existence of a celestial power.”
 “they either take in or else they are taken in.”
 “captare” may be defined as to get the upper hand of someone; and
 “captari” means to be the dupe of someone, to be the object of interested
 flattery; “captator” means a succession of successful undertakings of the
 sort referred to above. martial, lib. vi, , addresses the following
 verses to a certain marianus, whose inheritance had excited the avarice of
 one of the intriguers:
 “you know you’re being influenced, you know the miser’s
 mind; you know the miser, and you sensed his purpose; still,
 you’re blind.”
 pliny the elder, historia naturalis, lib. xiv, chap. i, writes in scathing
 terms against the infamous practice of paying assiduous court to old
 people for the purpose of obtaining a legacy under their wills. “later,
 childlessness conferred advantages in the shape of the greatest authority
 and lower; undue influence became very insidious in its quest of wealth,
 and in grasping the joyous things alone, debasing the true rewards of
 life; and all the liberal arts operating for the greatest good were turned
 to the opposite purpose, and commenced to profit by sycophantic
 subservience alone.”
 and ammianus marcellinus, lib. xviii, chap. , remarks: “some there are
 that grovel before rich men, old men or young, childless or unmarried, or
 even wives and children, for the purpose of so influencing their wishes
 and them by deft and dextrous finesse.”
 that this profession of legacy hunting is not one of the lost arts is
 apparent even in our day, for the term “undue influence” is as common in
 our courts as ambrose bierce’s definition of “husband,” or refined
 cruelty, or “injunctions” restraining husbands from disposing of property,
 or separate maintenance, or even “heart balm” and the consequent breach of
 promise. 
chapter . the rite of the
 persians:
 castration has been practiced from remote antiquity, and is a feature of
 the harem life of the levant to the present day. semiramis is accused of
 having been the first to order the emasculation of a troupe of her boy
 slaves.
 “whether the first false likeness of men came to the assyrians through the
 ingenuity of semiramis; for these wanton wretches with high timbered
 voices could not have produced themselves, those smooth cheeks could not
 reproduce themselves; she gathered their like about her: or, parthian
 luxury forbade with its knife, the shadow of down to appear, and fostered
 long that boyish bloom, compelling art-retarded youth to sink to venus’
 calling,” claudianus, eutrop. i,  seq.
 “and last of all, the multitude of eunuchs, ranging in age, from old men
 to boys, pale and hideous from the twisted deformity of their features; so
 that, go where one will, seeing groups of mutilated men, he will detest
 the memory of semiramis, that ancient queen who was the first to
 emasculate young men of tender age; thwarting the intent of nature, and
 forcing her from her course.” ammianus marcellinus, book xiv, chap. vi.
 the old testament proves that the hebrew authorities of the time were no
 strangers to the abomination, but no mention of eunuchs in judea itself is
 to be found prior to the time of josiah. castration was forbidden the
 jews, deuteronomy, xxiii, , but as this book was probably unknown before
 the time of josiah, we can only conjecture as to the attitude of the
 patriarchs in regard to this subject; we are safe, however, in inferring
 that it was hostile. “periander, son of cypselus, had sent three hundred
 youths of the noblest young men of the corcyraeans to alyattes, at sardis;
 for the purpose of emasculation.” herodotus, iii, chapter .
 “hermotimus, then, was sprung from these pedasians; and, of all men we
 know, revenged himself in the severest manner for an injury he had
 received; for, having been captured by an enemy and sold, he was purchased
 by one panionius, a chian, who gained a livelihood by the most infamous
 practices; for whenever he purchased boys remarkable for their beauty,
 having castrated them, he used to take them to sardis and ephesus and sell
 them for large sums; for with the barbarians, eunuchs are more valued than
 others, on account of their perfect fidelity. panionius, therefore, had
 castrated many others, as he made his livelihood by this means, and among
 them, this man.
 “hermotimus, however, was not in every respect unfortunate, for he went to
 sardis, along with other presents for the king, and in process of time was
 the most esteemed by xerxes of all his eunuchs.
 “when the king was preparing to march his persian army against athens,
 hermotimus was at sardis, having gone down at that time, upon some
 business or other, to the mysian territory which the chians possess, and
 is called atarneus, he there met with panionius. having recognized him, he
 addressed many friendly words to him, first recounting the many advantages
 he had acquired by this means, and secondly, promising him how many favors
 he would confer upon him in requital, if he would bring his family and
 settle there; so that panionius joyfully accepted the proposal and brought
 his wife and children. but when hermotimus got him with his whole family
 into his power, he addressed him as follows:
 “‘o thou, who, of all mankind, hast gained thy living by the most infamous
 acts, what harm had either i, or any of mine, done to thee, or any of
 thine, that of a man thou hast made me nothing?
 “‘thou didst imagine, surely, that thy machinations would pass unnoticed
 by the gods, who, following righteous laws, have enticed thee, who hath
 committed unholy deeds, into my hands, so that thou canst not complain of
 the punishment i shall inflict upon thee.’
 “when he had thus upbraided him, his sons being brought into his presence,
 panionius was compelled to castrate his own sons, who were four in number;
 and, being compelled, he did it; and after he had finished it, his sons,
 being compelled, castrated him. thus did vengeance and hermotimus overtake
 panionius.” herodotus, viii, ch. -.
 mention of the galli, the emasculated priests of cybebe should be made.
 emasculation was a necessary first condition of service in her worship.
 (catullus, attys.) the latin literature of the silver and bronze ages
 contains many references to castration. juvenal and martial have lavished
 bitter scorn upon this form of degradation, and suetonius and statius
 inform us that domitian prohibited the practice, but it is in the
 “amoures” attributed to lucian that we find a passage so closely akin to
 the one forming a basis of this note, that it is inserted in extenso:
 “some pushed their cruelty so far as to outrage nature with the
 sacrilegious knife, and, after depriving men of their virility, found in
 them the height of pleasure. these miserable and unhappy creatures, that
 they may the longer serve the purposes of boys, are stunted in their
 manhood, and remain a doubtful riddle of a double sex, neither preserving
 that boyhood in which they were born, nor possessing that manhood which
 should be theirs. the bloom of their youth withers away in a premature old
 age: while yet boys, they suddenly become old, without any interval of
 manhood. for impure sensuality, the mistress of every vice, devising one
 shameless pleasure after another, insensibly plunges into unmentionable
 debauchery, experienced in every form of brutal lust.” the jealous roman
 husband’s furious desire to prevent the consequences of his wife’s
 incontinence was by no means well served by the use of such agents; on the
 contrary, the women themselves profited by the arrangement. by means of
 these eunuchs, they edited the morals of their maids and hampered the
 sodomitical hankerings, active or otherwise, of their husbands: martial,
 xii, : but when the passions and suspicions of both heads of the family
 were mutually aroused, the eunuchs fanned them into flame and gained the
 ascendancy in the home. they even went so far as to marry: martial, xi,
 , and juvenal, i, .
 in the third century a certain valesius formed a sect which, following the
 example set by origen, acted literally upon the text of matthew, v, ,
 , and matthew, xix, . of this sect, augustine, de heres. chap. ,
 said: “the valesians castrate themselves and those who partake of their
 hospitality, thinking that after this manner, they ought to serve god.”
 that injustice was done upon the wrong member is very evident, yet in an
 age so dark, so dominated by austere asceticism, this clean cut perception
 of the best interests of suffering humanity, is only to be rivalled by the
 french physician in the time of the black plague. he had observed that
 sthenic patients, when bled, died: the superstition and medical usage of
 the age prescribed bleeding, and when the fat abbots came to be bled, he
 bled them freely and with satisfaction. justinian decreed that anyone
 guilty of performing the operation which deprived an individual of
 virility should be subjected to a similar operation, and this crime was
 later punished with death. in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries we
 encounter another and even viler reason for this practice: that “the voice
 of such a person” (one castrated in boyhood) “after arriving at adult age,
 combines the high range and sweetness of the female with the power of the
 male voice,” had long been known, and italian singing masters were not
 slow in putting this hint to practical use. the poor sometimes sold their
 children for this purpose, and the castrati and soprani are terms well
 known to the musical historian.
 these artificial voices disgraced the italian stage until literally driven
 from it by public hostility, and the punishment of death was the reward of
 the individual bold enough to perform such an operation. the papal
 authority excommunicated those guilty of the crime and those upon whom
 such an operation had been performed, but received artificial voices,
 which were the result of accident, into the sistine choir. this pretext
 served the church well and, until the year , when the disgrace was
 wiped out by pope leo xiii, the sistine choir was an eloquent commentary
 upon the attitude of an institution placed, as it were, “between love and
 duty.” it should be recorded that this choir, in its recent visit to the
 united states, had but one artificial voice, and its owner was the oldest
 member of the choir.
 young home-born slaves were bought up by the dealers, castrated, because
 of the increased price they brought when in this condition, and sold for
 huge sums: seneca, controv. x, chap. ; and kidnapping was frequently
 resorted to, just as it is in africa today.
 in russia there is a sect called the “skoptzi,” whose tenets, in this
 respect, are indicated by their name. this sect is first mentioned in the
 person of a certain adrian, a monk, who came to russia about the year
 . in , l to ,  to , , they are noticed, and in
  to  they are prominent. they call themselves “white doves” and
 are divided into smaller congregations which, in their allegorical
 terminology, they call “ships”; the leader of each congregation is called
 the “pilot” and the female leader, the “pilot’s mate.” their tenets
 provide for two degrees of emasculation: complete and incomplete, and, in
 the case of the former, he who submitted to the operation had the “royal
 seal” affixed to him, this being their name for complete emasculation: in
 the case of the latter, the neophyte had reached the “second degree of
 purity.” the operation was performed with a red-hot knife or a hot iron,
 and this was known as the “baptism by fire.”
 in the case of female converts, the breasts were amputated, either with a
 red-hot knife or a pair of red-hot shears (kudrin trial, moscow, ;
 testimony of physicians and examination of the accused) which served the
 double purpose of checking haemorrhage, as would a thermo-cautery, and
 avoiding infection. another method consisted in searing the orifice of the
 vagina so that the scar tissue would contract it in such a manner as to
 effectually prevent the entrance of the male.
 a peculiar attribute of this sect is the character of many of its members:
 bankers, civil service officials, navy officers, army officers and others
 of the finest professions. leroy-beaulieu, in discussing their methods of
 obtaining converts says: “they prefer boys and youths, whom they strive to
 convince of the necessity of ‘killing the flesh.’ they sometimes succeed
 so well, that cases are known of boys of fifteen or so resorting to
 self-mutilation, to save themselves from the temptations of early manhood.
 these apostles of purity do not always scruple to have recourse to
 violence or deceit. they ensnare their victims by equivocal forms of
 speech, and having thus obtained their consent virtually upon false
 pretences, they reveal to the confiding dupes the real meaning of the
 engagement they have entered into only at the last moment, when it is too
 late for them to escape the murderous knife. one evening, two men, one of
 them young and blooming, the other old, with sallow and unnaturally smooth
 face, were conversing, while sipping their tea, in a house in moscow.
 ‘virgins will alone stand before the throne of the most high,’ said the
 elder man. ‘he who looks on a woman with desire commits adultery in his
 heart, and adulterers shall not enter the kingdom of heaven.’ ‘what then
 should we sinners doe’ asked the young man. ‘knowest thou not,’ replied
 the elder, ‘the word of the lord? if thy right eye leadeth thee into
 temptation, pluck it out and cast it from thee; if thy right hand leadeth
 thee into temptation, cut it off and cast it from thee. what ye must do is
 to kill the flesh. ye must become like unto the disembodied angels, and
 that may be attained only, through being made white as snow.’ ‘and how can
 we be made thus white?’ further inquired the young man. ‘come and see,’
 said the old man. ‘he took his companion down many stairs, into a cellar
 resplendent with lights. some fifteen white robed men and women were
 gathered there. in a corner was a stove, in which blazed a fire. after
 some prayers and dances, very like those in use among the flagellants, the
 old man announced to his companion: ‘now shalt thou learn how sinners are
 made white as snow.’ and the young man, before he had time to ask a single
 question, was seized and gagged, his eyes were bandaged, he was stretched
 out on the ground, and the apostle, with a red-hot knife, stamped him with
 the ‘seal of purity.’ this happened to a peasant, saltykov by name, and
 certainly not to him alone. he fainted away under the operation, and when
 he came to himself, he heard the voices of his chaste sponsors give him
 the choice between secrecy and death.”
 catherine ii signed the first edict against this sect in , but
 agitation was more or less constant until the imperial government began
 vigorous prosecutions in , and many were sentenced to hard labor in
 siberia. when prosecutions were instituted, large numbers emigrated to
 roumania and there took the name of “lipovans.” women, especially one of
 the name of anna romanovna, have had a great share in the invention and
 diffusion of the doctrine. not infrequently it is the women who, with
 their own hands, transform the men to angels.
 in  their number was estimated to be about , in  they numbered
 , including  women, and in ,  men and  women were
 transported to siberia. the sect still holds its own in russia. they are
 millennarians and the messiah will not come for them until their sect
 numbers ,.
 antiquity knew three varieties of eunuch:
 castrati: scrotum and testicles were amputated.
 spadones: testicles were torn out.
 thlibiae: testicles were destroyed by crushing. 
 “such sweetness permeated her voice as she said this, so entrancing was
 the sound upon the listening air that you would have believed the sirens’
 harmonies were floating in the breeze.”
 many scholars have drawn attention to the ethereal beauty of this passage.
 probably the finest parallel is to be found in horace’s ode to calliope.
 after the invocation to the muse he thinks he hears her playing:
 “hark! or is this but frenzy’s pleasing dream? through
 groves i seem to stray of consecrated bay, where voices
 mingle with the babbling stream, and whispering breezes play.”
 sir
 theodore martin’s version.
 another exquisite and illuminating passage occurs in catullus, , given
 in marchena’s fourth note. 
 “then she kneaded dust and spittle and, dipping her middle finger into the
 mixture, she crossed my forehead with it.”
 since the fairy tale era of the human race, sputum has been employed to
 give potency to charms and to curses. it was anciently used as anathema
 and that use is still in force to this day. let the incredulous critic
 spit in some one’s face if he doubts my word.
 but sputum had also a place in the greek and roman rituals. trimalchio
 spits and throws wine under the table when he hears a cock crowing
 unseasonably. this, in the first century. any jew in jerusalem hearing the
 name of titus mentioned, spits: this in . in the ceremony of naming
 roman children spittle had its part to play: it was customary for the
 nurse to touch the lips and forehead of the child with spittle. the
 catholic priest’s ritual, which prescribes that the ears and nostrils of
 the infant or neophyte, as the case may be, shall be touched with spittle,
 comes, in all probability from mark, vii, , , viii, , and john, ix,
 , which, in turn are probably derived from a classical original. it
 should be added that fishermen spit upon their bait before casting in
 their hooks. 
chapter . medio sustulit
 digito:
 there is more than a suggestion in the choice of the middle finger, in
 this instance. among the romans, the middle finger was known as the
 “infamous finger.”
 infami digito et lustralibus ante salivis expiat, urentes
 oculos inhibere perita. persius,
 sat. ii
 see also dio chrysostom, xxxiii. “neither,” says lampridius, life of
 heliogabalus, “was he given to demand infamies in words when he could
 indicate shamelessness with his fingers,” chapter . “with tears in his
 eyes, cestos often complains to me, mamurianus, of being touched by your
 finger. you need not use your finger, merely: take cestos all to yourself,
 if nothing else is wanting in your establishment,” martial, i, 
 to touch the posteriors lewdly with the finger, that is, the middle finger
 put forth and the two adjoining fingers bent down, so that the hand might
 form a sort of priapus, was an obscene sign to attract catamites. that
 this position of the fingers was an indecent symbol is attested by
 numerous passages in the classical writers. “he would extend his hand,
 bent into an obscene posture, for them to kiss,” suetonius, caligula, .
 it may be added that one of that emperor’s officers assassinated him for
 insulting him in that manner. when this finger was thus applied it
 signified that the person was ready to sodomise him whom he touched. the
 symbol is still used by the lower orders.
 “we are informed by our younger companions that gentlemen given to
 sodomitical practices are in the habit of frequenting some public place,
 such as the pillars of the county fire office, regent st., and placing
 their hands behind them, raising their fingers in a suggestive manner
 similar to that mentioned by our epigrammatist. should any gentleman place
 himself near enough to have his person touched by the playful fingers of
 the pleasure-seeker, and evince no repugnance, the latter turns around
 and, after a short conversation, the bargain is struck. in this epigram,
 however, martial threatens the eye and not the anus.” the romans used to
 point out sodomites and catamites by thus holding out the middle finger,
 and so it was used as well in ridicule (or chaff, as we say) as to denote
 infamy in the persons who were given to these practices.
 “if anyone calls you a catamite, sextillus,” says martial, ii, , “return
 the compliment and hold out your middle finger to him.” according to
 ramiresius, this custom was still common in the spain of his day (),
 and it still persists in spanish and italian countries, as well as in
 their colonies. this position of the fingers was supposed to represent the
 buttocks with a priapus inserted up the fundament; it was called “iliga,”
 by the spaniards. from this comes the ancient custom of suspending little
 priapi from boys’ necks to avert the evil eye.
 aristophanes, in the “clouds,” says:
 socrates: first they will help you to be pleasant in company, and to know
 what is meant by oenoplian rhythm and what by the dactylic.
 strepsiades: of the dactyl (finger)? i know that quite well.
 socrates: what is it then?
 strepsiades: why, ‘tis this finger; formerly, when a child, i used this
 one.
 (daktulos means, of course, both dactyl (name of a metrical foot) and
 finger. strepsiades presents his middle finger with the other fingers and
 thumb bent under in an indecent gesture meant to suggest the penis and
 testicles. it was for this reason that the romans called this finger the
 “unseemly finger.”)
 socrates: you are as low minded as you are stupid.
 [see also suetonius. tiberius, chapter .]
 “oenothea brought out a leathern dildo.”
 this instrument, made from glass, wax, leather, or other suitable material
 such as ivory or the precious metals (ezekiel xvi, ), has been known
 from primitive times; and the spread of the cult of priapus was a potent
 factor in making the instrument more common in the western world. numerous
 greek authors make mention of it: aristophanes, lucian, herondas, suidas
 and others. that it was only too familiar to the romans is shown by their
 many references to it: catullus, martial, the apostle paul, tertullian,
 and others.
 aristophanes, lysistrata: (lysistrata speaking) “and not so much as the
 shadow of a lover! since the day the milesians betrayed us, i have never
 once caught sight of an eight-inch-long dildo even, to be a leathern
 consolation to us poor widows.” her complaint is based upon the fact that
 all the men were constantly absent upon military duty and the force of the
 play lies in her strategic control of a commodity in great demand among
 the male members of society. quoting again from the same play: calonice:
 “and why do you summon us, lysistrata dear? what is it all about?”
 lysistrata: “about a big affair.” calonice: “and is it thick, too’?”
 lysistrata: “indeed it is, great and big too.” calonice: “and we are not
 all on the spot!” lysistrata: “oh! if it were what you have in mind, there
 would never be an absentee. no, no, it concerns a thing i have turned
 about and about, this way and that, for many sleepless nights.” when the
 plot has been explained, viz.: that the women refuse intercourse to their
 husbands until after peace has been declared--calonice: “but suppose our
 poor devils of husbands go away and leave us”’ lysistrata: “then, as
 pherecrates says, ‘we must flay a skinned dog,’ that’s all.”
 lucian, arnoures, says: “but, if it is becoming for men to have
 intercourse with men, for the future let women have intercourse with
 women. come, o new generation, inventor of strange pleasures! as you have
 devised new methods to satisfy male lust, grant the same privilege to
 women; let them have intercourse with one another like men, girding
 themselves with the infamous instruments of lust, an unholy imitation of a
 fruitless union.” 
 herondas, mime vi
 two women friends metro and a female domestic.
 time, about  b. c.
 scene, koritto’s sitting room.
 koritto: (metro has just come to call) take a seat, metro; (to the slave
 girl) get up and get the lady a chair; i have to tell you to do
 everything; you’re such a fool you never do a thing of your own accord.
 you’re only a stone in the house, you’re not a bit like a slave except
 when you count up your daily allowance of bread: you count the crumbs when
 you do that, though, and whenever the tiniest bit happens to fall upon the
 floor, the very walls get tired of listening to your grumbling and boiling
 over with temper, as you do all day long--now, when we want to use that
 chair you’ve found time to dust it off and rub up the polish--you may
 thank the lady that i don’t give you a taste of my hand.
 metro: you have as hard a time as i do, koritto, dear--day and night these
 low servants make me gnash my teeth and bark like a dog, just like they do
 you.--but i came to see you about--(to the slave girl) get out of here,
 get out of my sight, you trouble maker, you’re all ears and tongue and
 nothing else, all you do is to sit around koritto--dear, now please don’t
 tell me a fib, who stitched that red dildo of yours?
 koritto: metro, where did you see that?
 metro: why nossis, the daughter of erinna, had it three days ago. oh but
 it was a beauty!
 koritto: so nossis had it, did she? where did she get it, i wonder?
 metro: i’m afraid you’ll say something if i tell you.
 koritto: my dear metro, if anybody hears anything you tell me, from
 koritto’s mouth, i hope i go blind.
 metro: it was given to her by eubole of bitas, and she cautioned her not
 to let a soul hear of it.
 koritto: that woman will be my undoing, one of these days; i yielded to
 her importunity and gave it to her before i had used it myself, metro
 dear, but to her it was a godsend--, now she takes it and gives it to some
 one who ought not to have it. i bid a long farewell to such a friend as
 she; let her look out for another friend instead of me. as for nossis,
 adrasteia forgive me. i don’t want to talk bigger than a lady should--i
 wouldn’t give her even a rotten dildo; no, not even if i had a thousand!
 metro: please don’t flare up so quickly when you hear something
 unpleasant. a good woman must put up with everything. it’s all my fault
 for gossiping. my tongue ought to be cut out; honestly it should: but to
 get back to the question i asked you a moment ago: who stitched the dildo?
 tell me if you love me! what makes you laugh when you look at me? what
 does your coyness mean? have you never set eyes on me before? don’t fib to
 me now, koritto, i beg of you.
 koritto: why do you press me so? kerdon stitched it.
 metro: which kerdon? tell me, because there are two kerdons, one is that
 blue-eyed fellow, the neighbor of myrtaline the daughter of kylaithis; but
 he couldn’t even stitch a plectron to a lyre--the other one, who lives
 near the house of hermodorus, after you have left the street, was pretty
 good once, but he’s too old, now; the late lamented kylaithis--may her
 kinsfolk never forget her--used to patronize him.
 koritto: he’s neither of those you’ve mentioned, metro; this fellow is
 bald headed and short, he comes from chios or erythrai, i think--you would
 mistake him for another prexinos, one fig could not look more like
 another, but just hear him talk, and you’ll know that he is kerdon and not
 prexinos. he does business at home, selling his wares on the sly because
 everyone is afraid of the tax gatherers. my dear! he does do such
 beautiful work! you would think that what you see is the handiwork of
 athena and not that of kerdon! do you know that he had two of them when he
 came here! and when i got a look at them my eyes nearly burst from their
 sockets through desire. men never get--i hope we are alone--their tools so
 stiff; and not only that, but their smoothness was as sweet as sleep and
 their little straps were as soft as wool. if you went looking for one you
 would never find another ladies’ cobbler cleverer than he!
 metro: why didn’t you buy the other one, too?
 koritto: what didn’t i do, metro dear’? and what didn’t i do to persuade
 him’? i kissed him, i patted his bald head, i poured out some sweet wine
 for him to drink, i fondled him, the only thing i didn’t do was to give
 him my body.
 metro: but you should have given him that too, if he asked it.
 koritto: yes, and i would have, but bitas slave girl commenced grinding in
 the court, just at the wrong moment; she has reduced our hand mill nearly
 to powder by grinding day and night for fear she might have four obols to
 pay for having her own sharpened.
 metro: but how did he happen to come to your house, koritto dear? you’ll
 tell me the truth won’t you, now?
 koritto: artemis the daughter of kandas directed him to me by pointing out
 the roof of the tanner’s house as a landmark.
 metro: that artemis is always discovering something new to help her make
 capital out of her skill as a go-between. but anyhow, when you couldn’t
 buy them both you should have asked who ordered the other one.
 koritto: i begged him to tell me but he swore he wouldn’t, that’s how much
 he thought of me, metro dear.
 metro: you mean that i must go and find artemis now to learn who the
 kerdon is--good-bye koritto. he (my husband) is hungry by now, so it’s
 time i was going.
 koritto: (to the slave girl) close the doors, there, chicken keeper, and
 count the chickens to see if they’re all there; throw them some grain,
 too, for the chicken thieves will steal them out of one’s very lap. 
 a lascivious dance of the old greek comedy. any person who performed this
 dance except upon the stage was considered drunk or dissolute. that the
 dance underwent changes for the worse is manifest from the representation
 of it found on a marble tazza in the vatican (visconti, mus. pio-clem. iv,
 ), where it is performed by ten figures, five finns and five bacchanals,
 but their movements, though extremely lively and energetic, are not marked
 by any particular indelicacy. many ancient authors and scholiasts have
 commented upon the looseness and sex appeal of this dance. meursius,
 orchest., article kordax, has collected the majority of passages in the
 classical writers, bearing upon this subject, but from this disorderly
 collection it is impossible to arrive at any definite description of the
 cordax. the article in coelius rhodiginus. var. lect. lib. iv, is
 conventional. the cordax was probably not unlike the french “chalhut,”
 danced in the wayside inns, and it has been preserved in the spanish
 “bolero” and the neapolitan “tarantella.” when the romans adopted the
 greek customs, they did not neglect the dances and it is very likely that
 the roman nuptial dance, which portrayed the most secret actions of
 marriage had its origin in the greek cordax. the craze for dancing became
 so menacing under tiberius that the senate was compelled to run the
 dancers and dancing masters out of rome but the evil had become so deep
 rooted that the very precautions by which society was to be safeguarded
 served to inflame the passion for the dance and indulgence became so
 general and so public that great scandal resulted. domitian, who was by no
 means straight laced, found it necessary to expel from the senate those
 members who danced in public. the people imitated the nobles, and, as fast
 as the dancers were expelled, others from the highest and lowest ranks of
 society took their places, and there soon came to be no distinction, in
 this matter, between the noblest names of the patricians and the vilest
 rabble from the suburra. there is no comparison between the age of cicero
 and that of domitian. “one could do a man no graver injury than to call
 him a dancer,” says cicero, pro murena, and adds: “a man cannot dance
 unless he is drunk or insane.”
 probably the most realistic description of the cordax, conventional, of
 course, is to be found in merejkovski’s “death of the gods.” the passage
 occurs in chapter vi. i have permitted myself the liberty of supplying the
 omissions and euphemisms in trench’s otherwise excellent and spirited
 version of the novel. “at this moment hoarse sounds like the roarings of
 some subterranean monster came from the market square. they were the
 notes, now plaintive, now lively, of a hydraulic organ. at the entrance to
 a showman’s travelling booth, a blind christian slave, for four obols a
 day, was pumping up the water which produced this extraordinary harmony.
 agamemnon dragged his companions into the booth, a great tent with blue
 awnings sprinkled with silver stars. a lantern lighted a black-board on
 which the order of the program was chalked up in syriac and greek. it was
 stifling within, redolent of garlic and lamp oil soot. in addition to the
 organ, there struck up the wailing of two harsh flutes, and an ethopian,
 rolling the whites of his eyes, thrummed upon an arab drum. a dancer was
 skipping and throwing somersaults on a tightrope, clapping his hands to
 the time of the music, and singing a popular song:
 hue, huc, convenite nunc spatalocinaedi! pedem tendite
 cursum addite
 “this starveling snub-nosed dancer was old, repulsive, and nastily gay.
 drops of sweat mixed with paint were trickling from his shaven forehead;
 his wrinkles, plastered with white lead, looked like the cracks in some
 wall when rain has washed away the lime. the flutes and organ ceased when
 he withdrew, and a fifteen-year-old girl ran out upon the stage. she was
 to perform the celebrated cordax, so passionately adored by the mob. the
 fathers of the church called down anathema upon it, the roman laws
 prohibited it, but all in vain. the cordax was danced everywhere, by rich
 and poor, by senators’ wives and by street dancers, just as it had been
 before.
 “‘what a beautiful girl,’ whispered agamemnon enthusiastically. thanks to
 the fists of his companions, he had reached a place in the front rank of
 spectators. the slender bronze body of the nubian was draped only about
 the hips with an almost airy colorless scarf. her hair was wound on the
 top of her head, in close fine curls like those of nubian woven. her face
 was of the severest egyptian type, recalling that of the sphinx.
 “she began to dance languidly, carelessly, as if already weary. above her
 head she swung copper bells, castanets or ‘crotals,’--swung them lazily,
 so that they tinkled very faintly. gradually her movements became more
 emphatic, and suddenly under their long lashes, yellow eyes shone out,
 clear and bright as the eyes of a leopardess. she drew her body up to her
 full height and the copper castanets began to tinkle with such challenge
 in their piercing sound that the whole crowd trembled with emotion. vivid,
 slender, supple as a serpent, the damsel whirled rapidly, her nostrils
 dilated, and a strange cry came crooning from her throat. with each
 impetuous movement, two dark little breasts held tight by a green silk
 net, trembled like two ripe fruits in the wind, and their sharp, thickly
 painted nipples were like rubies, as they protruded from the net.
 “the crowd was beside itself with passion. agamemnon, nearly mad, was held
 back by his companions. suddenly the girl stopped as if exhausted. a
 slight shudder ran through her, from her head down the dark limbs to her
 feet. deep silence prevailed. the head of the nubian was thrown back as if
 in a rigid swoon but above it the crotals still tinkled with an
 extraordinary languor, a dying vibration, quick and soft as the wing
 flutterings of a captured butterfly. her eyes grew dim but in their inner
 depths glittered two sparks; the face remained severe, impersonal, but
 upon the sensuous red lips of that sphinx-like mouth a smile trembled,
 faint as the dying sound of the crotals.” 
 the conquests of the french have resulted, during this war, in a boon to
 knowledge and to letters. egypt has furnished us with monuments of its
 aboriginal inhabitants, which the ignorance and superstition of the copts
 and mussulmans kept concealed from civilized countries. the libraries of
 the convents of the various countries have been ransacked by savants and
 precious manuscripts have been brought to light.
 by no means the least interesting of the acquisitions is a fragment of
 petronius, which we offer to the public, taken from an ancient manuscript
 which our soldiers, in conquering st. gall, have sent to us for
 examination. we have made an important discovery in reading a parchment
 which contains the work of st. gennadius on the duties of priests, and
 which, judging from the form of the letters employed, we should say was
 written in the eleventh century. a most careful examination led us to
 perceive that the work by this saint had been written on pages containing
 written letters, which had been almost effaced. we know that in the dark
 ages it was customary to write ecclesiastical works on the manuscripts
 containing the best authors of latinity.
 at a cost of much labor we have been able to decipher a morsel which we
 give to the public: and of the authenticity of which there can be no
 doubt. we render homage to the brave french army to which we owe this
 acquisition.
 it is easy to notice that there is a lacuna in that passage of petronius
 in which encolpius is left with quartilla, looking through a chink in the
 door, at the actions of giton and little pannychis. a few lines below, it
 relates, in effect, that he was fatigued by the voluptuous enjoyment of
 quartilla, and in that which remains to us, there is no mention of the
 preliminaries to this enjoyment. the style of the latin so closely
 resembles the original of petronius that it is impossible to believe that
 the fragment was forged.
 for the benefit of those who have not read the author, it is well to state
 that this quartilla was a priestess of priapus, at whose house they
 celebrated the mysteries of that god. pannychis is a young girl of seven
 years who had been handed over to giton to be deflowered. this giton is
 the “good friend” of encolpius, who is supposed to relate the scene.
 encolpius, who had drunk an aphrodisiacal beverage, is occupied with
 quartilla in peeping through the door to see in what manner giton was
 acquitting himself in his role. at that moment a soldier enters the house.
 finally an old woman, about whom there is some question in the fragment,
 is the same as the one who had unexpectedly conducted encolpius to the
 house of the public women and of whom mention is made in the beginning of
 the work.
 ipsa venus magico religatum brachia nodo perdocuit, multis
 non sine verberibus. tibullus
 viii, .
 vous verrez que vous avez affaire a un homme. you will learn
 that you have to deal with a man.
 fighting men have in all times been distinguished on account of the beauty
 of their women. the charming fable of the loves of venus and mars,
 described by the most ancient of poets, expresses allegorically, this
 truth. all the demi-gods had their amorous adventures; the most valiant
 were always the most passionate and the happiest. hercules took the
 maidenheads of fifty girls, in a single night. thesus loved a thousand
 beauties, and slept with them. jason abandoned hypsipyle for medea, and
 her, for creusa. achilles, the swift of foot, forgot the tender deidamia
 in the arms of his briseis.
 it has been remarked that the lovers did not have very scrupulous tastes
 in their methods of attaining satisfaction from the women they loved. the
 most common method was abduction and the women always submitted to this
 without a murmur of any sort. helen was carried off by theseus, after
 having also been abducted by paris. the wife of atreus was abducted by
 thyestus, and from that arose the implacable hatred between the two
 families. rape was no less common. goddesses themselves and the favorites
 of the gods were at the risk of falling prey to strong mortals. pirithous,
 aided by theseus, even attempted to snatch proserpina from the god of the
 under-world. juno herself was compelled to painful submission to the
 pursuit of ixion, and thetis succumbed despite herself, to the assaults of
 peleus. the gift of foretelling the future, with which apollo endowed
 cassandra, did not insure her against the brutal caresses of ajax, son of
 oileus.
 in the infancy of society, there was never known any other distinction
 except between the weak and the strong: the strong commanded and the weak
 obeyed. for that reason, women were regarded in the light of beings
 destined by nature, to serve the pleasures and even the caprices of men.
 never did her suitors express a tender thought for penelope, and, instead
 of making love to her, they squandered her property, slept with her
 slaves, and took charge of things in her house.
 circe gave herself to ulysses who desired to slay her, and calypso, full
 blown goddess as she was, was obliged to make his advances for him. the
 fine sentiments that virgil puts into the mouth of the shade of creusa,
 content with having died while serving against the greeks, “she was a
 trojan, and she wedded the son of venus”; the confession with which
 andromache, confronted by the murderer of her first husband, responds to
 the question of aeneas; these ideas, i say, and these sentiments,
 appertained to the polished century of augustus and not to the epoch or,
 scene of the trojan war. virgil, in his aeneid, had never subscribed to
 the precepts of horace, and of common sense:
 aut famam sequere, aut sibi convenientia finge
 horace
 ars poet. .
 from this manner of dealing with women arose another reason for the
 possession of beauty by the valiant. one coveted a woman much as one would
 covet a fine flock of sheep, and, in the absence of laws, the one in
 possession of either the one or the other of these desirable objects would
 soon be dispossessed of them if he was not courageous enough to guard them
 against theft. wars were as much enterprises for ravishing women as they
 were for taking other property, and one should remember that agamemnon
 promised to retire from before troy if the trojans would restore helen and
 his riches to menelaus; things which paris had despoiled him of.
 also, there was never any of that thing we call “conjugal honor” among the
 greeks; that idea was far too refined; it was a matter too complex ever to
 have entered the heads of these semi-barbarous people. this is exemplified
 in the fact that, after the taking of troy, helen, who had, of her own
 free will, belonged successively to paris, and to deiphobus, afterwards
 returned to menelaus, who never offered her any reproach. that conduct of
 menelaus was so natural that telemachus, who, in his trip to sparta found
 helen again with menelaus, just as she was before her abduction, did not
 show the least astonishment.
 the books which bear the most remarkable resemblance to each other are the
 bible and homer, because the people they describe and the men about whom
 they speak are forerunners of civilization in pretty much the same degree.
 sarah was twice snatched from the bosom of abraham and he was never
 displeased with his wife and continued to live on good terms with her.
 david, a newcomer on the throne, hastened to have michol brought to him
 although she had already married another man.
 the best proof that, during the time of the romans the women preferred
 soldiers to other men is in the claims to successful enterprises by the
 bragging soldier of plautus. pyrgopolinices thought it was only necessary
 to pose as a great warrior, to have all the women chasing after him;
 therefore, his parasite and his slave spoke of nothing but the passions be
 inspired in women. tradition has it that among the samnites, the bravest
 men had the choice of the fairest women, and to this custom is attributed
 one of the reasons these people were so warlike.
 in the times of chivalry the greatest exploits were achieved for the
 pleasure of one’s lady-love, and there were even such valiant knights, as
 don quixote, who went about the world proving by force of arms that their
 ladies had no peer. the poverty-stricken troubadours singing harmoniously
 about their beautiful women found them flying away in the arms of knights
 who had broken lances at tournaments, or had performed the greatest feats
 of arms. in fine, all the peoples of the world have said with dryden:
 "none
 but the brave deserves the fair.” 
 ses camarades se saisissent de moi et de quartilla. his
 comrades seized hold of quartilla and me.
 the profession of quartilla corresponded to that which is followed by our
 ladies of the palace royal. this palace royal is a sort of babylon, with
 this difference; that the former prostitute themselves all the year round,
 and that they are not quite so attractive as the chaldean beauties. for
 the rest, one of the incontestable facts of ancient history is this
 prostitution of the women of babylon in honor of venus, and i cannot
 understand why voltaire refused to believe it, since religions have always
 been responsible for the most abominable actions, and because religious
 wars, the horrors of intolerance, the impostures of priests, the despotism
 of kings, the degradation and stupidity of the people, have been the
 direct fatal effects of religions; and seeing that the blind fanaticism of
 martyrs and the brutal cruelty of tyrants is a hundred times more
 deplorable than a sacrifice equally agreeable to the victim and to the one
 who officiates at the sacrifice; and seeing that the enjoyment and giving
 of life is no less holy than the maceration and caging of innocent
 animals.
 the origin of courtesans is lost in the deepest antiquity. it appears that
 it was one of the patriarchal customs to enjoy them, for judah slept with
 thamar, widow of his two sons, and who, to seduce him, disguised herself
 as a courtesan. another courtesan, rahab, played a great role in the first
 wars of the people of the lord: it was this same rahab who married
 solomon, father of boaz, fourth forefather of david, and thirty-second
 forefather of jesus christ, our divine savior. yet the eternal sagacity of
 man has failed to take notice of this profession and to resent the
 injustice done it by the scorn of men. the elected kings of the people,
 the man who adopts the word father according to the flesh, are descendants
 of a courtesan.
 for the rest, it must be admitted that many who follow this noble
 profession are unworthy of it and only too well justify the ignominy which
 is levelled against the entire class. you see these miserable creatures
 with livid complexions and haggard eyes, with voices of stentor, breathing
 out at the same time the poisons which circulate in their veins and the
 liquors with which they are intoxicated; you see on their blemished and
 emaciated bodies, the marks of beings more hideous than they (twenty come
 to satisfy their brutal passions for every one of them); you listen to
 their vile language, you hear their oaths and revolting expressions: to go
 to these megeres is often to encounter brigands and assassins: what a
 spectacle! it is the deformity of vice in the rags of indigence.
 ah! but these are not courtesans, they are the dregs of cities. a
 courtesan worthy of the name is a beautiful woman, gracious and amiable,
 at whose home gather men of letters and men of the world; the first
 magistrates, the greatest captains: and who keeps men of all professions
 in a happy state of mind because she is pleasing to them, she inspires in
 them a desire for reciprocal pleasure: such an one was aspasia who, after
 having charmed the cultured people of athens was for a long time the good
 companion of pericles, and contributed much, perhaps, towards making his
 century what it was, the age of taste in arts and letters. such an one
 also was phryne, lais, glycera, and their names will always be celebrated;
 such, also, was ninon d’enclos, one of the ornaments of the century of
 louis xiv, and clairon, the first who realized all the grandeur of her
 art; such an one art thou, c-----, french thalia, who commands attentions,
 i do not say this by way of apology but to share the opinion of alceste.
 a courtesan such as i have in mind may have all the public and private
 virtues. one knows the severe probity of ninon, her generosity, her taste
 for the arts, her attachment to her friends. epicharis, the soul of the
 conspiracy of piso against the execrable nero, was a courtesan, and the
 severe tacitus, who cannot be taxed with a partiality for gallantry, has
 borne witness to the constancy with which she resisted the most seductive
 promises and endured the most terrible tortures, without revealing any of
 the details of the conspiracy or any of the names of the conspirators.
 these facts should be recognized above that ascetic moral idea which
 consists of the sovereign virtue of abstinence in defiance of nature’s
 commands and which places weakness in these matters along with the most
 odious crimes. can one see without indignation suetonius’ reproach of
 caesar for his gallantries with servilia, with tertia, and other roman
 ladies, as a thing equal to his extortions and his measureless ambitions,
 and praising his warlike ardor against peoples who had never furnished
 room for complaint to rome? the source of these errors was the theory of
 emanations. the first dreamers, who were called philosophers imagined that
 matter and light were co-eternal; they supposed that was all one unformed
 and tenebrous mass; and from the former they established the principle of
 evil and of all imperfection, while they regarded the latter as sovereign
 perfection. creation, or, one might better say co-ordination, was only the
 emanation of light which penetrated chaos, but the mixture of light and
 matter was the cause of all the inevitable imperfections of the universe.
 the soul of man was part and parcel of divinity or of increased light; it
 would never attain happiness until it was re-united to the source of all
 light; but for it, we would be free from all things we call gross and
 material, and we would be taken into the ethereal regions by contemplation
 and by abstinence from the pleasures of the flesh. when these absurdities
 were adopted for the regulation of conduct, they necessarily resulted in a
 fierce morality, inimical to all the pleasures of life, such, in a word,
 as that of the gymnosophists or, in a lesser measure, of the trappists.
 but despite the gloomy nonsense of certain atrabilious dreamers, the
 wonderful era of the greeks was that of the reign of the courtesans. it
 was about the houses of these that revolved the sands of pactolus, their
 fame exceeded that of the first men of greece. the rich offerings that
 decorated the temples of the gods were the gifts of these women, and it
 must be remembered that most of them were foreigners, originating, for the
 most part, in asia minor. it happened that an athenian financier, who
 resembled the rest of his tribe as much as two drops of water, proposed
 once to levy an impost upon the courtesans. as he spoke eloquently of the
 incalculable advantages which would accrue to the government by this tax,
 a certain person asked him by whom the courtesans were paid. “by the
 athenians,” replied our orator, after deliberation. “then it would be the
 athenians who would pay the impost,” replied the questioner, and the
 people of athens, who had a little more sense than certain legislative
 assemblies, hooted the orator down, and there was never any more question
 about a tax upon courtesans.
 corinth was famous for the number and beauty of its courtesans, from which
 comes the proverb: “it is not given to every man to go to corinth”; there
 they ran the risk of losing their money and ruining their health. the
 cause of this great vogue of courtesans in greece was not the supposed
 ugliness of the sex, as the savant paw imagined, and contradicted by the
 unanimous evidence of ancient authors and of modern travellers; but
 rather, the retired and solitary life which the women of the country led.
 they lived in separate apartments and never had any communication with the
 streets or with the residences of men “the inner part of the house which
 was called the women’s apartments,” said cornelius nepos (preface).
 strangers never visited them; they rarely visited their nearest relations.
 this was why marriage between brothers and sisters was authorized by law
 and encouraged by usage; the sisters were exposed to the attacks of their
 brothers because they lived separated from them.
 with the romans, as with us, the virtuous women corrupted somewhat the
 profession of the courtesans. the absolute seclusion of women was never
 the fashion at rome and the stories we have on the authority of valerius
 maximus on the chastity and modesty of the first roman matrons merit the
 same degree of belief as the legend of romulus and remus being brought up
 by a wolf, the rape of lucretia or the tragic death of virginia. on the
 contrary, in livy, a great admirer of the customs of the early days of
 rome, we find that in those times a great number of roman women of the
 noblest families were convicted of having poisoned their husbands and
 condemned to death for this hideous crime: that, by no means shows a very
 exquisite and tender conjugal sentiment. during the period of the second
 punic war with what energy they went about the city seeking the repeal of
 the law which took out of their hands the custody of jewels and precious
 stones! a repeal which they obtained despite the opposition of cato the
 censor. it appears that the profession of the courtesan was generally
 practised by the freed-women; their manner necessarily showed the results
 of their education. but the young sparks of rome never paid much attention
 to them, they preferred to have love affairs with the wives of their
 friends. for one sallust who ruined himself with freedwomen, there were
 five cupienniuses; “cupiennius, that admirer of the pudenda garbed in
 white,” hor. sat. i, ii, . delia, lesbia, ipsythillia, corinna, nemesis,
 neeria, cynthia, sulpitia, lycimnia, and almost all the women to whom,
 under real or assumed names, catullus, tibullus, propertius, ovid, horace,
 and others, addressed their erotic compositions, were roman married women.
 horace is the only one who celebrated a freedwoman in some of his odes.
 this is due, however, to his taste for variety and perhaps also, to his
 birth, for he himself was the son of a freedwoman. ovid’s art of love and
 the satires of juvenal reveal the extent to which gallantry was the
 fashion at rome and cato would never have praised the conduct of that
 young man who had recourse to a public house if that had been an ordinary
 course of procedure.
 in europe of the middle ages, the priests and abbots helped to some extent
 in reviving the profession of the courtesans. long before, saint paul had
 stated in his epistles that it was permitted to the apostles of the lord
 to take with them everywhere a sister for charity. the deaconesses date
 from the first century of the church. but the celibacy of the clergy was
 not universally and solidly established until about the eleventh century,
 under the pontificate of gregory vii. during the preceding century, the
 celebrated marozie and theodore had put their lovers successively upon the
 chair of st. peter, and their sons and grandsons, as well. but after the
 priests had submitted to celibacy they ostensibly took the concubines of
 which, alas! our housekeepers of today are but feeble vestiges. the
 spanish codes of the middle ages were often concerned with the rights of
 the concubines of priests (mancebas de los clerigos) and these chosen ones
 of the chosen ones of the lord invariably appeared worthy of envy. finally
 the courtesans appeared in all their magnificence in the holy city, and
 modern rome atoned for the rebuffs and indignities these women had been
 compelled to endure in ancient rome. the princes of the church showered
 them with gifts, they threw at their feet the price of redemption from
 sin, paid by the faithful, and the age of leo x was for rome a wonderful
 epoch of fine arts, belles lettres, and beautiful women. but a fanatical
 monk from lower germany fell upon this calm of the church and this happy
 era of the harlots; since then the revenues of the sacred college have
 continued to decrease, the beautiful courtesans have abandoned the capital
 of the christian world, and their pleasures have fled with them. and can
 anyone longer believe in the perfection of the human race, since the best,
 the most holy of human institutions has so visibly degenerated! 
 le soldat ordonne a embasicetas de m’accabler de ses impurs
 baisers. [the soldier ordered the catamite to beslaver me with his
 stinking kisses.]
 one of the reasons which caused the learned and paradoxical hardouin to
 assert that all the works which have been attributed to the ancients, with
 the exception of the georgics and the natural history of pliny, were the
 compositions of monks, was doubtless the very frequent repetition of
 scenes of love for boys, which one notices in most of these writings: this
 savant was a jesuit. but this taste is not peculiar to convents; it is to
 be found among all peoples and in all climates; its origin is lost in the
 night of the centuries; it is common in the most polished nations and it
 is common among savage tribes. profound philosophers have argued in favor
 of it; poets have sung the objects of this sort of love in their tender
 and passionate compositions, and these compositions have always been the
 delight of posterity. what stupid or unfeeling reader can read without
 emotion that beautiful eclogue of virgil where corydon sighs his hopeless
 love for the beautiful alexis? the most passionate ode of horace is that
 one in which he complains of the harshness of ligurinus. the tender
 tibullus, deceived by his marathus, brings tears to all who have hearts.
 the delicate anacreon, praising his bathylle, and the valiant alceus
 giving himself up after his labors in war to sing of the dark eyes and
 black hair of lycus . . . “with dark eyes and black hair beautiful.” it is
 not to over-civilized refinements of society which, according to certain
 misanthropists, degrade nature and corrupt it, that this taste is due; it
 is found among the south sea islanders, and the evidence of the first
 spaniards attests that it was common among the hordes of american indians
 before the discovery of the new world. paw had attempted to explain this
 as resulting from defects in the formation of the organs of pleasure among
 the natives; but a peculiar cause is not sufficient explanation for a
 universal effect.
 at the time of the patriarchs, greek love was so general that in the four
 cities, sodom, gomorrah, adama, and seboim, it was impossible to find ten
 men exempt from the contagion; that number would have sufficed, said the
 lord, to withhold the punishment which he inflicted upon those cities.
 it should be noted here that most of the assertions about the morals of
 the israelites which are to be found in the erotica biblon of mirabeau are
 either false or pure guesswork. it is a bizarre method of judging the
 morals of a people, that of taking their legal code and inferring that the
 people were accustomed to break all the laws which are forbidden by that
 code. nevertheless, that is the method which the author of the erotica
 biblon adopts for portraying the morals of the jewish people. again, he
 has not even understood this code; he has believed that the law against
 giving one’s seed to the idol moloch meant giving the human semen; and he
 is ignorant of the fact that this seed, as spoken of in the bible, means
 the children and descendants. thus it is that the land of canaan is
 promised to the seed of abraham, and the perpetuity of the reign on sion
 to that of david. moloch was a phoenician deity, the same one to which, in
 carthage, they sacrificed children; the romans believed him to be a
 reincarnation of their saturn, but saturn was an etruscan divinity who
 could never have had any connection with the gods of phoenicia. he
 (mirabeau) has translated “those who polluted the temple” as meaning those
 who were guilty of some obscenity in the temple; and he does not know that
 the temple was “polluted” by a thousand acts, declared impure by law, and
 which were not obscene. the entrance of a woman into a sacred place, less
 than forty days after her accouchement, or the entrance of a man who had
 touched an impure animal, constituted a pollution of the house of the
 lord. when one wishes to make a parade of erudition he should make some
 attempt to understand the things which he pretends to make clear to
 others. or is it that this mirabeau was merely careless?
 the love of boys was so thoroughly the fashion in greece that we have
 today given it the name “greek love.” orestes was regarded as the “good
 friend” of pylades and patroclus as the lover of achilles. in this taste,
 the gods set the example for mortals, and the abduction of ganymede for
 the service of the master of thunder, was not the least cause for
 annoyance given the chaste but over-prudish juno. lastly, hercules was not
 content with the loves of omphale and dejanira, he also loved the
 beautiful hylas, who was brought up by the nymphs.
 the greeks boasted, without blushing, of this love, which they considered
 the only passion worthy of men, and they did blush at loving a woman,
 intimacy with whom, they said, only rendered her adorers soft and
 effeminate. in the dialogue of plato, entitled “the banquet,” which is
 concerned entirely with discussions of the various forms of love, they
 dismiss love for women as unworthy of occupying the attention of sensible
 men. one of the speakers, i believe it was aristophanes, explaining the
 cause of this fire which we kindle in the bosoms of our loved ones,
 affirms that the first men were doubles which multiplied their force and
 their power. this, they abused and, as punishment, jupiter struck them
 with lightning and separated them. by their love for each other they came
 together again to regain their primitive state. but the effeminates sought
 out only the women because they were only half men, half women; while
 those whose tastes were masculine and courageous wanted to become double
 men again.
 phedre has put into the mouth of aesop an explanation of that love which
 would certainly not have been relished by the greeks. he says that while
 prometheus was occupied with modelling his man and woman, he was invited
 to a feast given by jupiter, to the gods; he came back intoxicated and, by
 mistake, applied the sexual parts of one to the body of the other.
 for the rest, the greeks were all in accord in their profound contempt for
 women. the theatrical writers, especially, who studied more particularly
 the general opinions and catered to them in order to obtain the applause
 of the public, were distinguished by their bitterness against the sex.
 euripides maintained that prometheus deserved to be chained to mount
 caucasus with the vulture gnawing at his entrails, because he had
 fashioned a being so pernicious and hateful as woman. the shade of
 agamemnon, in the odyssey advised ulysses not to put any faith in penelope
 and did not stop talking until he had enumerated the entire list of the
 vices of the sex. the first latin authors imitated the greeks in their
 invectives against women; the comedies of plautus, especially, teem with
 virulent attacks upon them.
 at rome, however, the great freedom permitted to women, soon brought about
 other opinions in regard to them; they often played an important role in
 public and private affairs, and the men convinced themselves that, like
 men, women were capable of the greatest crimes and of the most heroic
 virtues. the noble stoicism of arria is not the only example of courageous
 virtue displayed by the roman women at a time when crowned monsters
 governed the empire. the young paulina opened her veins with her husband,
 the philosopher, seneca; mallonia preferred to die in torments rather than
 give herself up to the odious he-goat of capri. who does not admire the
 noble independence, the conjugal love, and the matronly virtues of
 agrippina, the wife of germanicus?
 moreover, men began to avow their love for women, and we have here
 occasion to observe the rapid progress of gallantry among the romans.
 however, the love for boys was no less universally in vogue in rome, and
 cicero charges, in his letters to atticus, that the judges who had so
 scandalously white-washed clodius of the accusation of having profaned the
 mysteries of the “good goddess,” had been publicly promised the favors of
 the most illustrious women and the finest young men of the first families.
 caesar himself, in his early youth had yielded to the embraces of
 nicomedes, king of bithynia; moreover, after his triumph over the gauls,
 on the solemn occasion when it was customary to twit the victor with all
 his faults, the soldiers sang: “caesar subdued the gauls, nicomedes
 subdued caesar. but caesar who subdued the gauls, triumphed, and
 nicomedes, who subdued caesar did not.” cato said of him that he was loved
 by the king, in his youth and that, when he was older, he loved the queen
 and, one day, in the senate, while he was dwelling on i know not what
 request of the daughter of nicomedes, and recounting the benefits which
 rome owed to that monarch, cicero silenced him by replying: “we know very
 well what he has given, and what thou hast given him!” at last, during the
 time when the first triumvirate divided all the power, a bad joker
 remarked to pompey: “i salute thee, o king,” and, addressing caesar, “i
 salute thee, o queen!” his enemies maintained that he was the husband of
 all the women and the wife of all the husbands. catullus, who detested
 him, always called him “the bald catamite,” in his epigrams: he set forth
 that his friendship with mamurra was not at all honorable; he called this
 mamurra “pathicus,” a name which they bestowed upon those who looked for
 favors among mature men or among men who had passed the stage of
 adolescence.
 the masters of the empire never showed any hesitancy in trying and even in
 overdoing the pleasures which all their subjects permitted themselves.
 alas! a crown is such a weighty burden! the road of domination is strewn
 with so many briars that one would never be able to pass down it if he did
 not take care that they were pressed down under the roses. the roman
 emperors adopted that plan; they longed for pleasures and they took the
 pleasures which offered themselves without delay and in a spirit of
 competition. caligula was so little accustomed to waiting that, while
 occupied in offering a sacrifice to the gods, and the figure of a priest
 having pleased him, he did not take time to finish the sacred ceremonies
 before taking his pleasure of him.
 a remarkable thing is that among almost all peoples, the baths are the
 places where the prostitution of men by their own sex is the most common.
 we see in catullus that the “cinaedi” (catamites), a noun which my chaste
 pen refuses to translate into french, haunted the baths incessantly to
 carry out their practices. among the orientals, of all modern peoples who
 have retained this taste most generally, this same fact holds good. it was
 at the bath that tiberius, impotent through old age and debauchery, was
 made young again by the touch little children applied to his breasts;
 these children he called “‘little fishes,” they sucked his withered
 breasts, his infected mouth, his livid lips, and finally his virile parts.
 hideous spectacle of a tyrant disgraced by nature and struggling against
 her maledictions! but in vain did he invent new pleasures, in vain did he
 take part in these scenes in which groups of young men by threes and fours
 assumed all sorts of lascivious postures, and were at the same time active
 and passive; the sight of these indulgences of the “sprintriae” (for that
 is the name which was given there) did not enable him to resuscitate his
