 look, as we mentioned, is probably the gravest ever seen: yet it is not of
 that cast-iron gravity frequent enough among our own chancery suitors; but
 rather the gravity as of some silent, high-encircled mountain-pool,
 perhaps the crater of an extinct volcano; into whose black deeps you fear
 to gaze: those eyes, those lights that sparkle in it, may indeed be
 reflexes of the heavenly stars, but perhaps also glances from the region
 of nether fire.
 certainly a most involved, self-secluded, altogether enigmatic nature,
 this of teufelsdrockh! here, however, we gladly recall to mind that once
 we saw him laugh; once only, perhaps it was the first and last time
 in his life; but then such a peal of laughter, enough to have awakened the
 seven sleepers! it was of jean paul's doing: some single billow in that
 vast world-mahlstrom of humor, with its heaven-kissing coruscations, which
 is now, alas, all congealed in the frost of death! the large-bodied poet
 and the small, both large enough in soul, sat talking miscellaneously
 together, the present editor being privileged to listen; and now paul, in
 his serious way, was giving one of those inimitable "extra-harangues;"
 and, as it chanced, on the proposal for a cast-metal king:
 gradually a light kindled in our professor's eyes and face, a beaming,
 mantling, loveliest light; through those murky features, a radiant
 ever-young apollo looked; and he burst forth like the neighing of all
 tattersall's,—tears streaming down his cheeks, pipe held aloft, foot
 clutched into the air,—loud, long-continuing, uncontrollable; a
 laugh not of the face and diaphragm only, but of the whole man from head
 to heel. the present editor, who laughed indeed, yet with measure, began
 to fear all was not right: however, teufelsdrockh, composed himself, and
 sank into his old stillness; on his inscrutable countenance there was, if
 anything, a slight look of shame; and richter himself could not rouse him
 again. readers who have any tincture of psychology know how much is to be
 inferred from this; and that no man who has once heartily and wholly
 laughed can be altogether irreclaimably bad. how much lies in laughter:
 the cipher-key, wherewith we decipher the whole man! some men wear an
 everlasting barren simper; in the smile of others lies a cold glitter as
 of ice: the fewest are able to laugh, what can be called laughing, but
 only sniff and titter and snigger from the throat outwards; or at best,
 produce some whiffling husky cachinnation, as if they were laughing
 through wool: of none such comes good. the man who cannot laugh is not
 only fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils; but his whole life is
 already a treason and a stratagem.
 considered as an author, herr teufelsdrockh has one scarcely pardonable
 fault, doubtless his worst: an almost total want of arrangement. in this
 remarkable volume, it is true, his adherence to the mere course of time
 produces, through the narrative portions, a certain show of outward
 method; but of true logical method and sequence there is too little. apart
 from its multifarious sections and subdivisions, the work naturally falls
 into two parts; a historical-descriptive, and a philosophical-speculative:
 but falls, unhappily, by no firm line of demarcation; in that labyrinthic
 combination, each part overlaps, and indents, and indeed runs quite
 through the other. many sections are of a debatable rubric, or even quite
 nondescript and unnamable; whereby the book not only loses in
 accessibility, but too often distresses us like some mad banquet, wherein
 all courses had been confounded, and fish and flesh, soup and solid,
 oyster-sauce, lettuces, rhine-wine and french mustard, were hurled into
 one huge tureen or trough, and the hungry public invited to help itself.
 to bring what order we can out of this chaos shall be part of our
 endeavor.
 "as montesquieu wrote a spirit of laws," observes our professor,
 "so could i write a spirit of clothes; thus, with an esprit des
 lois, properly an esprit de coutumes, we should have an esprit
 de costumes. for neither in tailoring nor in legislating does man
 proceed by mere accident, but the hand is ever guided on by mysterious
 operations of the mind. in all his modes, and habilatory endeavors, an
 architectural idea will be found lurking; his body and the cloth are the
 site and materials whereon and whereby his beautified edifice, of a
 person, is to be built. whether he flow gracefully out in folded mantles,
 based on light sandals; tower up in high headgear, from amid peaks,
 spangles and bell-girdles; swell out in starched ruffs, buckram stuffings,
 and monstrous tuberosities; or girth himself into separate sections, and
 front the world an agglomeration of four limbs,—will depend on the
 nature of such architectural idea: whether grecian, gothic, later gothic,
 or altogether modern, and parisian or anglo-dandiacal. again, what meaning
 lies in color! from the soberest drab to the high-flaming scarlet,
 spiritual idiosyncrasies unfold themselves in choice of color: if the cut
 betoken intellect and talent, so does the color betoken temper and heart.
 in all which, among nations as among individuals, there is an incessant,
 indubitable, though infinitely complex working of cause and effect: every
 snip of the scissors has been regulated and prescribed by ever-active
 influences, which doubtless to intelligences of a superior order are
 neither invisible nor illegible.
 "for such superior intelligences a cause-and-effect philosophy of clothes,
 as of laws, were probably a comfortable winter-evening entertainment:
 nevertheless, for inferior intelligences, like men, such philosophies have
 always seemed to me uninstructive enough. nay, what is your montesquieu
 himself but a clever infant spelling letters from a hieroglyphical
 prophetic book, the lexicon of which lies in eternity, in heaven?—let
 any cause-and-effect philosopher explain, not why i wear such and such a
 garment, obey such and such a law; but even why i am here, to wear
 and obey anything!—much, therefore, if not the whole, of that same
 spirit of clothes i shall suppress, as hypothetical, ineffectual,
 and even impertinent: naked facts, and deductions drawn therefrom in quite
 another than that omniscient style, are my humbler and proper province."
 acting on which prudent restriction, teufelsdrockh, has nevertheless
 contrived to take in a well-nigh boundless extent of field; at least, the
 boundaries too often lie quite beyond our horizon. selection being
 indispensable, we shall here glance over his first part only in the most
 cursory manner. this first part is, no doubt, distinguished by omnivorous
 learning, and utmost patience and fairness: at the same time, in its
 results and delineations, it is much more likely to interest the compilers
 of some library of general, entertaining, useful, or even useless
 knowledge than the miscellaneous readers of these pages. was it this part
 of the book which heuschrecke had in view, when he recommended us to that
 joint-stock vehicle of publication, "at present the glory of british
 literature"? if so, the library editors are welcome to dig in it for their
 own behoof.
 to the first chapter, which turns on paradise and fig-leaves, and leads us
 into interminable disquisitions of a mythological, metaphorical,
 cabalistico-sartorial and quite antediluvian cast, we shall content
 ourselves with giving an unconcerned approval. still less have we to do
 with "lilis, adam's first wife, whom, according to the talmudists, he had
 before eve, and who bore him, in that wedlock, the whole progeny of
 aerial, aquatic, and terrestrial devils,"—very needlessly, we think.
 on this portion of the work, with its profound glances into the adam-kadmon,
 or primeval element, here strangely brought into relation with the nifl
 and muspel (darkness and light) of the antique north, it may be
 enough to say, that its correctness of deduction, and depth of talmudic
 and rabbinical lore have filled perhaps not the worst hebraist in britain
 with something like astonishment.
 but, quitting this twilight region, teufelsdrockh hastens from the tower
 of babel, to follow the dispersion of mankind over the whole habitable and
 habilable globe. walking by the light of oriental, pelasgic, scandinavian,
 egyptian, otaheitean, ancient and modern researches of every conceivable
 kind, he strives to give us in compressed shape (as the nurnbergers give
 an orbis pictus) an orbis vestitus; or view of the costumes
 of all mankind, in all countries, in all times. it is here that to the
 antiquarian, to the historian, we can triumphantly say: fall to! here is
 learning: an irregular treasury, if you will; but inexhaustible as the
 hoard of king nibelung, which twelve wagons in twelve days, at the rate of
 three journeys a day, could not carry off. sheepskin cloaks and wampum
 belts; phylacteries, stoles, albs; chlamydes, togas, chinese silks,
 afghaun shawls, trunk-hose, leather breeches, celtic hilibegs (though
 breeches, as the name gallia braccata indicates, are the more
 ancient), hussar cloaks, vandyke tippets, ruffs, fardingales, are brought
 vividly before us,—even the kilmarnock nightcap is not forgotten.
 for most part, too, we must admit that the learning, heterogeneous as it
 is, and tumbled down quite pell-mell, is true concentrated and purified
 learning, the drossy parts smelted out and thrown aside.
 philosophical reflections intervene, and sometimes touching pictures of
 human life. of this sort the following has surprised us. the first purpose
 of clothes, as our professor imagines, was not warmth or decency, but
 ornament. "miserable indeed," says he, "was the condition of the
 aboriginal savage, glaring fiercely from under his fleece of hair, which
 with the beard reached down to his loins, and hung round him like a matted
 cloak; the rest of his body sheeted in its thick natural fell. he loitered
 in the sunny glades of the forest, living on wild-fruits; or, as the
 ancient caledonian, squatted himself in morasses, lurking for his bestial
 or human prey; without implements, without arms, save the ball of heavy
 flint, to which, that his sole possession and defence might not be lost,
 he had attached a long cord of plaited thongs; thereby recovering as well
 as hurling it with deadly unerring skill. nevertheless, the pains of
 hunger and revenge once satisfied, his next care was not comfort but
 decoration (putz). warmth he found in the toils of the chase; or
 amid dried leaves, in his hollow tree, in his bark shed, or natural
 grotto: but for decoration he must have clothes. nay, among wild people,
 we find tattooing and painting even prior to clothes. the first spiritual
 want of a barbarous man is decoration, as indeed we still see among the
 barbarous classes in civilized countries.
 "reader, the heaven-inspired melodious singer; loftiest serene highness;
 nay thy own amber-locked, snow-and-rosebloom maiden, worthy to glide
 sylph-like almost on air, whom thou lovest, worshippest as a divine
 presence, which, indeed, symbolically taken, she is,—has descended,
 like thyself, from that same hair-mantled, flint-hurling aboriginal
 anthropophagus! out of the eater cometh forth meat; out of the strong
 cometh forth sweetness. what changes are wrought, not by time, yet in
 time! for not mankind only, but all that mankind does or beholds, is in
 continual growth, re-genesis and self-perfecting vitality. cast forth thy
 act, thy word, into the ever-living, ever-working universe: it is a
 seed-grain that cannot die; unnoticed to-day (says one), it will be found
 flourishing as a banyan-grove (perhaps, alas, as a hemlock-forest!) after
 a thousand years.
 "he who first shortened the labor of copyists by device of movable
 types was disbanding hired armies, and cashiering most kings and
 senates, and creating a whole new democratic world: he had invented the
 art of printing. the first ground handful of nitre, sulphur, and charcoal
 drove monk schwartz's pestle through the ceiling: what will the last do?
 achieve the final undisputed prostration of force under thought, of animal
 courage under spiritual. a simple invention it was in the old-world
 grazier,—sick of lugging his slow ox about the country till he got
 it bartered for corn or oil,—to take a piece of leather, and thereon
 scratch or stamp the mere figure of an ox (or pecus); put it in his
 pocket, and call it pecunia, money. yet hereby did barter grow
 sale, the leather money is now golden and paper, and all miracles have
 been out-miracled: for there are rothschilds and english national debts;
 and whoso has sixpence is sovereign (to the length of sixpence) over all
 men; commands cooks to feed him, philosophers to teach him, kings to mount
 guard over him,—to the length of sixpence.—clothes too, which
 began in foolishest love of ornament, what have they not become! increased
 security and pleasurable heat soon followed: but what of these? shame,
 divine shame (schaam, modesty), as yet a stranger to the
 anthropophagous bosom, arose there mysteriously under clothes; a mystic
 grove-encircled shrine for the holy in man. clothes gave us individuality,
 distinctions, social polity; clothes have made men of us; they are
 threatening to make clothes-screens of us.
 "but, on the whole," continues our eloquent professor, "man is a
 tool-using animal (handthierendes thier). weak in himself, and of
 small stature, he stands on a basis, at most for the flattest-soled, of
 some half-square foot, insecurely enough; has to straddle out his legs,
 lest the very wind supplant him. feeblest of bipeds! three quintals are a
 crushing load for him; the steer of the meadow tosses him aloft, like a
 waste rag. nevertheless he can use tools; can devise tools: with these the
 granite mountain melts into light dust before him; he kneads glowing iron,
 as if it were soft paste; seas are his smooth highway, winds and fire his
 unwearying steeds. nowhere do you find him without tools; without tools he
 is nothing, with tools he is all."
 here may we not, for a moment, interrupt the stream of oratory with a
 remark, that this definition of the tool-using animal appears to us, of
 all that animal-sort, considerably the precisest and best? man is called a
 laughing animal: but do not the apes also laugh, or attempt to do it; and
 is the manliest man the greatest and oftenest laugher? teufelsdrockh
 himself, as we said, laughed only once. still less do we make of that
 other french definition of the cooking animal; which, indeed, for rigorous
 scientific purposes, is as good as useless. can a tartar be said to cook,
 when he only readies his steak by riding on it? again, what cookery does
 the greenlander use, beyond stowing up his whale-blubber, as a marmot, in
 the like case, might do? or how would monsieur ude prosper among those
 orinoco indians who, according to humboldt, lodge in crow-nests, on the
 branches of trees; and, for half the year, have no victuals but pipe-clay,
 the whole country being under water? but, on the other hand, show us the
 human being, of any period or climate, without his tools: those very
 caledonians, as we saw, had their flint-ball, and thong to it, such as no
 brute has or can have.
 "man is a tool-using animal," concludes teufelsdrockh, in his abrupt way;
 "of which truth clothes are but one example: and surely if we consider the
 interval between the first wooden dibble fashioned by man, and those
 liverpool steam-carriages, or the british house of commons, we shall note
 what progress he has made. he digs up certain black stones from the bosom
 of the earth, and says to them, transport me and this luggage at the
 rate of file-and-thirty miles an hour; and they do it: he collects,
 apparently by lot, six hundred and fifty-eight miscellaneous individuals,
 and says to them, make this nation toil for us, bleed for us, hunger
 and, sorrow and sin for us; and they do it."
 one of the most unsatisfactory sections in the whole volume is that on aprons.
 what though stout old gao, the persian blacksmith, "whose apron, now
 indeed hidden under jewels, because raised in revolt which proved
 successful, is still the royal standard of that country;" what though john
 knox's daughter, "who threatened sovereign majesty that she would catch
 her husband's head in her apron, rather than he should lie and be a
 bishop;" what though the landgravine elizabeth, with many other apron
 worthies,—figure here? an idle wire-drawing spirit, sometimes even a
 tone of levity, approaching to conventional satire, is too clearly
 discernible. what, for example, are we to make of such sentences as the
 following?
 "aprons are defences; against injury to cleanliness, to safety, to
 modesty, sometimes to roguery. from the thin slip of notched silk (as it
 were, the emblem and beatified ghost of an apron), which some highest-bred
 housewife, sitting at nurnberg work-boxes and toy-boxes, has gracefully
 fastened on; to the thick-tanned hide, girt round him with thongs, wherein
 the builder builds, and at evening sticks his trowel; or to those jingling
 sheet-iron aprons, wherein your otherwise half-naked vulcans hammer and
 smelt in their smelt-furnace,—is there not range enough in the
 fashion and uses of this vestment? how much has been concealed, how much
 has been defended in aprons! nay, rightly considered, what is your whole
 military and police establishment, charged at uncalculated millions, but a
 huge scarlet-colored, iron-fastened apron, wherein society works (uneasily
 enough); guarding itself from some soil and stithy-sparks, in this
 devil's-smithy (teufels-schmiede) of a world? but of all aprons the
 most puzzling to me hitherto has been the episcopal or cassock. wherein
 consists the usefulness of this apron? the overseer (episcopus) of
 souls, i notice, has tucked in the corner of it, as if his day's work were
 done: what does he shadow forth thereby?" &c. &c.
 or again, has it often been the lot of our readers to read such stuff as
 we shall now quote?
 "i consider those printed paper aprons, worn by the parisian cooks, as a
 new vent, though a slight one, for typography; therefore as an
 encouragement to modern literature, and deserving of approval: nor is it
 without satisfaction that i hear of a celebrated london firm having in
 view to introduce the same fashion, with important extensions, in
 england."—we who are on the spot hear of no such thing; and indeed
 have reason to be thankful that hitherto there are other vents for our
 literature, exuberant as it is.—teufelsdrockh continues: "if such
 supply of printed paper should rise so far as to choke up the highways and
 public thoroughfares, new means must of necessity be had recourse to. in a
 world existing by industry, we grudge to employ fire as a destroying
 element, and not as a creating one. however, heaven is omnipotent, and
 will find us an outlet. in the mean while, is it not beautiful to see five
 million quintals of rags picked annually from the laystall; and annually,
 after being macerated, hot-pressed, printed on, and sold,—returned
 thither; filling so many hungry mouths by the way? thus is the laystall,
 especially with its rags or clothes-rubbish, the grand electric battery,
 and fountain-of-motion, from which and to which the social activities
 (like vitreous and resinous electricities) circulate, in larger or smaller
 circles, through the mighty, billowy, storm-tost chaos of life, which they
 keep alive!"—such passages fill us, who love the man, and partly
 esteem him, with a very mixed feeling.
 farther down we meet with this: "the journalists are now the true kings
 and clergy: henceforth historians, unless they are fools, must write not
 of bourbon dynasties, and tudors and hapsburgs; but of stamped broad-sheet
 dynasties, and quite new successive names, according as this or the other
 able editor, or combination of able editors, gains the world's ear. of the
 british newspaper press, perhaps the most important of all, and wonderful
 enough in its secret constitution and procedure, a valuable descriptive
 history already exists, in that language, under the title of satan's
 invisible world displayed; which, however, by search in all the
 weissnichtwo libraries, i have not yet succeeded in procuring (vermochte
 night aufzutreiben)."
 thus does the good homer not only nod, but snore. thus does teufelsdrockh,
 wandering in regions where he had little business, confound the old
 authentic presbyterian witchfinder with a new, spurious, imaginary
 historian of the brittische journalistik; and so stumble on perhaps
 the most egregious blunder in modern literature!
 happier is our professor, and more purely scientific and historic, when he
 reaches the middle ages in europe, and down to the end of the seventeenth
 century; the true era of extravagance in costume. it is here that the
 antiquary and student of modes comes upon his richest harvest. fantastic
 garbs, beggaring all fancy of a teniers or a callot, succeed each other,
 like monster devouring monster in a dream. the whole too in brief
 authentic strokes, and touched not seldom with that breath of genius which
 makes even old raiment live. indeed, so learned, precise, graphical, and
 every way interesting have we found these chapters, that it may be thrown
 out as a pertinent question for parties concerned, whether or not a good
 english translation thereof might henceforth be profitably incorporated
 with mr. merrick's valuable work on ancient armor? take, by way of
 example, the following sketch; as authority for which paulinus's zeitkurzende
 lust (ii. ) is, with seeming confidence, referred to:
 "did we behold the german fashionable dress of the fifteenth century, we
 might smile; as perhaps those bygone germans, were they to rise again, and
 see our haberdashery, would cross themselves, and invoke the virgin. but
 happily no bygone german, or man, rises again; thus the present is not
 needlessly trammelled with the past; and only grows out of it, like a
 tree, whose roots are not intertangled with its branches, but lie
 peaceably underground. nay it is very mournful, yet not useless, to see
 and know, how the greatest and dearest, in a short while, would find his
 place quite filled up here, and no room for him; the very napoleon, the
 very byron, in some seven years, has become obsolete, and were now a
 foreigner to his europe. thus is the law of progress secured; and in
 clothes, as in all other external things whatsoever, no fashion will
 continue.
 "of the military classes in those old times, whose buff-belts, complicated
 chains and gorgets, huge churn-boots, and other riding and fighting gear
 have been bepainted in modern romance, till the whole has acquired
 somewhat of a sign-post character,—i shall here say nothing: the
 civil and pacific classes, less touched upon, are wonderful enough for us.
 "rich men, i find, have teusinke [a perhaps untranslatable
 article]; also a silver girdle, whereat hang little bells; so that when a
 man walks, it is with continual jingling. some few, of musical turn, have
 a whole chime of bells (glockenspiel) fastened there; which,
 especially in sudden whirls, and the other accidents of walking, has a
 grateful effect. observe too how fond they are of peaks, and gothic-arch
 intersections. the male world wears peaked caps, an ell long, which hang
 bobbing over the side (schief): their shoes are peaked in front,
 also to the length of an ell, and laced on the side with tags; even the
 wooden shoes have their ell-long noses: some also clap bells on the peak.
 further, according to my authority, the men have breeches without seat (ohne
 gesass): these they fasten peakwise to their shirts; and the long
 round doublet must overlap them.
 "rich maidens, again, flit abroad in gowns scolloped out behind and
 before, so that back and breast are almost bare. wives of quality, on the
 other hand, have train-gowns four or five ells in length; which trains
 there are boys to carry. brave cleopatras, sailing in their silk-cloth
 galley, with a cupid for steersman! consider their welts, a handbreadth
 thick, which waver round them by way of hem; the long flood of silver
 buttons, or rather silver shells, from throat to shoe, wherewith these
 same welt-gowns are buttoned. the maidens have bound silver snoods about
 their hair, with gold spangles, and pendent flames (flammen), that
 is, sparkling hair-drops: but of their mother's head-gear who shall speak?
 neither in love of grace is comfort forgotten. in winter weather you
 behold the whole fair creation (that can afford it) in long mantles, with
 skirts wide below, and, for hem, not one but two sufficient hand-broad
 welts; all ending atop in a thick well-starched ruff, some twenty inches
 broad: these are their ruff-mantles (kragenmantel).
 "as yet among the womankind hoop-petticoats are not; but the men have
 doublets of fustian, under which lie multiple ruffs of cloth, pasted
 together with batter (mit teig zusammengekleistert), which create
 protuberance enough. thus do the two sexes vie with each other in the art
 of decoration; and as usual the stronger carries it."
 our professor, whether he have humor himself or not, manifests a certain
 feeling of the ludicrous, a sly observance of it which, could emotion of
 any kind be confidently predicated of so still a man, we might call a real
 love. none of those bell-girdles, bushel-breeches, counted shoes, or other
 the like phenomena, of which the history of dress offers so many, escape
 him: more especially the mischances, or striking adventures, incident to
 the wearers of such, are noticed with due fidelity. sir walter raleigh's
 fine mantle, which he spread in the mud under queen elizabeth's feet,
 appears to provoke little enthusiasm in him; he merely asks, whether at
 that period the maiden queen "was red-painted on the nose, and
 white-painted on the cheeks, as her tire-women, when from spleen and
 wrinkles she would no longer look in any glass, were wont to serve her"?
 we can answer that sir walter knew well what he was doing, and had the
 maiden queen been stuffed parchment dyed in verdigris, would have done the
 same.
 thus too, treating of those enormous habiliments, that were not only
 slashed and gallooned, but artificially swollen out on the broader parts
 of the body, by introduction of bran,—our professor fails not to
 comment on that luckless courtier, who having seated himself on a chair
 with some projecting nail on it, and therefrom rising, to pay his devoir
 on the entrance of majesty, instantaneously emitted several pecks of dry
 wheat-dust: and stood there diminished to a spindle, his galloons and
 slashes dangling sorrowful and flabby round him. whereupon the professor
 publishes this reflection:—
 "by what strange chances do we live in history? erostratus by a torch;
 milo by a bullock; henry darnley, an unfledged booby and bustard, by his
 limbs; most kings and queens by being born under such and such a
 bed-tester; boileau despreaux (according to helvetius) by the peck of a
 turkey; and this ill-starred individual by a rent in his breeches,—for
 no memoirist of kaiser otto's court omits him. vain was the prayer of
 themistocles for a talent of forgetting: my friends, yield cheerfully to
 destiny, and read since it is written."—has teufelsdrockh, to be put
 in mind that, nearly related to the impossible talent of forgetting,
 stands that talent of silence, which even travelling englishmen manifest?
 "the simplest costume," observes our professor, "which i anywhere find
 alluded to in history, is that used as regimental, by bolivar's cavalry,
 in the late colombian wars. a square blanket, twelve feet in diagonal, is
 provided (some were wont to cut off the corners, and make it circular): in
 the centre a slit is effected eighteen inches long; through this the
 mother-naked trooper introduces his head and neck; and so rides shielded
 from all weather, and in battle from many strokes (for he rolls it about
 his left arm); and not only dressed, but harnessed and draperied."
 with which picture of a state of nature, affecting by its singularity, and
 old-roman contempt of the superfluous, we shall quit this part of our
 subject.
 if in the descriptive-historical portion of this volume, teufelsdrockh,
 discussing merely the werden (origin and successive improvement) of
 clothes, has astonished many a reader, much more will he in the
 speculative-philosophical portion, which treats of their wirken, or
 influences. it is here that the present editor first feels the pressure of
 his task; for here properly the higher and new philosophy of clothes
 commences: all untried, almost inconceivable region, or chaos; in
 venturing upon which, how difficult, yet how unspeakably important is it
 to know what course, of survey and conquest, is the true one; where the
 footing is firm substance and will bear us, where it is hollow, or mere
 cloud, and may engulf us! teufelsdrockh undertakes no less than to expound
 the moral, political, even religious influences of clothes; he undertakes
 to make manifest, in its thousand-fold bearings, this grand proposition,
 that man's earthly interests "are all hooked and buttoned together, and
 held up, by clothes." he says in so many words, "society is founded upon
 cloth;" and again, "society sails through the infinitude on cloth, as on a
 faust's mantle, or rather like the sheet of clean and unclean beasts in
 the apostle's dream; and without such sheet or mantle, would sink to
 endless depths, or mount to inane limbos, and in either case be no more."
 by what chains, or indeed infinitely complected tissues, of meditation
 this grand theorem is here unfolded, and innumerable practical corollaries
 are drawn therefrom, it were perhaps a mad ambition to attempt exhibiting.
 our professor's method is not, in any case, that of common school logic,
 where the truths all stand in a row, each holding by the skirts of the
 other; but at best that of practical reason' proceeding by large intuition
 over whole systematic groups and kingdoms; whereby, we might say, a noble
 complexity, almost like that of nature, reigns in his philosophy, or
 spiritual picture of nature: a mighty maze, yet, as faith whispers, not
 without a plan. nay we complained above, that a certain ignoble
 complexity, what we must call mere confusion, was also discernible. often,
 also, we have to exclaim: would to heaven those same biographical
 documents were come! for it seems as if the demonstration lay much in the
 author's individuality; as if it were not argument that had taught him,
 but experience. at present it is only in local glimpses, and by
 significant fragments, picked often at wide-enough intervals from the
 original volume, and carefully collated, that we can hope to impart some
 outline or foreshadow of this doctrine. readers of any intelligence are
 once more invited to favor us with their most concentrated attention: let
 these, after intense consideration, and not till then, pronounce, whether
 on the utmost verge of our actual horizon there is not a looming as of
 land; a promise of new fortunate islands, perhaps whole undiscovered
 americas, for such as have canvas to sail thither?—as exordium to
 the whole, stand here the following long citation:—
 "with men of a speculative turn," writes teufelsdrockh, "there come
 seasons, meditative, sweet, yet awful hours, when in wonder and fear you
 ask yourself that unanswerable question: who am i; the thing that can say
 'i' (das wesen das sich ich nennt)? the world, with its loud
 trafficking, retires into the distance; and, through the paper-hangings,
 and stonewalls, and thick-plied tissues of commerce and polity, and all
 the living and lifeless integuments (of society and a body), wherewith
 your existence sits surrounded,—the sight reaches forth into the
 void deep, and you are alone with the universe, and silently commune with
 it, as one mysterious presence with another.
 "who am i; what is this me? a voice, a motion, an appearance;—some
 embodied, visualized idea in the eternal mind? cogito, ergo sum.
 alas, poor cogitator, this takes us but a little way. sure enough, i am;
 and lately was not: but whence? how? whereto? the answer lies around,
 written in all colors and motions, uttered in all tones of jubilee and
 wail, in thousand-figured, thousand-voiced, harmonious nature: but where
 is the cunning eye and ear to whom that god-written apocalypse will yield
 articulate meaning? we sit as in a boundless phantasmagoria and
 dream-grotto; boundless, for the faintest star, the remotest century, lies
 not even nearer the verge thereof: sounds and many-colored visions flit
 round our sense; but him, the unslumbering, whose work both dream and
 dreamer are, we see not; except in rare half-waking moments, suspect not.
 creation, says one, lies before us, like a glorious rainbow; but the sun
 that made it lies behind us, hidden from us. then, in that strange dream,
 how we clutch at shadows as if they were substances; and sleep deepest
 while fancying ourselves most awake! which of your philosophical systems
 is other than a dream-theorem; a net quotient, confidently given out,
 where divisor and dividend are both unknown? what are all your national
 wars, with their moscow retreats, and sanguinary hate-filled revolutions,
 but the somnambulism of uneasy sleepers? this dreaming, this somnambulism
 is what we on earth call life; wherein the most indeed undoubtingly
 wander, as if they knew right hand from left; yet they only are wise who
 know that they know nothing.
 "pity that all metaphysics had hitherto proved so inexpressibly
 unproductive! the secret of man's being is still like the sphinx's secret:
 a riddle that he cannot rede; and for ignorance of which he suffers death,
 the worst death, a spiritual. what are your axioms, and categories, and
 systems, and aphorisms? words, words. high air-castles are cunningly built
 of words, the words well bedded also in good logic-mortar; wherein,
 however, no knowledge will come to lodge. the whole is greater than the
 part: how exceedingly true! nature abhors a vacuum: how
 exceedingly false and calumnious! again, nothing can act but where it
 is: with all my heart; only, where is it? be not the slave of words:
 is not the distant, the dead, while i love it, and long for it, and mourn
 for it, here, in the genuine sense, as truly as the floor i stand on? but
 that same where, with its brother when, are from the first the
 master-colors of our dream-grotto; say rather, the canvas (the warp and
 woof thereof) whereon all our dreams and life-visions are painted.
 nevertheless, has not a deeper meditation taught certain of every climate
 and age, that the where and when, so mysteriously inseparable from all our
 thoughts, are but superficial terrestrial adhesions to thought; that the
 seer may discern them where they mount up out of the celestial everywhere
 and forever: have not all nations conceived their god as omnipresent and
 eternal; as existing in a universal here, an everlasting now? think well,
 thou too wilt find that space is but a mode of our human sense, so
 likewise time; there is no space and no time: we are—we know
 not what;—light-sparkles floating in the ether of deity!
 "so that this so solid-seeming world, after all, were but an air-image,
 our me the only reality: and nature, with its thousand-fold production and
 destruction, but the reflex of our own inward force, the 'phantasy of our
 dream;' or what the earth-spirit in faust names it, the living
 visible garment of god:—
 "'in being's floods, in action's storm,
 i walk and work, above, beneath,
 work and weave in endless motion!
 birth and death,
 an infinite ocean;
 a seizing and giving
 the fire of living:
 'tis thus at the roaring loom of time i ply,
 and weave for god the garment thou seest him by.'
 of twenty millions that have read and spouted this thunder-speech of the
 erdgeist, are there yet twenty units of us that have learned the
 meaning thereof?
 "it was in some such mood, when wearied and fordone with these high
 speculations, that i first came upon the question of clothes. strange
 enough, it strikes me, is this same fact of there being tailors and
 tailored. the horse i ride has his own whole fell: strip him of the girths
 and flaps and extraneous tags i have fastened round him, and the noble
 creature is his own sempster and weaver and spinner; nay his own
 boot-maker, jeweller, and man-milliner; he bounds free through the
 valleys, with a perennial rain-proof court-suit on his body; wherein
 warmth and easiness of fit have reached perfection; nay, the graces also
 have been considered, and frills and fringes, with gay variety of color,
 featly appended, and ever in the right place, are not wanting. while i—good
 heaven!—have thatched myself over with the dead fleeces of sheep,
 the bark of vegetables, the entrails of worms, the hides of oxen or seals,
 the felt of furred beasts; and walk abroad a moving rag-screen, overheaped
 with shreds and tatters raked from the charnel-house of nature, where they
 would have rotted, to rot on me more slowly! day after day, i must thatch
 myself anew; day after day, this despicable thatch must lose some film of
 its thickness; some film of it, frayed away by tear and wear, must be
 brushed off into the ashpit, into the laystall; till by degrees the whole
 has been brushed thither, and i, the dust-making, patent rat-grinder, get
 new material to grind down. o subter-brutish! vile! most vile! for have
 not i too a compact all-enclosing skin, whiter or dingier? am i a botched
 mass of tailors' and cobblers' shreds, then; or a tightly articulated,
 homogeneous little figure, automatic, nay alive?
 "strange enough how creatures of the human-kind shut their eyes to
 plainest facts; and by the mere inertia of oblivion and stupidity, live at
 ease in the midst of wonders and terrors. but indeed man is, and was
 always, a blockhead and dullard; much readier to feel and digest, than to
 think and consider. prejudice, which he pretends to hate, is his absolute
 lawgiver; mere use-and-wont everywhere leads him by the nose; thus let but
 a rising of the sun, let but a creation of the world happen twice,
 and it ceases to be marvellous, to be noteworthy, or noticeable. perhaps
 not once in a lifetime does it occur to your ordinary biped, of any
 country or generation, be he gold-mantled prince or russet-jerkined
 peasant, that his vestments and his self are not one and indivisible; that
 he is naked, without vestments, till he buy or steal such, and by
 forethought sew and button them.
 "for my own part, these considerations, of our clothes-thatch, and how,
 reaching inwards even to our heart of hearts, it tailorizes and
 demoralizes us, fill me with a certain horror at myself and mankind;
 almost as one feels at those dutch cows, which, during the wet season, you
 see grazing deliberately with jackets and petticoats (of striped sacking),
 in the meadows of gouda. nevertheless there is something great in the
 moment when a man first strips himself of adventitious wrappages; and sees
 indeed that he is naked, and, as swift has it, 'a forked straddling animal
 with bandy legs;' yet also a spirit, and unutterable mystery of
 mysteries."
 let no courteous reader take offence at the opinions broached in the
 conclusion of the last chapter. the editor himself, on first glancing over
 that singular passage, was inclined to exclaim: what, have we got not only
 a sansculottist, but an enemy to clothes in the abstract? a new adamite,
 in this century, which flatters itself that it is the nineteenth, and
 destructive both to superstition and enthusiasm?
 consider, thou foolish teufelsdrockh, what benefits unspeakable all ages
 and sexes derive from clothes. for example, when thou thyself, a watery,
 pulpy, slobbery freshman and new-comer in this planet, sattest muling and
 puking in thy nurse's arms; sucking thy coral, and looking forth into the
 world in the blankest manner, what hadst thou been without thy blankets,
 and bibs, and other nameless hulls? a terror to thyself and mankind! or
 hast thou forgotten the day when thou first receivedst breeches, and thy
 long clothes became short? the village where thou livedst was all apprised
 of the fact; and neighbor after neighbor kissed thy pudding-cheek, and
 gave thee, as handsel, silver or copper coins, on that the first gala-day
 of thy existence. again, wert not thou, at one period of life, a buck, or
 blood, or macaroni, or incroyable, or dandy, or by whatever name,
 according to year and place, such phenomenon is distinguished? in that one
 word lie included mysterious volumes. nay, now when the reign of folly is
 over, or altered, and thy clothes are not for triumph but for defence,
 hast thou always worn them perforce, and as a consequence of man's fall;
 never rejoiced in them as in a warm movable house, a body round thy body,
 wherein that strange thee of thine sat snug, defying all variations of
 climate? girt with thick double-milled kerseys; half buried under shawls
 and broadbrims, and overalls and mudboots, thy very fingers cased in
 doeskin and mittens, thou hast bestrode that "horse i ride;" and, though
 it were in wild winter, dashed through the world, glorying in it as if
 thou wert its lord. in vain did the sleet beat round thy temples; it
 lighted only on thy impenetrable, felted or woven, case of wool. in vain
 did the winds howl,—forests sounding and creaking, deep calling unto
 deep,—and the storms heap themselves together into one huge arctic
 whirlpool: thou flewest through the middle thereof, striking fire from the
 highway; wild music hummed in thy ears, thou too wert as a "sailor of the
 air;" the wreck of matter and the crash of worlds was thy element and
 propitiously wafting tide. without clothes, without bit or saddle, what
 hadst thou been; what had thy fleet quadruped been?—nature is good,
 but she is not the best: here truly was the victory of art over nature. a
 thunderbolt indeed might have pierced thee; all short of this thou couldst
 defy.
 or, cries the courteous reader, has your teufelsdrockh forgotten what he
 said lately about "aboriginal savages," and their "condition miserable
 indeed"? would he have all this unsaid; and us betake ourselves again to
 the "matted cloak," and go sheeted in a "thick natural fell"?
 nowise, courteous reader! the professor knows full well what he is saying;
 and both thou and we, in our haste, do him wrong. if clothes, in these
 times, "so tailorize and demoralize us," have they no redeeming value; can
 they not be altered to serve better; must they of necessity be thrown to
 the dogs? the truth is, teufelsdrockh, though a sansculottist, is no
 adamite; and much perhaps as he might wish to go forth before this
 degenerate age "as a sign," would nowise wish to do it, as those old
 adamites did, in a state of nakedness. the utility of clothes is
 altogether apparent to him: nay perhaps he has an insight into their more
 recondite, and almost mystic qualities, what we might call the omnipotent
 virtue of clothes, such as was never before vouchsafed to any man. for
 example:—
 "you see two individuals," he writes, "one dressed in fine red, the other
 in coarse threadbare blue: red says to blue, 'be hanged and anatomized;'
 blue hears with a shudder, and (o wonder of wonders!) marches sorrowfully
 to the gallows; is there noosed up, vibrates his hour, and the surgeons
 dissect him, and fit his bones into a skeleton for medical purposes. how
 is this; or what make ye of your nothing can act but where it is?
 red has no physical hold of blue, no clutch of him, is nowise in contact
 with him: neither are those ministering sheriffs and lord-lieutenants and
 hangmen and tipstaves so related to commanding red, that he can tug them
 hither and thither; but each stands distinct within his own skin.
 nevertheless, as it is spoken, so is it done: the articulated word sets
 all hands in action; and rope and improved-drop perform their work.
 "thinking reader, the reason seems to me twofold: first, that man is a
 spirit, and bound by invisible bonds to all men; secondly, that
 he wears clothes, which are the visible emblems of that fact. has
 not your red hanging-individual a horsehair wig, squirrel-skins, and a
 plush-gown; whereby all mortals know that he is a judge?—society,
 which the more i think of it astonishes me the more, is founded upon
 cloth.
 "often in my atrabiliar moods, when i read of pompous ceremonials,
 frankfort coronations, royal drawing-rooms, levees, couchees; and how the
 ushers and macers and pursuivants are all in waiting; how duke this is
 presented by archduke that, and colonel a by general b, and innumerable
 bishops, admirals, and miscellaneous functionaries, are advancing
 gallantly to the anointed presence; and i strive, in my remote privacy, to
 form a clear picture of that solemnity,—on a sudden, as by some
 enchanter's wand, the—shall i speak it?—the clothes fly off
 the whole dramatic corps; and dukes, grandees, bishops, generals, anointed
 presence itself, every mother's son of them, stand straddling there, not a
 shirt on them; and i know not whether to laugh or weep. this physical or
 psychical infirmity, in which perhaps i am not singular, i have, after
 hesitation, thought right to publish, for the solace of those afflicted
 with the like."
 would to heaven, say we, thou hadst thought right to keep it secret! who
 is there now that can read the five columns of presentations in his
 morning newspaper without a shudder? hypochondriac men, and all men are to
 a certain extent hypochondriac, should be more gently treated. with what
 readiness our fancy, in this shattered state of the nerves, follows out
 the consequences which teufelsdrockh, with a devilish coolness, goes on to
 draw:—
 "what would majesty do, could such an accident befall in reality; should
 the buttons all simultaneously start, and the solid wool evaporate, in
 very deed, as here in dream? ach gott! how each skulks into the
 nearest hiding-place; their high state tragedy (haupt- und
 staats-action) becomes a pickleherring-farce to weep at, which is the
 worst kind of farce; the tables (according to horace), and with
 them, the whole fabric of government, legislation, property, police, and
 civilized society, are dissolved, in wails and howls."
 lives the man that can figure a naked duke of windlestraw addressing a
 naked house of lords? imagination, choked as in mephitic air, recoils on
 itself, and will not forward with the picture. the woolsack, the
 ministerial, the opposition benches—infandum! infandum! and
 yet why is the thing impossible? was not every soul, or rather every body,
 of these guardians of our liberties, naked, or nearly so, last night; "a
 forked radish with a head fantastically carved"? and why might he not, did
 our stern fate so order it, walk out to st. stephen's, as well as into
 bed, in that no-fashion; and there, with other similar radishes, hold a
 bed of justice? "solace of those afflicted with the like!" unhappy
 teufelsdrockh, had man ever such a "physical or psychical infirmity"
 before? and now how many, perhaps, may thy unparalleled confession (which
 we, even to the sounder british world, and goaded on by critical and
 biographical duty, grudge to reimpart) incurably infect therewith! art
 thou the malignest of sansculottists, or only the maddest?
 "it will remain to be examined," adds the inexorable teufelsdrockh, "in
 how far the scarecrow, as a clothed person, is not also entitled to
 benefit of clergy, and english trial by jury: nay perhaps, considering his
 high function (for is not he too a defender of property, and sovereign
 armed with the terrors of the law?), to a certain royal immunity
 and inviolability; which, however, misers and the meaner class of persons
 are not always voluntarily disposed to grant him."
 "o my friends, we are [in yorick sterne's words] but as 'turkeys driven,
 with a stick and red clout, to the market:' or if some drivers, as they do
 in norfolk, take a dried bladder and put peas in it, the rattle thereof
 terrifies the boldest!"
 it must now be apparent enough that our professor, as above hinted, is a
 speculative radical, and of the very darkest tinge; acknowledging, for
 most part, in the solemnities and paraphernalia of civilized life, which
 we make so much of, nothing but so many cloth-rags, turkey-poles, and
 "bladders with dried peas." to linger among such speculations, longer than
 mere science requires, a discerning public can have no wish. for our
 purposes the simple fact that such a naked world is possible, nay
 actually exists (under the clothed one), will be sufficient. much,
 therefore, we omit about "kings wrestling naked on the green with carmen,"
 and the kings being thrown: "dissect them with scalpels," says
 teufelsdrockh; "the same viscera, tissues, livers, lights, and other
 life-tackle, are there: examine their spiritual mechanism; the same great
 need, great greed, and little faculty; nay ten to one but the carman, who
 understands draught-cattle, the rimming of wheels, something of the laws
 of unstable and stable equilibrium, with other branches of wagon-science,
 and has actually put forth his hand and operated on nature, is the more
 cunningly gifted of the two. whence, then, their so unspeakable
 difference? from clothes." much also we shall omit about confusion of
 ranks, and joan and my lady, and how it would be everywhere "hail fellow
 well met," and chaos were come again: all which to any one that has once
 fairly pictured out the grand mother-idea, society in a state of
 nakedness, will spontaneously suggest itself. should some sceptical
 individual still entertain doubts whether in a world without clothes, the
 smallest politeness, polity, or even police, could exist, let him turn to
 the original volume, and view there the boundless serbonian bog of
 sansculottism, stretching sour and pestilential: over which we have
 lightly flown; where not only whole armies but whole nations might sink!
 if indeed the following argument, in its brief riveting emphasis, be not
 of itself incontrovertible and final:—
 "are we opossums; have we natural pouches, like the kangaroo? or how,
 without clothes, could we possess the master-organ, soul's seat, and true
 pineal gland of the body social: i mean, a purse?"
 nevertheless it is impossible to hate professor teufelsdrockh; at worst,
 one knows not whether to hate or to love him. for though, in looking at
 the fair tapestry of human life, with its royal and even sacred figures,
 he dwells not on the obverse alone, but here chiefly on the reverse; and
 indeed turns out the rough seams, tatters, and manifold thrums of that
 unsightly wrong-side, with an almost diabolic patience and indifference,
 which must have sunk him in the estimation of most readers,—there is
 that within which unspeakably distinguishes him from all other past and
 present sansculottists. the grand unparalleled peculiarity of
 teufelsdrockh is, that with all this descendentalism, he combines a
 transcendentalism, no less superlative; whereby if on the one hand he
 degrade man below most animals, except those jacketed gouda cows, he, on
 the other, exalts him beyond the visible heavens, almost to an equality
 with the gods.
 "to the eye of vulgar logic," says he, "what is man? an omnivorous biped
 that wears breeches. to the eye of pure reason what is he? a soul, a
 spirit, and divine apparition. round his mysterious me, there lies, under
 all those wool-rags, a garment of flesh (or of senses), contextured in the
 loom of heaven; whereby he is revealed to his like, and dwells with them
 in union and division; and sees and fashions for himself a universe, with
 azure starry spaces, and long thousands of years. deep-hidden is he under
 that strange garment; amid sounds and colors and forms, as it were,
 swathed in, and inextricably over-shrouded: yet it is sky-woven, and
 worthy of a god. stands he not thereby in the centre of immensities, in
 the conflux of eternities? he feels; power has been given him to know, to
 believe; nay does not the spirit of love, free in its celestial primeval
 brightness, even here, though but for moments, look through? well said
 saint chrysostom, with his lips of gold, 'the true shekinah is man:' where
 else is the god's-presence manifested not to our eyes only, but to our
 hearts, as in our fellow-man?"
 in such passages, unhappily too rare, the high platonic mysticism of our
 author, which is perhaps the fundamental element of his nature, bursts
 forth, as it were, in full flood: and, through all the vapor and tarnish
 of what is often so perverse, so mean in his exterior and environment, we
 seem to look into a whole inward sea of light and love;—though,
 alas, the grim coppery clouds soon roll together again, and hide it from
 view.
 such tendency to mysticism is everywhere traceable in this man; and
 indeed, to attentive readers, must have been long ago apparent. nothing
 that he sees but has more than a common meaning, but has two meanings:
 thus, if in the highest imperial sceptre and charlemagne-mantle, as well
 as in the poorest ox-goad and gypsy-blanket, he finds prose, decay,
 contemptibility; there is in each sort poetry also, and a reverend worth.
 for matter, were it never so despicable, is spirit, the manifestation of
 spirit: were it never so honorable, can it be more? the thing visible, nay
 the thing imagined, the thing in any way conceived as visible, what is it
 but a garment, a clothing of the higher, celestial invisible,
 "unimaginable formless, dark with excess of bright"? under which point of
 view the following passage, so strange in purport, so strange in phrase,
 seems characteristic enough:—
 "the beginning of all wisdom is to look fixedly on clothes, or even with
 armed eyesight, till they become transparent. 'the philosopher,'
 says the wisest of this age, 'must station himself in the middle:' how
 true! the philosopher is he to whom the highest has descended, and the
 lowest has mounted up; who is the equal and kindly brother of all.
 "shall we tremble before clothwebs and cobwebs, whether woven in arkwright
 looms, or by the silent arachnes that weave unrestingly in our
 imagination? or, on the other hand, what is there that we cannot love;
 since all was created by god?
 "happy he who can look through the clothes of a man (the woollen, and
 fleshly, and official bank-paper and state-paper clothes) into the man
 himself; and discern, it may be, in this or the other dread potentate, a
 more or less incompetent digestive-apparatus; yet also an inscrutable
 venerable mystery, in the meanest tinker that sees with eyes!"
 for the rest, as is natural to a man of this kind, he deals much in the
 feeling of wonder; insists on the necessity and high worth of universal
 wonder; which he holds to be the only reasonable temper for the denizen of
 so singular a planet as ours. "wonder," says he, "is the basis of worship:
 the reign of wonder is perennial, indestructible in man; only at certain
 stages (as the present), it is, for some short season, a reign in
 partibus infidelium." that progress of science, which is to destroy
 wonder, and in its stead substitute mensuration and numeration, finds
 small favor with teufelsdrockh, much as he otherwise venerates these two
 latter processes.
 "shall your science," exclaims he, "proceed in the small chink-lighted, or
 even oil-lighted, underground workshop of logic alone; and man's mind
 become an arithmetical mill, whereof memory is the hopper, and mere tables
 of sines and tangents, codification, and treatises of what you call
 political economy, are the meal? and what is that science, which the
 scientific head alone, were it screwed off, and (like the doctor's in the
 arabian tale) set in a basin to keep it alive, could prosecute without
 shadow of a heart,—but one other of the mechanical and menial
 handicrafts, for which the scientific head (having a soul in it) is too
 noble an organ? i mean that thought without reverence is barren, perhaps
 poisonous; at best, dies like cookery with the day that called it forth;
 does not live, like sowing, in successive tilths and wider-spreading
 harvests, bringing food and plenteous increase to all time."
 in such wise does teufelsdrockh deal hits, harder or softer, according to
 ability; yet ever, as we would fain persuade ourselves, with charitable
 intent. above all, that class of "logic-choppers, and treble-pipe
 scoffers, and professed enemies to wonder; who, in these days, so
 numerously patrol as night-constables about the mechanics' institute of
 science, and cackle, like true old-roman geese and goslings round their
 capitol, on any alarm, or on none; nay who often, as illuminated sceptics,
 walk abroad into peaceable society, in full daylight, with rattle and
 lantern, and insist on guiding you and guarding you therewith, though the
 sun is shining, and the street populous with mere justice-loving men:"
 that whole class is inexpressibly wearisome to him. hear with what
 uncommon animation he perorates:—
 "the man who cannot wonder, who does not habitually wonder (and worship),
 were he president of innumerable royal societies, and carried the whole mecanique
 celeste and hegel's philosophy, and the epitome of all
 laboratories and observatories with their results, in his single head,—is
 but a pair of spectacles behind which there is no eye. let those who have
 eyes look through him, then he may be useful.
 "thou wilt have no mystery and mysticism; wilt walk through thy world by
 the sunshine of what thou callest truth, or even by the hand-lamp of what
 i call attorney-logic; and 'explain' all, 'account' for all, or believe
 nothing of it? nay, thou wilt attempt laughter; whoso recognizes the
 unfathomable, all-pervading domain of mystery, which is everywhere under
 our feet and among our hands; to whom the universe is an oracle and
 temple, as well as a kitchen and cattle-stall,—he shall be a
 delirious mystic; to him thou, with sniffing charity, wilt protrusively
 proffer thy hand-lamp, and shriek, as one injured, when he kicks his foot
 through it?—armer teufel! doth not thy cow calve, doth not
 thy bull gender? thou thyself, wert thou not born, wilt thou not die?
 'explain' me all this, or do one of two things: retire into private places
 with thy foolish cackle; or, what were better, give it up, and weep, not
 that the reign of wonder is done, and god's world all disembellished and
 prosaic, but that thou hitherto art a dilettante and sand-blind pedant."
 the philosophy of clothes is now to all readers, as we predicted it would
 do, unfolding itself into new boundless expansions, of a cloud-capt,
 almost chimerical aspect, yet not without azure loomings in the far
 distance, and streaks as of an elysian brightness; the highly questionable
 purport and promise of which it is becoming more and more important for us
 to ascertain. is that a real elysian brightness, cries many a timid
 wayfarer, or the reflex of pandemonian lava? is it of a truth leading us
 into beatific asphodel meadows, or the yellow-burning marl of a
 hell-on-earth?
 our professor, like other mystics, whether delirious or inspired, gives an
 editor enough to do. ever higher and dizzier are the heights he leads us
 to; more piercing, all-comprehending, all-confounding are his views and
 glances. for example, this of nature being not an aggregate but a whole:—
 "well sang the hebrew psalmist: 'if i take the wings of the morning and
 dwell in the uttermost parts of the universe, god is there.' thou thyself,
 o cultivated reader, who too probably art no psalmist, but a prosaist,
 knowing god only by tradition, knowest thou any corner of the world where
 at least force is not? the drop which thou shakest from thy wet hand,
 rests not where it falls, but to-morrow thou findest it swept away;
 already on the wings of the north-wind, it is nearing the tropic of
 cancer. how came it to evaporate, and not lie motionless? thinkest thou
 there is aught motionless; without force, and utterly dead?
 "as i rode through the schwarzwald, i said to myself: that little fire
 which glows star-like across the dark-growing (nachtende) moor,
 where the sooty smith bends over his anvil, and thou hopest to replace thy
 lost horse-shoe,—is it a detached, separated speck, cut off from the
 whole universe; or indissolubly joined to the whole? thou fool, that
 smithy-fire was (primarily) kindled at the sun; is fed by air that
 circulates from before noah's deluge, from beyond the dog-star; therein,
 with iron force, and coal force, and the far stranger force of man, are
 cunning affinities and battles and victories of force brought about; it is
 a little ganglion, or nervous centre, in the great vital system of
 immensity. call it, if thou wilt, an unconscious altar, kindled on the
 bosom of the all; whose iron sacrifice, whose iron smoke and influence
 reach quite through the all; whose dingy priest, not by word, yet by brain
 and sinew, preaches forth the mystery of force; nay preaches forth
 (exoterically enough) one little textlet from the gospel of freedom, the
 gospel of man's force, commanding, and one day to be all-commanding.
 "detached, separated! i say there is no such separation: nothing hitherto
 was ever stranded, cast aside; but all, were it only a withered leaf,
 works together with all; is borne forward on the bottomless, shoreless
 flood of action, and lives through perpetual metamorphoses. the withered
 leaf is not dead and lost, there are forces in it and around it, though
 working in inverse order; else how could it rot? despise not the rag from
 which man makes paper, or the litter from which the earth makes corn.
 rightly viewed no meanest object is insignificant; all objects are as
 windows, through which the philosophic eye looks into infinitude itself."
 again, leaving that wondrous schwarzwald smithy-altar, what vacant,
 high-sailing air-ships are these, and whither will they sail with us?
 "all visible things are emblems; what thou seest is not there on its own
 account; strictly taken, is not there at all: matter exists only
 spiritually, and to represent some idea, and body it forth. hence
 clothes, as despicable as we think them, are so unspeakably significant.
 clothes, from the king's mantle downwards, are emblematic, not of want
 only, but of a manifold cunning victory over want. on the other hand, all
 emblematic things are properly clothes, thought-woven or hand-woven: must
 not the imagination weave garments, visible bodies, wherein the else
 invisible creations and inspirations of our reason are, like spirits,
 revealed, and first become all-powerful; the rather if, as we often see,
 the hand too aid her, and (by wool clothes or otherwise) reveal such even
 to the outward eye?
 "men are properly said to be clothed with authority, clothed with beauty,
 with curses, and the like. nay, if you consider it, what is man himself,
 and his whole terrestrial life, but an emblem; a clothing or visible
 garment for that divine me of his, cast hither, like a light-particle,
 down from heaven? thus is he said also to be clothed with a body.
 "language is called the garment of thought: however, it should rather be,
 language is the flesh-garment, the body, of thought. i said that
 imagination wove this flesh-garment; and does not she? metaphors are her
 stuff: examine language; what, if you except some few primitive elements
 (of natural sound), what is it all but metaphors, recognized as such, or
 no longer recognized; still fluid and florid, or now solid-grown and
 colorless? if those same primitive elements are the osseous fixtures in
 the flesh-garment, language,—then are metaphors its muscles and
 tissues and living integuments. an unmetaphorical style you shall in vain
 seek for: is not your very attention a stretching-to? the
 difference lies here: some styles are lean, adust, wiry, the muscle itself
 seems osseous; some are even quite pallid, hunger-bitten and dead-looking;
 while others again glow in the flush of health and vigorous self-growth,
 sometimes (as in my own case) not without an apoplectic tendency.
 moreover, there are sham metaphors, which overhanging that same
 thought's-body (best naked), and deceptively bedizening, or bolstering it
 out, may be called its false stuffings, superfluous show-cloaks (putz-mantel),
 and tawdry woollen rags: whereof he that runs and reads may gather whole
 hampers,—and burn them."
 than which paragraph on metaphors did the reader ever chance to see a more
 surprisingly metaphorical? however, that is not our chief grievance; the
 professor continues:—
 "why multiply instances? it is written, the heavens and the earth shall
 fade away like a vesture; which indeed they are: the time-vesture of the
 eternal. whatsoever sensibly exists, whatsoever represents spirit to
 spirit, is properly a clothing, a suit of raiment, put on for a season,
 and to be laid off. thus in this one pregnant subject of clothes, rightly
 understood, is included all that men have thought, dreamed, done, and
 been: the whole external universe and what it holds is but clothing; and
 the essence of all science lies in the philosophy of clothes."
 towards these dim infinitely expanded regions, close-bordering on the
 impalpable inane, it is not without apprehension, and perpetual
 difficulties, that the editor sees himself journeying and struggling. till
 lately a cheerful daystar of hope hung before him, in the expected aid of
 hofrath heuschrecke; which daystar, however, melts now, not into the red
 of morning, but into a vague, gray half-light, uncertain whether dawn of
 day or dusk of utter darkness. for the last week, these so-called
 biographical documents are in his hand. by the kindness of a scottish
 hamburg merchant, whose name, known to the whole mercantile world, he must
 not mention; but whose honorable courtesy, now and often before
 spontaneously manifested to him, a mere literary stranger, he cannot soon
 forget,—the bulky weissnichtwo packet, with all its custom-house
 seals, foreign hieroglyphs, and miscellaneous tokens of travel, arrived
 here in perfect safety, and free of cost. the reader shall now fancy with
 what hot haste it was broken up, with what breathless expectation glanced
 over; and, alas, with what unquiet disappointment it has, since then, been
 often thrown down, and again taken up.
 hofrath heuschrecke, in a too long-winded letter, full of compliments,
 weissnichtwo politics, dinners, dining repartees, and other ephemeral
 trivialities, proceeds to remind us of what we knew well already: that
 however it may be with metaphysics, and other abstract science originating
 in the head (verstand) alone, no life-philosophy (lebensphilosophie),
 such as this of clothes pretends to be, which originates equally in the
 character (gemuth), and equally speaks thereto, can attain its
 significance till the character itself is known and seen; "till the
 author's view of the world (weltansicht), and how he actively and
 passively came by such view, are clear: in short till a biography of him
 has been philosophico-poetically written, and philosophico-poetically
 read.... nay," adds he, "were the speculative scientific truth even known,
 you still, in this inquiring age, ask yourself, whence came it, and why,
 and how?—and rest not, till, if no better may be, fancy have shaped
 out an answer; and either in the authentic lineaments of fact, or the
 forged ones of fiction, a complete picture and genetical history of the
 man and his spiritual endeavor lies before you. but why," says the
 hofrath, and indeed say we, "do i dilate on the uses of our
 teufelsdrockh's biography? the great herr minister von goethe has
 penetratingly remarked that man is properly the only object that
 interests man:' thus i too have noted, that in weissnichtwo our whole
 conversation is little or nothing else but biography or autobiography;
 ever humano-anecdotical (menschlich-anekdotisch). biography is by
 nature the most universally profitable, universally pleasant of all
 things: especially biography of distinguished individuals.
 "by this time, mein verehrtester (my most esteemed)," continues he,
 with an eloquence which, unless the words be purloined from teufelsdrockh,
 or some trick of his, as we suspect, is well-nigh unaccountable, "by this
 time you are fairly plunged (vertieft) in that mighty forest of
 clothes-philosophy; and looking round, as all readers do, with
 astonishment enough. such portions and passages as you have already
 mastered, and brought to paper, could not but awaken a strange curiosity
 touching the mind they issued from; the perhaps unparalleled psychical
 mechanism, which manufactured such matter, and emitted it to the light of
 day. had teufelsdrockh also a father and mother; did he, at one time, wear
 drivel-bibs, and live on spoon-meat? did he ever, in rapture and tears,
 clasp a friend's bosom to his; looks he also wistfully into the long
 burial-aisle of the past, where only winds, and their low harsh moan, give
 inarticulate answer? has he fought duels;—good heaven! how did he
 comport himself when in love? by what singular stair-steps, in short, and
 subterranean passages, and sloughs of despair, and steep pisgah hills, has
 he reached this wonderful prophetic hebron (a true old-clothes jewry)
 where he now dwells?
 "to all these natural questions the voice of public history is as yet
 silent. certain only that he has been, and is, a pilgrim, and traveller
 from a far country; more or less footsore and travel-soiled; has parted
 with road-companions; fallen among thieves, been poisoned by bad cookery,
 blistered with bug-bites; nevertheless, at every stage (for they have let
 him pass), has had the bill to discharge. but the whole particulars of his
 route, his weather-observations, the picturesque sketches he took, though
 all regularly jotted down (in indelible sympathetic-ink by an invisible
 interior penman), are these nowhere forthcoming? perhaps quite lost: one
 other leaf of that mighty volume (of human memory) left to fly abroad,
 unprinted, unpublished, unbound up, as waste paper; and to rot, the sport
 of rainy winds?
 "no, verehrtester herr herausgeber, in no wise! i here, by the
 unexampled favor you stand in with our sage, send not a biography only,
 but an autobiography: at least the materials for such; wherefrom, if i
 misreckon not, your perspicacity will draw fullest insight: and so the
 whole philosophy and philosopher of clothes will stand clear to the
 wondering eyes of england, nay thence, through america, through hindostan,
 and the antipodal new holland, finally conquer (einnehmen) great
 part of this terrestrial planet!"
 and now let the sympathizing reader judge of our feeling when, in place of
 this same autobiography with "fullest insight," we find—six
 considerable paper-bags, carefully sealed, and marked successively, in
 gilt china-ink, with the symbols of the six southern zodiacal signs,
 beginning at libra; in the inside of which sealed bags lie miscellaneous
 masses of sheets, and oftener shreds and snips, written in professor
 teufelsdrockh's scarce legible cursiv-schrift; and treating of all
 imaginable things under the zodiac and above it, but of his own personal
 history only at rare intervals, and then in the most enigmatic manner.
 whole fascicles there are, wherein the professor, or, as he here, speaking
 in the third person, calls himself, "the wanderer," is not once named.
 then again, amidst what seems to be a metaphysico-theological
 disquisition, "detached thoughts on the steam-engine," or, "the continued
 possibility of prophecy," we shall meet with some quite private, not
 unimportant biographical fact. on certain sheets stand dreams, authentic
 or not, while the circumjacent waking actions are omitted. anecdotes,
 oftenest without date of place or time, fly loosely on separate slips,
 like sibylline leaves. interspersed also are long purely autobiographical
 delineations; yet without connection, without recognizable coherence; so
 unimportant, so superfluously minute, they almost remind us of "p.p. clerk
 of this parish." thus does famine of intelligence alternate with waste.
 selection, order, appears to be unknown to the professor. in all bags the
 same imbroglio; only perhaps in the bag capricorn, and those near
 it, the confusion a little worse confounded. close by a rather eloquent
 oration, "on receiving the doctor's-hat," lie wash-bills, marked bezahlt
 (settled). his travels are indicated by the street-advertisements of the
 various cities he has visited; of which street-advertisements, in most
 living tongues, here is perhaps the completest collection extant.
 so that if the clothes-volume itself was too like a chaos, we have now
 instead of the solar luminary that should still it, the airy limbo which
 by intermixture will farther volatilize and discompose it! as we shall
 perhaps see it our duty ultimately to deposit these six paper-bags in the
 british museum, farther description, and all vituperation of them, may be
 spared. biography or autobiography of teufelsdrockh there is, clearly
 enough, none to be gleaned here: at most some sketchy, shadowy fugitive
 likeness of him may, by unheard-of efforts, partly of intellect, partly of
 imagination, on the side of editor and of reader, rise up between them.
 only as a gaseous-chaotic appendix to that aqueous-chaotic volume can the
 contents of the six bags hover round us, and portions thereof be
 incorporated with our delineation of it.
 daily and nightly does the editor sit (with green spectacles) deciphering
 these unimaginable documents from their perplexed cursiv-schrift;
 collating them with the almost equally unimaginable volume, which stands
 in legible print. over such a universal medley of high and low, of hot,
 cold, moist and dry, is he here struggling (by union of like with like,
 which is method) to build a firm bridge for british travellers. never
 perhaps since our first bridge-builders, sin and death, built that
 stupendous arch from hell-gate to the earth, did any pontifex, or pontiff,
 undertake such a task as the present editor. for in this arch too,
 leading, as we humbly presume, far otherwards than that grand primeval
 one, the materials are to be fished up from the weltering deep, and down
 from the simmering air, here one mass, there another, and cunningly
 cemented, while the elements boil beneath: nor is there any supernatural
 force to do it with; but simply the diligence and feeble thinking faculty
 of an english editor, endeavoring to evolve printed creation out of a
 german printed and written chaos, wherein, as he shoots to and fro in it,
 gathering, clutching, piecing the why to the far-distant wherefore, his
 whole faculty and self are like to be swallowed up.
 patiently, under these incessant toils and agitations, does the editor,
 dismissing all anger, see his otherwise robust health declining; some
 fraction of his allotted natural sleep nightly leaving him, and little but
 an inflamed nervous-system to be looked for. what is the use of health, or
 of life, if not to do some work therewith? and what work nobler than
 transplanting foreign thought into the barren domestic soil; except indeed
 planting thought of your own, which the fewest are privileged to do? wild
 as it looks, this philosophy of clothes, can we ever reach its real
 meaning, promises to reveal new-coming eras, the first dim rudiments and
 already-budding germs of a nobler era, in universal history. is not such a
 prize worth some striving? forward with us, courageous reader; be it
 towards failure, or towards success! the latter thou sharest with us; the
 former also is not all our own.
 in a psychological point of view, it is perhaps questionable whether from
 birth and genealogy, how closely scrutinized soever, much insight is to be
 gained. nevertheless, as in every phenomenon the beginning remains always
 the most notable moment; so, with regard to any great man, we rest not
 till, for our scientific profit or not, the whole circumstances of his
 first appearance in this planet, and what manner of public entry he made,
 are with utmost completeness rendered manifest. to the genesis of our
 clothes-philosopher, then, be this first chapter consecrated. unhappily,
 indeed, he seems to be of quite obscure extraction; uncertain, we might
 almost say, whether of any: so that this genesis of his can properly be
 nothing but an exodus (or transit out of invisibility into visibility);
 whereof the preliminary portion is nowhere forthcoming.
 "in the village of entepfuhl," thus writes he, in the bag libra, on
 various papers, which we arrange with difficulty, "dwelt andreas futteral
 and his wife; childless, in still seclusion, and cheerful though now
 verging towards old age. andreas had been grenadier sergeant, and even
 regimental schoolmaster under frederick the great; but now, quitting the
 halbert and ferule for the spade and pruning-hook, cultivated a little
 orchard, on the produce of which he, cincinnatus-like, lived not without
 dignity. fruits, the peach, the apple, the grape, with other varieties
 came in their season; all which andreas knew how to sell: on evenings he
 smoked largely, or read (as beseemed a regimental schoolmaster), and
 talked to neighbors that would listen about the victory of rossbach; and
 how fritz the only (der einzige) had once with his own royal lips
 spoken to him, had been pleased to say, when andreas as camp-sentinel
 demanded the pass-word, 'schweig hund (peace, hound)!' before any
 of his staff-adjutants could answer. 'das nenn' ich mir einen konig,
 there is what i call a king,' would andreas exclaim: 'but the smoke of
 kunersdorf was still smarting his eyes.'
 "gretchen, the housewife, won like desdemona by the deeds rather than the
 looks of her now veteran othello, lived not in altogether military
 subordination; for, as andreas said, 'the womankind will not drill (wer
 kann die weiberchen dressiren):' nevertheless she at heart loved him
 both for valor and wisdom; to her a prussian grenadier sergeant and
 regiment's schoolmaster was little other than a cicero and cid: what you
 see, yet cannot see over, is as good as infinite. nay, was not andreas in
 very deed a man of order, courage, downrightness (geradheit); that
 understood busching's geography, had been in the victory of
 rossbach, and left for dead in the camisade of hochkirch? the good
 gretchen, for all her fretting, watched over him and hovered round him as
 only a true house-mother can: assiduously she cooked and sewed and scoured
 for him; so that not only his old regimental sword and grenadier-cap, but
 the whole habitation and environment, where on pegs of honor they hung,
 looked ever trim and gay: a roomy painted cottage, embowered in
 fruit-trees and forest-trees, evergreens and honeysuckles; rising
 many-colored from amid shaven grass-plots, flowers struggling in through
 the very windows; under its long projecting eaves nothing but garden-tools
 in methodic piles (to screen them from rain), and seats where, especially
 on summer nights, a king might have wished to sit and smoke, and call it
 his. such a bauergut (copyhold) had gretchen given her veteran; whose
 sinewy arms, and long-disused gardening talent, had made it what you saw.
 "into this umbrageous man's-nest, one meek yellow evening or dusk, when
 the sun, hidden indeed from terrestrial entepfuhl, did nevertheless
 journey visible and radiant along the celestial balance (libra), it
 was that a stranger of reverend aspect entered; and, with grave
 salutation, stood before the two rather astonished housemates. he was
 close-muffled in a wide mantle; which without farther parley unfolding, he
 deposited therefrom what seemed some basket, overhung with green persian
 silk; saying only: ihr lieben leute, hier bringe ein unschatzbares
 verleihen; nehmt es in aller acht, sorgfaltigst benutzt es: mit hohem
 lohn, oder wohl mit schweren zinsen, wird's einst zuruckgefordert.
 'good christian people, here lies for you an invaluable loan; take all
 heed thereof, in all carefulness employ it: with high recompense, or else
 with heavy penalty, will it one day be required back.' uttering which
 singular words, in a clear, bell-like, forever memorable tone, the
 stranger gracefully withdrew; and before andreas or his wife, gazing in
 expectant wonder, had time to fashion either question or answer, was clean
 gone. neither out of doors could aught of him be seen or heard; he had
 vanished in the thickets, in the dusk; the orchard-gate stood quietly
 closed: the stranger was gone once and always. so sudden had the whole
 transaction been, in the autumn stillness and twilight, so gentle,
 noiseless, that the futterals could have fancied it all a trick of
 imagination, or some visit from an authentic spirit. only that the
 green-silk basket, such as neither imagination nor authentic spirits are
 wont to carry, still stood visible and tangible on their little
 parlor-table. towards this the astonished couple, now with lit candle,
 hastily turned their attention. lifting the green veil, to see what
 invaluable it hid, they descried there, amid down and rich white
 wrappages, no pitt diamond or hapsburg regalia, but, in the softest sleep,
 a little red-colored infant! beside it, lay a roll of gold friedrichs, the
 exact amount of which was never publicly known; also a taufschein
 (baptismal certificate), wherein unfortunately nothing but the name was
 decipherable, other document or indication none whatever.
 "to wonder and conjecture was unavailing, then and always thenceforth.
 nowhere in entepfuhl, on the morrow or next day, did tidings transpire of
 any such figure as the stranger; nor could the traveller, who had passed
 through the neighboring town in coach-and-four, be connected with this
 apparition, except in the way of gratuitous surmise. meanwhile, for
 andreas and his wife, the grand practical problem was: what to do with
 this little sleeping red-colored infant? amid amazements and curiosities,
 which had to die away without external satisfying, they resolved, as in
 such circumstances charitable prudent people needs must, on nursing it,
 though with spoon-meat, into whiteness, and if possible into manhood. the
 heavens smiled on their endeavor: thus has that same mysterious individual
 ever since had a status for himself in this visible universe, some modicum
 of victual and lodging and parade-ground; and now expanded in bulk,
 faculty and knowledge of good and evil, he, as herr diogenes
 teufelsdrockh, professes or is ready to profess, perhaps not altogether
 without effect, in the new university of weissnichtwo, the new science of
 things in general."
 our philosopher declares here, as indeed we should think he well might,
 that these facts, first communicated, by the good gretchen futteral, in
 his twelfth year, "produced on the boyish heart and fancy a quite
 indelible impression. who this reverend personage," he says, "that glided
 into the orchard cottage when the sun was in libra, and then, as on
 spirit's wings, glided out again, might be? an inexpressible desire, full
 of love and of sadness, has often since struggled within me to shape an
 answer. ever, in my distresses and my loneliness, has fantasy turned, full
 of longing (sehnsuchtsvoll), to that unknown father, who perhaps
 far from me, perhaps near, either way invisible, might have taken me to
 his paternal bosom, there to lie screened from many a woe. thou beloved
 father, dost thou still, shut out from me only by thin penetrable curtains
 of earthly space, wend to and fro among the crowd of the living? or art
 thou hidden by those far thicker curtains of the everlasting night, or
 rather of the everlasting day, through which my mortal eye and
 outstretched arms need not strive to reach? alas, i know not, and in vain
 vex myself to know. more than once, heart-deluded, have i taken for thee
 this and the other noble-looking stranger; and approached him wistfully,
 with infinite regard; but he too had to repel me, he too was not thou.
 "and yet, o man born of woman," cries the autobiographer, with one of his
 sudden whirls, "wherein is my case peculiar? hadst thou, any more than i,
 a father whom thou knowest? the andreas and gretchen, or the adam and eve,
 who led thee into life, and for a time suckled and pap-fed thee there,
 whom thou namest father and mother; these were, like mine, but thy
 nursing-father and nursing-mother: thy true beginning and father is in
 heaven, whom with the bodily eye thou shalt never behold, but only with
 the spiritual....
 "the little green veil," adds he, among much similar moralizing, and
 embroiled discoursing, "i yet keep; still more inseparably the name,
 diogenes teufelsdrockh. from the veil can nothing be inferred: a piece of
 now quite faded persian silk, like thousands of others. on the name i have
 many times meditated and conjectured; but neither in this lay there any
 clew. that it was my unknown father's name i must hesitate to believe. to
 no purpose have i searched through all the herald's books, in and without
 the german empire, and through all manner of subscriber-lists (pranumeranten),
 militia-rolls, and other name-catalogues; extraordinary names as we have
 in germany, the name teufelsdrockh, except as appended to my own person,
 nowhere occurs. again, what may the unchristian rather than christian
 'diogenes' mean? did that reverend basket-bearer intend, by such
 designation, to shadow forth my future destiny, or his own present malign
 humor? perhaps the latter, perhaps both. thou ill-starred parent, who like
 an ostrich hadst to leave thy ill-starred offspring to be hatched into
 self-support by the mere sky-influences of chance, can thy pilgrimage have
 been a smooth one? beset by misfortune thou doubtless hast been; or indeed
 by the worst figure of misfortune, by misconduct. often have i fancied
 how, in thy hard life-battle, thou wert shot at, and slung at, wounded,
 hand-fettered, hamstrung, browbeaten and bedevilled by the time-spirit (zeitgeist)
 in thyself and others, till the good soul first given thee was seered into
 grim rage, and thou hadst nothing for it but to leave in me an indignant
 appeal to the future, and living speaking protest against the devil, as
 that same spirit not of the time only, but of time itself, is well named!
 which appeal and protest, may i now modestly add, was not perhaps quite
 lost in air.
 "for indeed, as walter shandy often insisted, there is much, nay almost
 all, in names. the name is the earliest garment you wrap round the
 earth-visiting me; to which it thenceforth cleaves, more tenaciously (for
 there are names that have lasted nigh thirty centuries) than the very
 skin. and now from without, what mystic influences does it not send
 inwards, even to the centre; especially in those plastic first-times, when
 the whole soul is yet infantine, soft, and the invisible seedgrain will
 grow to be an all overshadowing tree! names? could i unfold the influence
 of names, which are the most important of all clothings, i were a second
 greater trismegistus. not only all common speech, but science, poetry
 itself is no other, if thou consider it, than a right naming.
 adam's first task was giving names to natural appearances: what is ours
 still but a continuation of the same; be the appearances exotic-vegetable,
 organic, mechanic, stars, or starry movements (as in science); or (as in
 poetry) passions, virtues, calamities, god-attributes, gods?—in a
 very plain sense the proverb says, call one a thief, and he will steal;
 in an almost similar sense may we not perhaps say, call one diogenes
 teufelsdrockh, and he will open the philosophy of clothes?"
 "meanwhile the incipient diogenes, like others, all ignorant of his why,
 his how or whereabout, was opening his eyes to the kind light; sprawling
 out his ten fingers and toes; listening, tasting, feeling; in a word, by
 all his five senses, still more by his sixth sense of hunger, and a whole
 infinitude of inward, spiritual, half-awakened senses, endeavoring daily
 to acquire for himself some knowledge of this strange universe where he
 had arrived, be his task therein what it might. infinite was his progress;
 thus in some fifteen months, he could perform the miracle of—speech!
 to breed a fresh soul, is it not like brooding a fresh (celestial) egg;
 wherein as yet all is formless, powerless; yet by degrees organic elements
 and fibres shoot through the watery albumen; and out of vague sensation
 grows thought, grows fantasy and force, and we have philosophies,
 dynasties, nay poetries and religions!
 "young diogenes, or rather young gneschen, for by such diminutive had they
 in their fondness named him, travelled forward to those high
 consummations, by quick yet easy stages. the futterals, to avoid vain
 talk, and moreover keep the roll of gold friedrichs safe, gave out that he
 was a grandnephew; the orphan of some sister's daughter, suddenly
 deceased, in andreas's distant prussian birthland; of whom, as of her
 indigent sorrowing widower, little enough was known at entepfuhl. heedless
 of all which, the nursling took to his spoon-meat, and throve. i have
 heard him noted as a still infant, that kept his mind much to himself;
 above all, that seldom or never cried. he already felt that time was
 precious; that he had other work cut out for him than whimpering."
 such, after utmost painful search and collation among these miscellaneous
 paper-masses, is all the notice we can gather of herr teufelsdrockh's
 genealogy. more imperfect, more enigmatic it can seem to few readers than
 to us. the professor, in whom truly we more and more discern a certain
 satirical turn, and deep under-currents of roguish whim, for the present
 stands pledged in honor, so we will not doubt him: but seems it not
 conceivable that, by the "good gretchen futteral," or some other perhaps
 interested party, he has himself been deceived? should these sheets,
 translated or not, ever reach the entepfuhl circulating library, some
 cultivated native of that district might feel called to afford
 explanation. nay, since books, like invisible scouts, permeate the whole
 habitable globe, and timbuctoo itself is not safe from british literature,
 may not some copy find out even the mysterious basket-bearing stranger,
 who in a state of extreme senility perhaps still exists; and gently force
 even him to disclose himself; to claim openly a son, in whom any father
 may feel pride?
 "happy season of childhood!" exclaims teufelsdrockh: "kind nature, that
 art to all a bountiful mother; that visitest the poor man's hut with
 auroral radiance; and for thy nursling hast provided a soft swathing of
 love and infinite hope, wherein he waxes and slumbers, danced round (umgaukelt)
 by sweetest dreams! if the paternal cottage still shuts us in, its roof
 still screens us; with a father we have as yet a prophet, priest and king,
 and an obedience that makes us free. the young spirit has awakened out of
 eternity, and knows not what we mean by time; as yet time is no
 fast-hurrying stream, but a sportful sunlit ocean; years to the child are
 as ages: ah! the secret of vicissitude, of that slower or quicker decay
 and ceaseless down-rushing of the universal world-fabric, from the granite
 mountain to the man or day-moth, is yet unknown; and in a motionless
 universe, we taste, what afterwards in this quick-whirling universe is
 forever denied us, the balm of rest. sleep on, thou fair child, for thy
 long rough journey is at hand! a little while, and thou too shalt sleep no
 more, but thy very dreams shall be mimic battles; thou too, with old
 arnauld, wilt have to say in stern patience: 'rest? rest? shall i not have
 all eternity to rest in?' celestial nepenthe! though a pyrrhus conquer
 empires, and an alexander sack the world, he finds thee not; and thou hast
 once fallen gently, of thy own accord, on the eyelids, on the heart of
 every mother's child. for as yet, sleep and waking are one: the fair
 life-garden rustles infinite around, and everywhere is dewy fragrance, and
 the budding of hope; which budding, if in youth, too frost-nipt, it grow
 to flowers, will in manhood yield no fruit, but a prickly, bitter-rinded
 stone-fruit, of which the fewest can find the kernel."
 in such rose-colored light does our professor, as poets are wont, look
 back on his childhood; the historical details of which (to say nothing of
 much other vague oratorical matter) he accordingly dwells on with an
 almost wearisome minuteness. we hear of entepfuhl standing "in trustful
 derangement" among the woody slopes; the paternal orchard flanking it as
 extreme outpost from below; the little kuhbach gushing kindly by, among
 beech-rows, through river after river, into the donau, into the black sea,
 into the atmosphere and universe; and how "the brave old linden,"
 stretching like a parasol of twenty ells in radius, overtopping all other
 rows and clumps, towered up from the central agora and campus
 martius of the village, like its sacred tree; and how the old men sat
 talking under its shadow (gneschen often greedily listening), and the
 wearied laborers reclined, and the unwearied children sported, and the
 young men and maidens often danced to flute-music. "glorious summer
 twilights," cries teufelsdrockh, "when the sun, like a proud conqueror and
 imperial taskmaster, turned his back, with his gold-purple emblazonry, and
 all his fireclad bodyguard (of prismatic colors); and the tired
 brickmakers of this clay earth might steal a little frolic, and those few
 meek stars would not tell of them!"
 then we have long details of the weinlesen (vintage), the
 harvest-home, christmas, and so forth; with a whole cycle of the entepfuhl
 children's-games, differing apparently by mere superficial shades from
 those of other countries. concerning all which, we shall here, for obvious
 reasons, say nothing. what cares the world for our as yet miniature
 philosopher's achievements under that "brave old linden "? or even where
 is the use of such practical reflections as the following? "in all the
 sports of children, were it only in their wanton breakages and
 defacements, you shall discern a creative instinct (schaffenden trieb):
 the mankin feels that he is a born man, that his vocation is to work. the
 choicest present you can make him is a tool; be it knife or pen-gun, for
 construction or for destruction; either way it is for work, for change. in
 gregarious sports of skill or strength, the boy trains himself to
 co-operation, for war or peace, as governor or governed: the little maid
 again, provident of her domestic destiny, takes with preference to dolls."
 perhaps, however, we may give this anecdote, considering who it is that
 relates it: "my first short-clothes were of yellow serge; or rather, i
 should say, my first short-cloth, for the vesture was one and indivisible,
 reaching from neck to ankle, a mere body with four limbs: of which fashion
 how little could i then divine the architectural, how much less the moral
 significance!"
 more graceful is the following little picture: "on fine evenings i was
 wont to carry forth my supper (bread-crumb boiled in milk), and eat it
 out-of-doors. on the coping of the orchard-wall, which i could reach by
 climbing, or still more easily if father andreas would set up the
 pruning-ladder, my porringer was placed: there, many a sunset, have i,
 looking at the distant western mountains, consumed, not without relish, my
 evening meal. those hues of gold and azure, that hush of world's
 expectation as day died, were still a hebrew speech for me; nevertheless i
 was looking at the fair illuminated letters, and had an eye for their
 gilding."
 with "the little one's friendship for cattle and poultry" we shall not
 much intermeddle. it may be that hereby he acquired a "certain deeper
 sympathy with animated nature:" but when, we would ask, saw any man, in a
 collection of biographical documents, such a piece as this: "impressive
 enough (bedeutungsvoll) was it to hear, in early morning, the
 swineherd's horn; and know that so many hungry happy quadrupeds were, on
 all sides, starting in hot haste to join him, for breakfast on the heath.
 or to see them at eventide, all marching in again, with short squeak,
 almost in military order; and each, topographically correct, trotting off
 in succession to the right or left, through its own lane, to its own
 dwelling; till old kunz, at the village-head, now left alone, blew his
 last blast, and retired for the night. we are wont to love the hog chiefly
 in the form of ham; yet did not these bristly thick-skinned beings here
 manifest intelligence, perhaps humor of character; at any rate, a
 touching, trustful submissiveness to man,—who, were he but a
 swineherd, in darned gabardine, and leather breeches more resembling slate
 or discolored-tin breeches, is still the hierarch of this lower world?"
 it is maintained, by helvetius and his set, that an infant of genius is
 quite the same as any other infant, only that certain surprisingly
 favorable influences accompany him through life, especially through
 childhood, and expand him, while others lie close-folded and continue
 dunces. herein, say they, consists the whole difference between an
 inspired prophet and a double-barrelled game-preserver: the inner man of
 the one has been fostered into generous development; that of the other,
 crushed down perhaps by vigor of animal digestion, and the like, has
 exuded and evaporated, or at best sleeps now irresuscitably stagnant at
 the bottom of his stomach. "with which opinion," cries teufelsdrockh, "i
 should as soon agree as with this other, that an acorn might, by favorable
 or unfavorable influences of soil and climate, be nursed into a cabbage,
 or the cabbage-seed into an oak.
 "nevertheless," continues he, "i too acknowledge the all-but omnipotence
 of early culture and nurture: hereby we have either a doddered dwarf bush,
 or a high-towering, wide-shadowing tree; either a sick yellow cabbage, or
 an edible luxuriant green one. of a truth, it is the duty of all men,
 especially of all philosophers, to note down with accuracy the
 characteristic circumstances of their education, what furthered, what
 hindered, what in any way modified it: to which duty, nowadays so pressing
 for many a german autobiographer, i also zealously address myself."—thou
 rogue! is it by short clothes of yellow serge, and swineherd horns, that
 an infant of genius is educated? and yet, as usual, it ever remains
 doubtful whether he is laughing in his sleeve at these autobiographical
 times of ours, or writing from the abundance of his own fond ineptitude.
 for he continues: "if among the ever-streaming currents of sights,
 hearings, feelings for pain or pleasure, whereby, as in a magic hall,
 young gneschen went about environed, i might venture to select and
 specify, perhaps these following were also of the number:
 "doubtless, as childish sports call forth intellect, activity, so the
 young creature's imagination was stirred up, and a historical tendency
 given him by the narrative habits of father andreas; who, with his
 battle-reminiscences, and gray austere yet hearty patriarchal aspect,
 could not but appear another ulysses and 'much-enduring man.' eagerly i
 hung upon his tales, when listening neighbors enlivened the hearth; from
 these perils and these travels, wild and far almost as hades itself, a dim
 world of adventure expanded itself within me. incalculable also was the
 knowledge i acquired in standing by the old men under the linden-tree: the
 whole of immensity was yet new to me; and had not these reverend seniors,
 talkative enough, been employed in partial surveys thereof for nigh
 fourscore years? with amazement i began to discover that entepfuhl stood
 in the middle of a country, of a world; that there was such a thing as
 history, as biography to which i also, one day, by hand and tongue, might
 contribute.
 "in a like sense worked the postwagen (stage-coach), which,
 slow-rolling under its mountains of men and luggage, wended through our
 village: northwards, truly, in the dead of night; yet southwards visibly
 at eventide. not till my eighth year did i reflect that this postwagen
 could be other than some terrestrial moon, rising and setting by mere law
 of nature, like the heavenly one; that it came on made highways, from far
 cities towards far cities; weaving them like a monstrous shuttle into
 closer and closer union. it was then that, independently of schiller's wilhelm
 tell, i made this not quite insignificant reflection (so true also in
 spiritual things): any road, this simple entepfuhl road, will lead you
 to the end of the world!
 "why mention our swallows, which, out of far africa, as i learned,
 threading their way over seas and mountains, corporate cities and
 belligerent nations, yearly found themselves with the month of may,
 snug-lodged in our cottage lobby? the hospitable father (for cleanliness'
 sake) had fixed a little bracket plumb under their nest: there they built,
 and caught flies, and twittered, and bred; and all, i chiefly, from the
 heart loved them. bright, nimble creatures, who taught you the
 mason-craft; nay, stranger still, gave you a masonic incorporation, almost
 social police? for if, by ill chance, and when time pressed, your house
 fell, have i not seen five neighborly helpers appear next day; and
 swashing to and fro, with animated, loud, long-drawn chirpings, and
 activity almost super-hirundine, complete it again before nightfall?
 "but undoubtedly the grand summary of entepfuhl child's culture, where as
 in a funnel its manifold influences were concentrated and simultaneously
 poured down on us, was the annual cattle-fair. here, assembling from all
 the four winds, came the elements of an unspeakable hurry-burly. nut-brown
 maids and nut-brown men, all clear-washed, loud-laughing, bedizened and
 beribanded; who came for dancing, for treating, and if possible, for
 happiness. topbooted graziers from the north; swiss brokers, italian
 drovers, also topbooted, from the south; these with their subalterns in
 leather jerkins, leather skull-caps, and long ox-goads; shouting in
 half-articulate speech, amid the inarticulate barking and bellowing. apart
 stood potters from far saxony, with their crockery in fair rows; nurnberg
 pedlers, in booths that to me seemed richer than ormuz bazaars; showmen
 from the lago maggiore; detachments of the wiener schub
 (offscourings of vienna) vociferously superintending games of chance.
 ballad-singers brayed, auctioneers grew hoarse; cheap new wine (heuriger)
 flowed like water, still worse confounding the confusion; and high over
 all, vaulted, in ground-and-lofty tumbling, a particolored merry-andrew,
 like the genius of the place and of life itself.
 "thus encircled by the mystery of existence; under the deep heavenly
 firmament; waited on by the four golden seasons, with their vicissitudes
 of contribution, for even grim winter brought its skating-matches and
 shooting-matches, its snow-storms and christmas-carols,—did the
 child sit and learn. these things were the alphabet, whereby in aftertime
 he was to syllable and partly read the grand volume of the world: what
 matters it whether such alphabet be in large gilt letters or in small
 ungilt ones, so you have an eye to read it? for gneschen, eager to learn,
 the very act of looking thereon was a blessedness that gilded all: his
 existence was a bright, soft element of joy; out of which, as in
 prospero's island, wonder after wonder bodied itself forth, to teach by
 charming.
 "nevertheless, i were but a vain dreamer to say, that even then my
 felicity was perfect. i had, once for all, come down from heaven into the
 earth. among the rainbow colors that glowed on my horizon, lay even in
 childhood a dark ring of care, as yet no thicker than a thread, and often
 quite overshone; yet always it reappeared, nay ever waxing broader and
 broader; till in after-years it almost overshadowed my whole canopy, and
 threatened to engulf me in final night. it was the ring of necessity
 whereby we are all begirt; happy he for whom a kind heavenly sun brightens
 it into a ring of duty, and plays round it with beautiful prismatic
 diffractions; yet ever, as basis and as bourn for our whole being, it is
 there.
 "for the first few years of our terrestrial apprenticeship, we have not
 much work to do; but, boarded and lodged gratis, are set down mostly to
 look about us over the workshop, and see others work, till we have
 understood the tools a little, and can handle this and that. if good
 passivity alone, and not good passivity and good activity together, were
 the thing wanted, then was my early position favorable beyond the most. in
 all that respects openness of sense, affectionate temper, ingenuous
 curiosity, and the fostering of these, what more could i have wished? on
 the other side, however, things went not so well. my active power (thatkraft)
 was unfavorably hemmed in; of which misfortune how many traces yet abide
 with me! in an orderly house, where the litter of children's sports is
 hateful enough, your training is too stoical; rather to bear and forbear
 than to make and do. i was forbid much: wishes in any measure bold i had
 to renounce; everywhere a strait bond of obedience inflexibly held me
 down. thus already freewill often came in painful collision with
 necessity; so that my tears flowed, and at seasons the child itself might
 taste that root of bitterness, wherewith the whole fruitage of our life is
 mingled and tempered.
 "in which habituation to obedience, truly, it was beyond measure safer to
 err by excess than by defect. obedience is our universal duty and destiny;
 wherein whoso will not bend must break: too early and too thoroughly we
 cannot be trained to know that would, in this world of ours, is as mere
 zero to should, and for most part as the smallest of fractions even to
 shall. hereby was laid for me the basis of worldly discretion, nay of
 morality itself. let me not quarrel with my upbringing. it was rigorous,
 too frugal, compressively secluded, every way unscientific: yet in that
 very strictness and domestic solitude might there not lie the root of
 deeper earnestness, of the stem from which all noble fruit must grow?
 above all, how unskilful soever, it was loving, it was well-meant, honest;
 whereby every deficiency was helped. my kind mother, for as such i must
 ever love the good gretchen, did me one altogether invaluable service: she
 taught me, less indeed by word than by act and daily reverent look and
 habitude, her own simple version of the christian faith. andreas too
 attended church; yet more like a parade-duty, for which he in the other
 world expected pay with arrears,—as, i trust, he has received; but
 my mother, with a true woman's heart, and fine though uncultivated sense,
 was in the strictest acceptation religious. how indestructibly the good
 grows, and propagates itself, even among the weedy entanglements of evil!
 the highest whom i knew on earth i here saw bowed down, with awe
 unspeakable, before a higher in heaven: such things, especially in
 infancy, reach inwards to the very core of your being; mysteriously does a
 holy of holies build itself into visibility in the mysterious deeps; and
 reverence, the divinest in man, springs forth undying from its mean
 envelopment of fear. wouldst thou rather be a peasant's son that knew,
 were it never so rudely, there was a god in heaven and in man; or a duke's
 son that only knew there were two-and-thirty quarters on the
 family-coach?"
 to which last question we must answer: beware, o teufelsdrockh, of
 spiritual pride!
 hitherto we see young gneschen, in his indivisible case of yellow serge,
 borne forward mostly on the arms of kind nature alone; seated, indeed, and
 much to his mind, in the terrestrial workshop, but (except his soft hazel
 eyes, which we doubt not already gleamed with a still intelligence) called
 upon for little voluntary movement there. hitherto, accordingly, his
 aspect is rather generic, that of an incipient philosopher and poet in the
 abstract; perhaps it would puzzle herr heuschrecke himself to say wherein
 the special doctrine of clothes is as yet foreshadowed or betokened. for
 with gneschen, as with others, the man may indeed stand pictured in the
 boy (at least all the pigments are there); yet only some half of the man
 stands in the child, or young boy, namely, his passive endowment, not his
 active. the more impatient are we to discover what figure he cuts in this
 latter capacity; how, when, to use his own words, "he understands the
 tools a little, and can handle this or that," he will proceed to handle
 it.
 here, however, may be the place to state that, in much of our
 philosopher's history, there is something of an almost hindoo character:
 nay perhaps in that so well-fostered and every way excellent "passivity"
 of his, which, with no free development of the antagonist activity,
 distinguished his childhood, we may detect the rudiments of much that, in
 after days, and still in these present days, astonishes the world. for the
 shallow-sighted, teufelsdrockh is oftenest a man without activity of any
 kind, a no-man; for the deep-sighted, again, a man with activity almost
 superabundant, yet so spiritual, close-hidden, enigmatic, that no mortal
 can foresee its explosions, or even when it has exploded, so much as
 ascertain its significance. a dangerous, difficult temper for the modern
 european; above all, disadvantageous in the hero of a biography! now as
 heretofore it will behoove the editor of these pages, were it never so
 unsuccessfully, to do his endeavor.
 among the earliest tools of any complicacy which a man, especially a man
 of letters, gets to handle, are his class-books. on this portion of his
 history, teufelsdrockh looks down professedly as indifferent. reading he
 "cannot remember ever to have learned;" so perhaps had it by nature. he
 says generally: "of the insignificant portion of my education, which
 depended on schools, there need almost no notice be taken. i learned what
 others learn; and kept it stored by in a corner of my head, seeing as yet
 no manner of use in it. my schoolmaster, a down-bent, broken-hearted,
 underfoot martyr, as others of that guild are, did little for me, except
 discover that he could do little: he, good soul, pronounced me a genius,
 fit for the learned professions; and that i must be sent to the gymnasium,
 and one day to the university. meanwhile, what printed thing soever i
 could meet with i read. my very copper pocket-money i laid out on
 stall-literature; which, as it accumulated, i with my own hands sewed into
 volumes. by this means was the young head furnished with a considerable
 miscellany of things and shadows of things: history in authentic fragments
 lay mingled with fabulous chimeras, wherein also was reality; and the
 whole not as dead stuff, but as living pabulum, tolerably nutritive for a
 mind as yet so peptic."
 that the entepfuhl schoolmaster judged well, we now know. indeed, already
 in the youthful gneschen, with all his outward stillness, there may have
 been manifest an inward vivacity that promised much; symptoms of a spirit
 singularly open, thoughtful, almost poetical. thus, to say nothing of his
 suppers on the orchard-wall, and other phenomena of that earlier period,
 have many readers of these pages stumbled, in their twelfth year, on such
 reflections as the following? "it struck me much, as i sat by the kuhbach,
 one silent noontide, and watched it flowing, gurgling, to think how this
 same streamlet had flowed and gurgled, through all changes of weather and
 of fortune, from beyond the earliest date of history. yes, probably on the
 morning when joshua forded jordan; even as at the mid-day when caesar,
 doubtless with difficulty, swam the nile, yet kept his commentaries
 dry,—this little kuhbach, assiduous as tiber, eurotas or siloa, was
 murmuring on across the wilderness, as yet unnamed, unseen: here, too, as
 in the euphrates and the ganges, is a vein or veinlet of the grand
 world-circulation of waters, which, with its atmospheric arteries, has
 lasted and lasts simply with the world. thou fool! nature alone is
 antique, and the oldest art a mushroom; that idle crag thou sittest on is
 six thousand years of age." in which little thought, as in a little
 fountain, may there not lie the beginning of those well-nigh unutterable
 meditations on the grandeur and mystery of time, and its relation to
 eternity, which play such a part in this philosophy of clothes?
 over his gymnasic and academic years the professor by no means lingers so
 lyrical and joyful as over his childhood. green sunny tracts there are
 still; but intersected by bitter rivulets of tears, here and there
 stagnating into sour marshes of discontent. "with my first view of the
 hinterschlag gymnasium," writes he, "my evil days began. well do i still
 remember the red sunny whitsuntide morning, when, trotting full of hope by
 the side of father andreas, i entered the main street of the place, and
 saw its steeple-clock (then striking eight) and schuldthurm (jail),
 and the aproned or disaproned burghers moving in to breakfast: a little
 dog, in mad terror, was rushing past; for some human imps had tied a tin
 kettle to its tail; thus did the agonized creature, loud-jingling, career
 through the whole length of the borough, and become notable enough. fit
 emblem of many a conquering hero, to whom fate (wedding fantasy to sense,
 as it often elsewhere does) has malignantly appended a tin kettle of
 ambition, to chase him on; which the faster he runs, urges him the faster,
 the more loudly and more foolishly! fit emblem also of much that awaited
 myself, in that mischievous den; as in the world, whereof it was a portion
 and epitome!
 "alas, the kind beech-rows of entepfuhl were hidden in the distance: i was
 among strangers, harshly, at best indifferently, disposed towards me; the
 young heart felt, for the first time, quite orphaned and alone." his
 school-fellows, as is usual, persecuted him: "they were boys," he says,
 "mostly rude boys, and obeyed the impulse of rude nature, which bids the
 deer-herd fall upon any stricken hart, the duck-flock put to death any
 broken-winged brother or sister, and on all hands the strong tyrannize
 over the weak." he admits that though "perhaps in an unusual degree
 morally courageous," he succeeded ill in battle, and would fain have
 avoided it; a result, as would appear, owing less to his small personal
 stature (for in passionate seasons he was "incredibly nimble"), than to
 his "virtuous principles:" "if it was disgraceful to be beaten," says he,
 "it was only a shade less disgraceful to have so much as fought; thus was
 i drawn two ways at once, and in this important element of school-history,
 the war-element, had little but sorrow." on the whole, that same excellent
 "passivity," so notable in teufelsdrockh's childhood, is here visibly
 enough again getting nourishment. "he wept often; indeed to such a degree
 that he was nicknamed der weinende (the tearful), which epithet,
 till towards his thirteenth year, was indeed not quite unmerited. only at
 rare intervals did the young soul burst forth into fire-eyed rage, and,
 with a stormfulness (ungestum) under which the boldest quailed,
 assert that he too had rights of man, or at least of mankin." in all
 which, who does not discern a fine flower-tree and cinnamon-tree (of
 genius) nigh choked among pumpkins, reed-grass and ignoble shrubs; and
 forced if it would live, to struggle upwards only, and not outwards; into
 a height quite sickly, and disproportioned to its breadth?
 we find, moreover, that his greek and latin were "mechanically" taught;
 hebrew scarce even mechanically; much else which they called history,
 cosmography, philosophy, and so forth, no better than not at all. so that,
 except inasmuch as nature was still busy; and he himself "went about, as
 was of old his wont, among the craftsmen's workshops, there learning many
 things;" and farther lighted on some small store of curious reading, in
 hans wachtel the cooper's house, where he lodged,—his time, it would
 appear, was utterly wasted. which facts the professor has not yet learned
 to look upon with any contentment. indeed, throughout the whole of this
 bag scorpio, where we now are, and often in the following bag, he
 shows himself unusually animated on the matter of education, and not
 without some touch of what we might presume to be anger.
 "my teachers," says he, "were hide-bound pedants, without knowledge of
 man's nature, or of boy's; or of aught save their lexicons and quarterly
 account-books. innumerable dead vocables (no dead language, for they
 themselves knew no language) they crammed into us, and called it fostering
 the growth of mind. how can an inanimate, mechanical gerund-grinder, the
 like of whom will, in a subsequent century, be manufactured at nurnberg
 out of wood and leather, foster the growth of anything; much more of mind,
 which grows, not like a vegetable (by having its roots littered with
 etymological compost), but like a spirit, by mysterious contact of spirit;
 thought kindling itself at the fire of living thought? how shall he
 give kindling, in whose own inward man there is no live coal, but all is
 burnt out to a dead grammatical cinder? the hinterschlag professors knew
 syntax enough; and of the human soul thus much: that it had a faculty
 called memory, and could be acted on through the muscular integument by
 appliance of birch-rods.
 "alas, so is it everywhere, so will it ever be; till the hod-man is
 discharged, or reduced to hod-bearing; and an architect is hired, and on
 all hands fitly encouraged: till communities and individuals discover, not
 without surprise, that fashioning the souls of a generation by knowledge
 can rank on a level with blowing their bodies to pieces by gunpowder; that
 with generals and field-marshals for killing, there should be
 world-honored dignitaries, and were it possible, true god-ordained
 priests, for teaching. but as yet, though the soldier wears openly, and
 even parades, his butchering-tool, nowhere, far as i have travelled, did
 the schoolmaster make show of his instructing-tool: nay, were he to walk
 abroad with birch girt on thigh, as if he therefrom expected honor, would
 there not, among the idler class, perhaps a certain levity be excited?"
 in the third year of this gymnasic period, father andreas seems to have
 died: the young scholar, otherwise so maltreated, saw himself for the
 first time clad outwardly in sables, and inwardly in quite inexpressible
 melancholy. "the dark bottomless abyss, that lies under our feet, had
 yawned open; the pale kingdoms of death, with all their innumerable silent
 nations and generations, stood before him; the inexorable word, never! now
 first showed its meaning. my mother wept, and her sorrow got vent; but in
 my heart there lay a whole lake of tears, pent up in silent desolation.
 nevertheless the unworn spirit is strong; life is so healthful that it
 even finds nourishment in death: these stern experiences, planted down by
 memory in my imagination, rose there to a whole cypress-forest, sad but
 beautiful; waving, with not unmelodious sighs, in dark luxuriance, in the
 hottest sunshine, through long years of youth:—as in manhood also it
 does, and will do; for i have now pitched my tent under a cypress-tree;
 the tomb is now my inexpugnable fortress, ever close by the gate of which
 i look upon the hostile armaments, and pains and penalties of tyrannous
 life placidly enough, and listen to its loudest threatenings with a still
 smile. o ye loved ones, that already sleep in the noiseless bed of rest,
 whom in life i could only weep for and never help; and ye, who
 wide-scattered still toil lonely in the monster-bearing desert, dyeing the
 flinty ground with your blood,—yet a little while, and we shall all
 meet there, and our mother's bosom will screen us all; and oppression's
 harness, and sorrow's fire-whip, and all the gehenna bailiffs that patrol
 and inhabit ever-vexed time, cannot thenceforth harm us any more!"
 close by which rather beautiful apostrophe, lies a labored character of
 the deceased andreas futteral; of his natural ability, his deserts in life
 (as prussian sergeant); with long historical inquiries into the genealogy
 of the futteral family, here traced back as far as henry the fowler: the
 whole of which we pass over, not without astonishment. it only concerns us
 to add, that now was the time when mother gretchen revealed to her
 foster-son that he was not at all of this kindred; or indeed of any
 kindred, having come into historical existence in the way already known to
 us. "thus was i doubly orphaned," says he; "bereft not only of possession,
 but even of remembrance. sorrow and wonder, here suddenly united, could
 not but produce abundant fruit. such a disclosure, in such a season,
 struck its roots through my whole nature: ever till the years of mature
 manhood, it mingled with my whole thoughts, was as the stem whereon all my
 day-dreams and night-dreams grew. a certain poetic elevation, yet also a
 corresponding civic depression, it naturally imparted: i was like no
 other; in which fixed idea, leading sometimes to highest, and oftener
 to frightfullest results, may there not lie the first spring of
 tendencies, which in my life have become remarkable enough? as in birth,
 so in action, speculation, and social position, my fellows are perhaps not
 numerous."
 in the bag sagittarius, as we at length discover, teufelsdrockh has
 become a university man; though how, when, or of what quality, will
 nowhere disclose itself with the smallest certainty. few things, in the
 way of confusion and capricious indistinctness, can now surprise our
 readers; not even the total want of dates, almost without parallel in a
 biographical work. so enigmatic, so chaotic we have always found, and must
 always look to find, these scattered leaves. in sagittarius,
 however, teufelsdrockh begins to show himself even more than usually
 sibylline: fragments of all sorts: scraps of regular memoir,
 college-exercises, programs, professional testimoniums, milkscores, torn
 billets, sometimes to appearance of an amatory cast; all blown together as
 if by merest chance, henceforth bewilder the sane historian. to combine
 any picture of these university, and the subsequent, years; much more, to
 decipher therein any illustrative primordial elements of the
 clothes-philosophy, becomes such a problem as the reader may imagine.
 so much we can see; darkly, as through the foliage of some wavering
 thicket: a youth of no common endowment, who has passed happily through
 childhood, less happily yet still vigorously through boyhood, now at
 length perfect in "dead vocables," and set down, as he hopes, by the
 living fountain, there to superadd ideas and capabilities. from such
 fountain he draws, diligently, thirstily, yet never or seldom with his
 whole heart, for the water nowise suits his palate; discouragements,
 entanglements, aberrations are discoverable or supposable. nor perhaps are
 even pecuniary distresses wanting; for "the good gretchen, who in spite of
 advices from not disinterested relatives has sent him hither, must after a
 time withdraw her willing but too feeble hand." nevertheless in an
 atmosphere of poverty and manifold chagrin, the humor of that young soul,
 what character is in him, first decisively reveals itself; and, like
 strong sunshine in weeping skies, gives out variety of colors, some of
 which are prismatic. thus, with the aid of time and of what time brings,
 has the stripling diogenes teufelsdrockh waxed into manly stature; and
 into so questionable an aspect, that we ask with new eagerness, how he
 specially came by it, and regret anew that there is no more explicit
 answer. certain of the intelligible and partially significant fragments,
 which are few in number, shall be extracted from that limbo of a
 paper-bag, and presented with the usual preparation.
 as if, in the bag scorpio, teufelsdrockh had not already
 expectorated his antipedagogic spleen; as if, from the name sagittarius,
 he had thought himself called upon to shoot arrows, we here again fall in
 with such matter as this: "the university where i was educated still
 stands vivid enough in my remembrance, and i know its name well; which
 name, however, i, from tenderness to existing interests and persons, shall
 in nowise divulge. it is my painful duty to say that, out of england and
 spain, ours was the worst of all hitherto discovered universities. this is
 indeed a time when right education is, as nearly as may be, impossible:
 however, in degrees of wrongness there is no limit: nay, i can conceive a
 worse system than that of the nameless itself; as poisoned victual may be
 worse than absolute hunger.
 "it is written, when the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
 ditch: wherefore, in such circumstances, may it not sometimes be safer, if
 both leader and led simply—sit still? had you, anywhere in crim
 tartary, walled in a square enclosure; furnished it with a small,
 ill-chosen library; and then turned loose into it eleven hundred christian
 striplings, to tumble about as they listed, from three to seven years:
 certain persons, under the title of professors, being stationed at the
 gates, to declare aloud that it was a university, and exact considerable
 admission-fees,—you had, not indeed in mechanical structure, yet in
 spirit and result, some imperfect resemblance of our high seminary. i say,
 imperfect; for if our mechanical structure was quite other, so neither was
 our result altogether the same: unhappily, we were not in crim tartary,
 but in a corrupt european city, full of smoke and sin; moreover, in the
 middle of a public, which, without far costlier apparatus than that of the
 square enclosure, and declaration aloud, you could not be sure of gulling.
 "gullible, however, by fit apparatus, all publics are; and gulled, with
 the most surprising profit. towards anything like a statistics of
 imposture, indeed, little as yet has been done: with a strange
 indifference, our economists, nigh buried under tables for minor branches
 of industry, have altogether overlooked the grand all-overtopping
 hypocrisy branch; as if our whole arts of puffery, of quackery,
 priestcraft, kingcraft, and the innumerable other crafts and mysteries of
 that genus, had not ranked in productive industry at all! can any one, for
 example, so much as say, what moneys, in literature and shoeblacking, are
 realized by actual instruction and actual jet polish; what by
 fictitious-persuasive proclamation of such; specifying, in distinct items,
 the distributions, circulations, disbursements, incomings of said moneys,
 with the smallest approach to accuracy? but to ask, how far, in all the
 several infinitely complected departments of social business, in
 government, education, in manual, commercial, intellectual fabrication of
 every sort, man's want is supplied by true ware; how far by the mere
 appearance of true ware:—in other words, to what extent, by what
 methods, with what effects, in various times and countries, deception
 takes the place of wages of performance: here truly is an inquiry big with
 results for the future time, but to which hitherto only the vaguest answer
 can be given. if for the present, in our europe, we estimate the ratio of
 ware to appearance of ware so high even as at one to a hundred (which,
 considering the wages of a pope, russian autocrat, or english
 game-preserver, is probably not far from the mark),—what almost
 prodigious saving may there not be anticipated, as the statistics of
 imposture advances, and so the manufacturing of shams (that of
 realities rising into clearer and clearer distinction therefrom) gradually
 declines, and at length becomes all but wholly unnecessary!
 "this for the coming golden ages. what i had to remark, for the present
 brazen one, is, that in several provinces, as in education, polity,
 religion, where so much is wanted and indispensable, and so little can as
 yet be furnished, probably imposture is of sanative, anodyne nature, and
 man's gullibility not his worst blessing. suppose your sinews of war quite
 broken; i mean your military chest insolvent, forage all but exhausted;
 and that the whole army is about to mutiny, disband, and cut your and each
 other's throat,—then were it not well could you, as if by miracle,
 pay them in any sort of fairy-money, feed them on coagulated water, or
 mere imagination of meat; whereby, till the real supply came up, they
 might be kept together and quiet? such perhaps was the aim of nature, who
 does nothing without aim, in furnishing her favorite, man, with this his
 so omnipotent or rather omnipatient talent of being gulled.
 "how beautifully it works, with a little mechanism; nay, almost makes
 mechanism for itself! these professors in the nameless lived with ease,
 with safety, by a mere reputation, constructed in past times, and then too
 with no great effort, by quite another class of persons. which reputation,
 like a strong brisk-going undershot wheel, sunk into the general current,
 bade fair, with only a little annual re-painting on their part, to hold
 long together, and of its own accord assiduously grind for them. happy
 that it was so, for the millers! they themselves needed not to work; their
 attempts at working, at what they called educating, now when i look back
 on it, fill me with a certain mute admiration.
 "besides all this, we boasted ourselves a rational university; in the
 highest degree hostile to mysticism; thus was the young vacant mind
 furnished with much talk about progress of the species, dark ages,
 prejudice, and the like; so that all were quickly enough blown out into a
 state of windy argumentativeness; whereby the better sort had soon to end
 in sick, impotent scepticism; the worser sort explode (crepiren) in
 finished self-conceit, and to all spiritual intents become dead.—but
 this too is portion of mankind's lot. if our era is the era of unbelief,
 why murmur under it; is there not a better coming, nay come? as in
 long-drawn systole and long-drawn diastole, must the period of faith
 alternate with the period of denial; must the vernal growth, the summer
 luxuriance of all opinions, spiritual representations and creations, be
 followed by, and again follow, the autumnal decay, the winter dissolution.
 for man lives in time, has his whole earthly being, endeavor and destiny
 shaped for him by time: only in the transitory time-symbol is the
 ever-motionless eternity we stand on made manifest. and yet, in such
 winter-seasons of denial, it is for the nobler-minded perhaps a
 comparative misery to have been born, and to be awake and work; and for
 the duller a felicity, if, like hibernating animals, safe-lodged in some
 salamanca university or sybaris city, or other superstitious or voluptuous
 castle of indolence, they can slumber through, in stupid dreams, and only
 awaken when the loud-roaring hailstorms have all alone their work, and to
 our prayers and martyrdoms the new spring has been vouchsafed."
 that in the environment, here mysteriously enough shadowed forth,
 teufelsdrockh must have felt ill at ease, cannot be doubtful. "the hungry
 young," he says, "looked up to their spiritual nurses; and, for food, were
 bidden eat the east-wind. what vain jargon of controversial metaphysic,
 etymology, and mechanical manipulation falsely named science, was current
 there, i indeed learned, better perhaps than the most. among eleven
 hundred christian youths, there will not be wanting some eleven eager to
 learn. by collision with such, a certain warmth, a certain polish was
 communicated; by instinct and happy accident, i took less to rioting (renommiren),
 than to thinking and reading, which latter also i was free to do. nay from
 the chaos of that library, i succeeded in fishing up more books perhaps
 than had been known to the very keepers thereof. the foundation of a
 literary life was hereby laid: i learned, on my own strength, to read
 fluently in almost all cultivated languages, on almost all subjects and
 sciences; farther, as man is ever the prime object to man, already it was
 my favorite employment to read character in speculation, and from the
 writing to construe the writer. a certain groundplan of human nature and
 life began to fashion itself in me; wondrous enough, now when i look back
 on it; for my whole universe, physical and spiritual, was as yet a
 machine! however, such a conscious, recognized groundplan, the truest i
 had, was beginning to be there, and by additional experiments might
 be corrected and indefinitely extended."
 thus from poverty does the strong educe nobler wealth; thus in the
 destitution of the wild desert does our young ishmael acquire for himself
 the highest of all possessions, that of self-help. nevertheless a desert
 this was, waste, and howling with savage monsters. teufelsdrockh gives us
 long details of his "fever-paroxysms of doubt;" his inquiries concerning
 miracles, and the evidences of religious faith; and how "in the silent
 night-watches, still darker in his heart than over sky and earth, he has
 cast himself before the all-seeing, and with audible prayers cried
 vehemently for light, for deliverance from death and the grave. not till
 after long years, and unspeakable agonies, did the believing heart
 surrender; sink into spell-bound sleep, under the nightmare, unbelief;
 and, in this hag-ridden dream, mistake god's fair living world for a
 pallid, vacant hades and extinct pandemonium. but through such purgatory
 pain," continues he, "it is appointed us to pass; first must the dead
 letter of religion own itself dead, and drop piecemeal into dust, if the
 living spirit of religion, freed from this its charnel-house, is to arise
 on us, new-born of heaven, and with new healing under its wings."
 to which purgatory pains, seemingly severe enough, if we add a liberal
 measure of earthly distresses, want of practical guidance, want of
 sympathy, want of money, want of hope; and all this in the fervid season
 of youth, so exaggerated in imagining, so boundless in desires, yet here
 so poor in means,—do we not see a strong incipient spirit oppressed
 and overloaded from without and from within; the fire of genius struggling
 up among fuel-wood of the greenest, and as yet with more of bitter vapor
 than of clear flame?
 from various fragments of letters and other documentary scraps, it is to
 be inferred that teufelsdrockh, isolated, shy, retiring as he was, had not
 altogether escaped notice: certain established men are aware of his
 existence; and, if stretching out no helpful hand, have at least their
 eyes on him. he appears, though in dreary enough humor, to be addressing
 himself to the profession of law;—whereof, indeed, the world has
 since seen him a public graduate. but omitting these broken,
 unsatisfactory thrums of economical relation, let us present rather the
 following small thread of moral relation; and therewith, the reader for
 himself weaving it in at the right place, conclude our dim arras-picture
 of these university years.
 "here also it was that i formed acquaintance with herr towgood, or, as it
 is perhaps better written, herr toughgut; a young person of quality (von
 adel), from the interior parts of england. he stood connected, by
 blood and hospitality, with the counts von zahdarm, in this quarter of
 germany; to which noble family i likewise was, by his means, with all
 friendliness, brought near. towgood had a fair talent, unspeakably
 ill-cultivated; with considerable humor of character: and, bating his
 total ignorance, for he knew nothing except boxing and a little grammar,
 showed less of that aristocratic impassivity, and silent fury, than for
 most part belongs to travellers of his nation. to him i owe my first
 practical knowledge of the english and their ways; perhaps also something
 of the partiality with which i have ever since regarded that singular
 people. towgood was not without an eye, could he have come at any light.
 invited doubtless by the presence of the zahdarm family, he had travelled
 hither, in the almost frantic hope of perfecting his studies; he, whose
 studies had as yet been those of infancy, hither to a university where so
 much as the notion of perfection, not to say the effort after it, no
 longer existed! often we would condole over the hard destiny of the young
 in this era: how, after all our toil, we were to be turned out into the
 world, with beards on our chins indeed, but with few other attributes of
 manhood; no existing thing that we were trained to act on, nothing that we
 could so much as believe. 'how has our head on the outside a polished
 hat,' would towgood exclaim, 'and in the inside vacancy, or a froth of
 vocables and attorney-logic! at a small cost men are educated to make
 leather into shoes; but at a great cost, what am i educated to make? by
 heaven, brother! what i have already eaten and worn, as i came thus far,
 would endow a considerable hospital of incurables.'—'man, indeed,' i
 would answer, 'has a digestive faculty, which must be kept working, were
 it even partly by stealth. but as for our miseducation, make not bad
 worse; waste not the time yet ours, in trampling on thistles because they
 have yielded us no figs. frisch zu, bruder! here are books, and we
 have brains to read them; here is a whole earth and a whole heaven, and we
 have eyes to look on them: frisch zu!'
 "often also our talk was gay; not without brilliancy, and even fire. we
 looked out on life, with its strange scaffolding, where all at once
 harlequins dance, and men are beheaded and quartered: motley, not
 unterrific was the aspect; but we looked on it like brave youths. for
 myself, these were perhaps my most genial hours. towards this young
 warm-hearted, strong-headed and wrong-headed herr towgood i was even near
 experiencing the now obsolete sentiment of friendship. yes, foolish
 heathen that i was, i felt that, under certain conditions, i could have
 loved this man, and taken him to my bosom, and been his brother once and
 always. by degrees, however, i understood the new time, and its wants. if
 man's soul is indeed, as in the finnish language, and utilitarian
 philosophy, a kind of stomach, what else is the true meaning of
 spiritual union but an eating together? thus we, instead of friends, are
 dinner-guests; and here as elsewhere have cast away chimeras."
 so ends, abruptly as is usual, and enigmatically, this little incipient
 romance. what henceforth becomes of the brave herr towgood, or toughgut?
 he has dived under, in the autobiographical chaos, and swims we see not
 where. does any reader "in the interior parts of england" know of such a
 man?
 "thus nevertheless," writes our autobiographer, apparently as quitting
 college, "was there realized somewhat; namely, i, diogenes teufelsdrockh:
 a visible temporary figure (zeitbild), occupying some cubic feet of
 space, and containing within it forces both physical and spiritual; hopes,
 passions, thoughts; the whole wondrous furniture, in more or less
 perfection, belonging to that mystery, a man. capabilities there were in
 me to give battle, in some small degree, against the great empire of
 darkness: does not the very ditcher and delver, with his spade, extinguish
 many a thistle and puddle; and so leave a little order, where he found the
 opposite? nay your very day-moth has capabilities in this kind; and ever
 organizes something (into its own body, if no otherwise), which was before
 inorganic; and of mute dead air makes living music, though only of the
 faintest, by humming.
 "how much more, one whose capabilities are spiritual; who has learned, or
 begun learning, the grand thaumaturgic art of thought! thaumaturgic i name
 it; for hitherto all miracles have been wrought thereby, and henceforth
 innumerable will be wrought; whereof we, even in these days, witness some.
 of the poet's and prophet's inspired message, and how it makes and unmakes
 whole worlds, i shall forbear mention: but cannot the dullest hear
 steam-engines clanking around him? has he not seen the scottish
 brass-smith's idea (and this but a mechanical one) travelling on
 fire-wings round the cape, and across two oceans; and stronger than any
 other enchanter's familiar, on all hands unweariedly fetching and
 carrying: at home, not only weaving cloth; but rapidly enough overturning
 the whole old system of society; and, for feudalism and preservation of
 the game, preparing us, by indirect but sure methods, industrialism and
 the government of the wisest? truly a thinking man is the worst enemy the
 prince of darkness can have; every time such a one announces himself, i
 doubt not, there runs a shudder through the nether empire; and new
 emissaries are trained, with new tactics, to, if possible, entrap him, and
 hoodwink and handcuff him.
 "with such high vocation had i too, as denizen of the universe, been
 called. unhappy it is, however, that though born to the amplest
 sovereignty, in this way, with no less than sovereign right of peace and
 war against the time-prince (zeitfurst), or devil, and all his
 dominions, your coronation-ceremony costs such trouble, your sceptre is so
 difficult to get at, or even to get eye on!"
 by which last wire-drawn similitude does teufelsdrockh mean no more than
 that young men find obstacles in what we call "getting under way"? "not
 what i have," continues he, "but what i do is my kingdom. to each is given
 a certain inward talent, a certain outward environment of fortune; to
 each, by wisest combination of these two, a certain maximum of capability.
 but the hardest problem were ever this first: to find by study of
 yourself, and of the ground you stand on, what your combined inward and
 outward capability specially is. for, alas, our young soul is all budding
 with capabilities, and we see not yet which is the main and true one.
 always too the new man is in a new time, under new conditions; his course
 can be the fac-simile of no prior one, but is by its nature
 original. and then how seldom will the outward capability fit the inward:
 though talented wonderfully enough, we are poor, unfriended, dyspeptical,
 bashful; nay what is worse than all, we are foolish. thus, in a whole
 imbroglio of capabilities, we go stupidly groping about, to grope which is
 ours, and often clutch the wrong one: in this mad work must several years
 of our small term be spent, till the purblind youth, by practice, acquire
 notions of distance, and become a seeing man. nay, many so spend their
 whole term, and in ever-new expectation, ever-new disappointment, shift
 from enterprise to enterprise, and from side to side: till at length, as
 exasperated striplings of threescore-and-ten, they shift into their last
 enterprise, that of getting buried.
 "such, since the most of us are too ophthalmic, would be the general fate;
 were it not that one thing saves us: our hunger. for on this ground, as
 the prompt nature of hunger is well known, must a prompt choice be made:
 hence have we, with wise foresight, indentures and apprenticeships for our
 irrational young; whereby, in due season, the vague universality of a man
 shall find himself ready-moulded into a specific craftsman; and so
 thenceforth work, with much or with little waste of capability as it may
 be; yet not with the worst waste, that of time. nay even in matters
 spiritual, since the spiritual artist too is born blind, and does not,
 like certain other creatures, receive sight in nine days, but far later,
 sometimes never,—is it not well that there should be what we call
 professions, or bread-studies (brodzwecke), preappointed us? here,
 circling like the gin-horse, for whom partial or total blindness is no
 evil, the bread-artist can travel contentedly round and round, still
 fancying that it is forward and forward; and realize much: for himself
 victual; for the world an additional horse's power in the grand corn-mill
 or hemp-mill of economic society. for me too had such a leading-string
 been provided; only that it proved a neck-halter, and had nigh throttled
 me, till i broke it off. then, in the words of ancient pistol, did the
 world generally become mine oyster, which i, by strength or cunning, was
 to open, as i would and could. almost had i deceased (fast war ich
 umgekommen), so obstinately did it continue shut."
 we see here, significantly foreshadowed, the spirit of much that was to
 befall our autobiographer; the historical embodiment of which, as it
 painfully takes shape in his life, lies scattered, in dim disastrous
 details, through this bag pisces, and those that follow. a young
 man of high talent, and high though still temper, like a young mettled
 colt, "breaks off his neck-halter," and bounds forth, from his peculiar
 manger, into the wide world; which, alas, he finds all rigorously fenced
 in. richest clover-fields tempt his eye; but to him they are forbidden
 pasture: either pining in progressive starvation, he must stand; or, in
 mad exasperation, must rush to and fro, leaping against sheer stone-walls,
 which he cannot leap over, which only lacerate and lame him; till at last,
 after thousand attempts and endurances, he, as if by miracle, clears his
 way; not indeed into luxuriant and luxurious clover, yet into a certain
 bosky wilderness where existence is still possible, and freedom, though
 waited on by scarcity, is not without sweetness. in a word, teufelsdrockh
 having thrown up his legal profession, finds himself without landmark of
 outward guidance; whereby his previous want of decided belief, or inward
 guidance, is frightfully aggravated. necessity urges him on; time will not
 stop, neither can he, a son of time; wild passions without solacement,
 wild faculties without employment, ever vex and agitate him. he too must
 enact that stern monodrama, no object and no rest; must front its
 successive destinies, work through to its catastrophe, and deduce
 therefrom what moral he can.
 yet let us be just to him, let us admit that his "neck-halter" sat nowise
 easy on him; that he was in some degree forced to break it off. if we look
 at the young man's civic position, in this nameless capital, as he emerges
 from its nameless university, we can discern well that it was far from
 enviable. his first law-examination he has come through triumphantly; and
 can even boast that the examen rigorosum need not have frightened
 him: but though he is hereby "an auscultator of respectability,"
 what avails it? there is next to no employment to be had. neither, for a
 youth without connections, is the process of expectation very hopeful in
 itself; nor for one of his disposition much cheered from without. "my
 fellow auscultators," he says, "were auscultators: they dressed, and
 digested, and talked articulate words; other vitality showed they almost
 none. small speculation in those eyes, that they did glare withal! sense
 neither for the high nor for the deep, nor for aught human or divine, save
 only for the faintest scent of coming preferment." in which words,
 indicating a total estrangement on the part of teufelsdrockh may there not
 also lurk traces of a bitterness as from wounded vanity? doubtless these
 prosaic auscultators may have sniffed at him, with his strange ways; and
 tried to hate, and what was much more impossible, to despise him. friendly
 communion, in any case, there could not be: already has the young
 teufelsdrockh left the other young geese; and swims apart, though as yet
 uncertain whether he himself is cygnet or gosling.
 perhaps, too, what little employment he had was performed ill, at best
 unpleasantly. "great practical method and expertness" he may brag of; but
 is there not also great practical pride, though deep-hidden, only the
 deeper-seated? so shy a man can never have been popular. we figure to
 ourselves, how in those days he may have played strange freaks with his
 independence, and so forth: do not his own words betoken as much? "like a
 very young person, i imagined it was with work alone, and not also with
 folly and sin, in myself and others, that i had been appointed to
 struggle." be this as it may, his progress from the passive
 auscultatorship, towards any active assessorship, is evidently of the
 slowest. by degrees, those same established men, once partially inclined
 to patronize him, seem to withdraw their countenance, and give him up as
 "a man of genius" against which procedure he, in these papers, loudly
 protests. "as if," says he, "the higher did not presuppose the lower; as
 if he who can fly into heaven, could not also walk post if he resolved on
 it! but the world is an old woman, and mistakes any gilt farthing for a
 gold coin; whereby being often cheated, she will thenceforth trust nothing
 but the common copper."
 how our winged sky-messenger, unaccepted as a terrestrial runner,
 contrived, in the mean while, to keep himself from flying skyward without
 return, is not too clear from these documents. good old gretchen seems to
 have vanished from the scene, perhaps from the earth; other horn of
 plenty, or even of parsimony, nowhere flows for him; so that "the prompt
 nature of hunger being well known," we are not without our anxiety. from
 private tuition, in never so many languages and sciences, the aid
 derivable is small; neither, to use his own words, "does the young
 adventurer hitherto suspect in himself any literary gift; but at best
 earns bread-and-water wages, by his wide faculty of translation.
 nevertheless," continues he, "that i subsisted is clear, for you find me
 even now alive." which fact, however, except upon the principle of our
 true-hearted, kind old proverb, that "there is always life for a living
 one," we must profess ourselves unable to explain.
 certain landlords' bills, and other economic documents, bearing the mark
 of settlement, indicate that he was not without money; but, like an
 independent hearth-holder, if not house-holder, paid his way. here also
 occur, among many others, two little mutilated notes, which perhaps throw
 light on his condition. the first has now no date, or writer's name, but a
 huge blot; and runs to this effect: "the (inkblot), tied down by
 previous promise, cannot, except by best wishes, forward the herr
 teufelsdrockh's views on the assessorship in question; and sees himself
 under the cruel necessity of forbearing, for the present, what were
 otherwise his duty and joy, to assist in opening the career for a man of
 genius, on whom far higher triumphs are yet waiting." the other is on gilt
 paper; and interests us like a sort of epistolary mummy now dead, yet
 which once lived and beneficently worked. we give it in the original: "herr
 teufelsdrockh wird von der frau grafinn, auf donnerstag, zum aesthetischen
 thee schonstens eingeladen."
 thus, in answer to a cry for solid pudding, whereof there is the most
 urgent need, comes, epigrammatically enough, the invitation to a wash of
 quite fluid aesthetic tea! how teufelsdrockh, now at actual
 hand-grips with destiny herself, may have comported himself among these
 musical and literary dilettanti of both sexes, like a hungry lion invited
 to a feast of chickenweed, we can only conjecture. perhaps in expressive
 silence, and abstinence: otherwise if the lion, in such case, is to feast
 at all, it cannot be on the chickenweed, but only on the chickens. for the
 rest, as this frau grafinn dates from the zahdarm house, she can be
 no other than the countess and mistress of the same; whose intellectual
 tendencies, and good-will to teufelsdrockh, whether on the footing of herr
 towgood, or on his own footing, are hereby manifest. that some sort of
 relation, indeed, continued, for a time, to connect our autobiographer,
 though perhaps feebly enough, with this noble house, we have elsewhere
 express evidence. doubtless, if he expected patronage, it was in vain;
 enough for him if he here obtained occasional glimpses of the great world,
 from which we at one time fancied him to have been always excluded. "the
 zahdarms," says he, "lived in the soft, sumptuous garniture of
 aristocracy; whereto literature and art, attracted and attached from
 without, were to serve as the handsomest fringing. it was to the gnadigen
 frau (her ladyship) that this latter improvement was due: assiduously
 she gathered, dexterously she fitted on, what fringing was to be had; lace
 or cobweb, as the place yielded." was teufelsdrockh also a fringe, of lace
 or cobweb; or promising to be such? "with his excellenz (the
 count)," continues he, "i have more than once had the honor to converse;
 chiefly on general affairs, and the aspect of the world, which he, though
 now past middle life, viewed in no unfavorable light; finding indeed,
 except the outrooting of journalism (die auszurottende journalistik),
 little to desiderate therein. on some points, as his excellenz was
 not uncholeric, i found it more pleasant to keep silence. besides, his
 occupation being that of owning land, there might be faculties enough,
 which, as superfluous for such use, were little developed in him."
 that to teufelsdrockh the aspect of the world was nowise so faultless, and
 many things besides "the outrooting of journalism" might have seemed
 improvements, we can readily conjecture. with nothing but a barren
 auscultatorship from without, and so many mutinous thoughts and wishes
 from within, his position was no easy one. "the universe," he says, "was
 as a mighty sphinx-riddle, which i knew so little of, yet must rede, or be
 devoured. in red streaks of unspeakable grandeur, yet also in the
 blackness of darkness, was life, to my too-unfurnished thought, unfolding
 itself. a strange contradiction lay in me; and i as yet knew not the
 solution of it; knew not that spiritual music can spring only from
 discords set in harmony; that but for evil there were no good, as victory
 is only possible by battle."
 "i have heard affirmed (surely in jest)," observes he elsewhere, "by not
 unphilanthropic persons, that it were a real increase of human happiness,
 could all young men from the age of nineteen be covered under barrels, or
 rendered otherwise invisible; and there left to follow their lawful
 studies and callings, till they emerged, sadder and wiser, at the age of
 twenty-five. with which suggestion, at least as considered in the light of
 a practical scheme, i need scarcely say that i nowise coincide.
 nevertheless it is plausibly urged that, as young ladies (madchen)
 are, to mankind, precisely the most delightful in those years; so young
 gentlemen (bubchen) do then attain their maximum of detestability.
 such gawks (gecken) are they, and foolish peacocks, and yet with
 such a vulturous hunger for self-indulgence; so obstinate, obstreperous,
 vain-glorious; in all senses, so froward and so forward. no mortal's
 endeavor or attainment will, in the smallest, content the as yet
 unendeavoring, unattaining young gentleman; but he could make it all
 infinitely better, were it worthy of him. life everywhere is the most
 manageable matter, simple as a question in the rule-of-three: multiply
 your second and third term together, divide the product by the first, and
 your quotient will be the answer,—which you are but an ass if you
 cannot come at. the booby has not yet found out, by any trial, that, do
 what one will, there is ever a cursed fraction, oftenest a decimal
 repeater, and no net integer quotient so much as to be thought of."
 in which passage does not there lie an implied confession that
 teufelsdrockh himself, besides his outward obstructions, had an inward,
 still greater, to contend with; namely, a certain temporary, youthful, yet
 still afflictive derangement of head? alas, on the former side alone, his
 case was hard enough. "it continues ever true," says he, "that saturn, or
 chronos, or what we call time, devours all his children: only by incessant
 running, by incessant working, may you (for some threescore-and-ten years)
 escape him; and you too he devours at last. can any sovereign, or holy
 alliance of sovereigns, bid time stand still; even in thought, shake
 themselves free of time? our whole terrestrial being is based on time, and
 built of time; it is wholly a movement, a time-impulse; time is the author
 of it, the material of it. hence also our whole duty, which is to move, to
 work,—in the right direction. are not our bodies and our souls in
 continual movement, whether we will or not; in a continual waste,
 requiring a continual repair? utmost satisfaction of our whole outward and
 inward wants were but satisfaction for a space of time; thus, whatso we
 have done, is done, and for us annihilated, and ever must we go and do
 anew. o time-spirit, how hast thou environed and imprisoned us, and sunk
 us so deep in thy troublous dim time-element, that only in lucid moments
 can so much as glimpses of our upper azure home be revealed to us! me,
 however, as a son of time, unhappier than some others, was time
 threatening to eat quite prematurely; for, strive as i might, there was no
 good running, so obstructed was the path, so gyved were the feet." that is
 to say, we presume, speaking in the dialect of this lower world, that
 teufelsdrockh's whole duty and necessity was, like other men's, "to work,—in
 the right direction," and that no work was to be had; whereby he became
 wretched enough. as was natural: with haggard scarcity threatening him in
 the distance; and so vehement a soul languishing in restless inaction, and
 forced thereby, like sir hudibras's sword by rust,
 "to eat into itself, for lack
 of something else to hew and hack;"
 but on the whole, that same "excellent passivity," as it has all along
 done, is here again vigorously flourishing; in which circumstance may we
 not trace the beginnings of much that now characterizes our professor and
 perhaps, in faint rudiments, the origin of the clothes-philosophy itself?
 already the attitude he has assumed towards the world is too defensive;
 not, as would have been desirable, a bold attitude of attack. "so far
 hitherto," he says, "as i had mingled with mankind, i was notable, if for
 anything, for a certain stillness of manner, which, as my friends often
 rebukingly declared, did but ill express the keen ardor of my feelings. i,
 in truth, regarded men with an excess both of love and of fear. the
 mystery of a person, indeed, is ever divine to him that has a sense for
 the godlike. often, notwithstanding, was i blamed, and by half-strangers
 hated, for my so-called hardness (harte), my indifferentism towards
 men; and the seemingly ironic tone i had adopted, as my favorite dialect
 in conversation. alas, the panoply of sarcasm was but as a buckram case,
 wherein i had striven to envelop myself; that so my own poor person might
 live safe there, and in all friendliness, being no longer exasperated by
 wounds. sarcasm i now see to be, in general, the language of the devil;
 for which reason i have long since as good as renounced it. but how many
 individuals did i, in those days, provoke into some degree of hostility
 thereby! an ironic man, with his sly stillness, and ambuscading ways, more
 especially an ironic young man, from whom it is least expected, may be
 viewed as a pest to society. have we not seen persons of weight and name
 coming forward, with gentlest indifference, to tread such a one out of
 sight, as an insignificancy and worm, start ceiling-high (balkenhock),
 and thence fall shattered and supine, to be borne home on shutters, not
 without indignation, when he proved electric and a torpedo!"
 alas, how can a man with this devilishness of temper make way for himself
 in life; where the first problem, as teufelsdrockh too admits, is "to
 unite yourself with some one, and with somewhat (sich anzuschliessen)"?
 division, not union, is written on most part of his procedure. let us add
 too that, in no great length of time, the only important connection he had
 ever succeeded in forming, his connection with the zahdarm family, seems
 to have been paralyzed, for all practical uses, by the death of the "not
 uncholeric" old count. this fact stands recorded, quite incidentally, in a
 certain discourse on epitaphs, huddled into the present bag, among
 so much else; of which essay the learning and curious penetration are more
 to be approved of than the spirit. his grand principle is, that lapidary
 inscriptions, of what sort soever, should be historical rather than
 lyrical. "by request of that worthy nobleman's survivors," says he, "i
 undertook to compose his epitaph; and not unmindful of my own rules,
 produced the following; which however, for an alleged defect of latinity,
 a defect never yet fully visible to myself, still remains unengraven;"—wherein,
 we may predict, there is more than the latinity that will surprise an
 english reader:
 primum in orbe dejecit [sub dato]; postremum [sub dato].
 "for long years," writes teufelsdrockh, "had the poor hebrew, in this
 egypt of an auscultatorship, painfully toiled, baking bricks without
 stubble, before ever the question once struck him with entire force: for
 what?—beym himmel! for food and warmth! and are food and
 warmth nowhere else, in the whole wide universe, discoverable?—come
 of it what might, i resolved to try."
 thus then are we to see him in a new independent capacity, though perhaps
 far from an improved one. teufelsdrockh is now a man without profession.
 quitting the common fleet of herring-busses and whalers, where indeed his
 leeward, laggard condition was painful enough, he desperately steers off,
 on a course of his own, by sextant and compass of his own. unhappy
 teufelsdrockh! though neither fleet, nor traffic, nor commodores pleased
 thee, still was it not a fleet, sailing in prescribed track, for
 fixed objects; above all, in combination, wherein, by mutual guidance, by
 all manner of loans and borrowings, each could manifoldly aid the other?
 how wilt thou sail in unknown seas; and for thyself find that shorter
 northwest passage to thy fair spice-country of a nowhere?—a solitary
 rover, on such a voyage, with such nautical tactics, will meet with
 adventures. nay, as we forthwith discover, a certain calypso-island
 detains him at the very outset; and as it were falsifies and oversets his
 whole reckoning.
 "if in youth," writes he once, "the universe is majestically unveiling,
 and everywhere heaven revealing itself on earth, nowhere to the young man
 does this heaven on earth so immediately reveal itself as in the young
 maiden. strangely enough, in this strange life of ours, it has been so
 appointed. on the whole, as i have often said, a person (personlichkeit)
 is ever holy to us; a certain orthodox anthropomorphism connects my me
 with all thees in bonds of love: but it is in this approximation of
 the like and unlike, that such heavenly attraction, as between negative
 and positive, first burns out into a flame. is the pitifullest mortal
 person, think you, indifferent to us? is it not rather our heartfelt wish
 to be made one with him; to unite him to us, by gratitude, by admiration,
 even by fear; or failing all these, unite ourselves to him? but how much
 more, in this case of the like-unlike! here is conceded us the higher
 mystic possibility of such a union, the highest in our earth; thus, in the
 conducting medium of fantasy, flames forth that fire-development of the
 universal spiritual electricity, which, as unfolded between man and woman,
 we first emphatically denominate love.
 "in every well-conditioned stripling, as i conjecture, there already
 blooms a certain prospective paradise, cheered by some fairest eve; nor,
 in the stately vistas, and flowerage and foliage of that garden, is a tree
 of knowledge, beautiful and awful in the midst thereof, wanting. perhaps
 too the whole is but the lovelier, if cherubim and a flaming sword divide
 it from all footsteps of men; and grant him, the imaginative stripling,
 only the view, not the entrance. happy season of virtuous youth, when
 shame is still an impassable celestial barrier; and the sacred air-cities
 of hope have not shrunk into the mean clay-hamlets of reality; and man, by
 his nature, is yet infinite and free!
 "as for our young forlorn," continues teufelsdrockh evidently meaning
 himself, "in his secluded way of life, and with his glowing fantasy, the
 more fiery that it burnt under cover, as in a reverberating furnace, his
 feeling towards the queens of this earth was, and indeed is, altogether
 unspeakable. a visible divinity dwelt in them; to our young friend all
 women were holy, were heavenly. as yet he but saw them flitting past, in
 their many-colored angel-plumage; or hovering mute and inaccessible on the
 outskirts of aesthetic tea: all of air they were, all soul and
 form; so lovely, like mysterious priestesses, in whose hand was the
 invisible jacob's-ladder, whereby man might mount into very heaven. that
 he, our poor friend, should ever win for himself one of these gracefuls (holden)—ach
 gott! how could he hope it; should he not have died under it? there
 was a certain delirious vertigo in the thought.
 "thus was the young man, if all-sceptical of demons and angels such as the
 vulgar had once believed in, nevertheless not unvisited by hosts of true
 sky-born, who visibly and audibly hovered round him wheresoever he went;
 and they had that religious worship in his thought, though as yet it was
 by their mere earthly and trivial name that he named them. but now, if on
 a soul so circumstanced, some actual air-maiden, incorporated into
 tangibility and reality, should cast any electric glance of kind eyes,
 saying thereby, 'thou too mayest love and be loved;' and so kindle him,—good
 heaven, what a volcanic, earthquake-bringing, all-consuming fire were
 probably kindled!"
 such a fire, it afterwards appears, did actually burst forth, with
 explosions more or less vesuvian, in the inner man of herr diogenes; as
 indeed how could it fail? a nature, which, in his own figurative style, we
 might say, had now not a little carbonized tinder, of irritability; with
 so much nitre of latent passion, and sulphurous humor enough; the whole
 lying in such hot neighborhood, close by "a reverberating furnace of
 fantasy:" have we not here the components of driest gunpowder, ready, on
 occasion of the smallest spark, to blaze up? neither, in this our
 life-element, are sparks anywhere wanting. without doubt, some angel,
 whereof so many hovered round, would one day, leaving "the outskirts of aesthetic
 tea," flit higher; and, by electric promethean glance, kindle no
 despicable firework. happy, if it indeed proved a firework, and flamed off
 rocket-wise, in successive beautiful bursts of splendor, each growing
 naturally from the other, through the several stages of a happy youthful
 love; till the whole were safely burnt out; and the young soul relieved
 with little damage! happy, if it did not rather prove a conflagration and
 mad explosion; painfully lacerating the heart itself; nay perhaps bursting
 the heart in pieces (which were death); or at best, bursting the thin
 walls of your "reverberating furnace," so that it rage thenceforth all
 unchecked among the contiguous combustibles (which were madness): till of
 the so fair and manifold internal world of our diogenes, there remained
 nothing, or only the "crater of an extinct volcano"!
 from multifarious documents in this bag capricornus, and in the
 adjacent ones on both sides thereof, it becomes manifest that our
 philosopher, as stoical and cynical as he now looks, was heartily and even
 frantically in love: here therefore may our old doubts whether his heart
 were of stone or of flesh give way. he loved once; not wisely but too
 well. and once only: for as your congreve needs a new case or wrappage for
 every new rocket, so each human heart can properly exhibit but one love,
 if even one; the "first love which is infinite" can be followed by no
 second like unto it. in more recent years, accordingly, the editor of
 these sheets was led to regard teufelsdrockh as a man not only who would
 never wed, but who would never even flirt; whom the grand-climacteric
 itself, and st. martin's summer of incipient dotage, would crown
 with no new myrtle-garland. to the professor, women are henceforth pieces
 of art; of celestial art, indeed, which celestial pieces he glories to
 survey in galleries, but has lost thought of purchasing.
 psychological readers are not without curiosity to see how teufelsdrockh
 in this for him unexampled predicament, demeans himself; with what
 specialties of successive configuration, splendor and color, his firework
 blazes off. small, as usual, is the satisfaction that such can meet with
 here. from amid these confused masses of eulogy and elegy, with their mad
 petrarchan and werterean ware lying madly scattered among all sorts of
 quite extraneous matter, not so much as the fair one's name can be
 deciphered. for, without doubt, the title blumine, whereby she is
 here designated, and which means simply goddess of flowers, must be
 fictitious. was her real name flora, then? but what was her surname, or
 had she none? of what station in life was she; of what parentage, fortune,
 aspect? specially, by what pre-established harmony of occurrences did the
 lover and the loved meet one another in so wide a world; how did they
 behave in such meeting? to all which questions, not unessential in a
 biographic work, mere conjecture must for most part return answer. "it was
 appointed," says our philosopher, "that the high celestial orbit of
 blumine should intersect the low sublunary one of our forlorn; that he,
 looking in her empyrean eyes, should fancy the upper sphere of light was
 come down into this nether sphere of shadows; and finding himself
 mistaken, make noise enough."
 we seem to gather that she was young, hazel-eyed, beautiful, and some
 one's cousin; high-born, and of high spirit; but unhappily dependent and
 insolvent; living, perhaps, on the not too gracious bounty of moneyed
 relatives. but how came "the wanderer" into her circle? was it by the
 humid vehicle of aesthetic tea, or by the arid one of mere
 business? was it on the hand of herr towgood; or of the gnadige frau, who,
 as an ornamental artist, might sometimes like to promote flirtation,
 especially for young cynical nondescripts? to all appearance, it was
 chiefly by accident, and the grace of nature.
 "thou fair waldschloss," writes our autobiographer, "what stranger ever
 saw thee, were it even an absolved auscultator, officially bearing in his
 pocket the last relatio ex actis he would ever write, but must have
 paused to wonder! noble mansion! there stoodest thou, in deep mountain
 amphitheatre, on umbrageous lawns, in thy serene solitude; stately,
 massive, all of granite; glittering in the western sunbeams, like a palace
 of el dorado, overlaid with precious metal. beautiful rose up, in wavy
 curvature, the slope of thy guardian hills; of the greenest was their
 sward, embossed with its dark-brown frets of crag, or spotted by some
 spreading solitary tree and its shadow. to the unconscious wayfarer thou
 wert also as an ammon's temple, in the libyan waste; where, for joy and
 woe, the tablet of his destiny lay written. well might he pause and gaze;
 in that glance of his were prophecy and nameless forebodings."
 but now let us conjecture that the so presentient auscultator has handed
 in his relatio ex actis; been invited to a glass of rhine-wine; and
 so, instead of returning dispirited and athirst to his dusty town-home, is
 ushered into the garden-house, where sit the choicest party of dames and
 cavaliers: if not engaged in aesthetic tea, yet in trustful evening
 conversation, and perhaps musical coffee, for we hear of "harps and pure
 voices making the stillness live." scarcely, it would seem, is the
 garden-house inferior in respectability to the noble mansion itself.
 "embowered amid rich foliage, rose-clusters, and the hues and odors of
 thousand flowers, here sat that brave company; in front, from the
 wide-opened doors, fair outlook over blossom and bush, over grove and
 velvet green, stretching, undulating onwards to the remote mountain peaks:
 so bright, so mild, and everywhere the melody of birds and happy
 creatures: it was all as if man had stolen a shelter from the suit in the
 bosom-vesture of summer herself. how came it that the wanderer advanced
 thither with such forecasting heart (ahndungsvoll), by the side of
 his gay host? did he feel that to these soft influences his hard bosom
 ought to be shut; that here, once more, fate had it in view to try him; to
 mock him, and see whether there were humor in him?
 "next moment he finds himself presented to the party; and especially by
 name to—blumine! peculiar among all dames and damosels glanced
 blumine, there in her modesty, like a star among earthly lights. noblest
 maiden! whom he bent to, in body and in soul; yet scarcely dared look at,
 for the presence filled him with painful yet sweetest embarrassment.
 "blumine's was a name well known to him; far and wide was the fair one
 heard of, for her gifts, her graces, her caprices: from all which vague
 colorings of rumor, from the censures no less than from the praises, had
 our friend painted for himself a certain imperious queen of hearts, and
 blooming warm earth-angel, much more enchanting than your mere white
 heaven-angels of women, in whose placid veins circulates too little
 naphtha-fire. herself also he had seen in public places; that light yet so
 stately form; those dark tresses, shading a face where smiles and sunlight
 played over earnest deeps: but all this he had seen only as a magic
 vision, for him inaccessible, almost without reality. her sphere was too
 far from his; how should she ever think of him; o heaven! how should they
 so much as once meet together? and now that rose-goddess sits in the same
 circle with him; the light of her eyes has smiled on him; if he
 speak, she will hear it! nay, who knows, since the heavenly sun looks into
 lowest valleys, but blumine herself might have aforetime noted the so
 unnotable; perhaps, from his very gainsayers, as he had from hers,
 gathered wonder, gathered favor for him? was the attraction, the agitation
 mutual, then; pole and pole trembling towards contact, when once brought
 into neighborhood? say rather, heart swelling in presence of the queen of
 hearts; like the sea swelling when once near its moon! with the wanderer
 it was even so: as in heavenward gravitation, suddenly as at the touch of
 a seraph's wand, his whole soul is roused from its deepest recesses; and
 all that was painful and that was blissful there, dim images, vague
 feelings of a whole past and a whole future, are heaving in unquiet eddies
 within him.
 "often, in far less agitating scenes, had our still friend shrunk forcibly
 together; and shrouded up his tremors and flutterings, of what sort
 soever, in a safe cover of silence, and perhaps of seeming stolidity. how
 was it, then, that here, when trembling to the core of his heart, he did
 not sink into swoons, but rose into strength, into fearlessness and
 clearness? it was his guiding genius (damon) that inspired him; he
 must go forth and meet his destiny. show thyself now, whispered it, or be
 forever hid. thus sometimes it is even when your anxiety becomes
 transcendental, that the soul first feels herself able to transcend it;
 that she rises above it, in fiery victory; and borne on new-found wings of
 victory, moves so calmly, even because so rapidly, so irresistibly. always
 must the wanderer remember, with a certain satisfaction and surprise, how
 in this case he sat not silent but struck adroitly into the stream of
 conversation; which thenceforth, to speak with an apparent not a real
 vanity, he may say that he continued to lead. surely, in those hours, a
 certain inspiration was imparted him, such inspiration as is still
 possible in our late era. the self-secluded unfolds himself in noble
 thoughts, in free, glowing words; his soul is as one sea of light, the
 peculiar home of truth and intellect; wherein also fantasy bodies forth
 form after form, radiant with all prismatic hues."
 it appears, in this otherwise so happy meeting, there talked one
 "philisitine;" who even now, to the general weariness, was dominantly
 pouring forth philistinism (philistriositaten.); little witting
 what hero was here entering to demolish him! we omit the series of
 socratic, or rather diogenic utterances, not unhappy in their way, whereby
 the monster, "persuaded into silence," seems soon after to have withdrawn
 for the night. "of which dialectic marauder," writes our hero, "the
 discomfiture was visibly felt as a benefit by most: but what were all
 applauses to the glad smile, threatening every moment to become a laugh,
 wherewith blumine herself repaid the victor? he ventured to address her
 she answered with attention: nay what if there were a slight tremor in
 that silver voice; what if the red glow of evening were hiding a transient
 blush!
 "the conversation took a higher tone, one fine thought called forth
 another: it was one of those rare seasons, when the soul expands with full
 freedom, and man feels himself brought near to man. gayly in light,
 graceful abandonment, the friendly talk played round that circle; for the
 burden was rolled from every heart; the barriers of ceremony, which are
 indeed the laws of polite living, had melted as into vapor; and the poor
 claims of me and thee, no longer parted by rigid fences, now
 flowed softly into one another; and life lay all harmonious, many-tinted,
 like some fair royal champaign, the sovereign and owner of which were love
 only. such music springs from kind hearts, in a kind environment of place
 and time. and yet as the light grew more aerial on the mountaintops, and
 the shadows fell longer over the valley, some faint tone of sadness may
 have breathed through the heart; and, in whispers more or less audible,
 reminded every one that as this bright day was drawing towards its close,
 so likewise must the day of man's existence decline into dust and
 darkness; and with all its sick toilings, and joyful and mournful noises,
 sink in the still eternity.
 "to our friend the hours seemed moments; holy was he and happy: the words
 from those sweetest lips came over him like dew on thirsty grass; all
 better feelings in his soul seemed to whisper, it is good for us to be
 here. at parting, the blumine's hand was in his: in the balmy twilight,
 with the kind stars above them, he spoke something of meeting again, which
 was not contradicted; he pressed gently those small soft fingers, and it
 seemed as if they were not hastily, not angrily withdrawn."
 poor teufelsdrockh! it is clear to demonstration thou art smit: the queen
 of hearts would see a "man of genius" also sigh for her; and there, by
 art-magic, in that preternatural hour, has she bound and spell-bound thee.
 "love is not altogether a delirium," says he elsewhere; "yet has it many
 points in common therewith. i call it rather a discerning of the infinite
 in the finite, of the idea made real; which discerning again may be either
 true or false, either seraphic or demoniac, inspiration or insanity. but
 in the former case too, as in common madness, it is fantasy that superadds
 itself to sight; on the so petty domain of the actual plants its
 archimedes-lever, whereby to move at will the infinite spiritual. fantasy
 i might call the true heaven-gate and hell-gate of man: his sensuous life
 is but the small temporary stage (zeitbuhne), whereon
 thick-streaming influences from both these far yet near regions meet
 visibly, and act tragedy and melodrama. sense can support herself
 handsomely, in most countries, for some eighteenpence a day; but for
 fantasy planets and solar-systems will not suffice. witness your pyrrhus
 conquering the world, yet drinking no better red wine than he had before."
 alas! witness also your diogenes, flame-clad, scaling the upper heaven,
 and verging towards insanity, for prize of a "high-souled brunette," as if
 the earth held but one and not several of these!
 he says that, in town, they met again: "day after day, like his heart's
 sun, the blooming blumine shone on him. ah! a little while ago, and he was
 yet in all darkness: him what graceful (holde) would ever love?
 disbelieving all things, the poor youth had never learned to believe in
 himself. withdrawn, in proud timidity, within his own fastnesses; solitary
 from men, yet baited by night-spectres enough, he saw himself, with a sad
 indignation, constrained to renounce the fairest hopes of existence. and
 now, o now! 'she looks on thee,' cried he: 'she the fairest, noblest; do
 not her dark eyes tell thee, thou art not despised? the
 heaven's-messenger! all heaven's blessings be hers!' thus did soft
 melodies flow through his heart; tones of an infinite gratitude; sweetest
 intimations that he also was a man, that for him also unutterable joys had
 been provided.
 "in free speech, earnest or gay, amid lambent glances, laughter, tears,
 and often with the inarticulate mystic speech of music: such was the
 element they now lived in; in such a many-tinted, radiant aurora, and by
 this fairest of orient light-bringers must our friend be blandished, and
 the new apocalypse of nature enrolled to him. fairest blumine! and, even
 as a star, all fire and humid softness, a very light-ray incarnate! was
 there so much as a fault, a 'caprice,' he could have dispensed with? was
 she not to him in very deed a morning-star; did not her presence bring
 with it airs from heaven? as from aeolian harps in the breath of dawn, as
 from the memnon's statue struck by the rosy finger of aurora, unearthly
 music was around him, and lapped him into untried balmy rest. pale doubt
 fled away to the distance; life bloomed up with happiness and hope. the
 past, then, was all a haggard dream; he had been in the garden of eden,
 then, and could not discern it! but lo now! the black walls of his prison
 melt away; the captive is alive, is free. if he loved his disenchantress?
 ach gott! his whole heart and soul and life were hers, but never
 had he named it love: existence was all a feeling, not yet shaped into a
 thought."
 nevertheless, into a thought, nay into an action, it must be shaped; for
 neither disenchanter nor disenchantress, mere "children of time," can
 abide by feeling alone. the professor knows not, to this day, "how in her
 soft, fervid bosom the lovely found determination, even on hest of
 necessity, to cut asunder these so blissful bonds." he even appears
 surprised at the "duenna cousin," whoever she may have been, "in whose
 meagre hunger-bitten philosophy, the religion of young hearts was, from
 the first, faintly approved of." we, even at such distance, can explain it
 without necromancy. let the philosopher answer this one question: what
 figure, at that period, was a mrs. teufelsdrockh likely to make in
 polished society? could she have driven so much as a brass-bound gig, or
 even a simple iron-spring one? thou foolish "absolved auscultator," before
 whom lies no prospect of capital, will any yet known "religion of young
 hearts" keep the human kitchen warm? pshaw! thy divine blumine, when she
 "resigned herself to wed some richer," shows more philosophy, though but
 "a woman of genius," than thou, a pretended man.
 our readers have witnessed the origin of this love-mania, and with what
 royal splendor it waxes, and rises. let no one ask us to unfold the
 glories of its dominant state; much less the horrors of its almost
 instantaneous dissolution. how from such inorganic masses, henceforth
 madder than ever, as lie in these bags, can even fragments of a living
 delineation be organized? besides, of what profit were it? we view, with a
 lively pleasure, the gay silk montgolfier start from the ground, and shoot
 upwards, cleaving the liquid deeps, till it dwindle to a luminous star:
 but what is there to look longer on, when once, by natural elasticity, or
 accident of fire, it has exploded? a hapless air-navigator, plunging, amid
 torn parachutes, sand-bags, and confused wreck, fast enough into the jaws
 of the devil! suffice it to know that teufelsdrockh rose into the highest
 regions of the empyrean, by a natural parabolic track, and returned thence
 in a quick perpendicular one. for the rest, let any feeling reader, who
 has been unhappy enough to do the like, paint it out for himself:
 considering only that if he, for his perhaps comparatively insignificant
 mistress, underwent such agonies and frenzies, what must teufelsdrockh's
 have been, with a fire-heart, and for a nonpareil blumine! we glance
 merely at the final scene:—
 "one morning, he found his morning-star all dimmed and dusky-red; the fair
 creature was silent, absent, she seemed to have been weeping. alas, no
 longer a morning-star, but a troublous skyey portent, announcing that the
 doomsday had dawned! she said, in a tremulous voice, they were to meet no
 more." the thunder-struck air-sailor is not wanting to himself in this
 dread hour: but what avails it? we omit the passionate expostulations,
 entreaties, indignations, since all was vain, and not even an explanation
 was conceded him; and hasten to the catastrophe. "'farewell, then, madam!'
 said he, not without sternness, for his stung pride helped him. she put
 her hand in his, she looked in his face, tears started to her eyes; in
 wild audacity he clasped her to his bosom; their lips were joined, their
 two souls, like two dew-drops, rushed into one,—for the first time
 and for the last!" thus was teufelsdrockh made immortal by a kiss. and
 then? why, then—"thick curtains of night rushed over his soul, as
 rose the immeasurable crash of doom; and through the ruins as of a
 shivered universe was he falling, falling, towards the abyss."
 we have long felt that, with a man like our professor, matters must often
 be expected to take a course of their own; that in so multiplex, intricate
 a nature, there might be channels, both for admitting and emitting, such
 as the psychologist had seldom noted; in short, that on no grand occasion
 and convulsion, neither in the joy-storm nor in the woe-storm could you
 predict his demeanor.
 to our less philosophical readers, for example, it is now clear that the
 so passionate teufelsdrockh precipitated through "a shivered universe" in
 this extraordinary way, has only one of three things which he can next do:
 establish himself in bedlam; begin writing satanic poetry; or blow out his
 brains. in the progress towards any of which consummations, do not such
 readers anticipate extravagance enough; breast-beating, brow-beating
 (against walls), lion-bellowings of blasphemy and the like, stampings,
 smitings, breakages of furniture, if not arson itself?
 nowise so does teufelsdrockh deport him. he quietly lifts his pilgerstab
 (pilgrim-staff), "old business being soon wound up;" and begins a
 perambulation and circumambulation of the terraqueous globe! curious it
 is, indeed, how with such vivacity of conception, such intensity of
 feeling, above all, with these unconscionable habits of exaggeration in
 speech, he combines that wonderful stillness of his, that stoicism in
 external procedure. thus, if his sudden bereavement, in this matter of the
 flower-goddess, is talked of as a real doomsday and dissolution of nature,
 in which light doubtless it partly appeared to himself, his own nature is
 nowise dissolved thereby; but rather is compressed closer. for once, as we
 might say, a blumine by magic appliances has unlocked that shut heart of
 his, and its hidden things rush out tumultuous, boundless, like genii
 enfranchised from their glass vial: but no sooner are your magic
 appliances withdrawn, than the strange casket of a heart springs to again;
 and perhaps there is now no key extant that will open it; for a
 teufelsdrockh as we remarked, will not love a second time. singular
 diogenes! no sooner has that heart-rending occurrence fairly taken place,
 than he affects to regard it as a thing natural, of which there is nothing
 more to be said. "one highest hope, seemingly legible in the eyes of an
 angel, had recalled him as out of death-shadows into celestial life: but a
 gleam of tophet passed over the face of his angel; he was rapt away in
 whirlwinds, and heard the laughter of demons. it was a calenture," adds
 he, "whereby the youth saw green paradise-groves in the waste
 ocean-waters: a lying vision, yet not wholly a lie, for he saw it."
 but what things soever passed in him, when he ceased to see it; what
 ragings and despairings soever teufelsdrockh's soul was the scene of, he
 has the goodness to conceal under a quite opaque cover of silence. we know
 it well; the first mad paroxysm past, our brave gneschen collected his
 dismembered philosophies, and buttoned himself together; he was meek,
 silent, or spoke of the weather and the journals: only by a transient
 knitting of those shaggy brows, by some deep flash of those eyes, glancing
 one knew not whether with tear-dew or with fierce fire,—might you
 have guessed what a gehenna was within: that a whole satanic school were
 spouting, though inaudibly, there. to consume your own choler, as some
 chimneys consume their own smoke; to keep a whole satanic school spouting,
 if it must spout, inaudibly, is a negative yet no slight virtue, nor one
 of the commonest in these times.
 nevertheless, we will not take upon us to say, that in the strange measure
 he fell upon, there was not a touch of latent insanity; whereof indeed the
 actual condition of these documents in capricornus and aquarius
 is no bad emblem. his so unlimited wanderings, toilsome enough, are
 without assigned or perhaps assignable aim; internal unrest seems his sole
 guidance; he wanders, wanders, as if that curse of the prophet had fallen
 on him, and he were "made like unto a wheel." doubtless, too, the chaotic
 nature of these paper-bags aggravates our obscurity. quite without note of
 preparation, for example, we come upon the following slip: "a peculiar
 feeling it is that will rise in the traveller, when turning some
 hill-range in his desert road, he descries lying far below, embosomed
 among its groves and green natural bulwarks, and all diminished to a
 toy-box, the fair town, where so many souls, as it were seen and yet
 unseen, are driving their multifarious traffic. its white steeple is then
 truly a starward-pointing finger; the canopy of blue smoke seems like a
 sort of lifebreath: for always, of its own unity, the soul gives unity to
 whatsoever it looks on with love; thus does the little dwelling-place of
 men, in itself a congeries of houses and huts, become for us an
 individual, almost a person. but what thousand other thoughts unite
 thereto, if the place has to ourselves been the arena of joyous or
 mournful experiences; if perhaps the cradle we were rocked in still stands
 there, if our loving ones still dwell there, if our buried ones there
 slumber!" does teufelsdrockh as the wounded eagle is said to make for its
 own eyrie, and indeed military deserters, and all hunted outcast
 creatures, turn as if by instinct in the direction of their birthland,—fly
 first, in this extremity, towards his native entepfuhl; but reflecting
 that there no help awaits him, take only one wistful look from the
 distance, and then wend elsewhither?
 little happier seems to be his next flight: into the wilds of nature; as
 if in her mother-bosom he would seek healing. so at least we incline to
 interpret the following notice, separated from the former by some
 considerable space, wherein, however, is nothing noteworthy:—
 "mountains were not new to him; but rarely are mountains seen in such
 combined majesty and grace as here. the rocks are of that sort called
 primitive by the mineralogists, which always arrange themselves in masses
 of a rugged, gigantic character; which ruggedness, however, is here
 tempered by a singular airiness of form, and softness of environment: in a
 climate favorable to vegetation, the gray cliff, itself covered with
 lichens, shoots up through a garment of foliage or verdure; and white,
 bright cottages, tree-shaded, cluster round the everlasting granite. in
 fine vicissitude, beauty alternates with grandeur: you ride through stony
 hollows, along strait passes, traversed by torrents, overhung by high
 walls of rock; now winding amid broken shaggy chasms, and huge fragments;
 now suddenly emerging into some emerald valley, where the streamlet
 collects itself into a lake, and man has again found a fair dwelling, and
 it seems as if peace had established herself in the bosom of strength.
 "to peace, however, in this vortex of existence, can the son of time not
 pretend: still less if some spectre haunt him from the past; and the
 future is wholly a stygian darkness, spectre-bearing. reasonably might the
 wanderer exclaim to himself: are not the gates of this world's happiness
 inexorably shut against thee; hast thou a hope that is not mad?
 nevertheless, one may still murmur audibly, or in the original greek if
 that suit thee better: 'whoso can look on death will start at no shadows.'
 "from such meditations is the wanderer's attention called outwards; for
 now the valley closes in abruptly, intersected by a huge mountain mass,
 the stony water-worn ascent of which is not to be accomplished on
 horseback. arrived aloft, he finds himself again lifted into the evening
 sunset light; and cannot but pause, and gaze round him, some moments
 there. an upland irregular expanse of wold, where valleys in complex
 branchings are suddenly or slowly arranging their descent towards every
 quarter of the sky. the mountain-ranges are beneath your feet, and folded
 together: only the loftier summits look down here and there as on a second
 plain; lakes also lie clear and earnest in their solitude. no trace of man
 now visible; unless indeed it were he who fashioned that little visible
 link of highway, here, as would seem, scaling the inaccessible, to unite
 province with province. but sunwards, lo you! how it towers sheer up, a
 world of mountains, the diadem and centre of the mountain region! a
 hundred and a hundred savage peaks, in the last light of day; all glowing,
 of gold and amethyst, like giant spirits of the wilderness; there in their
 silence, in their solitude, even as on the night when noah's deluge first
 dried! beautiful, nay solemn, was the sudden aspect to our wanderer. he
 gazed over those stupendous masses with wonder, almost with longing
 desire; never till this hour had he known nature, that she was one, that
 she was his mother and divine. and as the ruddy glow was fading into
 clearness in the sky, and the sun had now departed, a murmur of eternity
 and immensity, of death and of life, stole through his soul; and he felt
 as if death and life were one, as if the earth were not dead, as if the
 spirit of the earth had its throne in that splendor, and his own spirit
 were therewith holding communion.
 "the spell was broken by a sound of carriage-wheels. emerging from the
 hidden northward, to sink soon into the hidden southward, came a gay
 barouche-and-four: it was open; servants and postilions wore wedding
 favors: that happy pair, then, had found each other, it was their marriage
 evening! few moments brought them near: du himmel! it was herr
 towgood and—blumine! with slight unrecognizing salutation they
 passed me; plunged down amid the neighboring thickets, onwards, to heaven,
 and to england; and i, in my friend richter's words, i remained alone,
 behind them, with the night."
 were it not cruel in these circumstances, here might be the place to
 insert an observation, gleaned long ago from the great clothes-volume,
 where it stands with quite other intent: "some time before small-pox was
 extirpated," says the professor, "there came a new malady of the spiritual
 sort on europe: i mean the epidemic, now endemical, of view-hunting. poets
 of old date, being privileged with senses, had also enjoyed external
 nature; but chiefly as we enjoy the crystal cup which holds good or bad
 liquor for us; that is to say, in silence, or with slight incidental
 commentary: never, as i compute, till after the sorrows of werter,
 was there man found who would say: come let us make a description! having
 drunk the liquor, come let us eat the glass! of which endemic the jenner
 is unhappily still to seek." too true!
 we reckon it more important to remark that the professor's wanderings, so
 far as his stoical and cynical envelopment admits us to clear insight,
 here first take their permanent character, fatuous or not. that
 basilisk-glance of the barouche-and-four seems to have withered up what
 little remnant of a purpose may have still lurked in him: life has become
 wholly a dark labyrinth; wherein, through long years, our friend, flying
 from spectres, has to stumble about at random, and naturally with more
 haste than progress.
 foolish were it in us to attempt following him, even from afar, in this
 extraordinary world-pilgrimage of his; the simplest record of which, were
 clear record possible, would fill volumes. hopeless is the obscurity,
 unspeakable the confusion. he glides from country to country, from
 condition to condition; vanishing and reappearing, no man can calculate
 how or where. through all quarters of the world he wanders, and apparently
 through all circles of society. if in any scene, perhaps difficult to fix
 geographically, he settles for a time, and forms connections, be sure he
 will snap them abruptly asunder. let him sink out of sight as private
 scholar (privatsirender), living by the grace of god in some
 european capital, you may next find him as hadjee in the neighborhood of
 mecca. it is an inexplicable phantasmagoria, capricious, quick-changing;
 as if our traveller, instead of limbs and highways, had transported
 himself by some wishing-carpet, or fortunatus' hat. the whole, too,
 imparted emblematically, in dim multifarious tokens (as that collection of
 street-advertisements); with only some touch of direct historical notice
 sparingly interspersed: little light-islets in the world of haze! so that,
 from this point, the professor is more of an enigma than ever. in
 figurative language, we might say he becomes, not indeed a spirit, yet
 spiritualized, vaporized. fact unparalleled in biography: the river of his
 history, which we have traced from its tiniest fountains, and hoped to see
 flow onward, with increasing current, into the ocean, here dashes itself
 over that terrific lover's leap; and, as a mad-foaming cataract, flies
 wholly into tumultuous clouds of spray! low down it indeed collects again
 into pools and plashes; yet only at a great distance, and with difficulty,
 if at all, into a general stream. to cast a glance into certain of those
 pools and plashes, and trace whither they run, must, for a chapter or two,
 form the limit of our endeavor.
 for which end doubtless those direct historical notices, where they can be
 met with, are the best. nevertheless, of this sort too there occurs much,
 which, with our present light, it were questionable to emit. teufelsdrockh
 vibrating everywhere between the highest and the lowest levels, comes into
 contact with public history itself. for example, those conversations and
 relations with illustrious persons, as sultan mahmoud, the emperor
 napoleon, and others, are they not as yet rather of a diplomatic character
 than of a biographic? the editor, appreciating the sacredness of crowned
 heads, nay perhaps suspecting the possible trickeries of a
 clothes-philosopher, will eschew this province for the present; a new time
 may bring new insight and a different duty.
 if we ask now, not indeed with what ulterior purpose, for there was none,
 yet with what immediate outlooks; at all events, in what mood of mind, the
 professor undertook and prosecuted this world-pilgrimage,—the answer
 is more distinct than favorable. "a nameless unrest," says he, "urged me
 forward; to which the outward motion was some momentary lying solace.
 whither should i go? my loadstars were blotted out; in that canopy of grim
 fire shone no star. yet forward must i; the ground burnt under me; there
 was no rest for the sole of my foot. i was alone, alone! ever too the
 strong inward longing shaped phantasms for itself: towards these, one
 after the other, must i fruitlessly wander. a feeling i had, that for my
 fever-thirst there was and must be somewhere a healing fountain. to many
 fondly imagined fountains, the saints' wells of these days, did i pilgrim;
 to great men, to great cities, to great events: but found there no
 healing. in strange countries, as in the well-known; in savage deserts, as
 in the press of corrupt civilization, it was ever the same: how could your
 wanderer escape from—his own shadow? nevertheless still
 forward! i felt as if in great haste; to do i saw not what. from the
 depths of my own heart, it called to me, forwards! the winds and the
 streams, and all nature sounded to me, forwards! ach gott, i was
 even, once for all, a son of time."
 from which is it not clear that the internal satanic school was still
 active enough? he says elsewhere: "the enchiridion of epictetus i
 had ever with me, often as my sole rational companion; and regret to
 mention that the nourishment it yielded was trifling." thou foolish
 teufelsdrockh how could it else? hadst thou not greek enough to understand
 thus much: the end of man is an action, and not a thought, though
 it were the noblest?
 "how i lived?" writes he once: "friend, hast thou considered the 'rugged
 all-nourishing earth,' as sophocles well names her; how she feeds the
 sparrow on the house-top, much more her darling, man? while thou stirrest
 and livest, thou hast a probability of victual. my breakfast of tea has
 been cooked by a tartar woman, with water of the amur, who wiped her
 earthen kettle with a horse-tail. i have roasted wild eggs in the sand of
 sahara; i have awakened in paris estrapades and vienna malzleins,
 with no prospect of breakfast beyond elemental liquid. that i had my
 living to seek saved me from dying,—by suicide. in our busy europe,
 is there not an everlasting demand for intellect, in the chemical,
 mechanical, political, religious, educational, commercial departments? in
 pagan countries, cannot one write fetishes? living! little knowest thou
 what alchemy is in an inventive soul; how, as with its little finger, it
 can create provision enough for the body (of a philosopher); and then, as
 with both hands, create quite other than provision; namely, spectres to
 torment itself withal."
 poor teufelsdrockh! flying with hunger always parallel to him; and a whole
 infernal chase in his rear; so that the countenance of hunger is
 comparatively a friend's! thus must he, in the temper of ancient cain, or
 of the modern wandering jew,—save only that he feels himself not
 guilty and but suffering the pains of guilt,—wend to and fro with
 aimless speed. thus must he, over the whole surface of the earth (by
 footprints), write his sorrows of teufelsdrockh; even as the great
 goethe, in passionate words, had to write his sorrows of werter,
 before the spirit freed herself, and he could become a man. vain truly is
 the hope of your swiftest runner to escape "from his own shadow"!
 nevertheless, in these sick days, when the born of heaven first descries
 himself (about the age of twenty) in a world such as ours, richer than
 usual in two things, in truths grown obsolete, and trades grown obsolete,—what
 can the fool think but that it is all a den of lies, wherein whoso will
 not speak lies and act lies, must stand idle and despair? whereby it
 happens that, for your nobler minds, the publishing of some such work of
 art, in one or the other dialect, becomes almost a necessity. for what is
 it properly but an altercation with the devil, before you begin honestly
 fighting him? your byron publishes his sorrows of lord george, in
 verse and in prose, and copiously otherwise: your bonaparte represents his
 sorrows of napoleon opera, in an all-too stupendous style; with
 music of cannon-volleys, and murder-shrieks of a world; his stage-lights
 are the fires of conflagration; his rhyme and recitative are the tramp of
 embattled hosts and the sound of falling cities.—happier is he who,
 like our clothes-philosopher, can write such matter, since it must be
 written, on the insensible earth, with his shoe-soles only; and also
 survive the writing thereof!
 under the strange nebulous envelopment, wherein our professor has now
 shrouded himself, no doubt but his spiritual nature is nevertheless
 progressive, and growing: for how can the "son of time," in any case,
 stand still? we behold him, through those dim years, in a state of crisis,
 of transition: his mad pilgrimings, and general solution into aimless
 discontinuity, what is all this but a mad fermentation; wherefrom the
 fiercer it is, the clearer product will one day evolve itself?
 such transitions are ever full of pain: thus the eagle when he moults is
 sickly; and, to attain his new beak, must harshly dash off the old one
 upon rocks. what stoicism soever our wanderer, in his individual acts and
 motions, may affect, it is clear that there is a hot fever of anarchy and
 misery raging within; coruscations of which flash out: as, indeed, how
 could there be other? have we not seen him disappointed, bemocked of
 destiny, through long years? all that the young heart might desire and
 pray for has been denied; nay, as in the last worst instance, offered and
 then snatched away. ever an "excellent passivity;" but of useful,
 reasonable activity, essential to the former as food to hunger, nothing
 granted: till at length, in this wild pilgrimage, he must forcibly seize
 for himself an activity, though useless, unreasonable. alas, his cup of
 bitterness, which had been filling drop by drop, ever since that first
 "ruddy morning" in the hinterschlag gymnasium, was at the very lip; and
 then with that poison-drop, of the towgood-and-blumine business, it runs
 over, and even hisses over in a deluge of foam.
 he himself says once, with more justness than originality: "men is,
 properly speaking, based upon hope, he has no other possession but hope;
 this world of his is emphatically the place of hope." what, then, was our
 professor's possession? we see him, for the present, quite shut out from
 hope; looking not into the golden orient, but vaguely all round into a dim
 copper firmament, pregnant with earthquake and tornado.
 alas, shut out from hope, in a deeper sense than we yet dream of! for, as
 he wanders wearisomely through this world, he has now lost all tidings of
 another and higher. full of religion, or at least of religiosity, as our
 friend has since exhibited himself, he hides not that, in those days, he
 was wholly irreligious: "doubt had darkened into unbelief," says he;
 "shade after shade goes grimly over your soul, till you have the fixed,
 starless, tartarean black." to such readers as have reflected, what can be
 called reflecting, on man's life, and happily discovered, in contradiction
 to much profit-and-loss philosophy, speculative and practical, that soul
 is not synonymous with stomach; who understand, therefore, in our friend's
 words, "that, for man's well-being, faith is properly the one thing
 needful; how, with it, martyrs, otherwise weak, can cheerfully endure the
 shame and the cross; and without it, worldlings puke up their sick
 existence, by suicide, in the midst of luxury:" to such it will be clear
 that, for a pure moral nature, the loss of his religious belief was the
 loss of everything. unhappy young man! all wounds, the crush of
 long-continued destitution, the stab of false friendship and of false
 love, all wounds in thy so genial heart, would have healed again, had not
 its life-warmth been withdrawn. well might he exclaim, in his wild way:
 "is there no god, then; but at best an absentee god, sitting idle, ever
 since the first sabbath, at the outside of his universe, and seeing
 it go? has the word duty no meaning; is what we call duty no divine
 messenger and guide, but a false earthly phantasm, made up of desire and
 fear, of emanations from the gallows and from doctor graham's
 celestial-bed? happiness of an approving conscience! did not paul of
 tarsus, whom admiring men have since named saint, feel that he was
 'the chief of sinners;' and nero of rome, jocund in spirit (wohlgemuth),
 spend much of his time in fiddling? foolish wordmonger and motive-grinder,
 who in thy logic-mill hast an earthly mechanism for the godlike itself,
 and wouldst fain grind me out virtue from the husks of pleasure,—i
 tell thee, nay! to the unregenerate prometheus vinctus of a man, it is
 ever the bitterest aggravation of his wretchedness that he is conscious of
 virtue, that he feels himself the victim not of suffering only, but of
 injustice. what then? is the heroic inspiration we name virtue but some
 passion; some bubble of the blood, bubbling in the direction others profit
 by? i know not: only this i know, if what thou namest happiness be our
 true aim, then are we all astray. with stupidity and sound digestion man
 may front much. but what, in these dull unimaginative days, are the
 terrors of conscience to the diseases of the liver! not on morality, but
 on cookery, let us build our stronghold: there brandishing our frying-pan,
 as censer, let us offer sweet incense to the devil, and live at ease on
 the fat things he has provided for his elect!"
 thus has the bewildered wanderer to stand, as so many have done, shouting
 question after question into the sibyl-cave of destiny, and receive no
 answer but an echo. it is all a grim desert, this once-fair world of his;
 wherein is heard only the howling of wild beasts, or the shrieks of
 despairing, hate-filled men; and no pillar of cloud by day, and no pillar
 of fire by night, any longer guides the pilgrim. to such length has the
 spirit of inquiry carried him. "but what boots it (was thut's)?"
 cries he: "it is but the common lot in this era. not having come to
 spiritual majority prior to the siecle de louis quinze, and not
 being born purely a loghead (dummkopf ), thou hadst no other
 outlook. the whole world is, like thee, sold to unbelief; their old
 temples of the godhead, which for long have not been rain-proof, crumble
 down; and men ask now: where is the godhead; our eyes never saw him?"
 pitiful enough were it, for all these wild utterances, to call our
 diogenes wicked. unprofitable servants as we all are, perhaps at no era of
 his life was he more decisively the servant of goodness, the servant of
 god, than even now when doubting god's existence. "one circumstance i
 note," says he: "after all the nameless woe that inquiry, which for me,
 what it is not always, was genuine love of truth, had wrought me! i
 nevertheless still loved truth, and would bate no jot of my allegiance to
 her. 'truth!' i cried, 'though the heavens crush me for following her: no
 falsehood! though a whole celestial lubberland were the price of
 apostasy.' in conduct it was the same. had a divine messenger from the
 clouds, or miraculous handwriting on the wall, convincingly proclaimed to
 me this thou shalt do, with what passionate readiness, as i often
 thought, would i have done it, had it been leaping into the infernal fire.
 thus, in spite of all motive-grinders, and mechanical profit-and-loss
 philosophies, with the sick ophthalmia and hallucination they had brought
 on, was the infinite nature of duty still dimly present to me: living
 without god in the world, of god's light i was not utterly bereft; if my
 as yet sealed eyes, with their unspeakable longing, could nowhere see him,
 nevertheless in my heart he was present, and his heaven-written law still
 stood legible and sacred there."
 meanwhile, under all these tribulations, and temporal and spiritual
 destitutions, what must the wanderer, in his silent soul, have endured!
 "the painfullest feeling," writes he, "is that of your own feebleness (unkraft);
 ever, as the english milton says, to be weak is the true misery. and yet
 of your strength there is and can be no clear feeling, save by what you
 have prospered in, by what you have done. between vague wavering
 capability and fixed indubitable performance, what a difference! a certain
 inarticulate self-consciousness dwells dimly in us; which only our works
 can render articulate and decisively discernible. our works are the mirror
 wherein the spirit first sees its natural lineaments. hence, too, the
 folly of that impossible precept, know thyself; till it be
 translated into this partially possible one, know what thou canst work
 at.
 "but for me, so strangely unprosperous had i been, the net-result of my
 workings amounted as yet simply to—nothing. how then could i believe
 in my strength, when there was as yet no mirror to see it in? ever did
 this agitating, yet, as i now perceive, quite frivolous question, remain
 to me insoluble: hast thou a certain faculty, a certain worth, such even
 as the most have not; or art thou the completest dullard of these modern
 times? alas, the fearful unbelief is unbelief in yourself; and how could i
 believe? had not my first, last faith in myself, when even to me the
 heavens seemed laid open, and i dared to love, been all too cruelly
 belied? the speculative mystery of life grew ever more mysterious to me:
 neither in the practical mystery had i made the slightest progress, but
 been everywhere buffeted, foiled, and contemptuously cast out. a feeble
 unit in the middle of a threatening infinitude, i seemed to have nothing
 given me but eyes, whereby to discern my own wretchedness. invisible yet
 impenetrable walls, as of enchantment, divided me from all living: was
 there, in the wide world, any true bosom i could press trustfully to mine?
 o heaven, no, there was none! i kept a lock upon my lips: why should i
 speak much with that shifting variety of so-called friends, in whose
 withered, vain and too-hungry souls friendship was but an incredible
 tradition? in such cases, your resource is to talk little, and that little
 mostly from the newspapers. now when i look back, it was a strange
 isolation i then lived in. the men and women around me, even speaking with
 me, were but figures; i had, practically, forgotten that they were alive,
 that they were not merely automatic. in the midst of their crowded streets
 and assemblages, i walked solitary; and (except as it was my own heart,
 not another's, that i kept devouring) savage also, as the tiger in his
 jungle. some comfort it would have been, could i, like a faust, have
 fancied myself tempted and tormented of the devil; for a hell, as i
 imagine, without life, though only diabolic life, were more frightful: but
 in our age of down-pulling and disbelief, the very devil has been pulled
 down, you cannot so much as believe in a devil. to me the universe was all
 void of life, of purpose, of volition, even of hostility: it was one huge,
 dead, immeasurable steam-engine, rolling on, in its dead indifference, to
 grind me limb from limb. oh, the vast, gloomy, solitary golgotha, and mill
 of death! why was the living banished thither companionless, conscious?
 why, if there is no devil; nay, unless the devil is your god?"
 a prey incessantly to such corrosions, might not, moreover, as the worst
 aggravation to them, the iron constitution even of a teufelsdrockh
 threaten to fail? we conjecture that he has known sickness; and, in spite
 of his locomotive habits, perhaps sickness of the chronic sort. hear this,
 for example: "how beautiful to die of broken-heart, on paper! quite
 another thing in practice; every window of your feeling, even of your
 intellect, as it were, begrimed and mud-bespattered, so that no pure ray
 can enter; a whole drug-shop in your inwards; the fordone soul drowning
 slowly in quagmires of disgust!"
 putting all which external and internal miseries together, may we not find
 in the following sentences, quite in our professor's still vein,
 significance enough? "from suicide a certain after-shine (nachschein)
 of christianity withheld me: perhaps also a certain indolence of
 character; for, was not that a remedy i had at any time within reach?
 often, however, was there a question present to me: should some one now,
 at the turning of that corner, blow thee suddenly out of space, into the
 other world, or other no-world, by pistol-shot,—how were it? on
 which ground, too, i have often, in sea-storms and sieged cities and other
 death-scenes, exhibited an imperturbability, which passed, falsely enough,
 for courage."
 "so had it lasted," concludes the wanderer, "so had it lasted, as in
 bitter protracted death-agony, through long years. the heart within me,
 unvisited by any heavenly dew-drop, was smouldering in sulphurous,
 slow-consuming fire. almost since earliest memory i had shed no tear; or
 once only when i, murmuring half-audibly, recited faust's death-song, that
 wild selig der den er im siegesglanze findet (happy whom he
 finds in battle's splendor), and thought that of this last friend even i
 was not forsaken, that destiny itself could not doom me not to die. having
 no hope, neither had i any definite fear, were it of man or of devil: nay,
 i often felt as if it might be solacing, could the arch-devil himself,
 though in tartarean terrors, but rise to me, that i might tell him a
 little of my mind. and yet, strangely enough, i lived in a continual,
 indefinite, pining fear; tremulous, pusillanimous, apprehensive of i knew
 not what: it seemed as if all things in the heavens above and the earth
 beneath would hurt me; as if the heavens and the earth were but boundless
 jaws of a devouring monster, wherein i, palpitating, waited to be
 devoured.
 "full of such humor, and perhaps the miserablest man in the whole french
 capital or suburbs, was i, one sultry dog-day, after much perambulation,
 toiling along the dirty little rue saint-thomas de l'enfer, among
 civic rubbish enough, in a close atmosphere, and over pavements hot as
 nebuchadnezzar's furnace; whereby doubtless my spirits were little
 cheered; when, all at once, there rose a thought in me, and i asked
 myself: 'what art thou afraid of? wherefore, like a coward, dost
 thou forever pip and whimper, and go cowering and trembling? despicable
 biped! what is the sum-total of the worst that lies before thee? death?
 well, death; and say the pangs of tophet too, and all that the devil and
 man may, will or can do against thee! hast thou not a heart; canst thou
 not suffer whatsoever it be; and, as a child of freedom, though outcast,
 trample tophet itself under thy feet, while it consumes thee? let it come,
 then; i will meet it and defy it!' and as i so thought, there rushed like
 a stream of fire over my whole soul; and i shook base fear away from me
 forever. i was strong, of unknown strength; a spirit, almost a god. ever
 from that time, the temper of my misery was changed: not fear or whining
 sorrow was it, but indignation and grim fire-eyed defiance.
 "thus had the everlasting no (das ewige nein) pealed
 authoritatively through all the recesses of my being, of my me; and then
 was it that my whole me stood up, in native god-created majesty, and with
 emphasis recorded its protest. such a protest, the most important
 transaction in life, may that same indignation and defiance, in a
 psychological point of view, be fitly called. the everlasting no had said:
 'behold, thou art fatherless, outcast, and the universe is mine (the
 devil's);' to which my whole me now made answer: 'i am not thine,
 but free, and forever hate thee!'
 "it is from this hour that i incline to date my spiritual new-birth, or
 baphometic fire-baptism; perhaps i directly thereupon began to be a man."
 though, after this "baphometic fire-baptism" of his, our wanderer
 signifies that his unrest was but increased; as, indeed, "indignation and
 defiance," especially against things in general, are not the most
 peaceable inmates; yet can the psychologist surmise that it was no longer
 a quite hopeless unrest; that henceforth it had at least a fixed centre to
 revolve round. for the fire-baptized soul, long so scathed and
 thunder-riven, here feels its own freedom, which feeling is its baphometic
 baptism: the citadel of its whole kingdom it has thus gained by assault,
 and will keep inexpugnable; outwards from which the remaining dominions,
 not indeed without hard battling, will doubtless by degrees be conquered
 and pacificated. under another figure, we might say, if in that great
 moment, in the rue saint-thomas de l'enfer, the old inward satanic
 school was not yet thrown out of doors, it received peremptory judicial
 notice to quit;—whereby, for the rest, its howl-chantings,
 ernulphus-cursings, and rebellious gnashings of teeth, might, in the mean
 while, become only the more tumultuous, and difficult to keep secret.
 accordingly, if we scrutinize these pilgrimings well, there is perhaps
 discernible henceforth a certain incipient method in their madness. not
 wholly as a spectre does teufelsdrockh now storm through the world; at
 worst as a spectra-fighting man, nay who will one day be a
 spectre-queller. if pilgriming restlessly to so many "saints' wells," and
 ever without quenching of his thirst, he nevertheless finds little secular
 wells, whereby from time to time some alleviation is ministered. in a
 word, he is now, if not ceasing, yet intermitting to "eat his own heart;"
 and clutches round him outwardly on the not-me for wholesomer food. does
 not the following glimpse exhibit him in a much more natural state?
 "towns also and cities, especially the ancient, i failed not to look upon
 with interest. how beautiful to see thereby, as through a long vista, into
 the remote time; to have, as it were, an actual section of almost the
 earliest past brought safe into the present, and set before your eyes!
 there, in that old city, was a live ember of culinary fire put down, say
 only two thousand years ago; and there, burning more or less triumphantly,
 with such fuel as the region yielded, it has burnt, and still burns, and
 thou thyself seest the very smoke thereof. ah! and the far more mysterious
 live ember of vital fire was then also put down there; and still
 miraculously burns and spreads; and the smoke and ashes thereof (in these
 judgment-halls and churchyards), and its bellows-engines (in these
 churches), thou still seest; and its flame, looking out from every kind
 countenance, and every hateful one, still warms thee or scorches thee.
 "of man's activity and attainment the chief results are aeriform, mystic,
 and preserved in tradition only: such are his forms of government, with
 the authority they rest on; his customs, or fashions both of cloth-habits
 and of soul-habits; much more his collective stock of handicrafts, the
 whole faculty he has acquired of manipulating nature: all these things, as
 indispensable and priceless as they are, cannot in any way be fixed under
 lock and key, but must flit, spirit-like, on impalpable vehicles, from
 father to son; if you demand sight of them, they are nowhere to be met
 with. visible ploughmen and hammermen there have been, ever from cain and
 tubal-cain downwards: but where does your accumulated agricultural,
 metallurgic, and other manufacturing skill lie warehoused? it transmits
 itself on the atmospheric air, on the sun's rays (by hearing and by
 vision); it is a thing aeriform, impalpable, of quite spiritual sort. in
 like manner, ask me not, where are the laws; where is the government? in
 vain wilt thou go to schonbrunn, to downing street, to the palais bourbon;
 thou findest nothing there but brick or stone houses, and some bundles of
 papers tied with tape. where, then, is that same cunningly devised
 almighty government of theirs to be laid hands on? everywhere, yet
 nowhere: seen only in its works, this too is a thing aeriform, invisible;
 or if you will, mystic and miraculous. so spiritual (geistig) is
 our whole daily life: all that we do springs out of mystery, spirit,
 invisible force; only like a little cloud-image, or armida's palace,
 air-built, does the actual body itself forth from the great mystic deep.
 "visible and tangible products of the past, again, i reckon up to the
 extent of three: cities, with their cabinets and arsenals; then tilled
 fields, to either or to both of which divisions roads with their bridges
 may belong; and thirdly—books. in which third truly, the last
 invented, lies a worth far surpassing that of the two others. wondrous
 indeed is the virtue of a true book. not like a dead city of stones,
 yearly crumbling, yearly needing repair; more like a tilled field, but
 then a spiritual field: like a spiritual tree, let me rather say, it
 stands from year to year, and from age to age (we have books that already
 number some hundred and fifty human ages); and yearly comes its new
 produce of leaves (commentaries, deductions, philosophical, political
 systems; or were it only sermons, pamphlets, journalistic essays), every
 one of which is talismanic and thaumaturgic, for it can persuade men. o
 thou who art able to write a book, which once in the two centuries or
 oftener there is a man gifted to do, envy not him whom they name
 city-builder, and inexpressibly pity him whom they name conqueror or
 city-burner! thou too art a conqueror and victor; but of the true sort,
 namely over the devil: thou too hast built what will outlast all marble
 and metal, and be a wonder-bringing city of the mind, a temple and
 seminary and prophetic mount, whereto all kindreds of the earth will
 pilgrim.—fool! why journeyest thou wearisomely, in thy antiquarian
 fervor, to gaze on the stone pyramids of geeza, or the clay ones of
 sacchara? these stand there, as i can tell thee, idle and inert, looking
 over the desert, foolishly enough, for the last three thousand years: but
 canst thou not open thy hebrew bible, then, or even luther's version
 thereof?"
 no less satisfactory is his sudden appearance not in battle, yet on some
 battle-field; which, we soon gather, must be that of wagram; so that here,
 for once, is a certain approximation to distinctness of date. omitting
 much, let us impart what follows:—
 "horrible enough! a whole marchfeld strewed with shell-splinters,
 cannon-shot, ruined tumbrils, and dead men and horses; stragglers still
 remaining not so much as buried. and those red mould heaps; ay, there lie
 the shells of men, out of which all the life and virtue has been blown;
 and now are they swept together, and crammed down out of sight, like blown
 egg-shells!—did nature, when she bade the donau bring down his
 mould-cargoes from the carinthian and carpathian heights, and spread them
 out here into the softest, richest level,—intend thee, o marchfeld,
 for a corn-bearing nursery, whereon her children might be nursed; or for a
 cockpit, wherein they might the more commodiously be throttled and
 tattered? were thy three broad highways, meeting here from the ends of
 europe, made for ammunition-wagons, then? were thy wagrams and stillfrieds
 but so many ready-built casemates, wherein the house of hapsburg might
 batter with artillery, and with artillery be battered? konig ottokar, amid
 yonder hillocks, dies under rodolf's truncheon; here kaiser franz falls
 a-swoon under napoleon's: within which five centuries, to omit the others,
 how has thy breast, fair plain, been defaced and defiled! the greensward
 is torn up and trampled down; man's fond care of it, his fruit-trees,
 hedge-rows, and pleasant dwellings, blown away with gunpowder; and the
 kind seedfield lies a desolate, hideous place of skulls.—nevertheless,
 nature is at work; neither shall these powder-devilkins with their utmost
 devilry gainsay her: but all that gore and carnage will be shrouded in,
 absorbed into manure; and next year the marchfeld will be green, nay
 greener. thrifty unwearied nature, ever out of our great waste educing
 some little profit of thy own,—how dost thou, from the very carcass
 of the killer, bring life for the living!
 "what, speaking in quite unofficial language, is the net purport and
 upshot of war? to my own knowledge, for example, there dwell and toil, in
 the british village of dumdrudge, usually some five hundred souls. from
 these, by certain 'natural enemies' of the french, there are successively
 selected, during the french war, say thirty able-bodied men; dumdrudge, at
 her own expense, has suckled and nursed them: she has, not without
 difficulty and sorrow, fed them up to manhood, and even trained them to
 crafts, so that one can weave, another build, another hammer, and the
 weakest can stand under thirty stone avoirdupois. nevertheless, amid much
 weeping and swearing, they are selected; all dressed in red; and shipped
 away, at the public charges, some two thousand miles, or say only to the
 south of spain; and fed there till wanted. and now to that same spot, in
 the south of spain, are thirty similar french artisans, from a french
 dumdrudge, in like manner wending: till at length, after infinite effort,
 the two parties come into actual juxtaposition; and thirty stands fronting
 thirty, each with a gun in his hand. straightaway the word 'fire!' is
 given; and they blow the souls out of one another; and in place of sixty
 brisk useful craftsmen, the world has sixty dead carcasses, which it must
 bury, and anew shed tears for. had these men any quarrel? busy as the
 devil is, not the smallest! they lived far enough apart; were the entirest
 strangers; nay, in so wide a universe, there was even, unconsciously, by
 commerce, some mutual helpfulness between them. how then? simpleton! their
 governors had fallen out; and instead of shooting one another, had the
 cunning to make these poor blockheads shoot.—alas, so is it in
 deutschland, and hitherto in all other lands; still as of old, 'what
 devilry soever kings do, the greeks must pay the piper!'—in that
 fiction of the english smollett, it is true, the final cessation of war is
 perhaps prophetically shadowed forth; where the two natural enemies, in
 person, take each a tobacco-pipe, filled with brimstone; light the same,
 and smoke in one another's faces, till the weaker gives in: but from such
 predicted peace-era, what blood-filled trenches, and contentious
 centuries, may still divide us!"
 thus can the professor, at least in lucid intervals, look away from his
 own sorrows, over the many-colored world, and pertinently enough note what
 is passing there. we may remark, indeed, that for the matter of spiritual
 culture, if for nothing else, perhaps few periods of his life were richer
 than this. internally, there is the most momentous instructive course of
 practical philosophy, with experiments, going on; towards the right
 comprehension of which his peripatetic habits, favorable to meditation,
 might help him rather than hinder. externally, again, as he wanders to and
 fro, there are, if for the longing heart little substance, yet for the
 seeing eye sights enough in these so boundless travels of his, granting
 that the satanic school was even partially kept down, what an incredible
 knowledge of our planet, and its inhabitants and their works, that is to
 say, of all knowable things, might not teufelsdrockh acquire!
 "i have read in most public libraries," says he, "including those of
 constantinople and samarcand: in most colleges, except the chinese
 mandarin ones, i have studied, or seen that there was no studying. unknown
 languages have i oftenest gathered from their natural repertory, the air,
 by my organ of hearing; statistics, geographics, topographics came,
 through the eye, almost of their own accord. the ways of man, how he seeks
 food, and warmth, and protection for himself, in most regions, are
 ocularly known to me. like the great hadrian, i meted out much of the
 terraqueous globe with a pair of compasses that belonged to myself only.
 "of great scenes why speak? three summer days, i lingered reflecting, and
 even composing (dichtete), by the pine-chasms of vaucluse; and in
 that clear lakelet moistened my bread. i have sat under the palm-trees of
 tadmor; smoked a pipe among the ruins of babylon. the great wall of china
 i have seen; and can testify that it is of gray brick, coped and covered
 with granite, and shows only second-rate masonry.—great events,
 also, have not i witnessed? kings sweated down (ausgemergelt) into
 berlin-and-milan customhouse-officers; the world well won, and the world
 well lost; oftener than once a hundred thousand individuals shot (by each
 other) in one day. all kindreds and peoples and nations dashed together,
 and shifted and shovelled into heaps, that they might ferment there, and
 in time unite. the birth-pangs of democracy, wherewith convulsed europe
 was groaning in cries that reached heaven, could not escape me.
 "for great men i have ever had the warmest predilection; and can perhaps
 boast that few such in this era have wholly escaped me. great men are the
 inspired (speaking and acting) texts of that divine book of revelations,
 whereof a chapter is completed from epoch to epoch, and by some named
 history; to which inspired texts your numerous talented men, and your
 innumerable untalented men, are the better or worse exegetic commentaries,
 and wagon-load of too-stupid, heretical or orthodox, weekly sermons. for
 my study, the inspired texts themselves! thus did not i, in very early
 days, having disguised me as tavern-waiter, stand behind the field-chairs,
 under that shady tree at treisnitz by the jena highway; waiting upon the
 great schiller and greater goethe; and hearing what i have not forgotten.
 for—"
 —but at this point the editor recalls his principle of caution, some
 time ago laid down, and must suppress much. let not the sacredness of
 laurelled, still more, of crowned heads, be tampered with. should we, at a
 future day, find circumstances altered, and the time come for publication,
 then may these glimpses into the privacy of the illustrious be conceded;
 which for the present were little better than treacherous, perhaps
 traitorous eavesdroppings. of lord byron, therefore, of pope pius, emperor
 tarakwang, and the "white water-roses" (chinese carbonari) with their
 mysteries, no notice here! of napoleon himself we shall only, glancing
 from afar, remark that teufelsdrockh's relation to him seems to have been
 of very varied character. at first we find our poor professor on the point
 of being shot as a spy; then taken into private conversation, even pinched
 on the ear, yet presented with no money; at last indignantly dismissed,
 almost thrown out of doors, as an "ideologist." "he himself," says the
 professor, "was among the completest ideologists, at least ideopraxists:
 in the idea (in der idee) he lived, moved and fought. the man was a
 divine missionary, though unconscious of it; and preached, through the
 cannon's throat, that great doctrine, la carriere ouverte aux talens
 (the tools to him that can handle them), which is our ultimate political
 evangel, wherein alone can liberty lie. madly enough he preached, it is
 true, as enthusiasts and first missionaries are wont, with imperfect
 utterance, amid much frothy rant; yet as articulately perhaps as the case
 admitted. or call him, if you will, an american backwoodsman, who had to
 fell unpenetrated forests, and battle with innumerable wolves, and did not
 entirely forbear strong liquor, rioting, and even theft; whom,
 notwithstanding, the peaceful sower will follow, and, as he cuts the
 boundless harvest, bless."
 more legitimate and decisively authentic is teufelsdrockh's appearance and
 emergence (we know not well whence) in the solitude of the north cape, on
 that june midnight. he has a "light-blue spanish cloak" hanging round him,
 as his "most commodious, principal, indeed sole upper-garment;" and stands
 there, on the world-promontory, looking over the infinite brine, like a
 little blue belfry (as we figure), now motionless indeed, yet ready, if
 stirred, to ring quaintest changes.
 "silence as of death," writes he; "for midnight, even in the arctic
 latitudes, has its character: nothing but the granite cliffs ruddy-tinged,
 the peaceable gurgle of that slow-heaving polar ocean, over which in the
 utmost north the great sun hangs low and lazy, as if he too were
 slumbering. yet is his cloud-couch wrought of crimson and cloth-of-gold;
 yet does his light stream over the mirror of waters, like a tremulous
 fire-pillar, shooting downwards to the abyss, and hide itself under my
 feet. in such moments, solitude also is invaluable; for who would speak,
 or be looked on, when behind him lies all europe and africa, fast asleep,
 except the watchmen; and before him the silent immensity, and palace of
 the eternal, whereof our sun is but a porch-lamp?
 "nevertheless, in this solemn moment comes a man, or monster, scrambling
 from among the rock-hollows; and, shaggy, huge as the hyperborean bear,
 hails me in russian speech: most probably, therefore, a russian smuggler.
 with courteous brevity, i signify my indifference to contraband trade, my
 humane intentions, yet strong wish to be private. in vain: the monster,
 counting doubtless on his superior stature, and minded to make sport for
 himself, or perhaps profit, were it with murder, continues to advance;
 ever assailing me with his importunate train-oil breath; and now has
 advanced, till we stand both on the verge of the rock, the deep sea
 rippling greedily down below. what argument will avail? on the thick
 hyperborean, cherubic reasoning, seraphic eloquence were lost. prepared
 for such extremity, i, deftly enough, whisk aside one step; draw out, from
 my interior reservoirs, a sufficient birmingham horse-pistol, and say, 'be
 so obliging as retire, friend (er ziehe sich zuruck, freund), and
 with promptitude!' this logic even the hyperborean understands: fast
 enough, with apologetic, petitionary growl, he sidles off; and, except for
 suicidal as well as homicidal purposes, need not return.
 "such i hold to be the genuine use of gunpowder: that it makes all men
 alike tall. nay, if thou be cooler, cleverer than i, if thou have more mind,
 though all but no body whatever, then canst thou kill me first, and
 art the taller. hereby, at last, is the goliath powerless, and the david
 resistless; savage animalism is nothing, inventive spiritualism is all.
 "with respect to duels, indeed, i have my own ideas. few things, in this
 so surprising world, strike me with more surprise. two little visual
 spectra of men, hovering with insecure enough cohesion in the midst of the
 unfathomable, and to dissolve therein, at any rate, very soon,—make
 pause at the distance of twelve paces asunder; whirl round; and,
 simultaneously by the cunningest mechanism, explode one another into
 dissolution; and off-hand become air, and non-extant! deuce on it (verdammt),
 the little spitfires!—nay, i think with old hugo von trimberg: 'god
 must needs laugh outright, could such a thing be, to see his wondrous
 manikins here below.'"
 but amid these specialties, let us not forget the great generality, which
 is our chief quest here: how prospered the inner man of teufelsdrockh,
 under so much outward shifting! does legion still lurk in him, though
 repressed; or has he exorcised that devil's brood? we can answer that the
 symptoms continue promising. experience is the grand spiritual doctor; and
 with him teufelsdrockh has now been long a patient, swallowing many a
 bitter bolus. unless our poor friend belong to the numerous class of
 incurables, which seems not likely, some cure will doubtless be effected.
 we should rather say that legion, or the satanic school, was now pretty
 well extirpated and cast out, but next to nothing introduced in its room;
 whereby the heart remains, for the while, in a quiet but no comfortable
 state.
 "at length, after so much roasting," thus writes our autobiographer, "i
 was what you might name calcined. pray only that it be not rather, as is
 the more frequent issue, reduced to a caput-mortuum! but in any
 case, by mere dint of practice, i had grown familiar with many things.
 wretchedness was still wretched; but i could now partly see through it,
 and despise it. which highest mortal, in this inane existence, had i not
 found a shadow-hunter, or shadow-hunted; and, when i looked through his
 brave garnitures, miserable enough? thy wishes have all been sniffed
 aside, thought i: but what, had they even been all granted! did not the
 boy alexander weep because he had not two planets to conquer; or a whole
 solar system; or after that, a whole universe? ach gott, when i
 gazed into these stars, have they not looked down on me as if with pity,
 from their serene spaces; like eyes glistening with heavenly tears over
 the little lot of man! thousands of human generations, all as noisy as our
 own, have been swallowed up of time, and there remains no wreck of them
 any more; and arcturus and orion and sirius and the pleiades are still
 shining in their courses, clear and young, as when the shepherd first
 noted them in the plain of shinar. pshaw! what is this paltry little
 dog-cage of an earth; what art thou that sittest whining there? thou art
 still nothing, nobody: true; but who, then, is something, somebody? for
 thee the family of man has no use; it rejects thee; thou art wholly as a
 dissevered limb: so be it; perhaps it is better so!"
 too-heavy-laden teufelsdrockh! yet surely his bands are loosening; one day
 he will hurl the burden far from him, and bound forth free and with a
 second youth.
 "this," says our professor, "was the centre of indifference i had now
 reached; through which whoso travels from the negative pole to the
 positive must necessarily pass."
 "temptations in the wilderness!" exclaims teufelsdrockh, "have we not all
 to be tried with such? not so easily can the old adam, lodged in us by
 birth, be dispossessed. our life is compassed round with necessity; yet is
 the meaning of life itself no other than freedom, than voluntary force:
 thus have we a warfare; in the beginning, especially, a hard-fought
 battle. for the god-given mandate, work thou in well-doing, lies
 mysteriously written, in promethean prophetic characters, in our hearts;
 and leaves us no rest, night or day, till it be deciphered and obeyed;
 till it burn forth, in our conduct, a visible, acted gospel of freedom.
 and as the clay-given mandate, eat thou and be filled, at the same
 time persuasively proclaims itself through every nerve,—must not
 there be a confusion, a contest, before the better influence can become
 the upper?
 "to me nothing seems more natural than that the son of man, when such
 god-given mandate first prophetically stirs within him, and the clay must
 now be vanquished or vanquish,—should be carried of the spirit into
 grim solitudes, and there fronting the tempter do grimmest battle with
 him; defiantly setting him at naught till he yield and fly. name it as we
 choose: with or without visible devil, whether in the natural desert of
 rocks and sands, or in the populous moral desert of selfishness and
 baseness,—to such temptation are we all called. unhappy if we are
 not! unhappy if we are but half-men, in whom that divine handwriting has
 never blazed forth, all-subduing, in true sun-splendor; but quivers
 dubiously amid meaner lights: or smoulders, in dull pain, in darkness,
 under earthly vapors!—our wilderness is the wide world in an
 atheistic century; our forty days are long years of suffering and fasting:
 nevertheless, to these also comes an end. yes, to me also was given, if
 not victory, yet the consciousness of battle, and the resolve to persevere
 therein while life or faculty is left. to me also, entangled in the
 enchanted forests, demon-peopled, doleful of sight and of sound, it was
 given, after weariest wanderings, to work out my way into the higher
 sunlit slopes—of that mountain which has no summit, or whose summit
 is in heaven only!"
 he says elsewhere, under a less ambitious figure; as figures are, once for
 all, natural to him: "has not thy life been that of most sufficient men (tuchtigen
 manner) thou hast known in this generation? an outflush of foolish
 young enthusiasm, like the first fallow-crop, wherein are as many weeds as
 valuable herbs: this all parched away, under the droughts of practical and
 spiritual unbelief, as disappointment, in thought and act, often-repeated
 gave rise to doubt, and doubt gradually settled into denial! if i have had
 a second-crop, and now see the perennial greensward, and sit under
 umbrageous cedars, which defy all drought (and doubt); herein too, be the
 heavens praised, i am not without examples, and even exemplars."
 so that, for teufelsdrockh, also, there has been a "glorious revolution:"
 these mad shadow-hunting and shadow-hunted pilgrimings of his were but
 some purifying "temptation in the wilderness," before his apostolic work
 (such as it was) could begin; which temptation is now happily over, and
 the devil once more worsted! was "that high moment in the rue de
 l'enfer," then, properly the turning-point of the battle; when the
 fiend said, worship me, or be torn in shreds; and was answered
 valiantly with an apage satana?—singular teufelsdrockh, would
 thou hadst told thy singular story in plain words! but it is fruitless to
 look there, in those paper-bags, for such. nothing but innuendoes,
 figurative crotchets: a typical shadow, fitfully wavering,
 prophetico-satiric; no clear logical picture. "how paint to the sensual
 eye," asks he once, "what passes in the holy-of-holies of man's soul; in
 what words, known to these profane times, speak even afar-off of the
 unspeakable?" we ask in turn: why perplex these times, profane as they
 are, with needless obscurity, by omission and by commission? not mystical
 only is our professor, but whimsical; and involves himself, now more than
 ever, in eye-bewildering chiaroscuro. successive glimpses, here
 faithfully imparted, our more gifted readers must endeavor to combine for
 their own behoof.
 he says: "the hot harmattan wind had raged itself out; its howl went
 silent within me; and the long-deafened soul could now hear. i paused in
 my wild wanderings; and sat me down to wait, and consider; for it was as
 if the hour of change drew nigh. i seemed to surrender, to renounce
 utterly, and say: fly, then, false shadows of hope; i will chase you no
 more, i will believe you no more. and ye too, haggard spectres of fear, i
 care not for you; ye too are all shadows and a lie. let me rest here: for
 i am way-weary and life-weary; i will rest here, were it but to die: to
 die or to live is alike to me; alike insignificant."—and again:
 "here, then, as i lay in that centre of indifference; cast, doubtless by
 benignant upper influence, into a healing sleep, the heavy dreams rolled
 gradually away, and i awoke to a new heaven and a new earth. the first
 preliminary moral act, annihilation of self (selbst-todtung), had
 been happily accomplished; and my mind's eyes were now unsealed, and its
 hands ungyved."
 might we not also conjecture that the following passage refers to his
 locality, during this same "healing sleep;" that his pilgrim-staff lies
 cast aside here, on "the high table-land;" and indeed that the repose is
 already taking wholesome effect on him? if it were not that the tone, in
 some parts, has more of riancy, even of levity, than we could have
 expected! however, in teufelsdrockh, there is always the strangest
 dualism: light dancing, with guitar-music, will be going on in the
 fore-court, while by fits from within comes the faint whimpering of woe
 and wail. we transcribe the piece entire.
 "beautiful it was to sit there, as in my skyey tent, musing and
 meditating; on the high table-land, in front of the mountains; over me, as
 roof, the azure dome, and around me, for walls, four azure-flowing
 curtains,—namely, of the four azure winds, on whose bottom-fringes
 also i have seen gilding. and then to fancy the fair castles that stood
 sheltered in these mountain hollows; with their green flower-lawns, and
 white dames and damosels, lovely enough: or better still, the straw-roofed
 cottages, wherein stood many a mother baking bread, with her children
 round her:—all hidden and protectingly folded up in the
 valley-folds; yet there and alive, as sure as if i beheld them. or to see,
 as well as fancy, the nine towns and villages, that lay round my
 mountain-seat, which, in still weather, were wont to speak to me (by their
 steeple-bells) with metal tongue; and, in almost all weather, proclaimed
 their vitality by repeated smoke-clouds; whereon, as on a culinary
 horologe, i might read the hour of the day. for it was the smoke of
 cookery, as kind housewives at morning, midday, eventide, were boiling
 their husbands' kettles; and ever a blue pillar rose up into the air,
 successively or simultaneously, from each of the nine, saying, as plainly
 as smoke could say: such and such a meal is getting ready here. not
 uninteresting! for you have the whole borough, with all its love-makings
 and scandal-mongeries, contentions and contentments, as in miniature, and
 could cover it all with your hat.—if, in my wide way-farings, i had
 learned to look into the business of the world in its details, here
 perhaps was the place for combining it into general propositions, and
 deducing inferences therefrom.
 "often also could i see the black tempest marching in anger through the
 distance: round some schreckhorn, as yet grim-blue, would the eddying
 vapor gather, and there tumultuously eddy, and flow down like a mad
 witch's hair; till, after a space, it vanished, and, in the clear sunbeam,
 your schreckhorn stood smiling grim-white, for the vapor had held snow.
 how thou fermentest and elaboratest, in thy great fermenting-vat and
 laboratory of an atmosphere, of a world, o nature!—or what is
 nature? ha! why do i not name thee god? art not thou the 'living garment
 of god'? o heavens, is it, in very deed, he, then, that ever speaks
 through thee; that lives and loves in thee, that lives and loves in me?
 "fore-shadows, call them rather fore-splendors, of that truth, and
 beginning of truths, fell mysteriously over my soul. sweeter than
 dayspring to the shipwrecked in nova zembla; ah, like the mother's voice
 to her little child that strays bewildered, weeping, in unknown tumults;
 like soft streamings of celestial music to my too-exasperated heart, came
 that evangel. the universe is not dead and demoniacal, a charnel-house
 with spectres; but godlike, and my father's!
 "with other eyes, too, could i now look upon my fellowman: with an
 infinite love, an infinite pity. poor, wandering, wayward man! art thou
 not tried, and beaten with stripes, even as i am? ever, whether thou bear
 the royal mantle or the beggar's gabardine, art thou not so weary, so
 heavy-laden; and thy bed of rest is but a grave. o my brother, my brother,
 why cannot i shelter thee in my bosom, and wipe away all tears from thy
 eyes!—truly, the din of many-voiced life, which, in this solitude,
 with the mind's organ, i could hear, was no longer a maddening discord,
 but a melting one; like inarticulate cries, and sobbings of a dumb
 creature, which in the ear of heaven are prayers. the poor earth, with her
 poor joys, was now my needy mother, not my cruel stepdame; man, with his
 so mad wants and so mean endeavors, had become the dearer to me; and even
 for his sufferings and his sins, i now first named him brother. thus was i
 standing in the porch of that 'sanctuary of sorrow;' by strange,
 steep ways had i too been guided thither; and ere long its sacred gates
 would open, and the 'divine depth of sorrow' lie disclosed to me."
 the professor says, he here first got eye on the knot that had been
 strangling him, and straightway could unfasten it, and was free. "a vain
 interminable controversy," writes he, "touching what is at present called
 origin of evil, or some such thing, arises in every soul, since the
 beginning of the world; and in every soul, that would pass from idle
 suffering into actual endeavoring, must first be put an end to. the most,
 in our time, have to go content with a simple, incomplete enough
 suppression of this controversy; to a few some solution of it is
 indispensable. in every new era, too, such solution comes out in different
 terms; and ever the solution of the last era has become obsolete, and is
 found unserviceable. for it is man's nature to change his dialect from
 century to century; he cannot help it though he would. the authentic church-catechism
 of our present century has not yet fallen into my hands: meanwhile, for my
 own private behoof i attempt to elucidate the matter so. man's
 unhappiness, as i construe, comes of his greatness; it is because there is
 an infinite in him, which with all his cunning he cannot quite bury under
 the finite. will the whole finance ministers and upholsterers and
 confectioners of modern europe undertake, in joint-stock company, to make
 one shoeblack happy? they cannot accomplish it, above an hour or two: for
 the shoeblack also has a soul quite other than his stomach; and would
 require, if you consider it, for his permanent satisfaction and
 saturation, simply this allotment, no more, and no less: god's infinite
 universe altogether to himself, therein to enjoy infinitely, and fill
 every wish as fast as it rose. oceans of hochheimer, a throat like that of
 ophiuchus: speak not of them; to the infinite shoeblack they are as
 nothing. no sooner is your ocean filled, than he grumbles that it might
 have been of better vintage. try him with half of a universe, of an
 omnipotence, he sets to quarrelling with the proprietor of the other half,
 and declares himself the most maltreated of men.—always there is a
 black spot in our sunshine: it is even, as i said, the shadow of
 ourselves.
 "but the whim we have of happiness is somewhat thus. by certain
 valuations, and averages, of our own striking, we come upon some sort of
 average terrestrial lot; this we fancy belongs to us by nature, and of
 indefeasible right. it is simple payment of our wages, of our deserts;
 requires neither thanks nor complaint; only such overplus as there
 may be do we account happiness; any deficit again is misery. now
 consider that we have the valuation of our own deserts ourselves, and what
 a fund of self-conceit there is in each of us,—do you wonder that
 the balance should so often dip the wrong way, and many a blockhead cry:
 see there, what a payment; was ever worthy gentleman so used!—i tell
 thee, blockhead, it all comes of thy vanity; of what thou fanciest
 those same deserts of thine to be. fancy that thou deservest to be hanged
 (as is most likely), thou wilt feel it happiness to be only shot: fancy
 that thou deservest to be hanged in a hair-halter, it will be a luxury to
 die in hemp.
 "so true is it, what i then said, that the fraction of life can be
 increased in value not so much by increasing your numerator as by
 lessening your denominator. nay, unless my algebra deceive me, unity
 itself divided by zero will give infinity. make thy claim of
 wages a zero, then; thou hast the world under thy feet. well did the
 wisest of our time write: 'it is only with renunciation (entsagen)
 that life, properly speaking, can be said to begin.'
 "i asked myself: what is this that, ever since earliest years, thou hast
 been fretting and fuming, and lamenting and self-tormenting, on account
 of? say it in a word: is it not because thou art not happy? because the
 thou (sweet gentleman) is not sufficiently honored, nourished,
 soft-bedded, and lovingly cared for? foolish soul! what act of legislature
 was there that thou shouldst be happy? a little while ago thou
 hadst no right to be at all. what if thou wert born and predestined
 not to be happy, but to be unhappy! art thou nothing other than a vulture,
 then, that fliest through the universe seeking after somewhat to eat;
 and shrieking dolefully because carrion enough is not given thee? close
 thy byron; open thy goethe."
 "es leuchtet mir ein, i see a glimpse of it!" cries he elsewhere:
 "there is in man a higher than love of happiness: he can do without
 happiness, and instead thereof find blessedness! was it not to preach
 forth this same higher that sages and martyrs, the poet and the priest, in
 all times, have spoken and suffered; bearing testimony, through life and
 through death, of the godlike that is in man, and how in the godlike only
 has he strength and freedom? which god-inspiredd doctrine art thou also
 honored to be taught; o heavens! and broken with manifold merciful
 afflictions, even till thou become contrite and learn it! oh, thank thy
 destiny for these; thankfully bear what yet remain: thou hadst need of
 them; the self in thee needed to be annihilated. by benignant
 fever-paroxysms is life rooting out the deep-seated chronic disease, and
 triumphs over death. on the roaring billows of time, thou art not
 engulfed, but borne aloft into the azure of eternity. love not pleasure;
 love god. this is the everlasting yea, wherein all contradiction is
 solved: wherein whoso walks and works, it is well with him."
 and again: "small is it that thou canst trample the earth with its
 injuries under thy feet, as old greek zeno trained thee: thou canst love
 the earth while it injures thee, and even because it injures thee; for
 this a greater than zeno was needed, and he too was sent. knowest thou
 that 'worship of sorrow'? the temple thereof, founded some eighteen
 centuries ago, now lies in ruins, overgrown with jungle, the habitation of
 doleful creatures: nevertheless, venture forward; in a low crypt, arched
 out of falling fragments, thou findest the altar still there, and its
 sacred lamp perennially burning."
 without pretending to comment on which strange utterances, the editor will
 only remark, that there lies beside them much of a still more questionable
 character; unsuited to the general apprehension; nay wherein he himself
 does not see his way. nebulous disquisitions on religion, yet not without
 bursts of splendor; on the "perennial continuance of inspiration;" on
 prophecy; that there are "true priests, as well as baal-priests, in our
 own day:" with more of the like sort. we select some fractions, by way of
 finish to this farrago.
 "cease, my much-respected herr von voltaire," thus apostrophizes the
 professor: "shut thy sweet voice; for the task appointed thee seems
 finished. sufficiently hast thou demonstrated this proposition,
 considerable or otherwise: that the mythus of the christian religion looks
 not in the eighteenth century as it did in the eighth. alas, were thy
 six-and-thirty quartos, and the six-and-thirty thousand other quartos and
 folios, and flying sheets or reams, printed before and since on the same
 subject, all needed to convince us of so little! but what next? wilt thou
 help us to embody the divine spirit of that religion in a new mythus, in a
 new vehicle and vesture, that our souls, otherwise too like perishing, may
 live? what! thou hast no faculty in that kind? only a torch for burning,
 no hammer for building? take our thanks, then, and—thyself away.
 "meanwhile what are antiquated mythuses to me? or is the god present, felt
 in my own heart, a thing which herr von voltaire will dispute out of me;
 or dispute into me? to the 'worship of sorrow' ascribe what origin
 and genesis thou pleasest, has not that worship originated, and
 been generated; is it not here? feel it in thy heart, and then say
 whether it is of god! this is belief; all else is opinion,—for which
 latter whoso will, let him worry and be worried."
 "neither," observes he elsewhere, "shall ye tear out one another's eyes,
 struggling over 'plenary inspiration,' and such like: try rather to get a
 little even partial inspiration, each of you for himself. one bible i
 know, of whose plenary inspiration doubt is not so much as possible; nay
 with my own eyes i saw the god's-hand writing it: thereof all other bibles
 are but leaves,—say, in picture-writing to assist the weaker
 faculty."
 or, to give the wearied reader relief, and bring it to an end, let him
 take the following perhaps more intelligible passage:—
 "to me, in this our life," says the professor, "which is an internecine
 warfare with the time-spirit, other warfare seems questionable. hast thou
 in any way a contention with thy brother, i advise thee, think well what
 the meaning thereof is. if thou gauge it to the bottom, it is simply this:
 'fellow, see! thou art taking more than thy share of happiness in the
 world, something from my share: which, by the heavens, thou shalt not; nay
 i will fight thee rather.'—alas, and the whole lot to be divided is
 such a beggarly matter, truly a 'feast of shells,' for the substance has
 been spilled out: not enough to quench one appetite; and the collective
 human species clutching at them!—can we not, in all such cases,
 rather say: 'take it, thou too-ravenous individual; take that pitiful
 additional fraction of a share, which i reckoned mine, but which thou so
 wantest; take it with a blessing: would to heaven i had enough for thee!'—if
 fichte's wissenschaftslehre be, 'to a certain extent, applied
 christianity,' surely to a still greater extent, so is this. we have here
 not a whole duty of man, yet a half duty, namely the passive half: could
 we but do it, as we can demonstrate it!
 "but indeed conviction, were it never so excellent, is worthless till it
 convert itself into conduct. nay properly conviction is not possible till
 then; inasmuch as all speculation is by nature endless, formless, a vortex
 amid vortices, only by a felt indubitable certainty of experience does it
 find any centre to revolve round, and so fashion itself into a system.
 most true is it, as a wise man teaches us, that 'doubt of any sort cannot
 be removed except by action.' on which ground, too, let him who gropes
 painfully in darkness or uncertain light, and prays vehemently that the
 dawn may ripen into day, lay this other precept well to heart, which to me
 was of invaluable service: 'do the duty which lies nearest thee,'
 which thou knowest to be a duty! thy second duty will already have become
 clearer.
 "may we not say, however, that the hour of spiritual enfranchisement is
 even this: when your ideal world, wherein the whole man has been dimly
 struggling and inexpressibly languishing to work, becomes revealed, and
 thrown open; and you discover, with amazement enough, like the lothario in
 wilhelm meister, that your 'america is here or nowhere'? the
 situation that has not its duty, its ideal, was never yet occupied by man.
 yes here, in this poor, miserable, hampered, despicable actual, wherein
 thou even now standest, here or nowhere is thy ideal: work it out
 therefrom; and working, believe, live, be free. fool! the ideal is in
 thyself, the impediment too is in thyself: thy condition is but the stuff
 thou art to shape that same ideal out of: what matters whether such stuff
 be of this sort or that, so the form thou give it be heroic, be poetic? o
 thou that pinest in the imprisonment of the actual, and criest bitterly to
 the gods for a kingdom wherein to rule and create, know this of a truth:
 the thing thou seekest is already with thee, 'here or nowhere,' couldst
 thou only see!
 "but it is with man's soul as it was with nature: the beginning of
 creation is—light. till the eye have vision, the whole members are
 in bonds. divine moment, when over the tempest-tost soul, as once over the
 wild-weltering chaos, it is spoken: let there be light! ever to the
 greatest that has felt such moment, is it not miraculous and
 god-announcing; even as, under simpler figures, to the simplest and least.
 the mad primeval discord is hushed; the rudely jumbled conflicting
 elements bind themselves into separate firmaments: deep silent
 rock-foundations are built beneath; and the skyey vault with its
 everlasting luminaries above: instead of a dark wasteful chaos, we have a
 blooming, fertile, heaven-encompassed world.
 "i too could now say to myself: be no longer a chaos, but a world, or even
 worldkin. produce! produce! were it but the pitifullest infinitesimal
 fraction of a product, produce it, in god's name! 'tis the utmost thou
 hast in thee: out with it, then. up, up! whatsoever thy hand findeth to
 do, do it with thy whole might. work while it is called to-day; for the
 night cometh, wherein no man can work."
 thus have we, as closely and perhaps satisfactorily as, in such
 circumstances, might be, followed teufelsdrockh, through the various
 successive states and stages of growth, entanglement, unbelief, and almost
 reprobation, into a certain clearer state of what he himself seems to
 consider as conversion. "blame not the word," says he; "rejoice rather
 that such a word, signifying such a thing, has come to light in our modern
 era, though hidden from the wisest ancients. the old world knew nothing of
 conversion; instead of an ecce homo, they had only some choice
 of hercules. it was a new-attained progress in the moral development
 of man: hereby has the highest come home to the bosoms of the most
 limited; what to plato was but a hallucination, and to socrates a chimera,
 is now clear and certain to your zinzendorfs, your wesleys, and the
 poorest of their pietists and methodists."
 it is here, then, that the spiritual majority of teufelsdrockh commences:
 we are henceforth to see him "work in well-doing," with the spirit and
 clear aims of a man. he has discovered that the ideal workshop he so
 panted for is even this same actual ill-furnished workshop he has so long
 been stumbling in. he can say to himself: "tools? thou hast no tools? why,
 there is not a man, or a thing, now alive but has tools. the basest of
 created animalcules, the spider itself, has a spinning-jenny, and
 warping-mill, and power-loom within its head: the stupidest of oysters has
 a papin's-digester, with stone-and-lime house to hold it in: every being
 that can live can do something: this let him do.—tools? hast
 thou not a brain, furnished, furnishable with some glimmerings of light;
 and three fingers to hold a pen withal? never since aaron's rod went out
 of practice, or even before it, was there such a wonder-working tool:
 greater than all recorded miracles have been performed by pens. for
 strangely in this so solid-seeming world, which nevertheless is in
 continual restless flux, it is appointed that sound, to appearance
 the most fleeting, should be the most continuing of all things. the word
 is well said to be omnipotent in this world; man, thereby divine, can
 create as by a fiat. awake, arise! speak forth what is in thee;
 what god has given thee, what the devil shall not take away. higher task
 than that of priesthood was allotted to no man: wert thou but the meanest
 in that sacred hierarchy, is it not honor enough therein to spend and be
 spent?
 "by this art, which whoso will may sacrilegiously degrade into a
 handicraft," adds teufelsdrockh, "have i thenceforth abidden. writings of
 mine, not indeed known as mine (for what am i?), have fallen, perhaps not
 altogether void, into the mighty seedfield of opinion; fruits of my unseen
 sowing gratifyingly meet me here and there. i thank the heavens that i
 have now found my calling; wherein, with or without perceptible result, i
 am minded diligently to persevere.
 "nay how knowest thou," cries he, "but this and the other pregnant device,
 now grown to be a world-renowned far-working institution; like a grain of
 right mustard-seed once cast into the right soil, and now stretching out
 strong boughs to the four winds, for the birds of the air to lodge in,—may
 have been properly my doing? some one's doing, it without doubt was; from
 some idea, in some single head, it did first of all take beginning: why
 not from some idea in mine?" does teufelsdrockh, here glance at that
 "society for the conservation of property (eigenthums-conservirende
 gesellschaft)," of which so many ambiguous notices glide spectra-like
 through these inexpressible paper-bags? "an institution," hints he, "not
 unsuitable to the wants of the time; as indeed such sudden extension
 proves: for already can the society number, among its office-bearers or
 corresponding members, the highest names, if not the highest persons, in
 germany, england, france; and contributions, both of money and of
 meditation pour in from all quarters; to, if possible, enlist the
 remaining integrity of the world, and, defensively and with forethought,
 marshal it round this palladium." does teufelsdrockh mean, then, to give
 himself out as the originator of that so notable eigenthums-conservirende
 ("owndom-conserving") gesellschaft; and if so, what, in the devil's
 name, is it? he again hints: "at a time when the divine commandment, thou
 shalt not steal, wherein truly, if well understood, is comprised the
 whole hebrew decalogue, with solon's and lycurgrus's constitutions,
 justinian's pandects, the code napoleon, and all codes, catechisms,
 divinities, moralities whatsoever, that man has hitherto devised (and
 enforced with altar-fire and gallows-ropes) for his social guidance: at a
 time, i say, when this divine commandment has all but faded away from the
 general remembrance; and, with little disguise, a new opposite
 commandment, thou shalt steal, is everywhere promulgated,—it
 perhaps behooved, in this universal dotage and deliration, the sound
 portion of mankind to bestir themselves and rally. when the widest and
 wildest violations of that divine right of property, the only divine right
 now extant or conceivable, are sanctioned and recommended by a vicious
 press, and the world has lived to hear it asserted that we have no
 property in our very bodies, but only an accidental possession and
 life-rent, what is the issue to be looked for? hangmen and catchpoles
 may, by their noose-gins and baited fall-traps, keep down the smaller sort
 of vermin; but what, except perhaps some such universal association, can
 protect us against whole meat-devouring and man-devouring hosts of
 boa-constrictors. if, therefore, the more sequestered thinker have
 wondered, in his privacy, from what hand that perhaps not ill-written program
 in the public journals, with its high prize-questions and so
 liberal prizes, could have proceeded,—let him now cease such
 wonder; and, with undivided faculty, betake himself to the concurrenz
 (competition)."
 we ask: has this same "perhaps not ill-written program," or any
 other authentic transaction of that property-conserving society, fallen
 under the eye of the british reader, in any journal foreign or domestic?
 if so, what are those prize-questions; what are the terms of
 competition, and when and where? no printed newspaper-leaf, no farther
 light of any sort, to be met with in these paper-bags! or is the whole
 business one other of those whimsicalities and perverse inexplicabilities,
 whereby herr teufelsdrockh, meaning much or nothing, is pleased so often
 to play fast-and-loose with us?
 here, indeed, at length, must the editor give utterance to a painful
 suspicion, which, through late chapters, has begun to haunt him;
 paralyzing any little enthusiasm that might still have rendered his thorny
 biographical task a labor of love. it is a suspicion grounded perhaps on
 trifles, yet confirmed almost into certainty by the more and more
 discernible humoristico-satirical tendency of teufelsdrockh, in whom
 underground humors and intricate sardonic rogueries, wheel within wheel,
 defy all reckoning: a suspicion, in one word, that these autobiographical
 documents are partly a mystification! what if many a so-called fact were
 little better than a fiction; if here we had no direct camera-obscura
 picture of the professor's history; but only some more or less fantastic
 adumbration, symbolically, perhaps significantly enough, shadowing forth
 the same! our theory begins to be that, in receiving as literally
 authentic what was but hieroglyphically so, hofrath heuschrecke, whom in
 that case we scruple not to name hofrath nose-of-wax, was made a fool of,
 and set adrift to make fools of others. could it be expected, indeed, that
 a man so known for impenetrable reticence as teufelsdrockh would all at
 once frankly unlock his private citadel to an english editor and a german
 hofrath; and not rather deceptively inlock both editor and hofrath
 in the labyrinthic tortuosities and covered-ways of said citadel (having
 enticed them thither), to see, in his half-devilish way, how the fools
 would look?
 of one fool, however, the herr professor will perhaps find himself short.
 on a small slip, formerly thrown aside as blank, the ink being all but
 invisible, we lately noticed, and with effort decipher, the following:
 "what are your historical facts; still more your biographical? wilt thou
 know a man, above all a mankind, by stringing together bead-rolls of what
 thou namest facts? the man is the spirit he worked in; not what he did,
 but what he became. facts are engraved hierograms, for which the fewest
 have the key. and then how your blockhead (dummkopf) studies not
 their meaning; but simply whether they are well or ill cut, what he calls
 moral or immoral! still worse is it with your bungler (pfuscher):
 such i have seen reading some rousseau, with pretences of interpretation;
 and mistaking the ill-cut serpent-of-eternity for a common poisonous
 reptile." was the professor apprehensive lest an editor, selected as the
 present boasts himself, might mistake the teufelsdrockh
 serpent-of-eternity in like manner? for which reason it was to be altered,
 not without underhand satire, into a plainer symbol? or is this merely one
 of his half-sophisms, half-truisms, which if he can but set on the back of
 a figure, he cares not whither it gallop? we say not with certainty; and
 indeed, so strange is the professor, can never say. if our suspicion be
 wholly unfounded, let his own questionable ways, not our necessary
 circumspectness bear the blame.
 but be this as it will, the somewhat exasperated and indeed exhausted
 editor determines here to shut these paper-bags for the present. let it
 suffice that we know of teufelsdrockh, so far, if "not what he did, yet
 what he became:" the rather, as his character has now taken its ultimate
 bent, and no new revolution, of importance, is to be looked for. the
 imprisoned chrysalis is now a winged psyche: and such, wheresoever be its
 flight, it will continue. to trace by what complex gyrations (flights or
 involuntary waftings) through the mere external life-element,
 teufelsdrockh, reaches his university professorship, and the psyche
 clothes herself in civic titles, without altering her now fixed nature,—would
 be comparatively an unproductive task, were we even unsuspicious of its
 being, for us at least, a false and impossible one. his outward biography,
 therefore, which, at the blumine lover's-leap, we saw churned utterly into
 spray-vapor, may hover in that condition, for aught that concerns us here.
 enough that by survey of certain "pools and plashes," we have ascertained
 its general direction; do we not already know that, by one way and other,
 it has long since rained down again into a stream; and even now, at
 weissnichtwo, flows deep and still, fraught with the philosophy of
 clothes, and visible to whoso will cast eye thereon? over much
 invaluable matter, that lies scattered, like jewels among quarry-rubbish,
 in those paper-catacombs, we may have occasion to glance back, and
 somewhat will demand insertion at the right place: meanwhile be our
 tiresome diggings therein suspended.
 if now, before reopening the great clothes-volume, we ask what our
 degree of progress, during these ten chapters, has been, towards right
 understanding of the clothes-philosophy, let not our discouragement
 become total. to speak in that old figure of the hell-gate bridge over
 chaos, a few flying pontoons have perhaps been added, though as yet they
 drift straggling on the flood; how far they will reach, when once the
 chains are straightened and fastened, can, at present, only be matter of
 conjecture.
 so much we already calculate: through many a little loophole, we have had
 glimpses into the internal world of teufelsdrockh; his strange mystic,
 almost magic diagram of the universe, and how it was gradually drawn, is
 not henceforth altogether dark to us. those mysterious ideas on time,
 which merit consideration, and are not wholly unintelligible with such,
 may by and by prove significant. still more may his somewhat peculiar view
 of nature, the decisive oneness he ascribes to nature. how all nature and
 life are but one garment, a "living garment," woven and ever
 a-weaving in the "loom of time;" is not here, indeed, the outline of a
 whole clothes-philosophy; at least the arena it is to work in?
 remark, too, that the character of the man, nowise without meaning in such
 a matter, becomes less enigmatic: amid so much tumultuous obscurity,
 almost like diluted madness, do not a certain indomitable defiance and yet
 a boundless reverence seem to loom forth, as the two mountain-summits, on
 whose rock-strata all the rest were based and built?
 nay further, may we not say that teufelsdrockh's biography, allowing it
 even, as suspected, only a hieroglyphical truth, exhibits a man, as it
 were preappointed for clothes-philosophy? to look through the shows of
 things into things themselves he is led and compelled. the "passivity"
 given him by birth is fostered by all turns of his fortune. everywhere
 cast out, like oil out of water, from mingling in any employment, in any
 public communion, he has no portion but solitude, and a life of
 meditation. the whole energy of his existence is directed, through long
 years, on one task: that of enduring pain, if he cannot cure it. thus
 everywhere do the shows of things oppress him, withstand him, threaten him
 with fearfullest destruction: only by victoriously penetrating into things
 themselves can he find peace and a stronghold. but is not this same
 looking through the shows, or vestures, into the things, even the first
 preliminary to a philosophy of clothes? do we not, in all this,
 discern some beckonings towards the true higher purport of such a
 philosophy; and what shape it must assume with such a man, in such an era?
 perhaps in entering on book third, the courteous reader is not utterly
 without guess whither he is bound: nor, let us hope, for all the fantastic
 dream-grottos through which, as is our lot with teufelsdrockh, he must
 wander, will there be wanting between whiles some twinkling of a steady
 polar star.
 as a wonder-loving and wonder-seeking man, teufelsdrockh, from an early
 part of this clothes-volume, has more and more exhibited himself. striking
 it was, amid all his perverse cloudiness, with what force of vision and of
 heart he pierced into the mystery of the world; recognizing in the highest
 sensible phenomena, so far as sense went, only fresh or faded raiment; yet
 ever, under this, a celestial essence thereby rendered visible: and while,
 on the one hand, he trod the old rags of matter, with their tinsels, into
 the mire, he on the other everywhere exalted spirit above all earthly
 principalities and powers, and worshipped it, though under the meanest
 shapes, with a true platonic mysticism. what the man ultimately purposed
 by thus casting his greek-fire into the general wardrobe of the universe;
 what such, more or less complete, rending and burning of garments
 throughout the whole compass of civilized life and speculation, should
 lead to; the rather as he was no adamite, in any sense, and could not,
 like rousseau, recommend either bodily or intellectual nudity, and a
 return to the savage state: all this our readers are now bent to discover;
 this is, in fact, properly the gist and purport of professor
 teufelsdrockh's philosophy of clothes.
 be it remembered, however, that such purport is here not so much evolved,
 as detected to lie ready for evolving. we are to guide our british friends
 into the new gold-country, and show them the mines; nowise to dig out and
 exhaust its wealth, which indeed remains for all time inexhaustible. once
 there, let each dig for his own behoof, and enrich himself.
 neither, in so capricious inexpressible a work as this of the professor's,
 can our course now more than formerly be straightforward, step by step,
 but at best leap by leap. significant indications stand out here and
 there; which for the critical eye, that looks both widely and narrowly,
 shape themselves into some ground-scheme of a whole: to select these with
 judgment, so that a leap from one to the other be possible, and (in our
 old figure) by chaining them together, a passable bridge be effected:
 this, as heretofore, continues our only method. among such light-spots,
 the following, floating in much wild matter about perfectibility,
 has seemed worth clutching at:—
 "perhaps the most remarkable incident in modern history," says
 teufelsdrockh, "is not the diet of worms, still less the battle of
 austerlitz, waterloo, peterloo, or any other battle; but an incident
 passed carelessly over by most historians, and treated with some degree of
 ridicule by others: namely, george fox's making to himself a suit of
 leather. this man, the first of the quakers, and by trade a shoemaker, was
 one of those, to whom, under ruder or purer form, the divine idea of the
 universe is pleased to manifest itself; and, across all the hulls of
 ignorance and earthly degradation, shine through, in unspeakable
 awfulness, unspeakable beauty, on their souls: who therefore are rightly
 accounted prophets, god-possessed; or even gods, as in some periods it has
 chanced. sitting in his stall; working on tanned hides, amid pincers,
 paste-horns, rosin, swine-bristles, and a nameless flood of rubbish, this
 youth had, nevertheless, a living spirit belonging to him; also an antique
 inspired volume, through which, as through a window, it could look
 upwards, and discern its celestial home. the task of a daily pair of
 shoes, coupled even with some prospect of victuals, and an honorable
 mastership in cordwainery, and perhaps the post of thirdborough in his
 hundred, as the crown of long faithful sewing,—was nowise
 satisfaction enough to such a mind: but ever amid the boring and hammering
 came tones from that far country, came splendors and terrors; for this
 poor cordwainer, as we said, was a man; and the temple of immensity,
 wherein as man he had been sent to minister, was full of holy mystery to
 him.
 "the clergy of the neighborhood, the ordained watchers and interpreters of
 that same holy mystery, listened with un-affected tedium to his
 consultations, and advised him, as the solution of such doubts, to 'drink
 beer, and dance with the girls.' blind leaders of the blind! for what end
 were their tithes levied and eaten; for what were their shovel-hats
 scooped out, and their surplices and cassock-aprons girt on; and such a
 church-repairing, and chaffering, and organing, and other racketing, held
 over that spot of god's earth,—if man were but a patent digester,
 and the belly with its adjuncts the grand reality? fox turned from them,
 with tears and a sacred scorn, back to his leather-parings and his bible.
 mountains of encumbrance, higher than aetna, had been heaped over that
 spirit: but it was a spirit, and would not lie buried there. through long
 days and nights of silent agony, it struggled and wrestled, with a man's
 force, to be free: how its prison-mountains heaved and swayed
 tumultuously, as the giant spirit shook them to this hand and that, and
 emerged into the light of heaven! that leicester shoe-shop, had men known
 it, was a holier place than any vatican or loretto-shrine.—'so
 bandaged, and hampered, and hemmed in,' groaned he, 'with thousand
 requisitions, obligations, straps, tatters, and tagrags, i can neither see
 nor move: not my own am i, but the world's; and time flies fast, and
 heaven is high, and hell is deep: man! bethink thee, if thou hast power of
 thought! why not; what binds me here? want, want!—ha, of what? will
 all the shoe-wages under the moon ferry me across into that far land of
 light? only meditation can, and devout prayer to god. i will to the woods:
 the hollow of a tree will lodge me, wild berries feed me; and for clothes,
 cannot i stitch myself one perennial suit of leather!'
 "historical oil-painting," continues teufelsdrockh, "is one of the arts i
 never practiced; therefore shall i not decide whether this subject were
 easy of execution on the canvas. yet often has it seemed to me as if such
 first outflashing of man's freewill, to lighten, more and more into day,
 the chaotic night that threatened to engulf him in its hindrances and its
 horrors, were properly the only grandeur there is in history. let some
 living angelo or rosa, with seeing eye and understanding heart, picture
 george fox on that morning, when he spreads out his cutting-board for the
 last time, and cuts cowhides by unwonted patterns, and stitches them
 together into one continuous all-including case, the farewell service of
 his awl! stitch away, thou noble fox: every prick of that little
 instrument is pricking into the heart of slavery, and world-worship, and
 the mammon-god. thy elbows jerk, as in strong swimmer-strokes, and every
 stroke is bearing thee across the prison-ditch, within which vanity holds
 her workhouse and ragfair, into lands of true liberty; were the work done,
 there is in broad europe one free man, and thou art he!
 "thus from the lowest depth there is a path to the loftiest height; and
 for the poor also a gospel has been published. surely if, as d'alembert
 asserts, my illustrious namesake, diogenes, was the greatest man of
 antiquity, only that he wanted decency, then by stronger reason is george
 fox the greatest of the moderns, and greater than diogenes himself: for he
 too stands on the adamantine basis of his manhood, casting aside all props
 and shoars; yet not, in half-savage pride, undervaluing the earth; valuing
 it rather, as a place to yield him warmth and food, he looks heavenward
 from his earth, and dwells in an element of mercy and worship, with a
 still strength, such as the cynic's tub did nowise witness. great, truly,
 was that tub; a temple from which man's dignity and divinity was
 scornfully preached abroad: but greater is the leather hull, for the same
 sermon was preached there, and not in scorn but in love."
 george fox's "perennial suit," with all that it held, has been worn quite
 into ashes for nigh two centuries: why, in a discussion on the perfectibility
 of society, reproduce it now? not out of blind sectarian partisanship:
 teufelsdrockh, himself is no quaker; with all his pacific tendencies, did
 not we see him, in that scene at the north cape, with the archangel
 smuggler, exhibit fire-arms?
 for us, aware of his deep sansculottism, there is more meant in this
 passage than meets the ear. at the same time, who can avoid smiling at the
 earnestness and boeotian simplicity (if indeed there be not an underhand
 satire in it), with which that "incident" is here brought forward; and, in
 the professor's ambiguous way, as clearly perhaps as he durst in
 weissnichtwo, recommended to imitation! does teufelsdrockh anticipate
 that, in this age of refinement, any considerable class of the community,
 by way of testifying against the "mammon-god," and escaping from what he
 calls "vanity's workhouse and ragfair," where doubtless some of them are
 toiled and whipped and hoodwinked sufficiently,—will sheathe
 themselves in close-fitting cases of leather? the idea is ridiculous in
 the extreme. will majesty lay aside its robes of state, and beauty its
 frills and train-gowns, for a second skin of tanned hide? by which change
 huddersfield and manchester, and coventry and paisley, and the
 fancy-bazaar, were reduced to hungry solitudes; and only day and martin
 could profit. for neither would teufelsdrockh's mad daydream, here as we
 presume covertly intended, of levelling society (levelling it
 indeed with a vengeance, into one huge drowned marsh!), and so attaining
 the political effects of nudity without its frigorific or other
 consequences,—be thereby realized. would not the rich man purchase a
 waterproof suit of russia leather; and the high-born belle step forth in
 red or azure morocco, lined with shamoy: the black cowhide being left to
 the drudges and gibeonites of the world; and so all the old distinctions
 be re-established?
 or has the professor his own deeper intention; and laughs in his sleeve at
 our strictures and glosses, which indeed are but a part thereof?
 not less questionable is his chapter on church-clothes, which has
 the farther distinction of being the shortest in the volume. we here
 translate it entire:—
 "by church-clothes, it need not be premised that i mean infinitely more
 than cassocks and surplices; and do not at all mean the mere haberdasher
 sunday clothes that men go to church in. far from it! church-clothes are,
 in our vocabulary, the forms, the vestures, under which men have at
 various periods embodied and represented for themselves the religious
 principle; that is to say, invested the divine idea of the world with a
 sensible and practically active body, so that it might dwell among them as
 a living and life-giving word.
 "these are unspeakably the most important of all the vestures and
 garnitures of human existence. they are first spun and woven, i may say,
 by that wonder of wonders, society; for it is still only when 'two or
 three are gathered together,' that religion, spiritually existent, and
 indeed indestructible, however latent, in each, first outwardly manifests
 itself (as with 'cloven tongues of fire'), and seeks to be embodied in a
 visible communion and church militant. mystical, more than magical, is
 that communing of soul with soul, both looking heavenward: here properly
 soul first speaks with soul; for only in looking heavenward, take it in
 what sense you may, not in looking earthward, does what we can call union,
 mutual love, society, begin to be possible. how true is that of novalis:
 'it is certain, my belief gains quite infinitely the moment i can
 convince another mind thereof'! gaze thou in the face of thy brother, in
 those eyes where plays the lambent fire of kindness, or in those where
 rages the lurid conflagration of anger; feel how thy own so quiet soul is
 straightway involuntarily kindled with the like, and ye blaze and
 reverberate on each other, till it is all one limitless confluent flame
 (of embracing love, or of deadly-grappling hate); and then say what
 miraculous virtue goes out of man into man. but if so, through all the
 thick-plied hulls of our earthly life; how much more when it is of the
 divine life we speak, and inmost me is, as it were, brought into contact
 with inmost me!
 "thus was it that i said, the church clothes are first spun and woven by
 society; outward religion originates by society, society becomes possible
 by religion. nay, perhaps, every conceivable society, past and present,
 may well be figured as properly and wholly a church, in one or other of
 these three predicaments: an audibly preaching and prophesying church,
 which is the best; second, a church that struggles to preach and prophesy,
 but cannot as yet, till its pentecost come; and third and worst, a church
 gone dumb with old age, or which only mumbles delirium prior to
 dissolution. whoso fancies that by church is here meant chapter-houses and
 cathedrals, or by preaching and prophesying, mere speech and chanting, let
 him," says the oracular professor, "read on, light of heart (getrosten
 muthes).
 "but with regard to your church proper, and the church-clothes specially
 recognized as church-clothes, i remark, fearlessly enough, that without
 such vestures and sacred tissues society has not existed, and will not
 exist. for if government is, so to speak, the outward skin of the body
 politic, holding the whole together and protecting it; and all your
 craft-guilds, and associations for industry, of hand or of head, are the
 fleshly clothes, the muscular and osseous tissues (lying under such
 skin), whereby society stands and works;—then is religion the inmost
 pericardial and nervous tissue, which ministers life and warm circulation
 to the whole. without which pericardial tissue the bones and muscles (of
 industry) were inert, or animated only by a galvanic vitality; the skin
 would become a shrivelled pelt, or fast-rotting rawhide; and society
 itself a dead carcass,—deserving to be buried. men were no longer
 social, but gregarious; which latter state also could not continue, but
 must gradually issue in universal selfish discord, hatred, savage
 isolation, and dispersion;—whereby, as we might continue to say, the
 very dust and dead body of society would have evaporated and become
 abolished. such, and so all-important, all-sustaining, are the
 church-clothes to civilized or even to rational men.
 "meanwhile, in our era of the world, those same church-clothes have gone
 sorrowfully out-at-elbows; nay, far worse, many of them have become mere
 hollow shapes, or masks, under which no living figure or spirit any longer
 dwells; but only spiders and unclean beetles, in horrid accumulation,
 drive their trade; and the mask still glares on you with its glass eyes,
 in ghastly affectation of life,—some generation-and-half after
 religion has quite withdrawn from it, and in unnoticed nooks is weaving
 for herself new vestures, wherewith to reappear, and bless us, or our sons
 or grandsons. as a priest, or interpreter of the holy, is the noblest and
 highest of all men, so is a sham-priest (schein-priester) the
 falsest and basest; neither is it doubtful that his canonicals, were they
 popes' tiaras, will one day be torn from him, to make bandages for the
 wounds of mankind; or even to burn into tinder, for general scientific or
 culinary purposes.
 "all which, as out of place here, falls to be handled in my second volume,
 on the palingenesia, or newbirth of society; which volume, as
 treating practically of the wear, destruction, and retexture of spiritual
 tissues, or garments, forms, properly speaking, the transcendental or
 ultimate portion of this my work on clothes, and is already in a
 state of forwardness."
 and herewith, no farther exposition, note, or commentary being added, does
 teufelsdrockh, and must his editor now, terminate the singular chapter on
 church-clothes!
 probably it will elucidate the drift of these foregoing obscure
 utterances, if we here insert somewhat of our professor's speculations on
 symbols. to state his whole doctrine, indeed, were beyond our
 compass: nowhere is he more mysterious, impalpable, than in this of
 "fantasy being the organ of the godlike;" and how "man thereby, though
 based, to all seeming, on the small visible, does nevertheless extend down
 into the infinite deeps of the invisible, of which invisible, indeed, his
 life is properly the bodying forth." let us, omitting these high
 transcendental aspects of the matter, study to glean (whether from the
 paper-bags or the printed volume) what little seems logical and practical,
 and cunningly arrange it into such degree of coherence as it will assume.
 by way of proem, take the following not injudicious remarks:—
 "the benignant efficacies of concealment," cries our professor, "who shall
 speak or sing? silence and secrecy! altars might still be raised to them
 (were this an altar-building time) for universal worship. silence is the
 element in which great things fashion themselves together; that at length
 they may emerge, full-formed and majestic, into the daylight of life,
 which they are thenceforth to rule. not william the silent only, but all
 the considerable men i have known, and the most undiplomatic and
 unstrategic of these, forbore to babble of what they were creating and
 projecting. nay, in thy own mean perplexities, do thou thyself but hold
 thy tongue for one day: on the morrow, how much clearer are thy
 purposes and duties; what wreck and rubbish have those mute workmen within
 thee swept away, when intrusive noises were shut out! speech is too often
 not, as the frenchman defined it, the art of concealing thought; but of
 quite stifling and suspending thought, so that there is none to conceal.
 speech too is great, but not the greatest. as the swiss inscription says:
 sprechen ist silbern, schweigen ist golden (speech is silvern,
 silence is golden); or as i might rather express it: speech is of time,
 silence is of eternity.
 "bees will not work except in darkness; thought will not work except in
 silence: neither will virtue work except in secrecy. let not thy left hand
 know what thy right hand doeth! neither shalt thou prate even to thy own
 heart of 'those secrets known to all.' is not shame (schaam) the
 soil of all virtue, of all good manners and good morals? like other
 plants, virtue will not grow unless its root be hidden, buried from the
 eye of the sun. let the sun shine on it, nay do but look at it privily
 thyself, the root withers, and no flower will glad thee. o my friends,
 when we view the fair clustering flowers that overwreathe, for example,
 the marriage-bower, and encircle man's life with the fragrance and hues of
 heaven, what hand will not smite the foul plunderer that grubs them up by
 the roots, and, with grinning, grunting satisfaction, shows us the dung
 they flourish in! men speak much of the printing press with its
 newspapers: du himmel! what are these to clothes and the tailor's
 goose?
 "of kin to the so incalculable influences of concealment, and connected
 with still greater things, is the wondrous agency of symbols. in a
 symbol there is concealment and yet revelation; here therefore, by silence
 and by speech acting together, comes a double significance. and if both
 the speech be itself high, and the silence fit and noble, how expressive
 will their union be! thus in many a painted device, or simple seal-emblem,
 the commonest truth stands out to us proclaimed with quite new emphasis.
 "for it is here that fantasy with her mystic wonderland plays into the
 small prose domain of sense, and becomes incorporated therewith. in the
 symbol proper, what we can call a symbol, there is ever, more or less
 distinctly and directly, some embodiment and revelation of the infinite;
 the infinite is made to blend itself with the finite, to stand visible,
 and as it were, attainable there. by symbols, accordingly, is man guided
 and commanded, made happy, made wretched: he everywhere finds himself
 encompassed with symbols, recognized as such or not recognized: the
 universe is but one vast symbol of god; nay if thou wilt have it, what is
 man himself but a symbol of god; is not all that he does symbolical; a
 revelation to sense of the mystic god-given force that is in him; a
 'gospel of freedom,' which he, the 'messias of nature,' preaches, as he
 can, by act and word? not a hut he builds but is the visible embodiment of
 a thought; but bears visible record of invisible things; but is, in the
 transcendental sense, symbolical as well as real."
 "man," says the professor elsewhere, in quite antipodal contrast with
 these high-soaring delineations, which we have here cut short on the verge
 of the inane, "man is by birth somewhat of an owl. perhaps, too, of all
 the owleries that ever possessed him, the most owlish, if we consider it,
 is that of your actually existing motive-millwrights. fantastic tricks
 enough man has played, in his time; has fancied himself to be most things,
 down even to an animated heap of glass: but to fancy himself a dead
 iron-balance for weighing pains and pleasures on, was reserved for this
 his latter era. there stands he, his universe one huge manger, filled with
 hay and thistles to be weighed against each other; and looks long-eared
 enough. alas, poor devil! spectres are appointed to haunt him: one age he
 is hag-ridden, bewitched; the next, priest-ridden, befooled; in all ages,
 bedevilled. and now the genius of mechanism smothers him worse than any
 nightmare did; till the soul is nigh choked out of him, and only a kind of
 digestive, mechanic life remains. in earth and in heaven he can see
 nothing but mechanism; has fear for nothing else, hope in nothing else:
 the world would indeed grind him to pieces; but cannot he fathom the
 doctrine of motives, and cunningly compute these, and mechanize them to
 grind the other way?
 "were he not, as has been said, purblinded by enchantment, you had but to
 bid him open his eyes and look. in which country, in which time, was it
 hitherto that man's history, or the history of any man, went on by
 calculated or calculable 'motives'? what make ye of your christianities,
 and chivalries, and reformations, and marseillaise hymns, and reigns of
 terror? nay, has not perhaps the motive-grinder himself been in love?
 did he never stand so much as a contested election? leave him to time, and
 the medicating virtue of nature."
 "yes, friends," elsewhere observes the professor, "not our logical,
 mensurative faculty, but our imaginative one is king over us; i might say,
 priest and prophet to lead us heavenward; or magician and wizard to lead
 us hellward. nay, even for the basest sensualist, what is sense but the
 implement of fantasy; the vessel it drinks out of? ever in the dullest
 existence there is a sheen either of inspiration or of madness (thou
 partly hast it in thy choice, which of the two), that gleams in from the
 circumambient eternity, and colors with its own hues our little islet of
 time. the understanding is indeed thy window, too clear thou canst not
 make it; but fantasy is thy eye, with its color-giving retina, healthy or
 diseased. have not i myself known five hundred living soldiers sabred into
 crows'-meat for a piece of glazed cotton, which they called their flag;
 which, had you sold it at any market-cross, would not have brought above
 three groschen? did not the whole hungarian nation rise, like some
 tumultuous moon-stirred atlantic, when kaiser joseph pocketed their iron
 crown; an implement, as was sagaciously observed, in size and commercial
 value little differing from a horse-shoe? it is in and through symbols
 that man, consciously or unconsciously, lives, works, and has his being:
 those ages, moreover, are accounted the noblest which can the best
 recognize symbolical worth, and prize it the highest. for is not a symbol
 ever, to him who has eyes for it, some dimmer or clearer revelation of the
 godlike?
 "of symbols, however, i remark farther, that they have both an extrinsic
 and intrinsic value; oftenest the former only. what, for instance, was in
 that clouted shoe, which the peasants bore aloft with them as ensign in
 their bauernkrieg (peasants' war)? or in the wallet-and-staff round
 which the netherland gueux, glorying in that nickname of beggars,
 heroically rallied and prevailed, though against king philip himself?
 intrinsic significance these had none: only extrinsic; as the accidental
 standards of multitudes more or less sacredly uniting together; in which
 union itself, as above noted, there is ever something mystical and
 borrowing of the godlike. under a like category, too, stand, or stood, the
 stupidest heraldic coats-of-arms; military banners everywhere; and
 generally all national or other sectarian costumes and customs: they have
 no intrinsic, necessary divineness, or even worth; but have acquired an
 extrinsic one. nevertheless through all these there glimmers something of
 a divine idea; as through military banners themselves, the divine idea of
 duty, of heroic daring; in some instances of freedom, of right. nay the
 highest ensign that men ever met and embraced under, the cross itself, had
 no meaning save an accidental extrinsic one.
 "another matter it is, however, when your symbol has intrinsic meaning,
 and is of itself fit that men should unite round it. let but the
 godlike manifest itself to sense, let but eternity look, more or less
 visibly, through the time-figure (zeitbild)! then is it fit that
 men unite there; and worship together before such symbol; and so from day
 to day, and from age to age, superadd to it new divineness.
 "of this latter sort are all true works of art: in them (if thou know a
 work of art from a daub of artifice) wilt thou discern eternity looking
 through time; the godlike rendered visible. here too may an extrinsic
 value gradually superadd itself: thus certain iliads, and the like,
 have, in three thousand years, attained quite new significance. but nobler
 than all in this kind are the lives of heroic god-inspired men; for what
 other work of art is so divine? in death too, in the death of the just, as
 the last perfection of a work of art, may we not discern symbolic meaning?
 in that divinely transfigured sleep, as of victory, resting over the
 beloved face which now knows thee no more, read (if thou canst for tears)
 the confluence of time with eternity, and some gleam of the latter peering
 through.
 "highest of all symbols are those wherein the artist or poet has risen
 into prophet, and all men can recognize a present god, and worship the
 same: i mean religious symbols. various enough have been such religious
 symbols, what we call religions; as men stood in this stage of
 culture or the other, and could worse or better body forth the godlike:
 some symbols with a transient intrinsic worth; many with only an
 extrinsic. if thou ask to what height man has carried it in this manner,
 look on our divinest symbol: on jesus of nazareth, and his life, and his
 biography, and what followed therefrom. higher has the human thought not
 yet reached: this is christianity and christendom; a symbol of quite
 perennial, infinite character; whose significance will ever demand to be
 anew inquired into, and anew made manifest.
 "but, on the whole, as time adds much to the sacredness of symbols, so
 likewise in his progress he at length defaces, or even desecrates them;
 and symbols, like all terrestrial garments, wax old. homer's epos has not
 ceased to be true; yet it is no longer our epos, but shines in the
 distance, if clearer and clearer, yet also smaller and smaller, like a
 receding star. it needs a scientific telescope, it needs to be
 reinterpreted and artificially brought near us, before we can so much as
 know that it was a sun. so likewise a day comes when the runic
 thor, with his eddas, must withdraw into dimness; and many an african
 mumbo-jumbo and indian pawaw be utterly abolished. for all things, even
 celestial luminaries, much more atmospheric meteors, have their rise,
 their culmination, their decline.
 "small is this which thou tellest me, that the royal sceptre is but a
 piece of gilt wood; that the pyx has become a most foolish box, and truly,
 as ancient pistol thought, 'of little price.' a right conjurer might i
 name thee, couldst thou conjure back into these wooden tools the divine
 virtue they once held.
 "of this thing, however, be certain: wouldst thou plant for eternity, then
 plant into the deep infinite faculties of man, his fantasy and heart;
 wouldst thou plant for year and day, then plant into his shallow
 superficial faculties, his self-love and arithmetical understanding, what
 will grow there. a hierarch, therefore, and pontiff of the world will we
 call him, the poet and inspired maker; who, prometheus-like, can shape new
 symbols, and bring new fire from heaven to fix it there. such too will not
 always be wanting; neither perhaps now are. meanwhile, as the average of
 matters goes, we account him legislator and wise who can so much as tell
 when a symbol has grown old, and gently remove it.
 "when, as the last english coronation [*] i was preparing," concludes this
 wonderful professor, "i read in their newspapers that the 'champion of
 england,' he who has to offer battle to the universe for his new king, had
 brought it so far that he could now 'mount his horse with little
 assistance,' i said to myself: here also we have a symbol well-nigh
 superannuated. alas, move whithersoever you may, are not the tatters and
 rags of superannuated worn-out symbols (in this ragfair of a world)
 dropping off everywhere, to hoodwink, to halter, to tether you; nay, if
 you shake them not aside, threatening to accumulate, and perhaps produce
 suffocation?"
 * that of george iv.—ed.
 at this point we determine on adverting shortly, or rather reverting, to a
 certain tract of hofrath heuschrecke's, entitled institute for the
 repression of population; which lies, dishonorably enough (with torn
 leaves, and a perceptible smell of aloetic drugs), stuffed into the bag pisces.
 not indeed for the sake of the tract itself, which we admire little; but
 of the marginal notes, evidently in teufelsdrockh's hand, which rather
 copiously fringe it. a few of these may be in their right place here.
 into the hofrath's institute, with its extraordinary schemes, and
 machinery of corresponding boards and the like, we shall not so much as
 glance. enough for us to understand that heuschrecke is a disciple of
 malthus; and so zealous for the doctrine, that his zeal almost literally
 eats him up. a deadly fear of population possesses the hofrath; something
 like a fixed idea; undoubtedly akin to the more diluted forms of madness.
 nowhere, in that quarter of his intellectual world, is there light;
 nothing but a grim shadow of hunger; open mouths opening wider and wider;
 a world to terminate by the frightfullest consummation: by its too dense
 inhabitants, famished into delirium, universally eating one another. to
 make air for himself in which strangulation, choking enough to a
 benevolent heart, the hofrath founds, or proposes to found, this institute
 of his, as the best he can do. it is only with our professor's comments
 thereon that we concern ourselves.
 first, then, remark that teufelsdrockh, as a speculative radical, has his
 own notions about human dignity; that the zahdarm palaces and courtesies
 have not made him forgetful of the futteral cottages. on the blank cover
 of heuschrecke's tract we find the following indistinctly engrossed:—
 "two men i honor, and no third. first, the toilworn craftsman that with
 earth-made implement laboriously conquers the earth, and makes her man's.
 venerable to me is the hard hand; crooked, coarse; wherein notwithstanding
 lies a cunning virtue, indefeasibly royal, as of the sceptre of this
 planet. venerable too is the rugged face, all weather-tanned, besoiled,
 with its rude intelligence; for it is the face of a man living manlike.
 oh, but the more venerable for thy rudeness, and even because we must pity
 as well as love thee! hardly-entreated brother! for us was thy back so
 bent, for us were thy straight limbs and fingers so deformed: thou wert
 our conscript, on whom the lot fell, and fighting our battles wert so
 marred. for in thee too lay a god-created form, but it was not to be
 unfolded; encrusted must it stand with the thick adhesions and defacements
 of labor: and thy body, like thy soul, was not to know freedom. yet toil
 on, toil on: thou art in thy duty, be out of it who may; thou
 toilest for the altogether indispensable, for daily bread.
 "a second man i honor, and still more highly: him who is seen toiling for
 the spiritually indispensable; not daily bread, but the bread of life. is
 not he too in his duty; endeavoring towards inward harmony; revealing
 this, by act or by word, through all his outward endeavors, be they high
 or low? highest of all, when his outward and his inward endeavor are one:
 when we can name him artist; not earthly craftsman only, but inspired
 thinker, who with heaven-made implement conquers heaven for us! if the
 poor and humble toil that we have food, must not the high and glorious
 toil for him in return, that he have light, have guidance, freedom,
 immortality?—these two, in all their degrees, i honor: all else is
 chaff and dust, which let the wind blow whither it listeth.
 "unspeakably touching is it, however, when i find both dignities united;
 and he that must toil outwardly for the lowest of man's wants, is also
 toiling inwardly for the highest. sublimer in this world know i nothing
 than a peasant saint, could such now anywhere be met with. such a one will
 take thee back to nazareth itself; thou wilt see the splendor of heaven
 spring forth from the humblest depths of earth, like a light shining in
 great darkness."
 and again: "it is not because of his toils that i lament for the poor: we
 must all toil, or steal (howsoever we name our stealing), which is worse;
 no faithful workman finds his task a pastime. the poor is hungry and
 athirst; but for him also there is food and drink: he is heavy-laden and
 weary; but for him also the heavens send sleep, and of the deepest; in his
 smoky cribs, a clear dewy heaven of rest envelops him; and fitful
 glitterings of cloud-skirted dreams. but what i do mourn over is, that the
 lamp of his soul should go out; that no ray of heavenly, or even of
 earthly knowledge, should visit him; but only, in the haggard darkness,
 like two spectres, fear and indignation bear him company. alas, while the
 body stands so broad and brawny, must the soul lie blinded, dwarfed,
 stupefied, almost annihilated! alas, was this too a breath of god;
 bestowed in heaven, but on earth never to be unfolded!—that there
 should one man die ignorant who had capacity for knowledge, this i call a
 tragedy, were it to happen more than twenty times in the minute, as by
 some computations it does. the miserable fraction of science which our
 united mankind, in a wide universe of nescience, has acquired, why is not
 this, with all diligence, imparted to all?"
 quite in an opposite strain is the following: "the old spartans had a
 wiser method; and went out and hunted down their helots, and speared and
 spitted them, when they grew too numerous. with our improved fashions of
 hunting, herr hofrath, now after the invention of fire-arms, and standing
 armies, how much easier were such a hunt! perhaps in the most thickly
 peopled country, some three days annually might suffice to shoot all the
 able-bodied paupers that had accumulated within the year. let governments
 think of this. the expense were trifling: nay the very carcasses would pay
 it. have them salted and barrelled; could not you victual therewith, if
 not army and navy, yet richly such infirm paupers, in workhouses and
 elsewhere, as enlightened charity, dreading no evil of them, might see
 good to keep alive?"
 "and yet," writes he farther on, "there must be something wrong. a
 full-formed horse will, in any market, bring from twenty to as high as two
 hundred friedrichs d'or: such is his worth to the world. a full-formed man
 is not only worth nothing to the world, but the world could afford him a
 round sum would he simply engage to go and hang himself. nevertheless,
 which of the two was the more cunningly devised article, even as an
 engine? good heavens! a white european man, standing on his two legs, with
 his two five-fingered hands at his shackle-bones, and miraculous head on
 his shoulders, is worth, i should say, from fifty to a hundred horses!"
 "true, thou gold-hofrath," cries the professor elsewhere: "too crowded
 indeed! meanwhile, what portion of this inconsiderable terraqueous globe
 have ye actually tilled and delved, till it will grow no more? how thick
 stands your population in the pampas and savannas of america; round
 ancient carthage, and in the interior of africa; on both slopes of the
 altaic chain, in the central platform of asia; in spain, greece, turkey,
 crim tartary, the curragh of kildare? one man, in one year, as i have
 understood it, if you lend him earth, will feed himself and nine others.
 alas, where now are the hengsts and alarics of our still-glowing,
 still-expanding europe; who, when their home is grown too narrow, will
 enlist, and, like fire-pillars, guide onwards those superfluous masses of
 indomitable living valor; equipped, not now with the battle-axe and
 war-chariot, but with the steam engine and ploughshare? where are they?—preserving
 their game!"
 putting which four singular chapters together, and alongside of them
 numerous hints, and even direct utterances, scattered over these writings
 of his, we come upon the startling yet not quite unlooked-for conclusion,
 that teufelsdrockh is one of those who consider society, properly so
 called, to be as good as extinct; and that only the gregarious feelings,
 and old inherited habitudes, at this juncture, hold us from dispersion,
 and universal national, civil, domestic and personal war! he says
 expressly: "for the last three centuries, above all for the last three
 quarters of a century, that same pericardial nervous tissue (as we named
 it) of religion, where lies the life-essence of society, has been smote at
 and perforated, needfully and needlessly; till now it is quite rent into
 shreds; and society, long pining, diabetic, consumptive, can be regarded
 as defunct; for those spasmodic, galvanic sprawlings are not life; neither
 indeed will they endure, galvanize as you may, beyond two days."
 "call ye that a society," cries he again, "where there is no longer any
 social idea extant; not so much as the idea of a common home, but only of
 a common over-crowded lodging-house? where each, isolated, regardless of
 his neighbor, turned against his neighbor, clutches what he can get, and
 cries 'mine!' and calls it peace, because, in the cut-purse and cut-throat
 scramble, no steel knives, but only a far cunninger sort, can be employed?
 where friendship, communion, has become an incredible tradition; and your
 holiest sacramental supper is a smoking tavern dinner, with cook for
 evangelist? where your priest has no tongue but for plate-licking: and
 your high guides and governors cannot guide; but on all hands hear it
 passionately proclaimed: laissez faire; leave us alone of your
 guidance, such light is darker than darkness; eat you your wages, and
 sleep!
 "thus, too," continues he, "does an observant eye discern everywhere that
 saddest spectacle: the poor perishing, like neglected, foundered
 draught-cattle, of hunger and overwork; the rich, still more wretchedly,
 of idleness, satiety, and overgrowth. the highest in rank, at length,
 without honor from the lowest; scarcely, with a little mouth-honor, as
 from tavern-waiters who expect to put it in the bill. once-sacred symbols
 fluttering as empty pageants, whereof men grudge even the expense; a world
 becoming dismantled: in one word, the state fallen speechless, from
 obesity and apoplexy; the state shrunken into a police-office, straitened
 to get its pay!"
 we might ask, are there many "observant eyes," belonging to practical men
 in england or elsewhere, which have descried these phenomena; or is it
 only from the mystic elevation of a german wahngasse that such
 wonders are visible? teufelsdrockh contends that the aspect of a "deceased
 or expiring society" fronts us everywhere, so that whoso runs may read.
 "what, for example," says he, "is the universally arrogated virtue, almost
 the sole remaining catholic virtue, of these days? for some half-century,
 it has been the thing you name 'independence.' suspicion of 'servility,'
 of reverence for superiors, the very dog-leech is anxious to disavow.
 fools! were your superiors worthy to govern, and you worthy to obey,
 reverence for them were even your only possible freedom. independence, in
 all kinds, is rebellion; if unjust rebellion, why parade it, and
 everywhere prescribe it?"
 but what then? are we returning, as rousseau prayed, to the state of
 nature? "the soul politic having departed," says teufelsdrockh, "what can
 follow but that the body politic be decently interred, to avoid
 putrescence? liberals, economists, utilitarians enough i see marching with
 its bier, and chanting loud paeans, towards the funeral pile, where, amid
 wailings from some, and saturnalian revelries from the most, the venerable
 corpse is to be burnt. or, in plain words, that these men, liberals,
 utilitarians, or whatsoever they are called, will ultimately carry their
 point, and dissever and destroy most existing institutions of society,
 seems a thing which has some time ago ceased to be doubtful.
 "do we not see a little subdivision of the grand utilitarian armament come
 to light even in insulated england? a living nucleus, that will attract
 and grow, does at length appear there also; and under curious phasis;
 properly as the inconsiderable fag-end, and so far in the rear of the
 others as to fancy itself the van. our european mechanizers are a sect of
 boundless diffusion, activity, and co-operative spirit: has not
 utilitarianism flourished in high places of thought, here among ourselves,
 and in every european country, at some time or other, within the last
 fifty years? if now in all countries, except perhaps england, it has
 ceased to flourish, or indeed to exist, among thinkers, and sunk to
 journalists and the popular mass,—who sees not that, as hereby it no
 longer preaches, so the reason is, it now needs no preaching, but is in
 full universal action, the doctrine everywhere known, and enthusiastically
 laid to heart? the fit pabulum, in these times, for a certain rugged
 workshop intellect and heart, nowise without their corresponding workshop
 strength and ferocity, it requires but to be stated in such scenes to make
 proselytes enough.—admirably calculated for destroying, only not for
 rebuilding! it spreads like a sort of dog-madness; till the whole
 world-kennel will be rabid: then woe to the huntsmen, with or without
 their whips! they should have given the quadrupeds water," adds he; "the
 water, namely, of knowledge and of life, while it was yet time."
 thus, if professor teufelsdrockh can be relied on, we are at this hour in
 a most critical condition; beleaguered by that boundless "armament of
 mechanizers" and unbelievers, threatening to strip us bare! "the world,"
 says he, "as it needs must, is under a process of devastation and waste,
 which, whether by silent assiduous corrosion, or open quicker combustion,
 as the case chances, will effectually enough annihilate the past forms of
 society; replace them with what it may. for the present, it is
 contemplated that when man's whole spiritual interests are once divested,
 these innumerable stript-off garments shall mostly be burnt; but the
 sounder rags among them be quilted together into one huge irish watch-coat
 for the defence of the body only!"—this, we think, is but job's-news
 to the humane reader.
 "nevertheless," cries teufelsdrockh, "who can hinder it; who is there that
 can clutch into the wheelspokes of destiny, and say to the spirit of the
 time: turn back, i command thee?—wiser were it that we yielded to
 the inevitable and inexorable, and accounted even this the best."
 nay, might not an attentive editor, drawing his own inferences from what
 stands written, conjecture that teufelsdrockh, individually had yielded to
 this same "inevitable and inexorable" heartily enough; and now sat waiting
 the issue, with his natural diabolico-angelical indifference, if not even
 placidity? did we not hear him complain that the world was a "huge
 ragfair," and the "rags and tatters of old symbols" were raining down
 everywhere, like to drift him in, and suffocate him? what with those
 "unhunted helots" of his; and the uneven sic vos non vobis pressure
 and hard-crashing collision he is pleased to discern in existing things;
 what with the so hateful "empty masks," full of beetles and spiders, yet
 glaring out on him, from their glass eyes, "with a ghastly affectation of
 life,"—we feel entitled to conclude him even willing that much
 should be thrown to the devil, so it were but done gently! safe himself in
 that "pinnacle of weissnichtwo," he would consent, with a tragic
 solemnity, that the monster utilitaria, held back, indeed, and moderated
 by nose-rings, halters, foot-shackles, and every conceivable modification
 of rope, should go forth to do her work;—to tread down old ruinous
 palaces and temples with her broad hoof, till the whole were trodden down,
 that new and better might be built! remarkable in this point of view are
 the following sentences.
 "society," says he, "is not dead: that carcass, which you call dead
 society, is but her mortal coil which she has shuffled off, to assume a
 nobler; she herself, through perpetual metamorphoses, in fairer and fairer
 development, has to live till time also merge in eternity. wheresoever two
 or three living men are gathered together, there is society; or there it
 will be, with its cunning mechanisms and stupendous structures,
 overspreading this little globe, and reaching upwards to heaven and
 downwards to gehenna: for always, under one or the other figure, it has
 two authentic revelations, of a god and of a devil; the pulpit, namely,
 and the gallows."
 indeed, we already heard him speak of "religion, in unnoticed nooks,
 weaving for herself new vestures;"—teufelsdrockh himself being one
 of the loom-treadles? elsewhere he quotes without censure that strange
 aphorism of saint simon's, concerning which and whom so much were to be
 said: "l'age d'or, qu'une aveugle tradition a place jusqu'ici dans le
 passe, est devant nous; the golden age, which a blind tradition has
 hitherto placed in the past, is before us."—but listen again:—
 "when the phoenix is fanning her funeral pyre, will there not be sparks
 flying! alas, some millions of men, and among them such as a napoleon,
 have already been licked into that high-eddying flame, and like moths
 consumed there. still also have we to fear that incautious beards will get
 singed.
 "for the rest, in what year of grace such phoenix-cremation will be
 completed, you need not ask. the law of perseverance is among the deepest
 in man: by nature he hates change; seldom will he quit his old house till
 it has actually fallen about his ears. thus have i seen solemnities linger
 as ceremonies, sacred symbols as idle pageants, to the extent of three
 hundred years and more after all life and sacredness had evaporated out of
 them. and then, finally, what time the phoenix death-birth itself will
 require, depends on unseen contingencies.—meanwhile, would destiny
 offer mankind, that after, say two centuries of convulsion and
 conflagration, more or less vivid, the fire-creation should be
 accomplished, and we to find ourselves again in a living society, and no
 longer fighting but working,—were it not perhaps prudent in mankind
 to strike the bargain?"
 thus is teufelsdrockh, content that old sick society should be
 deliberately burnt (alas, with quite other fuel than spice-wood); in the
 faith that she is a phoenix; and that a new heaven-born young one will
 rise out of her ashes! we ourselves, restricted to the duty of indicator,
 shall forbear commentary. meanwhile, will not the judicious reader shake
 his head, and reproachfully, yet more in sorrow than in anger, say or
 think: from a doctor utriusque juris, titular professor in a
 university, and man to whom hitherto, for his services, society, bad as
 she is, has given not only food and raiment (of a kind), but books,
 tobacco and gukguk, we expected more gratitude to his benefactress; and
 less of a blind trust in the future which resembles that rather of a
 philosophical fatalist and enthusiast, than of a solid householder paying
 scot-and-lot in a christian country.
 as mentioned above, teufelsdrockh, though a sansculottist, is in practice
 probably the politest man extant: his whole heart and life are penetrated
 and informed with the spirit of politeness; a noble natural courtesy
 shines through him, beautifying his vagaries; like sunlight, making a
 rosyfingered, rainbow-dyed aurora out of mere aqueous clouds; nay
 brightening london-smoke itself into gold vapor, as from the crucible of
 an alchemist. hear in what earnest though fantastic wise he expresses
 himself on this head:—
 "shall courtesy be done only to the rich, and only by the rich? in
 good-breeding, which differs, if at all, from high-breeding, only as it
 gracefully remembers the rights of others, rather than gracefully insists
 on its own rights, i discern no special connection with wealth or birth:
 but rather that it lies in human nature itself, and is due from all men
 towards all men. of a truth, were your schoolmaster at his post, and worth
 anything when there, this, with so much else, would be reformed. nay, each
 man were then also his neighbor's schoolmaster; till at length a
 rude-visaged, unmannered peasant could no more be met with, than a peasant
 unacquainted with botanical physiology, or who felt not that the clod he
 broke was created in heaven.
 "for whether thou bear a sceptre or a sledge-hammer, art not thou alive;
 is not this thy brother alive? 'there is but one temple in the world,'
 says novalis, 'and that temple is the body of man. nothing is holier than
 this high form. bending before men is a reverence done to this revelation
 in the flesh. we touch heaven, when we lay our hands on a human body.'
 "on which ground, i would fain carry it farther than most do; and whereas
 the english johnson only bowed to every clergyman, or man with a
 shovel-hat, i would bow to every man with any sort of hat, or with no hat
 whatever. is not he a temple, then; the visible manifestation and
 impersonation of the divinity? and yet, alas, such indiscriminate bowing
 serves not. for there is a devil dwells in man, as well as a divinity; and
 too often the bow is but pocketed by the former. it would go to the
 pocket of vanity (which is your clearest phasis of the devil, in these
 times); therefore must we withhold it.
 "the gladder am i, on the other hand, to do reverence to those shells and
 outer husks of the body, wherein no devilish passion any longer lodges,
 but only the pure emblem and effigies of man: i mean, to empty, or even to
 cast clothes. nay, is it not to clothes that most men do reverence: to the
 fine frogged broadcloth, nowise to the 'straddling animal with bandy legs'
 which it holds, and makes a dignitary of? who ever saw any lord my-lorded
 in tattered blanket fastened with wooden skewer? nevertheless, i say,
 there is in such worship a shade of hypocrisy, a practical deception: for
 how often does the body appropriate what was meant for the cloth only!
 whoso would avoid falsehood, which is the essence of all sin, will perhaps
 see good to take a different course. that reverence which cannot act
 without obstruction and perversion when the clothes are full, may have
 free course when they are empty. even as, for hindoo worshippers, the
 pagoda is not less sacred than the god; so do i too worship the hollow
 cloth garment with equal fervor, as when it contained the man: nay, with
 more, for i now fear no deception, of myself or of others.
 "did not king toomtabard, or, in other words, john baliol, reign
 long over scotland; the man john baliol being quite gone, and only the
 'toom tabard' (empty gown) remaining? what still dignity dwells in a suit
 of cast clothes! how meekly it bears its honors! no haughty looks, no
 scornful gesture: silent and serene, it fronts the world; neither
 demanding worship, nor afraid to miss it. the hat still carries the
 physiognomy of its head: but the vanity and the stupidity, and
 goose-speech which was the sign of these two, are gone. the coat-arm is
 stretched out, but not to strike; the breeches, in modest simplicity,
 depend at ease, and now at last have a graceful flow; the waistcoat hides
 no evil passion, no riotous desire; hunger or thirst now dwells not in it.
 thus all is purged from the grossness of sense, from the carking cares and
 foul vices of the world; and rides there, on its clothes-horse; as, on a
 pegasus, might some skyey messenger, or purified apparition, visiting our
 low earth.
 "often, while i sojourned in that monstrous tuberosity of civilized life,
 the capital of england; and meditated, and questioned destiny, under that
 ink-sea of vapor, black, thick, and multifarious as spartan broth; and was
 one lone soul amid those grinding millions;—often have i turned into
 their old-clothes market to worship. with awe-struck heart i walk through
 that monmouth street, with its empty suits, as through a sanhedrim of
 stainless ghosts. silent are they, but expressive in their silence: the
 past witnesses and instruments of woe and joy, of passions, virtues,
 crimes, and all the fathomless tumult of good and evil in 'the prison men
 call life.' friends! trust not the heart of that man for whom old clothes
 are not venerable. watch, too, with reverence, that bearded jewish
 high-priest, who with hoarse voice, like some angel of doom, summons them
 from the four winds! on his head, like the pope, he has three hats,—a
 real triple tiara; on either hand are the similitude of wings, whereon the
 summoned garments come to alight; and ever, as he slowly cleaves the air,
 sounds forth his deep fateful note, as if through a trumpet he were
 proclaiming: 'ghosts of life, come to judgment!' reck not, ye fluttering
 ghosts: he will purify you in his purgatory, with fire and with water;
 and, one day, new-created ye shall reappear. oh, let him in whom the flame
 of devotion is ready to go out, who has never worshipped, and knows not
 what to worship, pace and repace, with austerest thought, the pavement of
 monmouth street, and say whether his heart and his eyes still continue
 dry. if field lane, with its long fluttering rows of yellow handkerchiefs,
 be a dionysius' ear, where, in stifled jarring hubbub, we hear the
 indictment which poverty and vice bring against lazy wealth, that it has
 left them there cast out and trodden under foot of want, darkness and the
 devil,—then is monmouth street a mirza's hill, where, in motley
 vision, the whole pageant of existence passes awfully before us; with its
 wail and jubilee, mad loves and mad hatreds, church-bells and
 gallows-ropes, farce-tragedy, beast-godhood,—the bedlam of
 creation!"
 to most men, as it does to ourselves, all this will seem overcharged. we
 too have walked through monmouth street; but with little feeling of
 "devotion:" probably in part because the contemplative process is so
 fatally broken in upon by the brood of money-changers who nestle in that
 church, and importune the worshipper with merely secular proposals.
 whereas teufelsdrockh, might be in that happy middle state, which leaves
 to the clothes-broker no hope either of sale or of purchase, and so be
 allowed to linger there without molestation.—something we would have
 given to see the little philosophical figure, with its steeple-hat and
 loose flowing skirts, and eyes in a fine frenzy, "pacing and repacing in
 austerest thought" that foolish street; which to him was a true delphic
 avenue, and supernatural whispering-gallery, where the "ghosts of life"
 rounded strange secrets in his ear. o thou philosophic teufelsdrockh, that
 listenest while others only gabble, and with thy quick tympanum hearest
 the grass grow!
 at the same time, is it not strange that, in paper-bag documents destined
 for an english work, there exists nothing like an authentic diary of this
 his sojourn in london; and of his meditations among the clothes-shops only
 the obscurest emblematic shadows? neither, in conversation (for, indeed,
 he was not a man to pester you with his travels), have we heard him more
 than allude to the subject.
 for the rest, however, it cannot be uninteresting that we here find how
 early the significance of clothes had dawned on the now so distinguished
 clothes-professor. might we but fancy it to have been even in monmouth
 street, at the bottom of our own english "ink-sea," that this remarkable
 volume first took being, and shot forth its salient point in his soul,—as
 in chaos did the egg of eros, one day to be hatched into a universe!
 for us, who happen to live while the world-phoenix is burning herself, and
 burning so slowly that, as teufelsdrockh calculates, it were a handsome
 bargain would she engage to have done "within two centuries," there seems
 to lie but an ashy prospect. not altogether so, however, does the
 professor figure it. "in the living subject," says he, "change is wont to
 be gradual: thus, while the serpent sheds its old skin, the new is already
 formed beneath. little knowest thou of the burning of a world-phoenix, who
 fanciest that she must first burn out, and lie as a dead cinereous heap;
 and therefrom the young one start up by miracle, and fly heavenward. far
 otherwise! in that fire-whirlwind, creation and destruction proceed
 together; ever as the ashes of the old are blown about, do organic
 filaments of the new mysteriously spin themselves: and amid the rushing
 and the waving of the whirlwind element come tones of a melodious
 death-song, which end not but in tones of a more melodious birth-song.
 nay, look into the fire-whirlwind with thy own eyes, and thou wilt see."
 let us actually look, then: to poor individuals, who cannot expect to live
 two centuries, those same organic filaments, mysteriously spinning
 themselves, will be the best part of the spectacle. first, therefore, this
 of mankind in general:—
 "in vain thou deniest it," says the professor; "thou art my brother. thy
 very hatred, thy very envy, those foolish lies thou tellest of me in thy
 splenetic humor: what is all this but an inverted sympathy? were i a
 steam-engine, wouldst thou take the trouble to tell lies of me? not thou!
 i should grind all unheeded, whether badly or well.
 "wondrous truly are the bonds that unite us one and all; whether by the
 soft binding of love, or the iron chaining of necessity, as we like to
 choose it. more than once have i said to myself, of some perhaps
 whimsically strutting figure, such as provokes whimsical thoughts: 'wert
 thou, my little brotherkin, suddenly covered up within the largest
 imaginable glass bell,—what a thing it were, not for thyself only,
 but for the world! post letters, more or fewer, from all the four winds,
 impinge against thy glass walls, but have to drop unread: neither from
 within comes there question or response into any post-bag; thy thoughts
 fall into no friendly ear or heart, thy manufacture into no purchasing
 hand: thou art no longer a circulating venous-arterial heart, that, taking
 and giving, circulatest through all space and all time: there has a hole
 fallen out in the immeasurable, universal world-tissue, which must be
 darned up again!'
 "such venous-arterial circulation, of letters, verbal messages, paper and
 other packages, going out from him and coming in, are a blood-circulation,
 visible to the eye: but the finer nervous circulation, by which all
 things, the minutest that he does, minutely influence all men, and the
 very look of his face blesses or curses whomso it lights on, and so
 generates ever new blessing or new cursing: all this you cannot see, but
 only imagine. i say, there is not a red indian, hunting by lake winnipeg,
 can quarrel with his squaw, but the whole world must smart for it: will
 not the price of beaver rise? it is a mathematical fact that the casting
 of this pebble from my hand alters the centre of gravity of the universe.
 "if now an existing generation of men stand so woven together, not less
 indissolubly does generation with generation. hast thou ever meditated on
 that word, tradition: how we inherit not life only, but all the garniture
 and form of life; and work, and speak, and even think and feel, as our
 fathers, and primeval grandfathers, from the beginning, have given it us?—who
 printed thee, for example, this unpretending volume on the philosophy of
 clothes? not the herren stillschweigen and company; but cadmus of thebes,
 faust of mentz, and innumerable others whom thou knowest not. had there
 been no moesogothic ulfila, there had been no english shakspeare, or a
 different one. simpleton! it was tubal-cain that made thy very tailor's
 needle, and sewed that court-suit of thine.
 "yes, truly, if nature is one, and a living indivisible whole, much more
 is mankind, the image that reflects and creates nature, without which
 nature were not. as palpable lifestreams in that wondrous individual
 mankind, among so many life-streams that are not palpable, flow on those
 main currents of what we call opinion; as preserved in institutions,
 polities, churches, above all in books. beautiful it is to understand and
 know that a thought did never yet die; that as thou, the originator
 thereof, hast gathered it and created it from the whole past, so thou wilt
 transmit it to the whole future. it is thus that the heroic heart, the
 seeing eye of the first times, still feels and sees in us of the latest;
 that the wise man stands ever encompassed, and spiritually embraced, by a
 cloud of witnesses and brothers; and there is a living, literal communion
 of saints, wide as the world itself, and as the history of the world.
 "noteworthy also, and serviceable for the progress of this same
 individual, wilt thou find his subdivision into generations. generations
 are as the days of toilsome mankind: death and birth are the vesper and
 the matin bells, that summon mankind to sleep, and to rise refreshed for
 new advancement. what the father has made, the son can make and enjoy; but
 has also work of his own appointed him. thus all things wax, and roll
 onwards; arts, establishments, opinions, nothing is completed, but ever
 completing. newton has learned to see what kepler saw; but there is also a
 fresh heaven-derived force in newton; he must mount to still higher points
 of vision. so too the hebrew lawgiver is, in due time, followed by an
 apostle of the gentiles. in the business of destruction, as this also is
 from time to time a necessary work, thou findest a like sequence and
 perseverance: for luther it was as yet hot enough to stand by that burning
 of the pope's bull; voltaire could not warm himself at the glimmering
 ashes, but required quite other fuel. thus likewise, i note, the english
 whig has, in the second generation, become an english radical; who, in the
 third again, it is to be hoped, will become an english rebuilder. find
 mankind where thou wilt, thou findest it in living movement, in progress
 faster or slower: the phoenix soars aloft, hovers with outstretched wings,
 filling earth with her music; or, as now, she sinks, and with spheral
 swan-song immolates herself in flame, that she may soar the higher and
 sing the clearer."
 let the friends of social order, in such a disastrous period, lay this to
 heart, and derive from it any little comfort they can. we subjoin another
 passage, concerning titles:—
 "remark, not without surprise," says teufelsdrockh, "how all high titles
 of honor come hitherto from fighting. your herzog (duke, dux)
 is leader of armies; your earl (jarl) is strong man; your marshal
 cavalry horse-shoer. a millennium, or reign of peace and wisdom, having
 from of old been prophesied, and becoming now daily more and more
 indubitable, may it not be apprehended that such fighting titles will
 cease to be palatable, and new and higher need to be devised?
 "the only title wherein i, with confidence, trace eternity is that of
 king. konig (king), anciently konning, means ken-ning
 (cunning), or which is the same thing, can-ning. ever must the sovereign
 of mankind be fitly entitled king."
 "well, also," says he elsewhere, "was it written by theologians: a king
 rules by divine right. he carries in him an authority from god, or man
 will never give it him. can i choose my own king? i can choose my own king
 popinjay, and play what farce or tragedy i may with him: but he who is to
 be my ruler, whose will is to be higher than my will, was chosen for me in
 heaven. neither except in such obedience to the heaven-chosen is freedom
 so much as conceivable."
 the editor will here admit that, among all the wondrous provinces of
 teufelsdrockh's spiritual world, there is none he walks in with such
 astonishment, hesitation, and even pain, as in the political. how, with
 our english love of ministry and opposition, and that generous conflict of
 parties, mind warming itself against mind in their mutual wrestle for the
 public good, by which wrestle, indeed, is our invaluable constitution kept
 warm and alive; how shall we domesticate ourselves in this spectral
 necropolis, or rather city both of the dead and of the unborn, where the
 present seems little other than an inconsiderable film dividing the past
 and the future? in those dim long-drawn expanses, all is so immeasurable;
 much so disastrous, ghastly; your very radiances and straggling
 light-beams have a supernatural character. and then with such an
 indifference, such a prophetic peacefulness (accounting the inevitably
 coming as already here, to him all one whether it be distant by centuries
 or only by days), does he sit;—and live, you would say, rather in
 any other age than in his own! it is our painful duty to announce, or
 repeat, that, looking into this man, we discern a deep, silent,
 slow-burning, inextinguishable radicalism, such as fills us with
 shuddering admiration.
 thus, for example, he appears to make little even of the elective
 franchise; at least so we interpret the following: "satisfy yourselves,"
 he says, "by universal, indubitable experiment, even as ye are now doing
 or will do, whether freedom, heaven-born and leading heavenward, and so
 vitally essential for us all, cannot peradventure be mechanically hatched
 and brought to light in that same ballot-box of yours; or at worst, in
 some other discoverable or devisable box, edifice, or steam-mechanism. it
 were a mighty convenience; and beyond all feats of manufacture witnessed
 hitherto." is teufelsdrockh acquainted with the british constitution, even
 slightly?—he says, under another figure: "but after all, were the
 problem, as indeed it now everywhere is, to rebuild your old house from
 the top downwards (since you must live in it the while), what better, what
 other, than the representative machine will serve your turn? meanwhile,
 however, mock me not with the name of free, 'when you have but knit up my
 chains into ornamental festoons.'"—or what will any member of the
 peace society make of such an assertion as this: "the lower people
 everywhere desire war. not so unwisely; there is then a demand for lower
 people—to be shot!"
 gladly, therefore, do we emerge from those soul-confusing labyrinths of
 speculative radicalism, into somewhat clearer regions. here, looking
 round, as was our hest, for "organic filaments," we ask, may not this,
 touching "hero-worship," be of the number? it seems of a cheerful
 character; yet so quaint, so mystical, one knows not what, or how little,
 may lie under it. our readers shall look with their own eyes:—
 "true is it that, in these days, man can do almost all things, only not
 obey. true likewise that whoso cannot obey cannot be free, still less bear
 rule; he that is the inferior of nothing, can be the superior of nothing,
 the equal of nothing. nevertheless, believe not that man has lost his
 faculty of reverence; that if it slumber in him, it has gone dead. painful
 for man is that same rebellious independence, when it has become
 inevitable; only in loving companionship with his fellows does he feel
 safe; only in reverently bowing down before the higher does he feel
 himself exalted.
 "or what if the character of our so troublous era lay even in this: that
 man had forever cast away fear, which is the lower; but not yet risen into
 perennial reverence, which is the higher and highest?
 "meanwhile, observe with joy, so cunningly has nature ordered it, that
 whatsoever man ought to obey, he cannot but obey. before no faintest
 revelation of the godlike did he ever stand irreverent; least of all, when
 the godlike showed itself revealed in his fellow-man. thus is there a true
 religious loyalty forever rooted in his heart; nay in all ages, even in
 ours, it manifests itself as a more or less orthodox hero-worship.
 in which fact, that hero-worship exists, has existed, and will forever
 exist, universally among mankind, mayest thou discern the corner-stone of
 living rock, whereon all polities for the remotest time may stand secure."
 do our readers discern any such corner-stone, or even so much as what
 teufelsdrockh, is looking at? he exclaims, "or hast thou forgotten paris
 and voltaire? how the aged, withered man, though but a sceptic, mocker,
 and millinery court-poet, yet because even he seemed the wisest, best,
 could drag mankind at his chariot-wheels, so that princes coveted a smile
 from him, and the loveliest of france would have laid their hair beneath
 his feet! all paris was one vast temple of hero-worship; though their
 divinity, moreover, was of feature too apish.
 "but if such things," continues he, "were done in the dry tree, what will
 be done in the green? if, in the most parched season of man's history, in
 the most parched spot of europe, when parisian life was at best but a
 scientific hortus siccus, bedizened with some italian gumflowers,
 such virtue could come out of it; what is to be looked for when life again
 waves leafy and bloomy, and your hero-divinity shall have nothing apelike,
 but be wholly human? know that there is in man a quite indestructible
 reverence for whatsoever holds of heaven, or even plausibly counterfeits
 such holding. show the dullest clodpoll, show the haughtiest featherhead,
 that a soul higher than himself is actually here; were his knees stiffened
 into brass, he must down and worship."
 organic filaments, of a more authentic sort, mysteriously spinning
 themselves, some will perhaps discover in the following passage:—
 "there is no church, sayest thou? the voice of prophecy has gone dumb?
 this is even what i dispute: but in any case, hast thou not still
 preaching enough? a preaching friar settles himself in every village; and
 builds a pulpit, which he calls newspaper. therefrom he preaches what most
 momentous doctrine is in him, for man's salvation; and dost not thou
 listen, and believe? look well, thou seest everywhere a new clergy of the
 mendicant orders, some barefooted, some almost bare-backed, fashion itself
 into shape, and teach and preach, zealously enough, for copper alms and
 the love of god. these break in pieces the ancient idols; and, though
 themselves too often reprobate, as idol-breakers are wont to be, mark out
 the sites of new churches, where the true god-ordained, that are to
 follow, may find audience, and minister. said i not, before the old skin
 was shed, the new had formed itself beneath it?"
 perhaps also in the following; wherewith we now hasten to knit up this
 ravelled sleeve:—
 "but there is no religion?" reiterates the professor. "fool! i tell thee,
 there is. hast thou well considered all that lies in this immeasurable
 froth-ocean we name literature? fragments of a genuine church-homiletic
 lie scattered there, which time will assort: nay fractions even of a liturgy
 could i point out. and knowest thou no prophet, even in the vesture,
 environment, and dialect of this age? none to whom the godlike had
 revealed itself, through all meanest and highest forms of the common; and
 by him been again prophetically revealed: in whose inspired melody, even
 in these rag-gathering and rag-burning days, man's life again begins, were
 it but afar off, to be divine? knowest thou none such? i know him, and
 name him—goethe.
 "but thou as yet standest in no temple; joinest in no psalm-worship;
 feelest well that, where there is no ministering priest, the people
 perish? be of comfort! thou art not alone, if thou have faith. spake we
 not of a communion of saints, unseen, yet not unreal, accompanying and
 brother-like embracing thee, so thou be worthy? their heroic sufferings
 rise up melodiously together to heaven, out of all lands, and out of all
 times, as a sacred miserere; their heroic actions also, as a
 boundless everlasting psalm of triumph. neither say that thou hast now no
 symbol of the godlike. is not god's universe a symbol of the godlike; is
 not immensity a temple; is not man's history, and men's history, a
 perpetual evangel? listen, and for organ-music thou wilt ever, as of old,
 hear the morning stars sing together."
 it is in his stupendous section, headed natural supernaturalism,
 that the professor first becomes a seer; and, after long effort, such as
 we have witnessed, finally subdues under his feet this refractory
 clothes-philosophy, and takes victorious possession thereof. phantasms
 enough he has had to struggle with; "cloth-webs and cob-webs," of imperial
 mantles, superannuated symbols, and what not: yet still did he
 courageously pierce through. nay, worst of all, two quite mysterious,
 world-embracing phantasms, time and space, have ever hovered round him,
 perplexing and bewildering: but with these also he now resolutely
 grapples, these also he victoriously rends asunder. in a word, he has
 looked fixedly on existence, till, one after the other, its earthly hulls
 and garnitures have all melted away; and now, to his rapt vision, the
 interior celestial holy-of-holies lies disclosed.
 here, therefore, properly it is that the philosophy of clothes attains to
 transcendentalism; this last leap, can we but clear it, takes us safe into
 the promised land, where palingenesia, in all senses, may be
 considered as beginning. "courage, then!" may our diogenes exclaim, with
 better right than diogenes the first once did. this stupendous section we,
 after long painful meditation, have found not to be unintelligible; but,
 on the contrary, to grow clear, nay radiant, and all-illuminating. let the
 reader, turning on it what utmost force of speculative intellect is in
 him, do his part; as we, by judicious selection and adjustment, shall
 study to do ours:—
 "deep has been, and is, the significance of miracles," thus quietly begins
 the professor; "far deeper perhaps than we imagine. meanwhile, the
 question of questions were: what specially is a miracle? to that dutch
 king of siam, an icicle had been a miracle; whoso had carried with him an
 air-pump, and vial of vitriolic ether, might have worked a miracle. to my
 horse, again, who unhappily is still more unscientific, do not i work a
 miracle, and magical 'open sesame!' every time i please to
 pay twopence, and open for him an impassable schlagbaum, or shut
 turnpike?
 "'but is not a real miracle simply a violation of the laws of nature?' ask
 several. whom i answer by this new question: what are the laws of nature?
 to me perhaps the rising of one from the dead were no violation of these
 laws, but a confirmation; were some far deeper law, now first penetrated
 into, and by spiritual force, even as the rest have all been, brought to
 bear on us with its material force.
 "here too may some inquire, not without astonishment: on what ground shall
 one, that can make iron swim, come and declare that therefore he can teach
 religion? to us, truly, of the nineteenth century, such declaration were
 inept enough; which nevertheless to our fathers, of the first century, was
 full of meaning.
 "'but is it not the deepest law of nature that she be constant?' cries an
 illuminated class: 'is not the machine of the universe fixed to move by
 unalterable rules?' probable enough, good friends: nay i, too, must
 believe that the god, whom ancient inspired men assert to be 'without
 variableness or shadow of turning,' does indeed never change; that nature,
 that the universe, which no one whom it so pleases can be prevented from
 calling a machine, does move by the most unalterable rules. and now of
 you, too, i make the old inquiry: what those same unalterable rules,
 forming the complete statute-book of nature, may possibly be?
 "they stand written in our works of science, say you; in the accumulated
 records of man's experience?—was man with his experience present at
 the creation, then, to see how it all went on? have any deepest scientific
 individuals yet dived down to the foundations of the universe, and gauged
 everything there? did the maker take them into his counsel; that they read
 his ground-plan of the incomprehensible all; and can say, this stands
 marked therein, and no more than this? alas, not in anywise! these
 scientific individuals have been nowhere but where we also are; have seen
 some hand breadths deeper than we see into the deep that is infinite,
 without bottom as without shore.
 "laplace's book on the stars, wherein he exhibits that certain planets,
 with their satellites, gyrate round our worthy sun, at a rate and in a
 course, which, by greatest good fortune, he and the like of him have
 succeeded in detecting,—is to me as precious as to another. but is
 this what thou namest 'mechanism of the heavens,' and 'system of the
 world;' this, wherein sirius and the pleiades, and all herschel's fifteen
 thousand suns per minute, being left out, some paltry handful of moons,
 and inert balls, had been—looked at, nick-named, and marked in the
 zodiacal way-bill; so that we can now prate of their whereabout; their
 how, their why, their what, being hid from us, as in the signless inane?
 "system of nature! to the wisest man, wide as is his vision, nature
 remains of quite infinite depth, of quite infinite expansion; and
 all experience thereof limits itself to some few computed centuries and
 measured square-miles. the course of nature's phases, on this our little
 fraction of a planet, is partially known to us: but who knows what deeper
 courses these depend on; what infinitely larger cycle (of causes) our
 little epicycle revolves on? to the minnow every cranny and pebble, and
 quality and accident, of its little native creek may have become familiar:
 but does the minnow understand the ocean tides and periodic currents, the
 trade-winds, and monsoons, and moon's eclipses; by all which the condition
 of its little creek is regulated, and may, from time to time
 (unmiraculously enough), be quite overset and reversed? such a minnow is
 man; his creek this planet earth; his ocean the immeasurable all; his
 monsoons and periodic currents the mysterious course of providence through
 aeons of aeons.
 "we speak of the volume of nature: and truly a volume it is,—whose
 author and writer is god. to read it! dost thou, does man, so much as well
 know the alphabet thereof? with its words, sentences, and grand
 descriptive pages, poetical and philosophical, spread out through solar
 systems, and thousands of years, we shall not try thee. it is a volume
 written in celestial hieroglyphs, in the true sacred-writing; of which
 even prophets are happy that they can read here a line and there a line.
 as for your institutes, and academies of science, they strive bravely;
 and, from amid the thick-crowded, inextricably intertwisted hieroglyphic
 writing, pick out, by dexterous combination, some letters in the vulgar
 character, and therefrom put together this and the other economic recipe,
 of high avail in practice. that nature is more than some boundless volume
 of such recipes, or huge, well-nigh inexhaustible domestic-cookery book,
 of which the whole secret will in this manner one day evolve itself, the
 fewest dream.
 "custom," continues the professor, "doth make dotards of us all. consider
 well, thou wilt find that custom is the greatest of weavers; and weaves
 air-raiment for all the spirits of the universe; whereby indeed these
 dwell with us visibly, as ministering servants, in our houses and
 workshops; but their spiritual nature becomes, to the most, forever
 hidden. philosophy complains that custom has hoodwinked us, from the
 first; that we do everything by custom, even believe by it; that our very
 axioms, let us boast of free-thinking as we may, are oftenest simply such
 beliefs as we have never heard questioned. nay, what is philosophy
 throughout but a continual battle against custom; an ever-renewed effort
 to transcend the sphere of blind custom, and so become
 transcendental?
 "innumerable are the illusions and legerdemain-tricks of custom: but of
 all these, perhaps the cleverest is her knack of persuading us that the
 miraculous, by simple repetition, ceases to be miraculous. true, it is by
 this means we live; for man must work as well as wonder: and herein is
 custom so far a kind nurse, guiding him to his true benefit. but she is a
 fond foolish nurse, or rather we are false foolish nurslings, when, in our
 resting and reflecting hours, we prolong the same deception. am i to view
 the stupendous with stupid indifference, because i have seen it twice, or
 two hundred, or two million times? there is no reason in nature or in art
 why i should: unless, indeed, i am a mere work-machine, for whom the
 divine gift of thought were no other than the terrestrial gift of steam is
 to the steam-engine; a power whereby cotton might be spun, and money and
 money's worth realized.
 "notable enough too, here as elsewhere, wilt thou find the potency of
 names; which indeed are but one kind of such custom-woven, wonder-hiding
 garments. witchcraft, and all manner of spectre-work, and demonology, we
 have now named madness, and diseases of the nerves. seldom reflecting that
 still the new question comes upon us: what is madness, what are nerves?
 ever, as before, does madness remain a mysterious-terrific, altogether infernal
 boiling-up of the nether chaotic deep, through this fair-painted vision of
 creation, which swims thereon, which we name the real. was luther's
 picture of the devil less a reality, whether it were formed within the
 bodily eye, or without it? in every the wisest soul lies a whole world of
 internal madness, an authentic demon-empire; out of which, indeed, his
 world of wisdom has been creatively built together, and now rests there,
 as on its dark foundations does a habitable flowery earth rind.
 "but deepest of all illusory appearances, for hiding wonder, as for many
 other ends, are your two grand fundamental world-enveloping appearances,
 space and time. these, as spun and woven for us from before birth itself,
 to clothe our celestial me for dwelling here, and yet to blind it,—lie
 all-embracing, as the universal canvas, or warp and woof, whereby all
 minor illusions, in this phantasm existence, weave and paint themselves.
 in vain, while here on earth, shall you endeavor to strip them off; you
 can, at best, but rend them asunder for moments, and look through.
 "fortunatus had a wishing hat, which when he put on, and wished himself
 anywhere, behold he was there. by this means had fortunatus triumphed over
 space, he had annihilated space; for him there was no where, but all was
 here. were a hatter to establish himself, in the wahngasse of
 weissnichtwo, and make felts of this sort for all mankind, what a world we
 should have of it! still stranger, should, on the opposite side of the
 street, another hatter establish himself; and, as his fellow-craftsman
 made space-annihilating hats, make time-annihilating! of both would i
 purchase, were it with my last groschen; but chiefly of this latter. to
 clap on your felt, and, simply by wishing that you were anywhere,
 straightway to be there! next to clap on your other felt, and,
 simply by wishing that you were anywhen, straightway to be then!
 this were indeed the grander: shooting at will from the fire-creation of
 the world to its fire-consummation; here historically present in the first
 century, conversing face to face with paul and seneca; there prophetically
 in the thirty-first, conversing also face to face with other pauls and
 senecas, who as yet stand hidden in the depth of that late time!
 "or thinkest thou it were impossible, unimaginable? is the past
 annihilated, then, or only past; is the future non-extant, or only future?
 those mystic faculties of thine, memory and hope, already answer: already
 through those mystic avenues, thou the earth-blinded summonest both past
 and future, and communest with them, though as yet darkly, and with mute
 beckonings. the curtains of yesterday drop down, the curtains of to-morrow
 roll up; but yesterday and to-morrow both are. pierce through the
 time-element, glance into the eternal. believe what thou findest written
 in the sanctuaries of man's soul, even as all thinkers, in all ages, have
 devoutly read it there: that time and space are not god, but creations of
 god; that with god as it is a universal here, so is it an everlasting now.
 "and seest thou therein any glimpse of immortality?—o heaven! is the
 white tomb of our loved one, who died from our arms, and had to be left
 behind us there, which rises in the distance, like a pale, mournfully
 receding milestone, to tell how many toilsome uncheered miles we have
 journeyed on alone,—but a pale spectral illusion! is the lost friend
 still mysteriously here, even as we are here mysteriously, with god!—know
 of a truth that only the time-shadows have perished, or are perishable;
 that the real being of whatever was, and whatever is, and whatever will
 be, is even now and forever. this, should it unhappily seem new, thou
 mayest ponder at thy leisure; for the next twenty years, or the next
 twenty centuries: believe it thou must; understand it thou canst not.
 "that the thought-forms, space and time, wherein, once for all, we are
 sent into this earth to live, should condition and determine our whole
 practical reasonings, conceptions, and imagings or imaginings, seems
 altogether fit, just, and unavoidable. but that they should, furthermore,
 usurp such sway over pure spiritual meditation, and blind us to the wonder
 everywhere lying close on us, seems nowise so. admit space and time to
 their due rank as forms of thought; nay even, if thou wilt, to their quite
 undue rank of realities: and consider, then, with thyself how their thin
 disguises hide from us the brightest god-effulgences! thus, were it not
 miraculous, could i stretch forth my hand and clutch the sun? yet thou
 seest me daily stretch forth my hand and therewith clutch many a thing,
 and swing it hither and thither. art thou a grown baby, then, to fancy
 that the miracle lies in miles of distance, or in pounds avoirdupois of
 weight; and not to see that the true inexplicable god-revealing miracle
 lies in this, that i can stretch forth my hand at all; that i have free
 force to clutch aught therewith? innumerable other of this sort are the
 deceptions, and wonder-hiding stupefactions, which space practices on us.
 "still worse is it with regard to time. your grand anti-magician, and
 universal wonder-hider, is this same lying time. had we but the
 time-annihilating hat, to put on for once only, we should see ourselves in
 a world of miracles, wherein all fabled or authentic thaumaturgy, and
 feats of magic, were outdone. but unhappily we have not such a hat; and
 man, poor fool that he is, can seldom and scantily help himself without
 one.
 "were it not wonderful, for instance, had orpheus, or amphion, built the
 walls of thebes by the mere sound of his lyre? yet tell me, who built
 these walls of weissnichtwo; summoning out all the sandstone rocks, to
 dance along from the steinbruch (now a huge troglodyte chasm, with
 frightful green-mantled pools); and shape themselves into doric and ionic
 pillars, squared ashlar houses and noble streets? was it not the still
 higher orpheus, or orpheuses, who, in past centuries, by the divine music
 of wisdom, succeeded in civilizing man? our highest orpheus walked in
 judea, eighteen hundred years ago: his sphere-melody, flowing in wild
 native tones, took captive the ravished souls of men; and, being of a
 truth sphere-melody, still flows and sounds, though now with thousand-fold
 accompaniments, and rich symphonies, through all our hearts; and
 modulates, and divinely leads them. is that a wonder, which happens in two
 hours; and does it cease to be wonderful if happening in two million? not
 only was thebes built by the music of an orpheus; but without the music of
 some inspired orpheus was no city ever built, no work that man glories in
 ever done.
 "sweep away the illusion of time; glance, if thou have eyes, from the near
 moving-cause to its far distant mover: the stroke that came transmitted
 through a whole galaxy of elastic balls, was it less a stroke than if the
 last ball only had been struck, and sent flying? oh, could i (with the
 time-annihilating hat) transport thee direct from the beginnings, to the
 endings, how were thy eyesight unsealed, and thy heart set flaming in the
 light-sea of celestial wonder! then sawest thou that this fair universe,
 were it in the meanest province thereof, is in very deed the star-domed
 city of god; that through every star, through every grass-blade, and most
 through every living soul, the glory of a present god still beams. but
 nature, which is the time-vesture of god, and reveals him to the wise,
 hides him from the foolish.
 "again, could anything be more miraculous than an actual authentic ghost?
 the english johnson longed, all his life, to see one; but could not,
 though he went to cock lane, and thence to the church-vaults, and tapped
 on coffins. foolish doctor! did he never, with the mind's eye as well as
 with the body's, look round him into that full tide of human life he so
 loved; did he never so much as look into himself? the good doctor was a
 ghost, as actual and authentic as heart could wish; well-nigh a million of
 ghosts were travelling the streets by his side. once more i say, sweep
 away the illusion of time; compress the threescore years into three
 minutes: what else was he, what else are we? are we not spirits, that are
 shaped into a body, into an appearance; and that fade away again into air
 and invisibility? this is no metaphor, it is a simple scientific fact:
 we start out of nothingness, take figure, and are apparitions; round us,
 as round the veriest spectre, is eternity; and to eternity minutes are as
 years and aeons. come there not tones of love and faith, as from celestial
 harp-strings, like the song of beatified souls? and again, do not we
 squeak and gibber (in our discordant, screech-owlish debatings and
 recriminatings); and glide bodeful, and feeble, and fearful; or uproar (poltern),
 and revel in our mad dance of the dead,—till the scent of the
 morning air summons us to our still home; and dreamy night becomes awake
 and day? where now is alexander of macedon: does the steel host, that
 yelled in fierce battle-shouts at issus and arbela, remain behind him; or
 have they all vanished utterly, even as perturbed goblins must? napoleon
 too, and his moscow retreats and austerlitz campaigns! was it all other
 than the veriest spectre-hunt; which has now, with its howling tumult that
 made night hideous, flitted away?—ghosts! there are nigh a thousand
 million walking the earth openly at noontide; some half-hundred have
 vanished from it, some half-hundred have arisen in it, ere thy watch ticks
 once.
 "o heaven, it is mysterious, it is awful to consider that we not only
 carry each a future ghost within him; but are, in very deed, ghosts! these
 limbs, whence had we them; this stormy force; this life-blood with its
 burning passion? they are dust and shadow; a shadow-system gathered round
 our me: wherein, through some moments or years, the divine essence is to
 be revealed in the flesh. that warrior on his strong war-horse, fire
 flashes through his eyes; force dwells in his arm and heart: but warrior
 and war-horse are a vision; a revealed force, nothing more. stately they
 tread the earth, as if it were a firm substance: fool! the earth is but a
 film; it cracks in twain, and warrior and war-horse sink beyond plummet's
 sounding. plummet's? fantasy herself will not follow them. a little while
 ago, they were not; a little while, and they are not, their very ashes are
 not.
 "so has it been from the beginning, so will it be to the end. generation
 after generation takes to itself the form of a body; and forth issuing
 from cimmerian night, on heaven's mission appears. what force and fire is
 in each he expends: one grinding in the mill of industry; one hunter-like
 climbing the giddy alpine heights of science; one madly dashed in pieces
 on the rocks of strife, in war with his fellow:—and then the
 heaven-sent is recalled; his earthly vesture falls away, and soon even to
 sense becomes a vanished shadow. thus, like some wild-flaming,
 wild-thundering train of heaven's artillery, does this mysterious mankind
 thunder and flame, in long-drawn, quick-succeeding grandeur, through the
 unknown deep. thus, like a god-created, fire-breathing spirit-host, we
 emerge from the inane; haste stormfully across the astonished earth; then
 plunge again into the inane. earth's mountains are levelled, and her seas
 filled up, in our passage: can the earth, which is but dead and a vision,
 resist spirits which have reality and are alive? on the hardest adamant
 some footprint of us is stamped in; the last rear of the host will read
 traces of the earliest van. but whence?—o heaven whither? sense
 knows not; faith knows not; only that it is through mystery to mystery,
 from god and to god.
 'we are such stuff
 as dreams are made of, and our little life
 is rounded with a sleep!'"
 here, then, arises the so momentous question: have many british readers
 actually arrived with us at the new promised country; is the philosophy of
 clothes now at last opening around them? long and adventurous has the
 journey been: from those outmost vulgar, palpable woollen hulls of man;
 through his wondrous flesh-garments, and his wondrous social garnitures;
 inwards to the garments of his very soul's soul, to time and space
 themselves! and now does the spiritual, eternal essence of man, and of
 mankind, bared of such wrappages, begin in any measure to reveal itself?
 can many readers discern, as through a glass darkly, in huge wavering
 outlines, some primeval rudiments of man's being, what is changeable
 divided from what is unchangeable? does that earth-spirit's speech in faust,—
 "'tis thus at the roaring loom of time i ply,
 and weave for god the garment thou seest him by; "
 or that other thousand-times repeated speech of the magician, shakespeare,—
 "and like the baseless fabric of this vision,
 the cloud-capt towers, the gorgeous palaces,
 the solemn temples, the great globe itself,
 and all which it inherit, shall dissolve;
 and like this unsubstantial pageant faded,
 leave not a wrack behind;"
 begin to have some meaning for us? in a word, do we at length stand safe
 in the far region of poetic creation and palingenesia, where that phoenix
 death-birth of human society, and of all human things, appears possible,
 is seen to be inevitable?
 along this most insufficient, unheard-of bridge, which the editor, by
 heaven's blessing, has now seen himself enabled to conclude if not
 complete, it cannot be his sober calculation, but only his fond hope, that
 many have travelled without accident. no firm arch, overspanning the
 impassable with paved highway, could the editor construct; only, as was
 said, some zigzag series of rafts floating tumultuously thereon. alas, and
 the leaps from raft to raft were too often of a breakneck character; the
 darkness, the nature of the element, all was against us!
 nevertheless, may not here and there one of a thousand, provided with a
 discursiveness of intellect rare in our day, have cleared the passage, in
 spite of all? happy few! little band of friends! be welcome, be of
 courage. by degrees, the eye grows accustomed to its new whereabout; the
 hand can stretch itself forth to work there: it is in this grand and
 indeed highest work of palingenesia that ye shall labor, each according to
 ability. new laborers will arrive; new bridges will be built; nay, may not
 our own poor rope-and-raft bridge, in your passings and repassings, be
 mended in many a point, till it grow quite firm, passable even for the
 halt?
 meanwhile, of the innumerable multitude that started with us, joyous and
 full of hope, where now is the innumerable remainder, whom we see no
 longer by our side? the most have recoiled, and stand gazing afar off, in
 unsympathetic astonishment, at our career: not a few, pressing forward
 with more courage, have missed footing, or leaped short; and now swim
 weltering in the chaos-flood, some towards this shore, some towards that.
 to these also a helping hand should be held out; at least some word of
 encouragement be said.
 or, to speak without metaphor, with which mode of utterance teufelsdrockh
 unhappily has somewhat infected us,—can it be hidden from the editor
 that many a british reader sits reading quite bewildered in head, and
 afflicted rather than instructed by the present work? yes, long ago has
 many a british reader been, as now, demanding with something like a snarl:
 whereto does all this lead; or what use is in it?
 in the way of replenishing thy purse, or otherwise aiding thy digestive
 faculty, o british reader, it leads to nothing, and there is no use in it;
 but rather the reverse, for it costs thee somewhat. nevertheless, if
 through this unpromising horn-gate, teufelsdrockh, and we by means of him,
 have led thee into the true land of dreams; and through the
 clothes-screen, as through a magical pierre-pertuis, thou lookest,
 even for moments, into the region of the wonderful, and seest and feelest
 that thy daily life is girt with wonder, and based on wonder, and thy very
 blankets and breeches are miracles,—then art thou profited beyond
 money's worth; and hast a thankfulness towards our professor; nay, perhaps
 in many a literary tea-circle wilt open thy kind lips, and audibly express
 that same.
 nay farther, art not thou too perhaps by this time made aware that all
 symbols are properly clothes; that all forms whereby spirit manifests
 itself to sense, whether outwardly or in the imagination, are clothes; and
 thus not only the parchment magna charta, which a tailor was nigh cutting
 into measures, but the pomp and authority of law, the sacredness of
 majesty, and all inferior worships (worth-ships) are properly a vesture
 and raiment; and the thirty-nine articles themselves are articles of
 wearing-apparel (for the religious idea)? in which case, must it not also
 be admitted that this science of clothes is a high one, and may with
 infinitely deeper study on thy part yield richer fruit: that it takes
 scientific rank beside codification, and political economy, and the theory
 of the british constitution; nay rather, from its prophetic height looks
 down on all these, as on so many weaving-shops and spinning-mills, where
 the vestures which it has to fashion, and consecrate, and
 distribute, are, too often by haggard hungry operatives who see no farther
 than their nose, mechanically woven and spun?
 but omitting all this, much more all that concerns natural
 supernaturalism, and indeed whatever has reference to the ulterior or
 transcendental portion of the science, or bears never so remotely on that
 promised volume of the palingenesie der menschlichen gesellschaft
 (newbirth of society),—we humbly suggest that no province of
 clothes-philosophy, even the lowest, is without its direct value, but that
 innumerable inferences of a practical nature may be drawn therefrom. to
 say nothing of those pregnant considerations, ethical, political,
 symbolical, which crowd on the clothes-philosopher from the very threshold
 of his science; nothing even of those "architectural ideas," which, as we
 have seen, lurk at the bottom of all modes, and will one day, better
 unfolding themselves, lead to important revolutions,—let us glance
 for a moment, and with the faintest light of clothes-philosophy, on what
 may be called the habilatory class of our fellow-men. here too
 overlooking, where so much were to be looked on, the million spinners,
 weavers, fullers, dyers, washers, and wringers, that puddle and muddle in
 their dark recesses, to make us clothes, and die that we may live,—let
 us but turn the reader's attention upon two small divisions of mankind,
 who, like moths, may be regarded as cloth-animals, creatures that live,
 move and have their being in cloth: we mean, dandies and tailors.
 in regard to both which small divisions it may be asserted without
 scruple, that the public feeling, unenlightened by philosophy, is at
 fault; and even that the dictates of humanity are violated. as will
 perhaps abundantly appear to readers of the two following chapters.
 first, touching dandies, let us consider, with some scientific strictness,
 what a dandy specially is. a dandy is a clothes-wearing man, a man whose
 trade, office and existence consists in the wearing of clothes. every
 faculty of his soul, spirit, purse and person is heroically consecrated to
 this one object, the wearing of clothes wisely and well: so that as others
 dress to live, he lives to dress. the all-importance of clothes, which a
 german professor, of unequalled learning and acumen, writes his enormous
 volume to demonstrate, has sprung up in the intellect of the dandy without
 effort, like an instinct of genius; he is inspired with cloth, a poet of
 cloth. what teufelsdrockh would call a "divine idea of cloth" is born with
 him; and this, like other such ideas, will express itself outwardly, or
 wring his heart asunder with unutterable throes.
 but, like a generous, creative enthusiast, he fearlessly makes his idea an
 action; shows himself in peculiar guise to mankind; walks forth, a witness
 and living martyr to the eternal worth of clothes. we called him a poet:
 is not his body the (stuffed) parchment-skin whereon he writes, with
 cunning huddersfield dyes, a sonnet to his mistress' eyebrow? say, rather,
 an epos, and clotha virumque cano, to the whole world, in macaronic
 verses, which he that runs may read. nay, if you grant, what seems to be
 admissible, that the dandy has a thinking-principle in him, and some
 notions of time and space, is there not in this life-devotedness to cloth,
 in this so willing sacrifice of the immortal to the perishable, something
 (though in reverse order) of that blending and identification of eternity
 with time, which, as we have seen, constitutes the prophetic character?
 and now, for all this perennial martyrdom, and poesy, and even prophecy,
 what is it that the dandy asks in return? solely, we may say, that you
 would recognize his existence; would admit him to be a living object; or
 even failing this, a visual object, or thing that will reflect rays of
 light. your silver or your gold (beyond what the niggardly law has already
 secured him) he solicits not; simply the glance of your eyes. understand
 his mystic significance, or altogether miss and misinterpret it; do but
 look at him, and he is contented. may we not well cry shame on an
 ungrateful world, which refuses even this poor boon; which will waste its
 optic faculty on dried crocodiles, and siamese twins; and over the
 domestic wonderful wonder of wonders, a live dandy, glance with hasty
 indifference, and a scarcely concealed contempt! him no zoologist classes
 among the mammalia, no anatomist dissects with care: when did we see any
 injected preparation of the dandy in our museums; any specimen of him
 preserved in spirits! lord herringbone may dress himself in a snuff-brown
 suit, with snuff-brown shirt and shoes: it skills not; the undiscerning
 public, occupied with grosser wants, passes by regardless on the other
 side.
 the age of curiosity, like that of chivalry, is indeed, properly speaking,
 gone. yet perhaps only gone to sleep: for here arises the
 clothes-philosophy to resuscitate, strangely enough, both the one and the
 other! should sound views of this science come to prevail, the essential
 nature of the british dandy, and the mystic significance that lies in him,
 cannot always remain hidden under laughable and lamentable hallucination.
 the following long extract from professor teufelsdrockh may set the
 matter, if not in its true light, yet in the way towards such. it is to be
 regretted, however, that here, as so often elsewhere, the professor's keen
 philosophic perspicacity is somewhat marred by a certain mixture of almost
 owlish purblindness, or else of some perverse, ineffectual, ironic
 tendency; our readers shall judge which:—
 "in these distracted times," writes he, "when the religious principle,
 driven out of most churches, either lies unseen in the hearts of good men,
 looking and longing and silently working there towards some new
 revelation; or else wanders homeless over the world, like a disembodied
 soul seeking its terrestrial organization,—into how many strange
 shapes, of superstition and fanaticism, does it not tentatively and
 errantly cast itself! the higher enthusiasm of man's nature is for the
 while without exponent; yet does it continue indestructible, unweariedly
 active, and work blindly in the great chaotic deep: thus sect after sect,
 and church after church, bodies itself forth, and melts again into new
 metamorphosis.
 "chiefly is this observable in england, which, as the wealthiest and
 worst-instructed of european nations, offers precisely the elements (of
 heat, namely, and of darkness), in which such moon-calves and
 monstrosities are best generated. among the newer sects of that country,
 one of the most notable, and closely connected with our present subject,
 is that of the dandies; concerning which, what little information i
 have been able to procure may fitly stand here.
 "it is true, certain of the english journalists, men generally without
 sense for the religious principle, or judgment for its manifestations,
 speak, in their brief enigmatic notices, as if this were perhaps rather a
 secular sect, and not a religious one; nevertheless, to the psychologic
 eye its devotional and even sacrificial character plainly enough reveals
 itself. whether it belongs to the class of fetish-worships, or of
 hero-worships or polytheisms, or to what other class, may in the present
 state of our intelligence remain undecided (schweben). a certain
 touch of manicheism, not indeed in the gnostic shape, is discernible
 enough; also (for human error walks in a cycle, and reappears at
 intervals) a not-inconsiderable resemblance to that superstition of the
 athos monks, who by fasting from all nourishment, and looking intensely
 for a length of time into their own navels, came to discern therein the
 true apocalypse of nature, and heaven unveiled. to my own surmise, it
 appears as if this dandiacal sect were but a new modification, adapted to
 the new time, of that primeval superstition, self-worship; which
 zerdusht, quangfoutchee, mahomet, and others, strove rather to subordinate
 and restrain than to eradicate; and which only in the purer forms of
 religion has been altogether rejected. wherefore, if any one chooses to
 name it revived ahrimanism, or a new figure of demon-worship, i have, so
 far as is yet visible, no objection.
 "for the rest, these people, animated with the zeal of a new sect, display
 courage and perseverance, and what force there is in man's nature, though
 never so enslaved. they affect great purity and separatism; distinguish
 themselves by a particular costume (whereof some notices were given in the
 earlier part of this volume); likewise, so far as possible, by a
 particular speech (apparently some broken lingua-franca, or
 english-french); and, on the whole, strive to maintain a true nazarene
 deportment, and keep themselves unspotted from the world.
 "they have their temples, whereof the chief, as the jewish temple did,
 stands in their metropolis; and is named almack's, a word of
 uncertain etymology. they worship principally by night; and have their
 high-priests and high-priestesses, who, however, do not continue for life.
 the rites, by some supposed to be of the menadic sort, or perhaps with an
 eleusinian or cabiric character, are held strictly secret. nor are sacred
 books wanting to the sect; these they call fashionable novels:
 however, the canon is not completed, and some are canonical and others
 not.
 "of such sacred books i, not without expense, procured myself some
 samples; and in hope of true insight, and with the zeal which beseems an
 inquirer into clothes, set to interpret and study them. but wholly to no
 purpose: that tough faculty of reading, for which the world will not
 refuse me credit, was here for the first time foiled and set at naught. in
 vain that i summoned my whole energies (mich weidlich anstrengte),
 and did my very utmost; at the end of some short space, i was uniformly
 seized with not so much what i can call a drumming in my ears, as a kind
 of infinite, unsufferable, jew's-harping and scrannel-piping there; to
 which the frightfullest species of magnetic sleep soon supervened. and if
 i strove to shake this away, and absolutely would not yield, there came a
 hitherto unfelt sensation, as of delirium tremens, and a melting
 into total deliquium: till at last, by order of the doctor, dreading ruin
 to my whole intellectual and bodily faculties, and a general breaking up
 of the constitution, i reluctantly but determinedly forbore. was there
 some miracle at work here; like those fire-balls, and supernal and
 infernal prodigies, which, in the case of the jewish mysteries, have also
 more than once scared back the alien? be this as it may, such failure on
 my part, after best efforts, must excuse the imperfection of this sketch;
 altogether incomplete, yet the completest i could give of a sect too
 singular to be omitted.
 "loving my own life and senses as i do, no power shall induce me, as a
 private individual, to open another fashionable novel. but luckily,
 in this dilemma, comes a hand from the clouds; whereby if not victory,
 deliverance is held out to me. round one of those book-packages, which the
 stillschweigen'sche buchhandlung is in the habit of importing from
 england, come, as is usual, various waste printed-sheets (maculatur-blatter),
 by way of interior wrappage: into these the clothes-philosopher, with a
 certain mahometan reverence even for waste-paper, where curious knowledge
 will sometimes hover, disdains not to cast his eye. readers may judge of
 his astonishment when on such a defaced stray-sheet, probably the outcast
 fraction of some english periodical, such as they name magazine,
 appears something like a dissertation on this very subject of fashionable
 novels! it sets out, indeed, chiefly from a secular point of view;
 directing itself, not without asperity, against some to me unknown
 individual named pelham, who seems to be a mystagogue, and leading
 teacher and preacher of the sect; so that, what indeed otherwise was not
 to be expected in such a fugitive fragmentary sheet, the true secret, the
 religious physiognomy and physiology of the dandiacal body, is nowise laid
 fully open there. nevertheless, scattered lights do from time to time
 sparkle out, whereby i have endeavored to profit. nay, in one passage
 selected from the prophecies, or mythic theogonies, or whatever they are
 (for the style seems very mixed) of this mystagogue, i find what appears
 to be a confession of faith, or whole duty of man, according to the tenets
 of that sect. which confession or whole duty, therefore, as proceeding
 from a source so authentic, i shall here arrange under seven distinct
 articles, and in very abridged shape lay before the german world;
 therewith taking leave of this matter. observe also, that to avoid
 possibility of error, i, as far as may be, quote literally from the
 original:—
 '. coats should have nothing of the triangle about them; at the same
 time, wrinkles behind should be carefully avoided.
 '. the collar is a very important point: it should be low behind, and
 slightly rolled.
 '. no license of fashion can allow a man of delicate taste to adopt the
 posterial luxuriance of a hottentot.
 '. there is safety in a swallow-tail.
 '. the good sense of a gentleman is nowhere more finely developed than in
 his rings.
 '. it is permitted to mankind, under certain restrictions, to wear white
 waistcoats.
 '. the trousers must be exceedingly tight across the hips.'
 "all which propositions i, for the present, content myself with modestly
 but peremptorily and irrevocably denying.
 "in strange contrast with this dandiacal body stands another british sect,
 originally, as i understand, of ireland, where its chief seat still is;
 but known also in the main island, and indeed everywhere rapidly
 spreading. as this sect has hitherto emitted no canonical books, it
 remains to me in the same state of obscurity as the dandiacal, which has
 published books that the unassisted human faculties are inadequate to
 read. the members appear to be designated by a considerable diversity of
 names, according to their various places of establishment: in england they
 are generally called the drudge sect; also, unphilosophically
 enough, the white negroes; and, chiefly in scorn by those of other
 communions, the ragged-beggar sect. in scotland, again, i find them
 entitled hallanshakers, or the stook of duds sect; any
 individual communicant is named stook of duds (that is, shock of
 rags), in allusion, doubtless, to their professional costume. while in
 ireland, which, as mentioned, is their grand parent hive, they go by a
 perplexing multiplicity of designations, such as bogtrotters,
 redshanks, ribbonmen, cottiers, peep-of-day boys, babes of the wood,
 rockites, poor-slaves: which last, however, seems to be the primary
 and generic name; whereto, probably enough, the others are only subsidiary
 species, or slight varieties; or, at most, propagated offsets from the
 parent stem, whose minute subdivisions, and shades of difference, it were
 here loss of time to dwell on. enough for us to understand, what seems
 indubitable, that the original sect is that of the poor-slaves;
 whose doctrines, practices, and fundamental characteristics pervade and
 animate the whole body, howsoever denominated or outwardly diversified.
 "the precise speculative tenets of this brotherhood: how the universe, and
 man, and man's life, picture themselves to the mind of an irish
 poor-slave; with what feelings and opinions he looks forward on the
 future, round on the present, back on the past, it were extremely
 difficult to specify. something monastic there appears to be in their
 constitution: we find them bound by the two monastic vows, of poverty and
 obedience; which vows, especially the former, it is said, they observe
 with great strictness; nay, as i have understood it, they are pledged, and
 be it by any solemn nazarene ordination or not, irrevocably consecrated
 thereto, even before birth. that the third monastic vow, of
 chastity, is rigidly enforced among them, i find no ground to conjecture.
 "furthermore, they appear to imitate the dandiacal sect in their grand
 principle of wearing a peculiar costume. of which irish poor-slave costume
 no description will indeed be found in the present volume; for this
 reason, that by the imperfect organ of language it did not seem
 describable. their raiment consists of innumerable skirts, lappets and
 irregular wings, of all cloths and of all colors; through the labyrinthic
 intricacies of which their bodies are introduced by some unknown process.
 it is fastened together by a multiplex combination of buttons, thrums and
 skewers; to which frequently is added a girdle of leather, of hempen or
 even of straw rope, round the loins. to straw rope, indeed, they seem
 partial, and often wear it by way of sandals. in head-dress they affect a
 certain freedom: hats with partial brim, without crown, or with only a
 loose, hinged, or valve crown; in the former case, they sometimes invert
 the hat, and wear it brim uppermost, like a university-cap, with what view
 is unknown.
 "the name poor-slaves seems to indicate a slavonic, polish, or russian
 origin: not so, however, the interior essence and spirit of their
 superstition, which rather displays a teutonic or druidical character. one
 might fancy them worshippers of hertha, or the earth: for they dig and
 affectionately work continually in her bosom; or else, shut up in private
 oratories, meditate and manipulate the substances derived from her; seldom
 looking up towards the heavenly luminaries, and then with comparative
 indifference. like the druids, on the other hand, they live in dark
 dwellings; often even breaking their glass windows, where they find such,
 and stuffing them up with pieces of raiment, or other opaque substances,
 till the fit obscurity is restored. again, like all followers of
 nature-worship, they are liable to out-breakings of an enthusiasm rising
 to ferocity; and burn men, if not in wicker idols, yet in sod cottages.
 "in respect of diet, they have also their observances. all poor-slaves are
 rhizophagous (or root-eaters); a few are ichthyophagous, and use salted
 herrings: other animal food they abstain from; except indeed, with perhaps
 some strange inverted fragment of a brahminical feeling, such animals as
 die a natural death. their universal sustenance is the root named potato,
 cooked by fire alone; and generally without condiment or relish of any
 kind, save an unknown condiment named point, into the meaning of
 which i have vainly inquired; the victual potatoes-and-point not
 appearing, at least not with specific accuracy of description, in any
 european cookery-book whatever. for drink, they use, with an almost
 epigrammatic counterpoise of taste, milk, which is the mildest of liquors,
 and potheen, which is the fiercest. this latter i have tasted, as
 well as the english blue-ruin, and the scotch whiskey,
 analogous fluids used by the sect in those countries: it evidently
 contains some form of alcohol, in the highest state of concentration,
 though disguised with acrid oils; and is, on the whole, the most pungent
 substance known to me,—indeed, a perfect liquid fire. in all their
 religious solemnities, potheen is said to be an indispensable requisite,
 and largely consumed.
 "an irish traveller, of perhaps common veracity, who presents himself
 under the to me unmeaning title of the late john bernard, offers
 the following sketch of a domestic establishment, the inmates whereof,
 though such is not stated expressly, appear to have been of that faith.
 thereby shall my german readers now behold an irish poor-slave, as it were
 with their own eyes; and even see him at meat. moreover, in the so
 precious waste-paper sheet above mentioned, i have found some
 corresponding picture of a dandiacal household, painted by that same
 dandiacal mystagogue, or theogonist: this also, by way of counterpart and
 contrast, the world shall look into.
 "first, therefore, of the poor-slave, who appears likewise to have been a
 species of innkeeper. i quote from the original:
 "'the furniture of this caravansera consisted of a large iron pot, two
 oaken tables, two benches, two chairs, and a potheen noggin. there was a
 loft above (attainable by a ladder), upon which the inmates slept; and the
 space below was divided by a hurdle into two apartments; the one for their
 cow and pig, the other for themselves and guests. on entering the house we
 discovered the family, eleven in number, at dinner: the father sitting at
 the top, the mother at the bottom, the children on each side, of a large
 oaken board, which was scooped out in the middle, like a trough, to
 receive the contents of their pot of potatoes. little holes were cut at
 equal distances to contain salt; and a bowl of milk stood on the table:
 all the luxuries of meat and beer, bread, knives and dishes were dispensed
 with.' the poor-slave himself our traveller found, as he says,
 broad-backed, black-browed, of great personal strength, and mouth from ear
 to ear. his wife was a sun-browned but well-featured woman; and his young
 ones, bare and chubby, had the appetite of ravens. of their philosophical
 or religious tenets or observances, no notice or hint.
 "but now, secondly, of the dandiacal household; in which, truly, that
 often-mentioned mystagogue and inspired penman himself has his abode:—
 "'a dressing-room splendidly furnished; violet-colored curtains, chairs
 and ottomans of the same hue. two full-length mirrors are placed, one on
 each side of a table, which supports the luxuries of the toilet. several
 bottles of perfumes, arranged in a peculiar fashion, stand upon a smaller
 table of mother-of-pearl: opposite to these are placed the appurtenances
 of lavation richly wrought in frosted silver. a wardrobe of buhl is on the
 left; the doors of which, being partly open, discover a profusion of
 clothes; shoes of a singularly small size monopolize the lower shelves.
 fronting the wardrobe a door ajar gives some slight glimpse of a
 bath-room. folding-doors in the background.—enter the author,' our
 theogonist in person, 'obsequiously preceded by a french valet, in white
 silk jacket and cambric apron.'
 "such are the two sects which, at this moment, divide the more unsettled
 portion of the british people; and agitate that ever-vexed country. to the
 eye of the political seer, their mutual relation, pregnant with the
 elements of discord and hostility, is far from consoling. these two
 principles of dandiacal self-worship or demon-worship, and poor-slavish or
 drudgical earth-worship, or whatever that same drudgism may be, do as yet
 indeed manifest themselves under distant and nowise considerable shapes:
 nevertheless, in their roots and subterranean ramifications, they extend
 through the entire structure of society, and work unweariedly in the
 secret depths of english national existence; striving to separate and
 isolate it into two contradictory, uncommunicating masses.
 "in numbers, and even individual strength, the poor-slaves or drudges, it
 would seem, are hourly increasing. the dandiacal, again, is by nature no
 proselytizing sect; but it boasts of great hereditary resources, and is
 strong by union; whereas the drudges, split into parties, have as yet no
 rallying-point; or at best only co-operate by means of partial secret
 affiliations. if, indeed, there were to arise a communion of drudges,
 as there is already a communion of saints, what strangest effects would
 follow therefrom! dandyism as yet affects to look down on drudgism: but
 perhaps the hour of trial, when it will be practically seen which ought to
 look down, and which up, is not so distant.
 "to me it seems probable that the two sects will one day part england
 between them; each recruiting itself from the intermediate ranks, till
 there be none left to enlist on either side. those dandiacal manicheans,
 with the host of dandyizing christians, will form one body: the drudges,
 gathering round them whosoever is drudgical, be he christian or infidel
 pagan; sweeping up likewise all manner of utilitarians, radicals,
 refractory pot-wallopers, and so forth, into their general mass, will form
 another. i could liken dandyism and drudgism to two bottomless boiling
 whirlpools that had broken out on opposite quarters of the firm land: as
 yet they appear only disquieted, foolishly bubbling wells, which man's art
 might cover in; yet mark them, their diameter is daily widening: they are
 hollow cones that boil up from the infinite deep, over which your firm
 land is but a thin crust or rind! thus daily is the intermediate land
 crumbling in, daily the empire of the two buchan-bullers extending; till
 now there is but a foot-plank, a mere film of land between them; this too
 is washed away: and then—we have the true hell of waters, and noah's
 deluge is out-deluged!
 "or better, i might call them two boundless, and indeed unexampled
 electric machines (turned by the 'machinery of society'), with batteries
 of opposite quality; drudgism the negative, dandyism the positive; one
 attracts hourly towards it and appropriates all the positive electricity
 of the nation (namely, the money thereof); the other is equally busy with
 the negative (that is to say the hunger), which is equally potent.
 hitherto you see only partial transient sparkles and sputters: but wait a
 little, till the entire nation is in an electric state: till your whole
 vital electricity, no longer healthfully neutral, is cut into two isolated
 portions of positive and negative (of money and of hunger); and stands
 there bottled up in two world-batteries! the stirring of a child's finger
 brings the two together; and then—what then? the earth is but
 shivered into impalpable smoke by that doom's thunder-peal; the sun misses
 one of his planets in space, and thenceforth there are no eclipses of the
 moon.—or better still, i might liken"—
 oh, enough, enough of likenings and similitudes; in excess of which,
 truly, it is hard to say whether teufelsdrockh or ourselves sin the more.
 we have often blamed him for a habit of wire-drawing and over-refining;
 from of old we have been familiar with his tendency to mysticism and
 religiosity, whereby in everything he was still scenting out religion: but
